One God, One Faith. OR A DISCOVRSE AGAINST. Those Lukewarm-Christians, who
extend Salvation to all kinds of Faith and Religion; so, that the Professors
do believe in the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion etc. howsoever they
differ in other inferior Articles. Written by VV. B. Priest.

One Lord, one Faith, one God. Ephesians. 4. Because thou are Lukewarm, and
neither cold, nor hot, I will vomit thee out of my mouth. Apoc. 3. Permissu
Superiorum.



M.DC.XXV.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
GOOD READER.
Such are the lamentable Times, wherein we live, as that, they not only bring
forth Men, who with great contention and heat of dispute, do undertake to
mantayne particular Errors, directly repugnant to the Scriptures, and the
judgment of Christ his Church; But also they affoard some others (as my own
experience assures me, taken from my conuersing with diverse such, during my
long endurance in England, and before my departure from thence) who are not
affrayd to entertayne all Religions, with such a cold Indifferency, as that
they hold, that Salvation may be obtained in any Religion, if so the
Professors thereof do believe only in the Trinity, the Incarnation, and such
fundamental points of Christianity; whether they be Papists, Protestants,
Anabaptists, Brownists, or any other of these la^er Sects. They heerupon
further teach, that we are not obliged, under pain of any spiritual loss, to
embrace any one of these Religions, before another; scornefully traducing all
others, who exact a more particular, and articulate belief of our Christian
misteryes.

And thus these ADIAPHORISTS in Religion (whose secret pulse does indeed beat
upon Atheism) disclayme from all necessity of Truth, even justifying the
defense of Errors, under the title of Errors; and houlding only this One
main Controversy in Christian Religion; to wit, That in Christian Religion,
there are no main CONTROVERSIES.

Against these Ambi-dexter Christians, (so to call them) who draw their Souls
perdition in the ropes of a supine and careless security, I have thought good to
undergo the writing of this short ensuing Treatise, styling it; One God, one
Faith, according to the words of the Ephesians. 4.
Apostle; implying hereby, That, as there is but one God, and not many; so this
one God will be truly worshipped (for the saving of our Souls) with one, only,
entyre, and perfect Faith, and not with multiplicity of Religions.

Now to make the passage more even to this discourse, by taking away some
tacit Objections, much insisted upon to the contrary by our Omni fidians in
Religion, these men thus dispute: God is most merciful, and therefore it would
be much repugnant to his infinite Mercy, to damn for all eternity, any Man
that beleiueth in him, and in Jesus Christ as his Redeemer; so that withal, he
forbear doing of all wrong, and do lead a virtuous (at least a moral) life;
though ^n other Articles of lesser importance, per^aps he may err.

To this I answer with the Apostle: Romans 11.
O altitudo diuitiarum sapientiae and scientiae ^ei? Gods Judgments are
inscrutable, and ^re to be admired, not to be searched after. If it was his
divine pleasure, for one ^nly Sin (and that but in thought ^ommitted, as
Deuines hold) to damn ^any thousands of Angels for ever; If ^arther he did
not forbear to punish all Mankind with infinite Miseryes for his first Parents
fault, committed only in eating of a forbidden Aple; if lastly it pleased him,
during several thousands of years, to make choice only of the Jewish Nation
(a handful of the whole earth) for his elected People, and to suffer all the
rest of the world (till our Saviors coming) to lie drowned in Idolatry, and
to be damned, some few Gentills only excepted: And if also after our Saviors
Incarnation, he vouchsafed not for the space of many ages to enlighten whole
Countries, with the Gospel of Christ, but permitted them to continue (to their
Soule^ eternal damnation) in their former Idolatry and Heathenisme, yea
suffering to thi^ very day (and how long yet after, his divine Majesty only
knows) diverse va^ Countries to persevere in their foresaid Infidelity:

If now (I say) this proceeding in God is best lyking to himself, and tha^ for
the same, it were blasphemy to charge him with Injustice, or Cruelty ( For
Esaias. 45.
shall the Clay say to him that fashioneth it, What make thou?) then dare any
man expostulate God of Injustice, and want of Mercy (for his divine Goodness is
nothing but Mercy and Justice: Psalm. 84.
misericordia and veritas obuiauerunt sibi, Iustitia and Pax osculatae sunt:)
If he suffer men to pe^ish eternally for want of an entyre, complete, and
perfect faith in all the Articles of Christianity, especially in these times,
when no Christian can pretend for ex^use any invincible ignorance in mat^ers of
Faith, by reason, that all the true Articles of Christian Religion are
sufficiently propounded, and diuulged by Gods Church to all Christians
whome^oeuer? Therefore thouching Gods secret ^udgments, and disposal in these
mat^ers, we will conclude, and confess with the Prophet Esaias: Psalm. 30.
Deus iudicij Do^inus.

This then being most true, from hence it appears, that diverse cold
Protestants much wrong the Catholics, in charging them with want of Charity,
because ^hey will not acknowledge, that Protestants ^ying Protestants, can be
saved; whereas ^n the contrary part many learned Pro^estants (say they) do
grant the hope of Salvation to Catholics, dying Catholics, or (as now a
days they term them) ^apists.

To this we reply: That here is no want of charity in the Catholics, but
rather a most vehement and burning Charity. For what greater Charity can there
be, seeing it is an undeniable Truth, That Men dying in a false Faith, cannot be
saved, then to premonish, and forewarne with all convenient sedulity and
endeavor 1. Timoth. 4.
opportune, importune, their Christian Brethren of so great a danger, as the
everlasting loss of their Souls comes unto? No; the souls interminable
weal or woe is not a matter of Complement, that so for Ceremony, the
remembrance thereof is to be forborne to be inculcated, and often spoken of;
especially where the most certain truth of the matter insisted upon, and the
charitable intention of the speaker, do warrant the discourse.

And if Catholics must be censure^ uncharitable, for these their so wholesome
Admonitions; then by the sam^ reason, the Apostle himself is to b^ included
within the like fault, who severely Tit. c. 3.
charge us, to fly the company and society of an Heretic; and of him who
Galat. 5.
rangeth Schisms and Heresies among those sins, the workers whereof shall
not attain the Kingdom of God. In like sort, the ancient Fathers of Christ's
Church (I mean, Augustine, Ambrose, Jerome, Cyprian, Epiphanius, and the rest)
must stand chargeable with the like want of Charity, for their anathematizing
and condemning (both in general Counsels, and in their particular writings,
and Catalogues of Heresies) all such men, as did hold any erroneous opinions
touching Faith, against the then present Church of God.

But to return more particulerly to the Subject of this Treatise. The source
from whence this Libertinisme in belief (impugned here by me) did take it
origin and beginning, is the contempt of the authority of Christ's Church, and
the assumed authority of each man's private Spirit. For thus reasons the
Neutrallist in Religion: Both the Papists and Protestants do agree in believing
the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion etc. But they maynly dissent touching
Purgatory, praying to Saints, Freewill, Sacrifice of the Mass etc. Therefore I
will embrace and follow the acknowledged doctrine of them both (meaning the
Doctrine of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion) and hold it necessary
only to Salvation, since in it all sides do conspire. But seeing the
dissentions in religion among the Papists and the Protestants, are of these
secondary and less principal points only, (to wit, Purgatory, prayer to
Saints etc.) and seeing it is impossible, that both the Protestant and the
Papist should teach truly in the said Articles (for they teach mere contrary
doctrines therein, so as if the one side teach true, it necessarily follows,
that the other side teaches false:) And further; seeing I have no more reason
(once rejecting the authority of Gods visible Church) to believe the one
party, more then the other, and it is impossible for me to believe them both:
Therefore my private Spirit bids me to believe neither; but to hold the
doctrines of Purgatory, prayer to Saints, Freewill, etc. and all other
controuerted points of Faith, at this day, between the Papist and the
Protestant, to be matters merely accessory, and of such indifferency, as that
neither the true, or false belief of them can further, nor hinder my Salvation.

Thus far argues our Newtrallist, who whiles he will be of all Religions, is
indeed of no Religion. Then which (as if Religion were but a mere abstracted
Notion in the mind) what can be excogitated to be more impious and Athiestical
in it self? more repugnant to the sacred Scriptures? more cross to the
practice of all Antiquity? and (as hereafter shall be proved) more adverse to
all natural Reason?

But (good Reader) as unwilling to tra^sgresse the accustomed limits of a
Preface, I will detayne thee no longer; only for some delibation, and taste of
the Subject hereafter handled, I will conclude with the sentence and judgment
of S. Augustine, passed upon the Pelagians, who believed in the Trinity, in
Christ, and his Passion, were men of honest and moral conversation; yet for
houlding, That only by the force of Nature, without the assistance of Gods
grace, a Man was able to exercise virtue, and fly vice (a point no more
fundamental, then most of the Controversies between the Catholics and the
Prostants) they are registered for Heretics by S. Augustine, and consequently
not to be (in his judgment) in state of Salvation: His words are these: Epist.
120. c. 37.
Nec tales sunt Pelagiani, quos facile conte^nas, sed continenter viuentes,
atque in omnibus operibus laudabiles: Nec falsum Christum, sed vnum, verum,
aequalemque Patri, and coaeternum, veraciterque hominem factum, and venisse
credentes, and venturum expectantes; sed tamen ignorantes Dei iustitia^, suam
constituere volentes, Haeretici sunt. Thus S. Augustine, with whom I end,
leaving thee (Courteous Reader) to the deliberate, and studious perusal of
these ensuing Leaves, and entreating most earnestly the prayer of all good
Catholics, for the remission of my infinite sins, and for a happy hour^ of the
dissolution of my old, and decayed Body.

Thy Souls wellwishing friend. VV. B. P.

The Contents of the ensuing Treatise.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and first by Counsels. Chap. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12 13 14. 15.
16. 17.
THAT A MAN, WHO BELIEVES IN the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion etc. And yet
belieueth not all other Articles of Christian faith, cannot be saved. And
first, of the definition of Heresy, and an Heretic. CHAP. I.
BEFORE we come (good Reader) to dispute particulerly of the Subject of this
Discourse, I hold it most convenient in place of a short Prolegomenon, or
Preface, to prefixe, and set down the true definition of Heresy, or an
Heretic, since this method will give light to this whole ensuing Treatise,
(diverse passages thereof being principally founded upon the definition, and
nature of Heresy,) and will best manifest, what opinions be Heresies, and what
men, Heretics; and consequently, (seeing Heresy is incompatible with salvation,
and cannot stand with the purchase of Heaven) will demonstrate, that not any
one Religion (professing the name of Christians) which does maintain but one
Heresy, can justly promi^^ to it self, the hope of Eternal life.

Well then, Heresy, or Haeresis, as w^ term it in Latin, is a Greek word,
^^gnifying as much as, Electio, Election (...) Choice; coming of the Greek
ver^^ (...), in Latin, Eligo, to Choose, or ma^^ Choice of, as lib. de
praescript. c. ^.
Tertullian, and S. I^rome in c. 5. Epist. ad Galat.
do well note; so that this wo^^ Haeresis, originally, and primitiuely
signi^^eth Election or Choice (as is said) in general^ yet because they, who
divide themselu^^ by maintaining false opinions from t^^ Church of Christ, do
make choice (...) these their new opinions, and so therb^ do separate
themselves from the Church therefore this word Haeresis (loosing it fo^mer
general signification) is restrayn^ by the Apostles, and the Ancient Father
through an Ecclesiastical use, acceptanc^ and appropriation (which course we
fin^ houlden in diverse other words, no^ taken by the Church, in a secondary
a^ception) to signify any false, or ne^ opinion in Religion among Christian
of which a man makes choice, and pert^naciously defends against the Chur^^
of God; and the maintainers thereof a^ commonly styled, Heretics. Thus three
things necessarily concur, to make any false opinion, Heresy, and the
defendours ^herof Heretics. First, it must be some er^our touching the Faith
of Christ: And the ^eason hereof is, because he that never pro^essed or
embraced the Christian Faith, is not an Heretic, though he err, but a Jew, or
a Pagan, and Heathen. This is the doctrine of S. quast. 11. art. ^.
Thomas, and of all learned men. The second condition necessarily ^oncurring to
every Heresy is, that there ^e an erreneous judgment in the vnder^tanding of
him, who maintayneth the Heresy; from whence it follows, that ^n external
denial of a man's Faith, is not Heresy, except it proceed from an inter^all
error of the understanding; but is rather to be accounted dissimulation, or
^chisme, as S. Thomas quaest. 10. 2. 2.
teaches.

The third and last condition is, that this ^rrour be maintained with great
obstinacy against the authority of Christ's Church, ^eaching the contrary
doctrine, and that ^he defendour thereof being admonished of ^is error, will
nevertheless openly resist ^he authority of the Church therein, seeing, ^f he
be admonished by the Church of his Error, and instantly thereupon do forsake
^is false opinion, he is to be accounted, only erroneous, and his false
doctrine only an Error.

This agrees to that of S. Augustine: l. 18. de ciuit. Dei. c. 51.
Qui in Ecclesia Christi aliquid prauum sapiunt, si correpti, vt sanum
rectumque sapiant, resistant contumaciter, suaque pestifera and mortisera
dogmata emendare nolunt, sed defensare persistant, Haeretici^ fiunt; and foraes
exeuntes, habentur in exercentibus Haereticis. That is, Who believe any false
or wrong opinion in the Church of Christ, and being counseled and admonished
thereof, do contumaciously and stubbornly resist, and will not recall their
pestiferous and deadly opinions, but do persist in defending of them, they are
thereby become Heretics; and so departing out of the Church, they are taken for
such, as vent forth open, and wilful Heresies. Thus S. Augustine.

This Construction (both touching the foresaid definition of Heresy, in taking
the words Haeresis, and Haereticus, in an evil restrained, and appropriated
sense) is warranted by the Apostle, by the Ancient Fathers, and lastly (to
omit the like acknowledged judgment of the Catholics) by the learned
Protestants. By the 1. Cor. 21.
Apostle: for thus we find him to say: There must be Heresies among you, that
they which are approved among you, may be known. Again; Galat. 5.19. vid e
Testam. nouum. 1576.
The works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery, fornication etc.
seditions, Heresies etc. As also Tit. 3.
A man, that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition, avoid. And
Act. 5.
finally: Those, which were of the Heresy of the Sadduces etc. laid hands upon
the Apostles.

By the Ancient Fathers: For S. Jerome in ca. 3. ad Titum.
showing the difference between He^esie and Schism, thus defines Heresy:
^aeresis est, quae peruersum dogma habet. Heresy is ^at which contains a
perverse and froward opi^on. And S. Augustine l. de fide and simbolo. ca. 10.
defines Here^kes in these words: Haeretici sunt qui de Deo ^^sa sentiendo,
fidem violant. Heretics are those, ^ho do violate their faith, by houlding
false opi^ons touching God.

By the Protestants: For to name one or woe among many, M. Dial. 2.
Ormerod a most ^orward Protestant, thus defines an Here^ike: He is an
Heretic, who so swarueth from the ^holesome doctrine, as contemning the
judgment ^^th of God, and the Church, persisteth in his opi^ion etc. With whom
conspireth D. Couell (...) saying: Heretics are they, who directly gain^ some
article of our faith.

Now, out of this former definition of ^eresie, I am to promonish the Reader of
^ee points (the which in the perusing of is Treatise, I would have him often
to ^ll to remembrance:) first that every He^y is maintained (as is above
taught) ^^th obstinacy, against the authority of the Church of God, and
therefore the maintayners thereof are said by the Apostle, Joan. 2.29.
that they went out of us, that is, out of God Church: and for the same reason
the Apostle Tit. 3.
does pronounce an Heretic, to (...) condemned by his own judgment; because
h^ prefers his judgment, before the judgment of the whole Church. From which
consideration it follows, that what man soever houldeth an erroneous opinion
^ touching Christian Faith, and being aduertized thereof by Gods Church, and n^
captiuating his judgment in all humili^^ thereto, is thereby become an Heretic.
An^ such is the state of Catholics and Protestants; since the one does ever
reciprocal charge and condemn the other with fal^ doctrine; and therefore
seeing the Church (...) Christ must be with the one of them, it follows, that
the other not submitting the judgment to it, are proclaimed thereby H^retikes.
And thus it may sometimes fall o^^ that the first Inuentour of a false opini^^
may be no Heretic, as maintayning it before it be condemned by the Church
whereas the Professors of it, after its condemnation, are become Heretics;
acc^ding to that of l. aduersus Haeres.
Vincentius Lyrinen^ O admirable change of things! the authors of (...) and
the same opinion are esteemed Catholics; (...) their followers are judged
Heretics: Thus we see that pertinacity of judgment does ever consumate an
Heresy.

The second, that the denial of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion etc.
are not properly called Heresies, but rather blasphemies; and the denyers of
them not to be accouned Heretics, but Infidels, Jews or Pagans. From whence
it proceeds that what places of Scripture, or of the Fa^hers are spoken of
Heretics, the same cannot be truly applied to the denyers of the Trinity, the
Incarnation, Passion etc.

The third is, that the foresaid definition ^f Heresy (being the only true
definition, and acknowledged for such on all sides) is ^ot restrained either in
it self, or by the ^eaning of the Apostle, only to the most ^upreme, and (as
they are called) fundamental ^oints of Christian Faith, as of the Trinity, ^^e
Incarnation of Christ, his passion, the ^ecalogue, and the Articles of the
Creed; ^^t it is extended, in it own nature (consi^ering that according to al
Art, the definition ^^d the thing defined, ought to be of an e^all latitude or
extent) to any erroneous ^^inion whatsoever, frowardly defended (...) a man,
and impugned by the Church of ^od: So, as it is as perfect an Heresy (and ^e
belieuers thereof are as true Heretics) to deny that there is a Purgatory, or
to deny Freewill, praying to Saints, the doctrine o^ Indulgences, the necessity
of Baptism, o^ any other Article affirmed by Catholics (granting the doctrine
of Catholics in these Articles to be true) as to deny the Trinity the
Incarnation of Christ, his death, Passion etc. supposing the denial of these
to b^ but Heresies. And a man shall be as well damned in Hell for denying these
former, as for these other; though the denial of these l^ter do exceed the
other in malice, since the blasphemies of them are in themselves mo^ wicked and
heinous. And thus much to^ching the definition of Heresy, or an Heretik^ which
being justly premised, we will con^ now to the main Controversy handle^ in
this Treatise.

THAT EVERY CHRISTIAN CANNON be saved in his own Religion: Proved from t^ holy
Scripture. CHAP. II.
NOw then to begin to fortify an^ warrant this undoubted truth, that eu^ry
Christian cannot be saved in his own Religion I will draw my first kind of
Proof from t^ sacred words of holy Scripture. And the^ testimonies shall be of
three sorts; One co^ce^ning Heretics textes which are not-restr^ned to any
particular Heresies, but delivered of Heresy in general. The second branch of
authorities shall touch Heretics, even for certain particular Heresies,
different from denying the Trinity, the Incarnation of our Savior, his
Passion, and other like principal and fundamental articles of Christian
Religion. The third shall contain the necessity and dignity of Faith, without
any restriction to the points or articles, which are to be believed.

And first to begin with the first: We read the Apostle thus to speak of an
Heretic in general: Epist. ad Tit. c. 3.
A man that is an Heretic, after the first or second admonition avoid, knowing
that he, that is such, is subverted, and sins, being condemned by his own
judgment. Where (we see) the Apostle commands us to avoid an Heretic; which
he would never have done, if the said Heretic had bin in state of Salvation:
The Apostle further adding this reason, in that he sins, and in that such a
man, as being a pertinacious and wilful Heretic, is condemned by his own
proper judgment; that is, because he aduaunceth his own judgment above the
judgment of Gods Church; and because he needs not that public condemnation
of the Church, which upon other offenders by way of Excommunication is
inflicted. Of which text of the Apostle, Tertullian both pithily and
excellently gives his gloss saying: Lib. de praescript. c. 6.
Quia and in qu^ damnatur, sibi elegit.

Moreover the Apostle elsewhere coniureth (as it were) in the name of Christ,
tha^ we should avoid all false belieuers in these words: 2 Thessalonians. cap. 3.
We denounce unto you (Brethren) i^ the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you
withdraw your selves from every Brother walking in ordinatly, and not according
to the Tradition, which they have received of us. This place concernet^ Faith
and doctrine (as the whole Chapte^ shows:) But if those men here to be
eschewed, were in state of Salvation, the^ ought not then to be eschewed.
Again this text cannot have refere^ce to those, wh^ deny the Trinity,
Incarnation, and Passion seeing the denyers of those high Article^ are not
Brethren in Christ; and yet the Apostle styleth them Brethren, whom he hee^
reprehendeth. The Apostle also in anoth^^ place thus forewarneth: Epist. ad
Galat. c. 5.
The works of the flesh be manifest, which are fornication, vncleane^ impurity
etc. dissentions or Heresies, according to the Testament of an. 1576.
Sects etc. They which do these things shall not obtain the kingdom of Go^
where we see, there is express mention made of Sects, and that the maintainers
o^ any Sects in opinion of Faith, much more of any Heresy (which is ever
auerred wit^ greater contumacy and frowardnes, an^ with neglect to the Churches
Authority) shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven: From which testimony we
may fur^her conclude, that as one only act of fornication barreth a man from
the kingdom of God, so also one Heresy excludes him from the same.

A fourth place is this: Epist. ad Romans c. 16.
I desire you Bre^hren, to mark them that make dissentions and scandalls,
contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them; for such do
not serve Christ our Lord. But if such men be to be avoided, and do not serve
Christ, then no doubt they continuing in that state, cannot be saved.

Fifthly, the Apostle speaks of certain men, saying of them: 1. Tim. 1.
Quidam circa fidem maufragauerunt: Certain men have made shipwreck of their
Faith. Where the Apostle uses the Metaphore of shipwreck, thereby to express
more fully, that Heretics once falling out of the ship of the Church of
Christ, are cast into the sea of eternal damnation.

To conclude, the Evangelist S. John speaks of all Heretics in general, not
embracing the Doctrine of Christ (within which all secondary questions of
Christian Religion are contained) in this sort: If any 2. Joan.
man come to you, and bring not the doctrine of Christ, receive him not into
your house, nor s^^ God save you, unto him. But a man is bound ^ charity to
suffer any one, which is in sta^ of Salvation, to come into his house and ^
salute him, or say, God save him. Now wh^ can be replied against these former
texts? ^ cannot be said, that they are meant only ^ such Heretics, as deny the
mysteries of t^ Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ, h^ Passion, and such like
supreme points ^ Christian Religion. This (I say) cannot (...) auerred, for
these reasons following: Fi^ because those, who in the Apostles tym^ denied
these principal points of Christi^nity, could not be truly termed Heretike^
but rather Jews or Heathens; seeing he (...) an Heretic truly (as is above
showed) wh^ was once a member of Christ's Church b^ Faith, (...). 1
but after cease to be thereof, by erring in some secondary points, touchin^
Christian Faith. Secondly, by reason tha^ (according to the true definition of
Heres^^ or Heretics, above set down) the forme^ texts have a necessary
reference to all Heresies and Heretics whatsoever, whethe^ the subject of the
said false opinions be sma^^ or great. Thirdly, because that in the former
texts of Scripture there is no restriction of the word Haereticus, or Haeresis,
to the chief or highest points of Christian Religion; but it is extended to
all kind of Here^ikes and Heresies whatsoever, even by the Apostle without
exception; who (no doubt) ^f he had understood Heretics, or Heresies only in
the greatest points (admitting such me^ for Heretics) would accordingly have
restrained his words (at least in some one ^ext or other among so many) only to
these kind of Heretics. But not to leave the least show of refuge or evasion
herein, I will produce some passage of holy Scripture, in which ^he mantayners of
particular errors, even ^n lesser points, then the highest articles of
Christianity, are censured by Christ's Apo^tles, to be deprived of eternal
Salvation.

And first we find S. Paul thus to prophecy: In the later 1. Tim. cap. 4.
times, certain shall depart from the Faith, attending to spirits of error,
and doctrine of devils, and forbidding to marry, and to abstain from meats
etc. Here the Apostle prophesies (according to the judgment of Hom. 12. in 1.
Tim.
S. Chrysostom Upon this place.
Ambrose l. contra Iouin. cap. 1.
Ierom, and Haer. 25. and 40.
Augustine) of the Heretics Encratites, Marcionistes, Ebionites etc. who denied
matrimony, as a thing altogether unlawful, and prohibited absolutely, and at
all times the eating of certain meats, as creatures impure: Now these
Heretics believed in the Trinity, the Incarnation etc. yet even for these two
former Heresies, touching marriage and eating of meats, they are said b^ the
Apostle to depart from the Faith of Christ and to attend to the doctrine of
devils. But suc^ as leave the Faith of Christ, and atten^ to the doctrine of
Devils, are not i^ state of Salvation. In my judgment, the one authority
alone is sufficient to oue^throw this fantasy of our Newtrallists (...) since
the words are divine Scripture, the Heresies reprehended no fundamental^ points
of Religion, but of as little or lesse^ consequence, then the Controversies
betwixt the Catholics and the Protestants: and yet the maintainers of them are
accounted to depart from the Faith of Christ, and to attend to the doctrine of
devils.

A second place shall be that of the former Apostle; who writing of certain
Heretics erring, touching the Resurrection of the Body (though the article of
the Resurrection it self they believed) says thus: 2. Tim. cap. ^.
Their speech spreads like a Canker, of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus, who
have erred from the truth, saying, That the Resurrection is already past, and
have subverted the Faith of some. These men believed all the mysteries of the
Trinity, the Incarnation etc. yet for erring only, touching the Resurrection of
the body, they are said to err from the truth, to subvert the Faith of some:
and that as Canker never leaves the body, till ^y little and little it wastes
it away; so their speeches by degrees, poison and kill ^he souls of the
hearers. From which it ^uidently follows, that these Heretics ^ontinuing and
dying in the foresaid Here^ie could not be saved: since that faith, which
^rreth from the truth, which subuerteth the true ^aith of Christ in others, and
which in killing and ^estroying resembles a Canker, cannot affoard Salvation
to its Professors.

Another passage, which here I will urge, ^s that of S. John, who calls
certain He^etikes, Antichrists, saying: 1. Joan. c. 2.
Now there are be^ome many Antichrists, who went out of us, and were not of us;
for if they had been of us, they would surely have remained with us. These
Heretics believed in the Trinity, in the Incarnation of Christ, that he dyed
for the salvation of the whole world; and only they erred touching the Person
and Natures of Christ; and yet they are figuratively styled Antichrists, and
are said to depart out of the Church of Christ; but no salvation is reserved
for Antichrists and Apostataes, leaving the Church of Christ. And thus much out
of Gods holy Writ, expressly touching Heresy in general, and particular.

To these Texts I will adioyne (though not immediately and directly raunged
under the former head) a place or two of Scripture, in my judgment most
unanswerable, and by necessary inference, euicting the point here vndertake^.
The first place is those words of S. Peter, where he says: 2. Ep. c. 3.
In the Epistles of S. Paul, there are certain things hard to be understood,
which the unlearned and unstable do pervert unto their own destruction. Now
here I thus argue: But these things hard to be understood in S. Paul his
Epistles, did not concern the doctrine of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the
Passion etc. and yet the misunderstanding of them does cause (as the text
says) the destruction, that is the damnation of them, who misunderstand them.
Therefore far lesser points then the denial of the Trinity, the Incarnation,
the Passion etc. do justly threaten to the false belieuers of them, damnation;
and consequently it follows, that a bare belief of those supreme points is
not sufficient to Salvation.

That those difficulties in S. Paul's Epistles, intimated by S. Peter, did not
concern the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion etc. I prove several
ways: first because S. Peter makes no such mention, which no doubt he would
have done, if the subject of them had only touched those supreme mysteries, and
were not to be extended to other inferior points. Secondly, it is
acknowledged by the writings and ^ommentaries of all the Fathers (besides ^at
the Epistles themselves show no less) ^at S. Paul is most evident and clear
in (...) his Epistles touching the Trinity, the ^carnation, the Passion etc.
and therefore ^ere is no reason, why the difficulties of them should be applied
to those articles, such less restrained to them alone.

Thirdly, the Fathers do understand these ^^fficulties in S. Paul his Epistles
mentio^d by S. Peter, chiefly touching Iustifica^o^, as appareth by the
testimony even of S. ^gustine l. de fide and operibus. c. 15. and 16.
himself, who particulerly ^tanceth in that place 1. Corinthians. 3. If ^ man
build upon this foundation, gold, silver, (...). (which text entreats of
Justification and works) and expressly says, that this is he of the difficult
passages intended, and ^ant by S. Peter. With S. Augustine, S. ^ome may seem
well to agree in these ^ords: Epist. ad Algasiam quae. 8.
Epistola ad Romanos nimijs obscuri^bus inuoluta est: The Epistle to the Ro^^ns
is inuolued with many obscurities, or ^ake places: for it is found, that the
Epi^^le to the Romans most entreats of Iu^fication, and of faith, and works.
Four^ly and lastly, the Protestants themselves (...) understand the said
obscurities of S. Paul (...) Epistles touching Justification, as appears (to
omit the testimonies of ^ others herein) from the words, and Comment of Doctor
Fulke against the Rh^mish Testament, upon the foresaid pla^^ of S. Peter. And
this far of this text, when we find by an inevitable deduction, that false
Faith touching Justification only, cannot stand with Salvation.

The second text of scripture is contain^ in those words of the Apostle, where
thus says: c. 11. ad Hebraeos.
(s) Credere oportet accedentem ad D^ quia est, and inquirentibus se
remunerator sit: (...) that comes to God, must believe that God i^ and is a
rewarder to them that seek him. He is imposed a necessity (as appears by
t^^ word Oportet) to believe not only, that the is a God, but that this God
gives rewar^ to such as seek him, to wit, eternal ly^ But to believe, that
God is a rewarder of go^ men, is an article in it self wholly distinct, (...)
different from the articles of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion etc.
and in natu^^ independent of these other: for a man man believe, that God is a
rewarder of good me^ with eternal felicity, and yet not belieu^ these other
supreme Mysteryes, as man virtuous men (no doubt) did in the law o^ nature, and
in the time of the old Test^ment; and on the contrary side, a man man believe
those chief articles of Christianity and yet not particulerly believe, that
God is a rewarder of such as seek him. And yet we see, the belief of this
later point is necessarily exacted by the Apostle of all those, who come to
God; and consequently of all those who shall be saved, seeing no man can be
saved, but such as come to God.

THE SAME PROVED, FROM THE DEfinition, Nature, and Propriety of Faith. CHAP.
III.
IN this place we shall first take into our consideration the definition of
faith set down by S. Paul. Secondly, the dignity and worth of ^ayth, much
celebrated by diverse of the A^ostles. Thirdly, the inseparable propriety ^f
Faith, which is Unity, for so does the ^cripture delineate, and describe Faith:
^^om all which it will ineuitably follow, that, that Faith which saves man, is
not ^o be restrained only to the Trinity, the ^ncarnation, and other such
sublime points ^f Christian Religion (though in other points it be erroneous)
but to all points whatsoever, which the Church of God propounds to be
believed.

And to begin with the definition of Faith given by the Apostle: He thus
de^neth Faith: c. 11. ad Hebraeos.
Faith is the substance of thi^ to be hoped for, the argument of things not
app^ring. The sense whereof is this: first, the Faith through an infallible
certainty, ca^seth those things to subsist, and have a b^ing in the mind of
man, which are y^ to come, but hoped and looked for. S^condly, that faith
causes the understanding to give an assent to those points whi^ it
understands not; acknowledging the^ to be more certain, then any other thin^
whatsoever, according to those words of (...) Thomas: quaest. 4. art. 8.
Multo magis homo certior est de eo q^^ audit a Deo, qui falli non potest, quam
de eo qu^ videt propria ratione, quae falli potest. Now hee^ I trust no man will
deny, but the Apostle d^fined that Faith of a Christian, which s^ueth him. This
being granted (for to den^ it were both impious in the denier, and mo^
injurious to the Apostle) we are to remember the nature of every true
definition, s^ down by the Logitians, to wit (as is above intimated) that the
thing defined, an^ the definition be of one and the same exten^ and latitude,
so as whatsoever is comprehended under the definition, the same is also
contained under the thing defined. This the^ being presupposed by force of all
reason (for Logike is but an artificial ha^dmaid to Reason) we find, that this
definition of Faith ^mpriseth in it self, not only the Doctri^e of the
Trinity, of the Incarnation, etc. and this, not articulately, but only by way
^deduction) but also it contains all se^^ndary points of Religion: seeing the
for^r definition does predicate, or may be ^^d of all the said secondary and
less prin^all points of Religion, controuerted bet^eene Christians at any
time. Therefore the ^ng here defined, which is the saving ^ayth of a Christian,
is in like sort to ex^^nd it self to all the said secondary points ^ Religion,
how indifferent soever they ^^me in man's judgment. This inference is (...)
demonstratiue, being taken from the for^er definition of Faith, as that the
Apostle ^^mselfe presently after the former words, ^^ginning to instance the
several Object of ^^yth (among diverse other examples) set^h down, that to
believe Noah's flood, (...) the deluge of the world by water, for ^ne, is an
article of Faith: for thus he ^^yth: By Faith Hebr. 11.
Noah having received an ans^^re concerning those things, which as yet were ^ot
seen, fearing, framed the Arc for the saving of ^is house.

But to proceed further; If the Articles of he Trinity, the Incarnation, and
the like (...) the only essential points of a true Christian Faith, it is more
then wonderful that the Apostle undertaking to set down the true definition of
an auailable Faith and exemplifying it in it several Objects should wholly and
silently omit the say articles of the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion etc. he in
that Chapter not expressly speaking one word of them.

And thus much touching the definition of Faith given by the Apostle; from
which definition we conclude, that whosoeu^^ seeks to have a true Faith
necessary to sa^uation, must believe (besides the mysteri^ of the Trinity, the
Incarnation etc.) diue^ others dogmaticall articles of Christian Religion. And
therefore answereably ther^ we assure our selves, that when our Sauio^ said: He
Marc. 16.
that belieueth not, shall be condemne^ he did speak of the believing of the
who^ corpse of Christian Faith and Doctrine, a^ not only of any part thereof; for
so in this l^ter manner it would be both false and absur^ In like fort, where
our Blessed Savior (...) the same Chapter says to his Apostle Preach the
Gospel to all creatures etc. He d^ understand the whole Gospel, which
c^^tayneth many other points, besides the T^^nity, Incarnation, and Passion,
etc.

In this next place we will descend (...) those passages of holy Scripture,
which much magnify the efficacy and virtue of ^^yth: And accordingly heerto we
find it (...) said: Marc. vlt.
He that belieueth, and is baptized, ^^albe saved; but he that belieueth not,
shall be con^^mned. Again our Savior said to the ^ind men, praying to receive
their sight: According to your faith be it done unto you: Mat. 9.
and further: Hebr. c. 11.
Without faith it is impossible to ^ase God. And more: 1. Joan. c. 5.
Our faith is the virie, which overcomes the world: Now in ^^ese and many
other such texts, for breuity ^itted, I demand, what faith is vnder^od or
meant? If it be answered, a true, ^yre and perfect faith, believing all points
Christian Religion proposed by Gods ^^urch; it is true, and that, which I hear
^e to prove: If an imperfect and mun^l faith, believing some points of
Chri^^^^^ Religion, and rejecting others, and so ^rroneus faith, being partly
true, partly ^; I say it can never deserve these praises ^n by the Evangelists
and Apostles, nei^^^ can it produce such supernatural ef^ above specifyed; no
more then darke^ an produce light: since Truth himself (...) taught us: Luc. 6.
That we cannot gather figs ^ornes, nor grapes of bushes. And hence by
premises we are to understand, that we ^n entyre and perfect faith, that, by
the ^h we believe all supreme articles of the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion
etc. an^ all the articles of the Creed, expressly and articulately in their
true sense; and do believe all other inferior articles, at least implicitly;
that is, that we have a ready preparation of mind to believe all other
articles, which the Church of Christ dot^ propound to be believed; so as, that
thoug^ we do not believe every article of Chr^stian Religion with an explicit
and express faith, yet we are bound under pain^ of damnation, nor to believe
any doctrine contrary or repugnant to the said article^ which the Church of
Christ does pr^pound to be believed: from which it unavoidably follows, that
once grauntin^ that the Church of Christ propounds (...) be believed, that
there is a Purgatory, ^ that we may pray to the Saints, he incureth damnation
who belieueth that the^ is no Purgatory, or that we ought not (...) pray to
Saints.

Now in this third place, we will touc^ that inseparable Attribute of true
Chr^stian faith, which is Unity in faith (...) doctrine. This mark is so
indissolub^^ annexed to the true faith of Christ, as the we find his Apostles
ever ready most ^^riously to inculcate the same to their d^ciples. Thus
accordingly the Apos^^ exhorts the Ephesians, saying: Ephesians. 4.
Be you careful to keep the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace. And
immediately again. Ephesians. vbi supra.
There is one Lord, one faith, one Baptism. Where we see, that Unity in faith
is expressly set down. As also in another place: Ephesians. loc. cit.
I beseech you, that you speak all one thing: be you k^it together in one mind
and one judgment. And as this was the exhortation of the Apostle, To we read
that the first belieuers followed ^he same, of whom S. Luke thus says: The
Act. 4.
multitude that believed, were of one heart, and ^ne soul. And hence it
proceeds, that the Church of Christ (which comprehends the Professors of
this unanimous faith) is ^tyled by Gods holy writ, Romans 12.
One Body, one Cant. 6.
Spouse, and, Joan. 10.
and one flock of sheep. A truth ^o evident, as that (besides the frequent
te^timonies of the Fa^hers Athanasius orat. 1. con. Any. Chrysostom. opere
imperfecto in Mat. Hom. 20. Tertullian de praescript. Irenaeus l r. c. 5.
confirming the ^ame) ever the Protestants subscribe in iudg^ent heerto. For
thus Luther tom. 3. Wittenberg in psalm. 5. fol. 166.
Luther himself to omit see her^^^f the Deuines of Mansfeild against the
Sacramentaries; And the Deuines of Heidelberg against the Anabaptists.
others) writes: A kingdom deui^ed in it self, shall not stand; neither have
any ^eretikes at any time bine overcome by force or ^btility, but by mutual
dissension; neither does christ fight with them otherwise, then with a spi^^t
of giddines, and disagreement.

Now then, this Unity of faith is so to be ^nderstood, as that it is not
repugnant thereto, that one and the same point should at one time, not be
houlden as necessary to be believed; the which after it has undergone a
definitive and sententionall decree of Gods Church, is necessarily to be
believed. As for example, it was not necessary in the beginning of Christianity
to believe, that the book of the Machabees, the Epistle of S. James, S. Jude,
the second Epistle of S. Peter, the second and third of S. John to be
Canonical Scripture, till they were defined so to be by the third Council
Can. 47.
of Carthage, at which S. Augustine was present; But after this Council had,
by the assistance of the holy Ghost, defined them to be Canonical, and this
after confirmed by the consent of the whole Church; then it was, and is Heresy
to deny them to be Canonical. And the reason of this disparity is, because it
is Gods good pleasure and wisdom, not to reveal to his Church all articles of
faith in the beginning, and at one time, but at several times, and upon
several occasions, as to his divine Majesty best seems expedient.

Thus the faith of a Christian is capable of dilatation, and of a more large
unfolding, or exposition; but not of any contrariety in belief, change, or
alteration. An^ thus (to insist in the former example) y^ may well stand with
Christian faith, in the ^eginning not to accept the former books or
Canonical, till the authority of the Church had pronounced them for such. But
it stands not with sound faith, that one man should positiuely believe (now
after the Churches definition thereof given) as an article of faith, that the
Machabees and the rest of the books above specified, are not Canonical
Scripture, but the profane writings of man; and another man should believe, as
an article of Faith, that they are Canonical Scripture; since the one of these
contrary beleifes must be Heretical.

This verity of the Unity of faith being warranted by the word both of God and
man (as is above said) we will take into our consideration the Catholic and
Protestant Religions, both which jointly do profess to believe in general, in
the Trinity, in Christ's Incarnation, his Passion, and the Creed of the
Apostles; and so we shall discern whether the faith of all these several
Professors does enjoy the foresaid mark of unity in doctrine or not. But
seeing this Subject is most ample and large, I will therefore sepose this ensuing
chapter for the more full and exact discovery of the many and great
disagreements between the Catholics and the Protestants in their faith and
Religion.

THE SAME PROVED FROM want of unity in faith, between Catholics an^
Protestants, touching the Articles of the Creed CHAP. IIII.
UNDERTAKING in this place t^ set down the multiplicity of opinions, between
Catholics an^ Protestants, though they all jointly believe in the Trinity, the
Incarnation o^ Christ, his Passion, and the like; and consequently, that this
their general belief wants that true Unity of faith, which out of the holy
Scriptures, Fathers, and the Protestants I have above showed to be most
necessary to Salvation; I will first examine, how the Protestants and
Catholics do differ touching the belief of the Creed, made by the Apostles.
Next I will demonstrate, that supposing all Professors of both Religions
should agree in the true sense and meaning of the Creed; yet there are diverse
other dogmaticall points necessarily to be believed, (and are at this instant
believed both by Protestants and Catholics) which are not expressed or
mentioned in the Creed, nor by any immediate inference can be drawn from
thence. Lastly I will set down the great difference between Catholics and
Protestants in other points of faith, of which the Creed makes no intimation or
mention at al; and yet the different belief of them is houlden necessary to
Salvation, both by Catholic and Protestant. From all which it shall appear,
how far distant the Catholic and Protestant Religion are from that unity in
doctrine, so necessarily required to that faith, whereby a Christian is to be
saved.

I do here begin with the Apostles Creed: first because the articles of the
Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion, are included in the Creed. Secondly, by
reason there are many Adiaphorists in Religion (as I may term them) who seem
to deal more largly and liberally heerin; seeing they are content to extend
the necessary Object of Faith, not only to the articles of the Trinity, the
Incarnation, and the Passion, but to all points set down in the Creed, who
assure themselves, that God exacteth at our hands, the belief of no other
articles, then are contained in the Creed.

Now here aforehand we are to conceive, that true Faith rests in the true
sense and meaning of the words of the Creed which was intended by the Apostles,
and not in the words themselves; seeing both in the judgment of all learned
Catholics and Protestants, to believe the words of the Creed in a sense
different from the intended sense of the Apostles (and consequently in a false
sense) is no better, then not to believe the Creed at all. And the reason hereof
is, because a false construction drawn from the Creed (no less then from the
Scripture) is not the word of God, but of man; and consequently the said letter
of the Creed so interpreted, is subject to the same censure, whereunto the word
of man is liable: from whence it follows, that whosoever belieueth the words
of the Creed in another sense, then was intended by the holy Ghost and the
Apostles, does not believe the Creed at all; but only belieueth the word of
man, which ever stands subject to error and mistaking. So as, that sentence
of S. Jerome delivered only of the Scripture, may justly be applied to the
Creed: In Epistola ad Paulinum.
Scripturae non in legendo, sed in intelligendo consistunt: Scriptures (or
Creed) do not consist in the letter, but in the sense and true understanding of
the letter.

This then being thus justly presupposed, let us begin to examine the
articles of the Creed, and see, how we Catholics and Protestants do differ in
the construction and understanding thereof. And first touching the first article
of our Belief in God, observe how different it is. The Catholics do believe,
that their God no way formally cooperateth or wills sin in man; that he
has but one simple and expressed will touching Sin, and this in detesting or
hating of Sin: that he will not punish us for not keeping of such precepts,
the which are not in our power to keep; that he imputes sins to every man
that commits sin; briefly that he gives to all sufficient grace to save
their souls, and desires that al men may be saved. Whereas the Protestants
believe the mere contrary to all these points: for they believe, that God Beza
his display of Popish practices p. 102. says: God exciteth the wicked will of
one thief to kill another: see Swinglius tom. 1. de Prouiden. c. 6. fol. 365.
Calu. Instit. l. 2. c. 18. sect. 1.
cooperateth, forces, and wills a man to sin: That he has a double will
(and therefore a dissembling will) the one expressed in Scripture, according to
which he forbids man to sin, the other concealed to himself, by the which
he impelleth man to sin; that he will D. Reynolds in his 2. Conclusion annexed
to his Conference p. 697.
punish us for transgressing the ten Commandments, it not being in our power
to keep the said Commandments; Luther tom. 2. wittenb. de capt. Babylon. fol.
74. D. Whitaker de Eccl. contra Bellarm. controuersia 2. quaest. 5. p. 301.
that to the faithful, sinning never so wickedly, no sin shall be imputed.

Finally, that to Calu. de Inst. l. 30. 23. says: Confilio nutuque etc. God
does ordain by his counsel, that among men some be borne to certain
damnation from their mothers womb. See Willets Synopsis p. 554. affirming the
same.
certain men he gives not sufficient means of Salvation, but purposes and
decrees from all eternity, that some men (living in the eye of the world and
in their own consciences never so virtuously) shall be damned, and thrall to
sempiternall perdition. Thus we see, how great a difference there is between
the Catholics and the Protestants, in beleiuing the first article of the
Creed. And how necessarily it follows, that either the Catholics or
Protestants, do stand subject and obnoxious to that saying of S. Augustine: q.
29. sup. Iosue.
Who imagines God such as God is not, he carries every where another God, a
false God in his mind.

Touching the second article, which is And in Jesus Christ his only Son: We
Council. Trid.
Catholics believe in Christ, who is God of God, and equal to his Father; a
Savior, who suffered death, quoad sufficientiam, for all mankind, and who
accomplished the function of his Sauiourship, only according to hi^ humanity; a
Savior, who dyed only in body and not in soul; finally a Savior, who from
his first conception was endewed with all knowledge, wisdom, and providence,
and exempt from all ignorance, passion and perturbation. Whereas diverse chief
Protestants do believe in Christ, as their Savior, who according to their
faith, is God of D. Whitaker approves this opinion, alleging Calvin in
prooffe thereof, Contra Ca^pianum p. 121.
himself, and Melancton in loc. comm. edit. 1561. p. 41.
inferior to the Father; who dyed only for the So does D. Willet teach in
Sinopsi, printed anno 1600. p. 780. as also Calvin and Beza in whole Treatises.
Elect; who performed his mediation, not only according to his humanity, but
also according to his divinity (though in the judgment of all earned men true
Divinity is impassible) who in the time of his Passion (besides the death of
the body, as insufficient for our ^aluatio^) suffered in soul the torments
Melancton vbi supra. D. fulke in his retent. p. 89.
So teaches Calvin Instit. l 2. c. 16. sect. 10. and D. Whit. contra Duraeum
l. 8. p. 556.
of Hell; briefly who labored with ignorance, So teaches Beza in resp. ad act
Colloq. Montisb. part. 1. p. 147. D. Willet Synop. p. 599. and 600.
passion, and even desperation it self.

Touching the Article of Christ's descen^^ng into Hell, the Catholics do
believe ^^ereby, that Christ descended in soul after his Passion, into that
part of Hell, with is called Lymbus Patrum, to deliver from thence the souls
of the Just, there detayned till ^is coming; of which judgment are also some
learned Protestants. But the greatest part of So D. Bilson in his Survey of
^^^ists suffering etc. p. 650. 651. 652. The Luthera^s are generally ^he same
opinion.
Protestants do interpret this article of Christ's descending into his D. Willet
in his Lymbomastix. D. Fulke ^ged by D. Willet in Synop. p. 605. 606.
^^aue; so by the word, Hell, understanding ^^e grave. But l. 2. Instit. c.
16.. 20.
Calvin teaches, that by Christ's descending into Hell, is vndertood, that
Christ apprehended God to be ^ost angry and offended with him for our ^akes;
and that thereupon Christ suffered ^^eat anxiety and grief of soul; and which
is more, most blasphemously Calvin teaches, that Christ uttered words of
desperation in saying: O God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

Touching the article of Christ's ascending into Heaven, we Catholics and the
Caluinists do believe heerby, that Christ truly in body ascended up into
Heaven: whera^ all Lutherans Luther in l. de Sacrament. Coenae Domini, tom. 2.
fol. 112. where he says: Credimus quod Christus iuxta humanitatem est vbique
praesens. The same is taught by Brentius in Apolog. pro Confess. Wittenberg.
And finally by all the Lutherans.
do teach, that Christ's Body is in all places with the divinity, and that
therefore it did not really, after his Passion, ascend up into Heaven, it being
there both before and after his Passion. Thus the Lutherans, both in ours, and
the Protestants judgments, do destroy, by this their construction, the whole
Creed, and particulerly Christ's Incarnation, Nativity, Passion, death,
ascending to Heaven, and his coming to Judgment; for supposing Christ's body to
be in all places, all these articles were but apparently, or phantastically,
and not truly and really performed.

Touching the article of Christ's judging the quick and dead: We Catholics do
believe, that Christ at his coming to judgment, will so judge man, as that his
good works, receiving all their force from our Saviors Passion, shall be
rewarded: whereas the Protestants denying all Calu. l. 3. Instit. c. 5.. ^.
Bucer. in actis Colloq. Ratisbon. Beza, Zwinglius and most Protestants.
merit of works (as injurious and derogatory to his death and Passion) do
hold, that Christ shall then reward only a bare and special Calu. in Antidoto
Conc. Tri. Kemnitius in examen Conc. Trident. and most other Protestants.
faith.

Concerning the article, I believe in the holy Ghost: Whereas all Catholics and
many Protestants, do believe, that the holy Ghost is the third Person in the
most Blessed Trinity; Calvin how ever he was persuaded of the truth or
falsehood thereof, much labors notwithstanding to avoid the force of
arguments drawn from the chiefest places of scripture, and usually alleged by all Antiquity, in proof of the holy Ghost being the third Person in the
Trinity. Thus we find, that Calvin Instit. l. 1. c. 13.. 15.
will not have (contrary to all Antiquity) that passage of Scripture, Psalm. 33.
By the word of the Lord the Heavens were made, and all the Host of the^ by the
spirit of his mouth, to be understood of the divinity of the holy Ghost: In
like sort he rejects the argument See of this Subject against the Trinity,
Aegidius Hunnius a Protestant, in his book entitled Caluinus Iudaiza^s.
drawn from that other most ^^markable text, John 5. There be three, that give
testimony in Heaven, the Father, the word, and the holy Ghost, and these three
be one; Calvin upon this place thus saying (heerby to take away from thence the
proof of the holy Ghost:) Quod dicit tres esse vnum, ad essentiam non
refertur, sed ad consensum potius. Finally Luther was so far from acknowledging
the holy Ghost to be the third Person in the Trinity, or to confess the
Trinity it self, that thus he writes: Luther Confut ration, Lat.
Anima mea odit hoc verbum Homousion, vel Consubstantialis. My very soul does
hate the word Homousion, or Consubstantiall.

Concerning the article, I believe the holy Catholic Church: The Catholics do
believe this Church to be a visible company of men, professing the present
Roman Catholic faith, of which some are predestined, others reprobated, The
Protestants do believe this Church to consist only of the Confess. Augustana
Art. 7. Luther. l. de Conc and Eccles. Call. l. 4. Inst. c. 1.. 2.
Elect and Predestinate.

Touching the Article, the Communion of Saints: The Catholics do hereby
believe such a Communion to be betwixt the Saints in Heaven, the Souls in
Purgatory, and men upon earth, that the one part does help the other with their
most auaylable prayers and Intercessions. The Protestants deny all such
intercourse of benefits between these several parts ^f the Church of Christ;
Calu. l. 3. Instit. c. 5.. 6. Centuriatores Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. col. 460.
Brentius in confess. wittenberg. c. de Purgatorio.
accounting the Catholics doctrine herein, superstitious and sacrilegious.

Lastly, touching the Article of forgiveness of Sins, we Catholics do
believe, that this remission of sins, is performed when the soul by a true
and inherent Justice, and by the infused gifts of God enjoys a renouation of
herself, and thereby becomes truly just in the sight of God. The Protestants
disalowing all inherent Justice, do only acknowledge an Ke^nit. in Examen.
Council. Trident. Call. l. 3. Instit. c. 11.
imputative Justice or righteousness, which consists in that the Justice of
Christ is (as they teach) only imputed unto sinners; so as we remain still
sinners, though our sin be not imputed unto us, through Christ's Justice. A
doctrine injurious to the most meritorious Passion, and death of Christ.

Thus have we run over the chief articles of the Creed, from whence we
collect, that seeing (as is above demonstrated) He only belieueth auailably,
and truly the Creed, who belieueth it in that sense, in which the Apostles did
write it; and seeing there are mere different or rather contrary constructions
of every Article, given by the Catholics and the Protestants; so as if the
construction of the Catholics be true, it follows necessarily that the other
of the Protestants be false, or contrariwise; we may therefore justly conclude,
that it is not sufficient to salvation for any one to say, that he beliueth the
Creed, who belieueth the words of it in general (without restrayning them to
any peculiar construction given either by Catholics or Protestants) except he
believe it in that one particular sense (and none other) which was intended by
the holy Ghost, when it was first framed by the Apostles.

Now in this next place, we are to demo^strate, that granting for a time, by
an Hypothesis, or supposall, that a man did believe all the Articles of the
Creed in their true sense and construction; yet follows it not, that this
belief (though it be most necessary) were sufficient for a man, to obtain his
salvation hereby; and the reason hereof is, because it is most certain, that
there are diverse points of Christian Religion houlde^ necessarily to be
believed in judgment both of Catholics and Protestants (and accordingly are
believed iontly both by Ptotestants and Catholics) and yet the said point^ are
not contained or expressed in the Creed* Among others I will insist in these
following.

First, That there are certain divine writings o^ infallible authority, which
we commonly call^ the Scriptures of the old and new Testament of which
Testaments we find no mention in the Creed, and yet all men are bound under
pain of damnation, to believe tha^ there are such writings; since other waye^
(abstracting from the authority of the Church) there were not sufficient mean
left, to believe that it were a sin to break^ any of the ten Commandments,
o^ (which is more) that Christ Jesus was the true Savior of the world; for
though w^ read in the Creed, that he suffered and died, yet we read not
expressly there, that he dyed to redeem man.

2. That there are spiritual Substances, which we call Angels, which now enjoy
the most happy sight of God; and that many thousands of them did fall presently
after their Creation, and are become those malignant Spirits, which usually are
termed Devils.

3. That there is any material place of Hell, where the wicked are tormented,
of which we find nothing in the Creed, in the judgment of the Protestants; for
though the word, Hell, be mentioned in that Article He descended into Hell; yet
by the word, Hell, the grave is understood by most of the Protestants.

4. That the pains of the damned shall be for all eternity, and not for a
certain time only.

5. That Adam did presently upon his Creation fall from the grace of God, and
thereby transferred Original sin upon all mankind; so as by reason of his
fall, all men are borne in Original sin.

6. That the world was once drowned for sin: which Inundation is commonly
called Noes flood.

7. That, our Savior whiles he conuersed here upon earth, did any miracles.

8. That S. John Baptist was our Saviors Precursor, or forerunner; and that
our Savior did choose unto him certain men for his Apostles, which did first
preach, and plant the Christian faith, throughout the world.

9. That Circumcision is now forbidden, as a thing most unlawful and ungodly.

10. That there are any Sacraments of the new Testament, (as the Sacrament of
Baptism, or Eucharist) and instituted by Christ for the spiritual good of
man's soul.

These points (besides some others) all christians (as well Protestants as
catholics) do believe, and do hold that their belief of these points is
necessary to salvation; and yet not any one of all these Articles is expressed
or set down in the Apostles creed. From whence I would conclude, that the
Apostles Creed cannot be a sufficient boundary, to contain and limit an
auayleable faith: For what hope can that man have of his salvation, who
belieueth, that there are neither any divine scriptures, nor Angels, nor
Diuell^; nor any Decalogue, commonly called the Ten commandments, nor that
Christ did work any miracles; nor that he dyed for man; nor that he instituted
any Sacrament, and particulerly the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Eucharist;
nor finally (to omit the rest) that there is any place of Hell, or any eternity
of punishment for the damned?

And here I am to premonish the Reader, that it is no sufficient answer to
reply, that most of all the foresaid points are expressed in the Scripture, and
therefore are to be believed; This (I say) avails not, seeing here I dispute
against those, who maintain with wonderful pertinacity of judgment, that it
is sufficient to salvation to believe only the Articles, (and nothing else)
which are contained in he Creed: bu^ not any of the former Articles are
contained therein. Again, seeing to believe that there are any divine
scriptures, is not expressed in the Creed, it conduces nothing to the
answering of this our argument, to say, that the forementioned articles are
proved out of Scripture, and therefore are to be believed.

Neither secondly, can the force of our said argument be avoided in replying,
that all the former articles are virtually and potentially comprehended in that
article, I believe the holy Church; because the Church teaches that all these
articles are to be believed. This is no warantable answer, by reason that, as
these may be reduced to this Ar^icle of the creed, so also may all other points
controuerted between the catholics and the Protestants be in like manner
reduced to the said Article; seeing the church of God sets down what is the
truth, and what is to be believed in the said controversies; bynding her
children under pain of damnation, as well to believe the truth in the
controversies of our days, as to believe the former mentioned articles, which
are not expressed in the creed. And yet these our Newtrallists in Religion, who
make the Creed the sole square of their Faith, do not think that those
questions of Religion insisted upon between the Catholics and the
Protestants, are in believing or not believing of them, any way hurtful to
their Salvation.

THE SAME PROVED FROM the want of unity in faith, between Catholics and
Protestants, in Articles necessary to be believed, and yet not expressed in the
Creed. CHAP. V.
IN this third and last place, we will ^nsist in certain controversies of
Religion, necessarily to be believed (the one way) both in the judgment of
^atholikes and Protestants, and not contained in the creed; and yet so
differently maintained by Catholics and Protestants, as that granting the
maintayners on the one side hold the truth, it follows, that the other party
vphouldeth falsehood and Heresy. Now for the more dangerous wounding of our
Newtralizing Christians herein, I will omit here to speak of the
controversies touching Purgatory, Praying to Saints, Freewill, Monachisme, and
diverse other such like, and will restrain my self only to those
Controversies, the subject of which Controversies are taught by the one side to
be (under Christ) the immediate means of our grace and Salvation; and denied
by the other party to be of any such force or efficacy for the souls
everlasting good: So as if it be showed, that the Protestants and the
Catholics do maynely dissent in the means of obtaining grace, and purchasing
of salvation, it must of necessity be inferred, that both the Protestants and
Catholics (continuing in such their contrary fayths) cannot attain grace and
salvation: since not only Philosophy, but even natural reason teaches us,
that he never shall attain the end, who uses either not the same means, or
contrary to those means, which are only and necessarily instituted to the
gayning of the said end.

Concerning the Sacraments in general; the Catholics do believe, that all of
them (where no just impediment is) do confer grace into the soul of man; by
the help and continuance of which grace, the soul in the end obtayneth
salvation: The Protestants do not ascribe any such supernatural effect or
operation of grace to them.

Baptism, the Catholics believe, that Children, as being borne in Original
sin, cannot be saved, except they be baptized with water, according to those
words of S. Joan. 3.
John: Unless a man be borne again of water and the spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God. The Willet in his meditation upon the 122. Psalm,
and Calvin and Beza most frequently.
Protestants believe, that Infants dying unbaptized, may be saved.

Touching the Sacrament of Penance, or Confession: The Catholics believe,
that after a Christian has committed any one mortal sin, that sin cannot
be forgiven him, but by means of confessing the said sin to a Priest of the
new Testament, and receiving absolution thereof from him; answereably to that of
S. Ca. 20.
John: whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose sins
you shall retain, they are retained. The Protestants believe, that neither the
confession of sins to man, nor the absolution of man is necessary for the
remitting of sin unto them, but that it is suficient to confess them only to
God. And thus according to this their diversity of doctrine, either the
Protestants, for want of this Sacrament, granting it to be necessary (after he
has once mortally sinned) cannot be saved; or the Catholic for practicing a
false and superstitious manner of seeking to have his sins remitted
(supposing it to be repugnant to the Institution of Christ) cannot have them
remitted, and consequently cannot be saved.

the most blessed Eucharist; The Catholics believe, that the very body and
blood does lie ineffably, and latently under the forms of bread and wine,
according to that: Mat. 26.
This is my Body, This is my blood. That Joan. 6.
Unless we eat his Body and drink his blood, we shall not have life
everlasting: Lastly, that we are to Adore Christ his Body, being accompanied
with his Divinity in the said Sacrament. The Protestants do believe, that his
true Body, as never leaving heaven, cannot possibly be truly and really under
the forms of bread and wine; and consequently they believe that the eating of
his body and drinking of his blood, is not necessary to Salvation; finally they
hold our Adoration of the Sacrament, to be open Idolatry; and term
Catholics Idolaters for the adoring of it. And thus the Protestants, as not
feeding upon this Celestial food, shall not have life everlasting, if the
Catholics doctrine heerin be true; or else Catholics, suppose they should
err, for teaching and practicing

Touching the means of our Justification: the Catholics believe, that not
only faith, but works also do justify: The Protestants reject all works from
Justification, teaching that only faith does justify man: yea they further
proceed, affirming, that who once has true faith, is most assured, and
Calvin. in Instit. passim. Kemnitius in exam. Concilij Trident.
certain of his salvation; whereas the Catholics, reputing this as mere
presumption, are willing according to the Phil. 2.
Apostle, to work their salvation with fear and trembling. To be short the
Protestants so Luther in art. 10. 11. 12. Calvin. in Antidot. Council. Trident.
sess. 6. Melancthon in locis. tit. de fide.
do teach, that a man by thinking himself to be Just, is by this means become
Just; whereas the Catholics do hold this doctrine not only to be
fantastical, but also in Vide Bellarm. l. 3. de Iustificat.
reason most absurd.

This is taught by Calvin and Beza in whole Treatises, and by D. Willet in his
Synopsis of anno. 1600. p. 589.
Protestants teach, that God gives not this sufficiency of grace to every
one, but to certain men only, and that diverse there are, who, notwithstanding
all their endeavor to believe truly, and live virtuously, yet cannot, nor
shall not be saved.

Decalogue, or ten Commaundments: The Catholics believe, that except a
Christian do keep them, he cannot be saved, according to that saying of our
Savior: Mat. 19.
If thou will enter into life, keep the Commaundments: The D. Reynolds in his
2. Conclus. annexed to his Conference p. 697. D. Willet in his Synopsis p. 564.
Protestants do absolutely teach an impossibility of keeping them; And
thereupon Sermon. de Moyse.
Luther thus affirms: The ten Commandments appertain not to us.

Lastly, Touching the Pope, or Bishop of Rome, The Catholics do believe, that
he is, under Christ, the supreme Pastor upon Earth; that who does not
communicate with him in Sacraments and doctrine, not yealding him all due
obedience, in subiecting their judgments in matters of faith to his judgment
and sententionall definitions, set down in a general Council, cannot be
saved: The Protestants do teach, the Bishop of Rome is that Antichrist, which
is decyphered by the 2. These. 2. and Apocal. 13. and 17.
Apostle, and which is the designed enemy of Christ; and that whosoever
imbraceth his doctrine, or enthralleth (as they write) their assents to his
Cathedral decrees in points of Religion, cannot obtain Salvation.

Thus far of these points, in which I have made particular choice to insist
(omitting some others of like nature) because we see, that most or all of them
do immediately and principally (as is above said) touch the means of
purchasing of grace, of remission of our Sins, and of obtaining our
Salvation, being maintained for such by the Catholics; but utterly denied and
rejected by the Protestants. And here I now urge two things. First, if these
former doctrines, as they are believed by the Catholics do immediately
concern Salvation, and become necessary means thereof, as instituted by
Christ; then cannot the Protestants, as rejecting all such Doctrines and such
means both in belief and practice, be saved: If by a supposall, they be not
of that nature, but false in themselves, and the contrary doctrines of
Protestants true, then cannot the Catholics (as believing false doctrines
immediately touching man's Salvation, and accordingly practicing them) be saved:
from which forked argument, it may demonstratiuely be inferred, that it is
impossible that both Catholics and Protestants (the one part believing, the
other not believing the foresaid doctrines) should both be saved.

Secondly I urge, that a false belief not only in these articles, but also in
all other Controversies between the Catholic and Protestant, is plain
Heresy: And this because this false belief is comprehended within the
definition of Heresy, as being in it self an Election and choice of a new or
false doctrine, wilfully maintained against the Church of God; and therefore it
follows, that either the Catholics or Protestants, for their persisting in
this false belief or Heresy, and maintayning it against Gods Church shall be
damned. But here I will stay my self, wading no further in the disquisition,
and search of the great dissentions between Catholics and Protestants,
touching faith and belief; only I will reflect a little upon the premises. And
here it is made most evident; first, that the Catholics and Protestants do
mainly differ in the sense and construction of the Articles of the Creed; and
consequently (seeing the sense and not the words do make the Creed) that they
both do not believe one and the same Creed, but have to themselves several
Creedes; from which point is sufficiently discovered the want of Unity in faith
among them both, which Unity is so necessarily required to man's salvation, as
in the precedent chapter is demonstrated. Secondly, that though by supposition,
they did believe the Creed, and the true sense thereof with an unanimous
consent; yet it is proved, there are diverse other articles not contained in the
Creed, which are indifferently believed, as necessary to salvation, both by
Catholic and Protestant.

Thirdly, seeing also there are sundry Controversies in Religion (as is above
exemplified) which immediately concern salvation, being houlden as necessary
means thereof by Catholics, but disclaymed from, and aba^doned by the
Protestants, as main errors and false doctrines; Therefore from all the former
premises I do auerre, that it is a manifest error to make the Creed the sole
rule of Faith, and that he who maintaynes, that both the Catholics and
Protestants (notwithstanding their great disparitie of belief and faith, the
one side necessarily believing and maintayning Heresy) can be saved, or enjoy
one heaven; is wholly deprived of all true judgment, reason, and discourse; and
for want thereof may deservedly be ranged among them, of whom the psalmist
speaks: Psalm. 11.
nolite fieri sicut equus and mulus, quibus non est intellectus.

THE SAME PROVED FROM the authority and privilege of the Church, in not erring
in her definitions, and condemnation of Heresies: and first of Councels. CHAP.
VI.
FROM the inviolable unity of faith, we will next descend to the privileges
of Gods true Church: Of which privileges I will at this time take only one
into my consideration; that is, that the Church of God is endued with a supreme
privilege and prerogative of not erring in her definitions of faith, or
condemnation of heresy. This point is warranted by innumerable texts of holy
Scripture, as where it is said: Esaias. 72.
Upon thy wall, o Jerusalem, I have set watchmen, all the day and all the
night, they shall not be silent. But God did not set watchmen over his Church
to teach error. And again, The 2. Tim. 3.
Church of God is the pillar and foundation of the truth: what more
perspicuous? And further, whereas each man ^s commanded to repair in
difficulties and matters of small conseque^ces to the Church; it is threatened
by Christ himself, that who will not hear the Church, shall be accounted ^s an
Heathen, or Publican, according to that his commination: Si Ecclesiam non
au^ierit, Mat. 18.
sit tibi sicut Ethnicus and Publicanus: where we find no restriction, but that
in all things we are to hear the Church.

Again, Christ himself speaks to his Apostles, and in them to the whole
Church: He Luc. 10.
that hears you, hears me; But if the church could err, neither would
Christ refer us to the church (especially under so great a penalty,) neither by
hearing the church, could we be justly said to hear Christ. Finally, the
Church is so governed by Christ as its head or spouse, and by the holy Ghost as
its soul, as therefore we find the Apostle thus to write Ephesians. 1.
thereof: God has made him head (speaking of Christ) over all the Church,
which is his body. And again: Ephesians. 4.
One body and one spirit; and yet more: The Ephesians. 5.
man is the head of the woman, as Christ is head of the Church. From which
texts it follows, that if the church should err in its definitio^s or
resolutions of faith and condemnation of Heresy, this erring might well be
ascribed to Christ and to the holy Ghost; and consequently it follows, that
the Apostles in making the creed, would have omitted that Article: I believe in
the Catholic Church. For why should we be bound to believe the church, if the
church could err?

This truth (I mean, that the church of Christ cannot err in her
sententionall decrees) is so illustrious and evident, that Tertullian speaking
of certain Heretics of his time, obiecting the erring of the whole church,
thus figuratively or Ironically writes: Age; Omnes in l. de praescript. c. 28.
Ecclesiae errauerunt, nullam respexit spiritus Sanctus, vti eam in veritatem
deduceret, ad hoc missus a Christo, ad hoc postulatus de Patre, vt esset doctor
veritatis etc. That is, Go to; Belike all the Churches have erred, and the holy
Ghost has regarded no Church, that be might lead it into truth, being sent for
this purpose by Christ, and to the same end begged by Christ of the Father,
that it might be the teacher of truth. And S. Augustine: Disputare Epist. 118.
contra id quod Ecclesia vniuersae sentit, insolentissimae insaniae est: To
dispute against any point maintained by the whole Church is extreme madness. To
whose judgment herein, most of the more sober and learned Protestants do
indisputably subscribe; since diverse of them do with all fervor and
earnestnes maintain, that D. Bancrost in his Sermon printed anno 1588. Fox
Act. mon. fol. 464. b. art. 4. The deuines of Geneua in their propositions and
principles, disputed etc. p. 141. and diverse others.
the church of Christ cannot err, and that what she defines for truth, is
most true; or what for Heresy or ^alshood, is heretical, and to be condemned.

This Basis, or foundation of the church not ^rring, being thus firmly laid,
we are hereupon to conclude, that what points of Religion the catholic church
of Christ has condemned for Heresies, the same are by us to be reputed for
Heresies (since the churches condemnation or approbation is most infallible)
and the maintayners of the said Heresies, for Heretics; and consequently that
such Heretics, as departing out of the Church of God, by their houlding of the
said Heretical opinions, cannot be saved. Now, because the judgment of the
Church in matters of faith is discovered two ways; first by the sentence of
general Counsels; secondly by the frequent attestations of the said chief
Doctors of the Church in every age, in their particular wrytings, they not
being contradicted therein by any other Orthodoxall Fathers, or Doctors of the
same age: I will therefore distributiuely handle both these ways, showing that
both in general by Councels, and also by the particular judgment of the
learned Fathers, many opinions, though not touching the Trinity, the
Incarnation, the Passion, or the express Articles of the Apostles creed, have
been condemned for plain Heresies, and the belieuers of them anathematized for
Heretics.

And first, to begin with counsels, the infallible authority of which even
Christ himself has by his own words often ratifyed; as where he says:
Where Mat. 18.
two or three (much more where many hundreds of venerable Bishops) are gathered
together in my name, I am in the midst of them: And again, speaking to the
Church, and in it to the assembled Doctors and Pastors thereof: I am Mat. 28.
with you all days, even to the consummation of the world: which counsels are
ever directed and governed by the holy Ghost, according to those words in the
Acts: c. 15.
Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis; and therefore are worthily received and
admitted for the supremest sentence of Gods church, not only by the ancient
Atha. Ep. ad Epictetum. August. in Epist. 162. Greg. Nazian. orat. in Athan.
Cyril l. de Trinit. etc.
Fathers, but even by the more learned Protestants; since to omit others, one
of the most remarkable of them thus writes: D. Bilson in his perpetual
government. p. 370.
Synods are an external Judicial means to discern error: and D. Bills. vbi
supra p. 374.
the surest means to decide doubts.

But to proceed forward, and to begin with these. And first with the council
of the Apostles; This council was assembled, as we read in S. Act. 15.
Luke, by reason of certain contentious men, maintayning that the Gentiles
converted to the christian Faith might eat meat offered up to Idols, blood,
and strangled beasts, contrary to the custom of the Jews. The Apostles being
assembled, and bearing with the weakness of the Jews in the infancy of the
church, decreed all prohibition of eating blood and strangled meats: After
which decree once established, it is certain, that it had been a mortal sin
immediately to have eaten of blood, and stra^gled meats; so as before it being
a point of indifferency, is now made necessary. This appears from the text;
First from those words: Certain going forth from us, have troubled you with
words, subuerting your souls. But men do neither depart out of the Church by
maintayning certain opinions, nor by their example therein can they subvert
other men's souls, if their doctrine and practice thereof do still remain
about things indifferent. Secondly from that other passage: It has seemed
good to the holy Ghost and us, to lay no further burden upon you, then these
necessary things; where we find, that the prohibition of such meats is ranged
by the Apostles, in regard of those times, among those things which are
necessary.

Again, neither would the Apostles have gathered themselves together so
solemnly, neither would they have ascribed the decreeing of it to the work of
the holy Ghost, if the Subject of the question, and difficulty then discussed
by the^, had concerned matters only of Indifferency, after such their decree
made. Now from the example of this council, I do gather, That if a council
by it own authority may decree, that the eating of certain meats (being
otherwise of their own nature indifferently to be eaten without sin) shall be
unlawful, and shall repute and hold the impugners thereof for men departed
out of the Church of Christ; then, a fortiori, what doctrine soever a council
shall condemn of it own nature for Heresy, the same is to be reputed by all
good christians for Heresy, and the defendours thereof for Heretics.

Secondly, the council of Nice was ce^ebrated (though principally for the
repres^ing of Arius his Heresy, denying the Divinity of Christ;) yet withal
touching the controversy of keeping the feast of Easter, as ^t is apparent out
of l. 3. de vit. Constable.
Eusebius, in lib. de Synod. Arim. and Seleuciae.
Athanasius, and Haeres. 70. vz. Audianorum.
Epiphanius. Now this council pronounces Anathema to al those, who (besides
the denying of the Divinity of Christ) should deny, that the feast of Easter
was not to be kept according to the custom of the church; but according to the
custom of the Jews. And these Heretics were called, Quartadecimani, of whom
see Tertullian libro de praescript. Augustine Haeresi 29. And here we are to
understand, that the word, Anathema, used and pronunced by this council (which
word is also almost every where used in all general counsels) signifies as
much as, accursed: and in this sense we find this word Anathema, to be used by
the Apostle in several Romans 1. Cor. 12
places; so as when a council pronounces Anathema to any, for believing such
or such Heresies, or not believing such and such true doctrines, it intends
to say, that those men so doing are to be accursed, and abandoned from God: But
no man is to be accursed or abandoned from God, for believing, or not believing
points of Indifferency, but for believing of such Errors, as cannot stand with
his Souls salvation.

The third Council of Carthage (whereat S. Augustine was present) decreed, that
the book of the Machabees, with some other books should be acknowledged, as
canonical, and pronounces Anathema, and condemnation to all those, who should
not believe them, as canonical Scripture. From whence it may be concluded,
that seeing the book of the Machabees teaches Prayer 2. Macab. c. 1.
for the dead, that therefore this council allows that doctrine, condemning
the contrary doctrine for Heresy.

The doctrine of the Nouatians, who taught, That there was not power in the
church to reconcile men to God, but only by Baptism (excluding and denying
thereby the Sacrament of Penance) was condemned with the brand of Anathema, in
the council of Rome, houlden under Pope Cornelius, as lib. 6. hist. c. 33.
Eusebius reports. At which time also was condemned for Heresy the error of
Anabaptisme, as the same l. 7. hist. cap. 2.
Eusebius relates.

The council of Calcedon condemned the Heresy of Eutiches, who taught that
there was but only one vt patet in act. 1. Conc.
Nature in Christ after his Incarnation. In like sort the first council of
Ephesus condemned the heresy of Nestorius, teaching two Persons to be in
Christ, as appears out of in Chronico.
Prosper and l. 7. c. 34.
Socrates. Now touching both these last Heresies, we are to understand, that
both Nestorius and Eutiches did believe in Christ Jesus our Savior, as the
Redeemer of the world, yet they were registered and branded for Heretics only
for their pertinacious erring, touching the Person and Natures of Christ; as
now the Protestants may be reputed Heretics, for their ascribing of Ignorance,
Passion, and Desperation to Christ.

The council of Chalcedon also decreed, that vowed Virgins and Monks could
not marry, condemning those with an Anathema, and for Heretics, that should
hold and maintain the Contrary, as is to be seen out of the Council it
self.

The fourth Can. 79.
council of Carthage (whereat S. Austine was present) pronounced, that the
doctrine of prayer and Sacrifice for the dead, was according to the true faith
of Christ's Church, and condemned the contrary opinion for Heresy, and the
maintainers thereof for Heretics.

The Council of Constantinople, under Pope Vigilius, condemned Origin for his
Heresy, in which he taught that the Devils should in the end be saved; as in
vita Iustiniani.
Zonaras, and lib. 17. c. 27.
Nicephorus relate. Finally the seventh Synod or Council of Nice condemned
all them for Heretics, who taught that the Images of Christ and his Saints
were to be deprived of all due respect and reverence, and to be contemned and
broken: Of this point, see Paulus l. 23. Rerum Rom^narum.
Diaconus, and in Co^pendio Historiarum.
Cedrenus.

Thus far concerning Counsels condemning for Heresies, fals^ opinions touching
faith and Religion; where I have restrained my self only to those Councels
(this last only excepted) which were within the first five hundred years or
little more, because those times are more prized and esteemed, then later
times. I have also made choice to exemplify some of the Controversies of these
days condemned in these Councels.

The like course was continued by Councels for condemning and resisting of
Innouations and false doctrines, (though not concerning the Trinity, the
Incarnation, or the Apostles Creed) in the succeeding ages, which I purposely
omit. But now I hear demand; First, how can it stand with the infallible
authority of Gods Church, in not erring in matters of faith (of which
privilege I have entreated in the beginning of this chapter) if so she shall
define the former Errors for condemned Heresies, and anathematize and curse
the maintayners of them for wicked Heretics (though otherwise they believed in
the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion etc.) if the Doctrines be but only matters of
indifferency, and such as may stand with Salvation? Secondly I ask, how both
the defenders and impugners of the said Doctrines can be freed from the brand
of Heresy? seeing the true definition of Heresy nessarily agrees to the
Doctrines maintained by the one side; for it is certain, that either the
Catholics, or Protestants do make choice of new opinions heerin, and do
stubbornely maintain these their Innouations against Gods Church.

THE SAME PROVED FROM the Authority of Gods Church, condemning Heresies;
manifested by the writings of particular Fathers. CHAP. VII.
NOw to come to the second way of discovering the Churches sentence in the
foresaid points, which, by the particular judgment of the Ancient and learned
Fathers (who were in their several ages the shining lamps of Gods Church, and
whose authorities all succeeding ages are to reverence) is easily euicted from
Gods holy writ: for answereably heereto we read in Ca. 32.
Deuteronomie: Remember the old days, think upon every generation; ask thy
fathers and they will tell thee, thy Elders and they will declare unto thee.
And the Protestant Confession of Bohemia conspireth thereunto saying: The
Ancient In the Harmony of Co^fessions. p. 400.
Church is the true, and best mistress of Posterity, and going before leads
the way. Coming then to the Fathers, I will first insist in the particular
Errors (not touching either the Trinity, the Incarnation, or Passion of our
Savior, or the Articles of the creed, but points seeming of more
indifferency) condemned by them for open and damnable Heresies.

Next, I will set down diverse of the Fathers sayings and sentences, pronounced
of Heresy and Heretics in general. But before we come to the condemnation of
particular Heresies, we must conceive that reason it self, and reverence due
to the chief Doctors and Fathers of the Primitive Church, must presuppose,
that in those times all those opinions were generally acknowledged for damnable
Heresies, which are placed in the Catalogue of Heresies, by Ireneus, Hierome,
Epiphanius, Philastrius, Augustine, Theodoret, and other approved authors.
This by drift of all reason is to be acknowledged for two respects: first,
because we cannot find any Doctor or wyter of the same ages, who contradicted
the foresaid Fathers, for placing in their Catalogues, any opinion, for Heresy,
which was not Heresy: Secondly, in that the forenamed Fathers and Authors of
the Catalogues of Heresies were godly and learned men, and therefore neither
would nor durst brand any opinion with the note and mark of Heresy, which the
whole church of God did not then take as Heresy.

All this then justly and truly presupposed, let us proceed to the particular
Heresies so registered for such by some of the foresaid fathers; where (for the
fuller co^uincing of our Newtralists in Religion) my greatest choice (some few
only excepted) shall be of the controversies remaining still at this day,
between the Catholics and Protestants.

1. That God was the author of sin, was maintained by Florinus, and
condemned for Heresy or rather Blasphemy, by as Eusebius relates l. 5. Hist.
c. 20.
Irenaeus, and Vincentius in suo Commonitorio.
Lyrinensis.

2. The opinion touching the Impossibility of the Commaundments, was maintained
by certain Nouellists of those times, and condemned for Heresy by in explanat.
Simbol. ad Damasum.
Jerome in these words: Execramur etc. We do execrate and abhor the blasphemy
of those, who say, that any impossible thing is commanded by God to be kept,
and observed by man. See also the like condemnation thereof given by de
tempore, sermon. 101.
Augustine.

3. That man had not freewill, is auerted by the Manichees, and condemned for
an explorate Heresy by in prefat. dial. contra Pelag.
Jerome, in these words: Manichaeorum est hominum damnare naturam, and liberum
auferre arbitrium: The Manichees do condemn man's nature, and do take away
freewill. As also by S. l. de haeres. c. 46.
Augustine saying: Peccatorum originem non tribuunt Manichaei libero arbitrio:
The Manichees do not ascribe the beginning o sin to Freewill:

4. That Faith does only justify, was condemned for an Heresy in the Eunomians
by Saint Augustine, l. de haeres. c. 54.
who further says, l. de fide and operibus c. 14.
That it first proceeded from the false understanding of S. Paul in his
Epistles.

5. That Prayer or Sacrifice could not be offered up for the dead, is
maintained by Aerius and his followers, who also taught, that no set
fasting-dayes are to be appointed by the church: yet were these two opinions
condemned for Heresies by haeres. 75.
Epiphanius, and Saint lib. de haeres. c. 33.
Augustine, who thus writes: Aeriani Haeretici docent, non oportere orare, aut
offerre sacrificium pro mortuis, nec statuta solemniter celebra^da esse
ieiunia, sed cum quisque voluerit, ieiunandum, ne videatur esse sub lege. The
Aerian Heretics do teach, that we ought not to pray, or offer sacrifice fo
the dead, that solemn fasting days are not to be celebrated, but that every
one is to fast, when it pleases him, least otherwise he might seem to live
under the law. Thus far S. Augustine.

6. That Priests might marry, was condemned in Vigilantius for Heresy, by
Jerome, who in his book against Vigilantius thus writes: Quid faciunt
Orie^tis Ecclesia etc. What do the Churches of the East in this point? what the
Church of Egypt, and the Apostolical Sea? they admit for Priests, men, who are
either Virgins, or co^tinent, or if they have wives, do cease to become
husbands.

7. That Marriage and Virginity were of equal dignity, was defended by
Iouinian; who also absolutely denied all diversity o^ merits; yet was this his
error condemne^ for heresy by lib. 1. aduersus Iouin. c. 2.
S. Hierome, and S. de tempore. sermon. 191.
Augustine, thus writing heerof: Iouiniani damnamus errorem, qui dicit nullam
in futuro meritorum distantiam: We condemn the error of Iouinian, who
teaches that there is no disparity or difference of merits in time to come.

8. That the Church was not ever visible* was taught by the Donatists, but
condemned for a most wicked Heresy by S. Augustine, who thus discourses
thereof: Donatistae detorque^ Scripturas in Ecclesia Dei, vt tanquam defeci^
and perijsse de toto orb videatur. The lib. de vnitat. Eccles. c. 22. and
Epist. 170. ad Sever.
Donatis^ do detort the Scripture, and apply it to the Church of God, that the
Church thereby may seem to ha^ suffered defect, or perished out of the whole
world.

9. That Baptism of Children was not necessary, was taught by the Pelagians,
but condemned for a manifest heresy, by in Rescripto ad Mileuit. Council.
Innocentius, by S. Augustine haeres. 86.
, and by S. in Ep. 86. ad Epis. Aquileiensem.
Leo.

10. The Religious use of Images of Christ o^ his Saints, was sacrilegiously
denied by Zenaias Persa, as l. 16. c. 27.
Nicephorus witnesses, writing thus: Xenaias iste primus (o audace^ animam,
and os impudens!) vocem illam euomuri Christi and eorum, qui illi placuere,
imagines venirandas non esse. That is this: Xenaias was the first that vomited
forth this word (o bold soul and imp^dent mouth!) that the Images of Christ
and his servants were not to be worshipped.

11. That we ought not to pray to Saints, or to worship their Relikes, was
justified by Vigilantius, but condemned for heresy by S. Jerome Li. contra
Vigil. c. 1. and 3.
and by S. Augustine, who of this latter branch thus writes: Sanctorum Lib. de
Eccles. Dog. c. 73.
corporum, and praecipue Beatorum Martyrum Reliquias, ac si Christi membra,
sincerissime honoranda credimus; Si quis contra hanc sententiam venerit, non
Christianus, sed Eunomianus aut Vigilantianus creditur. We believe, that the
Relikes of holy bodies (but especially of martyrs) as the members of Christ,
are to be honored most sincerely; and who shall come to impugn this doctrine,
is to be accounted no Christian, but an Eunomian, or a Vigilantian.

12 The overthrowing of Altars, and casting away of holy Chrisme, was taught
and practiced by the Donatists, yet was this their sacrilegious proceeding
condemned, and themselves branded for heretics by S. Lib. 2. cont. Petila c.
52. and l. 3. c. 40. and Epist. 163.
Augustine, and by Optatus, who speaking to the Donatists, discourses thereof
in this manu^er: Quid Lib. 6. contra Donatistas.
est tam sacrilegum, quam altaria Dei (inquibus and vos aliquando obtulistis)
frangere, radere, remouere? Quid enim est Altar, nisi seeds sanguinis and
corporis Christi? Quid vos offenderit Christus, cuius illic per certa mome^ta
corpus and sanguis habitabat? What is so sacrilegious (O you Donatists) as to
break, deface, and cast down the Altars of God, whereupon your selves have
sometimes offered up sacrifice? What other thing is an Altar, then the seat of
the body and blood of Christ? In what has Christ so offended you, whose body
and blood for certain moments or short times, did dwell or remain upon the
Altar?

To be short, I pass over (as less pertinent to the Controversies of these
times) how the Error of Origin touching the salvation of the Devils was
condemned for Heresy by Haeres. 43.
S. Augustine; the Error of Tertullian denying second marriages was in like
sort mightily reprehended and condemned by the said Haeres. 86.
S. Augustine: though both these Doctors (I mean Tertullian and Origin) had
otherways by their learned wrytings, deserved well of the church of God; and
though the Heresies taught by them, might seem partly to be excused, to wit,
the one in the defense of chastity, the other of mercy.

Thus far touching the foresaid controversies condemned for Heresies by the
fathers of the Primitive church, though the subject of the said Heresies was
neither touching the Trinity, the Incarnation, Passion of our Savior, or the
Articles of the creed; A poin^ so evident and confessed even by the
Protestants, as that many of the foresaid examples are collected out of the
Fathers, and confessed so to be condemned by diverse learned Protestants; as by
the Centurists in their fourth chapter of every several century; by Osiander
in his several centuries, as also by Pantaleo^ in his chronology. Besides
which condemnation of the church, either these Doctrines, or the contrary to
them, are necessarily proved to be Heresies, even from ^he definition of Heresy
above set down; and from whence it follows, that both ^he catholics and the
Protestants (the one ^elieuing the^, the other not believing them) cannot be
saved, seeing Heretics continu^ng Heretics cannot be saved.

Now, to come to the sentences of the ^athers, powered out in great heat and
fer^our of zeal, against Heretics and Heresy ^n general. And first to
begin with Saint ^ohn the Evangelist; S. Lib. 3. c. 3. and apud Eusebius. l. 4.
c. 23.
Irenaeus relates to set down Irenaeus his own words) that ^olicarpus the
martyr, who was scholar to ^he Apostles, was wont to tell, how that ^. John
(the Apostle of our Savior) being ^t a certain time in Ephesus, going into
(...) public Bath, and finding Cerinthus the Heretic to be within the bath,
ran present^y out of the bath, saying to them, that were with him; let us fly
from hence, for fearelest the ^ath fall upon us, and kill us, in which the enemy
of God Cerinthus abides. The same Author Vbi supra.
Irenaeus in like sort relates in these words following, how that the foresaid
Policarpus, meeting at Rome by chance Marcion the Heretic, and he demanding
of Policarpe, whether he knew him or not? Policarpe answered, I know thee for
the first begotten child of Satan.

To conclude with the testimony of this Father, the said Irenaeus writing to
Florinus an Heretic, who once was Scholar to S. Policarpe with him, thus
says: Iren. Epist. ad Florin.
These opinions of thine (O Florinus) to speak friendly, are not true, nor
wholesome. These opinions are repugnant to the Church, etc. I may truly protest,
that if the holy and Apostolical Priest Policarpus had heard of such opinion^
as thou defendest, he would have stopped his ears and cried out (according to
his fashion) o good God, unto what miserable times have thou reserved me, t^
hear these things! and presently would have run^ forth of the place, where he
had been standing or s^ting, where such doctrine had been uttered. Bu^ now to
reflect a little upon the premises Cerinthus, Marcion, and Florinus did all
believe in the Trinity, the Incarnation of o^^ Savior, and received the
Apostles creed and erred only in lesser points; For if the had erred in denying
the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion etc. they had not been repute for Heretics,
but rather for Jews, Pagans, ^or Infidells, as above is noted: and yet we ^ee,
what sharp reprehensions were used against them by S. John and S. Policarpe his
^choller, (as to fly out of their company: to acknowledge them to be the
Children of the Devil: to ^toppe their own ears for not hearing of their
Er^ours etc.) all which speeches had been over much aggrauated, and transcended
the bond of Charity, if their Errors had rested only upon matters of
Indifferency, and had been ^ut such, as had been compatible with man's Salvation.

But to proceed to the sentences of other Fathers in this point, S. Jerome
expressly thus writes: Lib. 3. Apolg. contr. Ruffin.
For one word or two contrary to the ^ayth, many have been cast out of the
Church. Yea ^e pronounces and proceeds further, ex^ressely thus writing:
Haeretici quicu^que, Chri^tiani non sunt: whosoever are Heretics, those men
^re not Christians. Basil was wont to say, as Lib. 4. hist. c. 17.
Theodoret records: Those who are truly ^nstructed in the divine doctrine,
will not suffer any ^llable of the divine decrees to be corrupted, but for ^s
defense (if necessity forces them) will undergo any kind of death. Lib. de
praescript.
Tertullian (that Aunci^nt Father) has a sentence not much diffe^ing from that
of the former Father Lib. 4. contra Do. cap. 8.
S. Augustine: Imagine a man to be chaste, continent, ^^t couetuous, not serving
Idols, ministering hospitality to the poor, enemy to none, maligning no body,
sober, frugall etc. But yet if he be an Heretic, certainly no man doubts,
but for this alone, that he i^ an Heretic, he shall not possess the Kingdom
o^ God. A dreadful saying of so learned and godly a Father.

The Donatists for disagreeing from S. Augustine in some Traditions; not
specifyed in the Scripture, (much less in the Creed) are thus reprehe^ded by
him: In Aug. in explan. psalm. 54.
these points those Heretics were with me, in Heresy not wit^ me; in many
things with me, in a few not wit^ me; the many could not help the^, in which
they we^^ with me. And yet these Donatists believed, with Saint Augustine, the
Trinity, the Incarnation, and recited with him the Apostles creed.

Briefly S. Augustine in q. 11. in Matt. thus describes an Heretic: Hereticus
est, qui de aliqua part doctrinae Christianae falsum credit. He i^ an
Heretic, who belieueth any false thing touching any part of Christian faith:
within which definition it necessarily follows, that eythe^ the Protestants
for not believing Purgatory* Prayer to Saints, freewill, merit of work etc. or
the Catholics for believing of them are to be included. S. Gregory Nazianze^
orat. 37. Vnum vni coharet etc. One point o^ faith agrees with another, so as
of them altogether there is made a certain golden and wholesome chain;
therefore if but one opinion or article be taken away, or made doubtful, the
whole chain of faith will become broken. S. Lib. 1. ad Mag.
Cyprian: Dominus noster Jesus Christus etc. When our Lord Jesus Christ did
testify in the Gospel, that those were his enemies, who were not with him, he
noted not any one Heresy, but he manifestly shows, that all Heretics
whatsoever are his enemies; saying: He that is not with me, is against me, and
he that does not gather with me, disperseth. S. In Epist. ad Galat. c. 10.
Chrysostom says: Quemadmodum moneta Regia etc. Even as, who pareth away a
little of the Kings silver, makes the whole piece to be adulterate; Eue^ so,
who overthrows the least branch or part of true Faith, may be said to corrupt
the whole, he proceeding from these small beginnings to worser courses.

To come to an end of the Fathers judgments in this point, S. Ambrose shall
Lib. 6. in Luc. c. 9.
conclude all, who thus plainly writes hereof: Si vnum horum retraxeris etc.
If thou shall recall, or deny any of these points, thou have retracted thy own
Salvation: for even Heretics seem to challenge Christ to them; for no man
will deny the name of Christ: nevertheless he indeed denies Christ, who does
not confess al points of says, instituted by Christ.

Thus far of the Fathers judgments in this matter, where I am to advertise the
Reader; first (as above I have touched in the Counsels) that if all false
Doctrines whatsoever pertinaciously defended against the church of God be
heresies, as the definition of Heresy above explicated, proves them to be, and
as the Fathers of the Primitiu^ church, (and in them the whole church of God)
have maintained; then either the Protestants, or Catholics, for their
different houlding of contrary Doctrines, touching Freewill, Purgatory, Prayer
to Saints, Sacrifice etc. are to be accounted Heretics, and consequently both
cannot be saved in their Religion. For that Heretics (continuing Heretics)
cannot be saved, is demonstrated, first, from the fearful threats and
comminations of the Apostles, thundered out against Heretics (of which point I
have discoursed above.) Secondly, from the Authority of the church of Christ,
which excludes all Heretics (as I have showed) from all hope of salvation;
and lastly (to omit many other reasons) from that principle, that Heretics are
no members of Christ his Church, of which point we are to dispute in the next
place. The Second thing to be advertised is, that not any of the former
authorities of the fathers against Heresy, are restrained by them to Heresies
touching the Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ, hi^ Passion, or the Articles
of the creed; supposing the denial of them to be heresies, a^ indeed they are
not, but rather blasphemies and Infidelity, (for of these there is made no
mention, or intimation in their authorities) within which compass our
Formallists in Religion seek to confine their faith; but they are implicitly
extended by the fathers to all Heresies whatsoever, whether they concern the
supreme and fundamental points of Christian Religion, or any other secondary,
and less principal points of the said Religion.

THE SAME PROVED, FROM that Principle, That neither Heretics nor Schismatiks
are members of Christ's Church. CHAP. VIII.
IN this last place concerning the church, we will set down another Principle
of Christian faith, and after will deduce from thence by way of most necessary
infere^ce, our conclusion here handled. The Principle is this: That Heretics
houlding any Heresies whatsoever, are no members of the Church of Christ: the
deduction is, that Heretics therefore cannot be saved; since none can be saved,
but such as are members of Christ's church. This principle is proved (as above
is intimated) out of Gods holy word: as where it is 1. Tim. 1.
said: Certain men made shippewracke touching faith, that is, they fell out of
the ship of the church by forging of Heresies. And again: 1. Joan. 2.
They went out of us; that is, as S. Augustine expounds it, out of the church,
whereof we are. The exposition of which texts are warranted even by force of
Reason: for seeing the church is an united multitude (for it is one kingdom,
one people, and one body) and this union chiefly rests in the profession of
one faith; it is repugnant to reason, that they should be reputed as members of
the body of the church, who have no conjunction at all in the chiefest matters
with the body.

If we proceed to the testimony of the Ancient Fathers, we shall find them
of an unanimous judgment herein; to wit, that Heretics are no members of
Christ's church, and therefore cannot be saved. And first occurreth Lib. 3. c. 3.
S. Irenaeus, who says, that Policarpe did convert many Heretics to the
Church: therefore it may be concluded, that those Heretics before their
conversion, were not of the church.

S. Epist. ad Iubaianum.
Cyprian says: Heretics, though they be out of the Church, do challenge to
themselves the authority of the Church, after the manner of Apes, who not
being men, would be accounted to be men. The same father thus in another place
writes: Cum Lib. de vnitate Ecclesiae.
Deo manner non possunt, qui in Ecclesia Dei vnanimes esse noluerunt. They
cannot remain with God, who dissent in judgment from the Church of God. And
yet more fully in the same place: Non peruenit ad Christi praemia etc. He
arriueth not to the rewards of Christ, who leaves the Church of Christ; he is
an alien; he is profane; he is an enemy; he shall not have God for his father,
who has not the Church for his mother.

S. Jerome: Qui non a Domino Jesus Christo, sed ab alio In dialogo co^tra
Luciferia^.
etc. Who take their denomination, or name not from our Lord Jesus Christ, but
from some other (as the Marcionists, Valentinians, Montanists,) etc. are not
the Church of God, but the Synagoge of Antichrist.

Finally S. Augustine (for I have already dwelled over long in the authority
of the fathers) pronounces, that: Nihil sic formidare debet etc. tract. 27. in
Ioannem.
A Christian ought to fear nothing so much as to be separated from the body of
Christ, which is his Church, and which is one, and Catholic; for if he be
separated from the body of Christ, he is not a member of Christ; then is he not
strengthened with his spirit. But who has not the spirit of God, the same man
is not of God. Thus far S. Augustine, with whom even the Protestants do join
herein in judgment, for D. Dove thus says: This proposition, that Heretics
are not to be communicated withal, is undoubtedly true. And D. Sutcliffe in
his examen p. 9. alleges the Laodicean council Can. 31.32.33. in proof
thereof, thus concluding: The Laodicean Council does directly condemn
Communion with Heretics, either in Marriage or Prayer.

This already alleged may serve to prove, that Heretics are no members of
the Church of Christ, and consequently cannot attain salvation; since it is
agreed amongst all learned men, that only the members of the church of Christ,
can find Salvation in Christ. Now here by Heretics, we cannot understand
those, who deny the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion etc. seeing the
denvers of these Articles are not Heretics (as is above showed in the
definition of Heresy) but they are either Jews, Pagans, or Infidels: from
which it follows, that the fathers authorityes above set down against
Heretykes, cannot be applied to the denvers of the Trinity, the Incarnation,
etc. but they are to be limited to such Heretyks, who maintain lesser errors
touching Christian faith. We will in this place descend to Schismatiks, who if
they be neither of the church of God, nor can justly expect any salvation
(during such their state) then a fortiori, no Heretic can expect any
salvation; since a schismatike believing all articles of Christian faith, does
only in will divide himself by disobedience in not communicating with the
church in Prayers and Sacraments; whereas an Heretic with greater malice (as is
above said) wilfully and contumaciously maintains in his judgment Errors
and false opinions, condemned by the church.

Now that a Schismatike is not a member of Christ's church, is first proved from
those texts of scripture (above in part touched) where the church is called one
sold of sheep. John 10. one Body, Romans 12. one spouse, and one Dove* Cant. 6.
But now Schism, according to its Etymology, divides that which was one, into
parts; for Schisma, being a greek word comes of the verb, (...), which is
scindere; therefore as a member being cut from the body, is no longer a part of
the body; so a schismatike dividing himself by his own disobedience from the
communion of the church, is no longer a member of the said church. This verity,
to wit, that Schismatiks are not members of Christ's church, is (besides the
former proofs) warranted with the authority and sentences of the Ancient
fathers. And first S. Cyprian thus purposely writes of Schismatikes: Lib. 41
Epist. ^. ad Florinum.
Qui cum Episcopo non sunt, in Ecclesia non sunt. Those who agree not with the
Bishop (meaning the supreme Bishop of Gods church) are (...) in the Church.

The said Lib. de vnitate Ecclesiae.
Father most elegantly compares Schismatikes, to beams divided from the
sun, to boughs cut from the tree* and to Ryuers wholly separated from their
springs.

S. Chrysostom discoursing of Schismatikes, thus Hom. 1. in Epist. 1. ad Cor.
says: Schismatis significatio sati^ eos arguit etc. The very signification of
the wo^^ Schism, does sufficiently reprehend them, or rath^^ the very name of
Schism is a vehement condemnation of them etc. which Father in another Homil.
13. in Epist. ad Ephesians.
place co^pareth a Schismatike to the han^ cut from the body, which thereupon
ceaset^ to be a member; and expressly affirms, that Schismatikes, though
they consent with the Church of Christ in Doctrine, yet an^ not in Christ's
church, but in altera Ecclesia, meaning in a Church differing from Christ's
Church.

S. Jerome distinguishing Schism from Heresy, thus discourses: Inter In c. 3.
ad Titum.
Haeresim and Schisma hoc interesse arbitramur etc. We take this to be the
difference between Heresy and Schism; That Heresy maintayneth a perverse and
false Doctrine; whereas Schism, ab Ecclesia pariter separat, in like manner
separateth a man from the Church, in regard of dissension and disobedience i^
our Bishops.

S. Augustine thus wounds a Schisma^^ke: Lib. de fide and sym. c. to.
Haeretici and Schismatici congregationes ^as Ecclesias vocant etc. Heretics
and Schisma^^kes do call their congregations, the Churches. But ^eretikes do
violate their faith in believing falsely ^^uching God; whereas Schismatikes,
though they ^^lieue the same points, which we believe, yet through ^^eir
dissentions, they do not keep fraternall Charity: ^herfore we conclude that
neither an Heretic be^ogeth to the Catholic Church, because he loves (...)
God; nor a Schismatike, because he loves not ^s neighbor.

To conclude, Lib de fide ad. Pet. c. ^ S. and 3^.
Fulgentius agrees ^ith the former reverend Fathers, thus say^^g: Firmissime
tene etc. Believe for certain, and ^^ubt not, that not only Pagans, but also
Jews, He^^tikes, and Schismatikes who dye out of the Church, ^e to go into
everlasting fire.

And thus far concerning Schismatikes, ^ho because they be not of the Church,
ca^^ot obtain salvation; which point being ^ade evident by so many authorityes
both ^^uine and humane; then much more strong^^ may we conclude, that Heretics
(as ex^^eding the Schismatiks in prauity and ma^e, and being excluded with them
in like ^^rt out of Christ's Church) cannot be sa^ed.

But before I end this Chapter, give me ^aue (good Reader) to expatiate a
little beyond my designed limits: O then you Schismatik^ here in our own
Country, whose soule^ are wholly absorpt in earthy and mudd^ considerations,
cast your eyes upon you own states, and use some small introuersion upon your
selves. You see here, wha^ a dangerous censure the Ancient church of Christ,
by the mouths of its chief Pastor^ and Doctors, has thundered against you: It
says, you are not of Christ's Church; you a^ aliens, and strangers thereunto.
It further pronounces, that dying in such your state, yo^ are deprived of all
hope of salvation. Goo^ God! what stupor, and dulnes of yours ^ this! Are you
Christians? prefer then Christ before the world. Fear you God more the^ man?
Give then to God, what is Gods, and to Casaer, what is Caesar's. Reflect upon
three principles of the Catholic (and therefore you own) Religion.

The first, that God ordinarily deriue^ his grace into man's soul by the
conduits o^ the Sacraments, and gives absolution o^ ones sins particulerly by
the Sacrament (...) Penance and confession, and not otherwise you wilfully
deprive your selves of the participation of the Sacraments, and thereby (...)
grace, and of the remission of your sins: are you not then as dried branches,
void that heavenly juice, which gives life the soul? you want this grace and
forgiveness of your sins; where then is your hope of eternal life? remember
the Apostles words, and be afraid: gratia Dei, vitae aeterna; and do not
disioyne those asunder, which S. Paul ^ath so inseparably united.

The second is, The uncertainty of any par^icular man's salvation, which point
is able ^o stryke you dead through fear; and the ^ather, since it is no small
sign of a man's fu^ure damnation, deliberately and wilfully year after year)
to divide himself from Christ's church, and from all the spiritual ^nfluences
streaming from thence.

The third, That there is a Purgatory, the ^aynes whereof, though terminable,
yet are ^nsupportable. Suppose then the best, that (...), that you finally dye
with true Repentance and reconciled to Christ's church (which ^et is not in your
own power, but out of ^he maine Ocean of Gods mercy) neuerthe^esse your own
faith assures you, that you must suffer in that place even insufferable
^orments for your former disunction; and that ^our continuance in dissembling
thus with God, serves but as bellows the more to ^low that dreadful fire. O
how great inte^est then are you to pay in the end, for the ^nioying of this
your misspent time? If you ^^e Catholics (though but in heart) you believe all
here said, and therefore may the more assuredly presage of your own future
misery. If you do not believe these three points of Catholic Religion, then
are you^ damned no less for want of true Faith in Christ, then otherwise by
your unchangeable Schismatic lives, for want of due co^formity to the
church of Christ: Therefore I wish you to awake out of that spiritual letargy
of the soul, and daily meditate on tha^ of the Apostle: Cord creditur ad
iustitiam, or^ fit confessio ad salutem. Romans 10.
With the heart we belieu^ unto justice, but with the mouth Confession is ma^^
unto salvation. And lest that dreadful commination and threate of our Lord and
Savior prevail with you herein: Luke. 12.
(...) that denies me before men, shall be denied before the Angels of God. But
I will stay my self, remembering my undertaken Subject, and will proceed to the
next Head.

THE FORMER TRVTH PROVED, from the consideration of the punishments anciently
inflicted upon Heretics, by the Church of Christ. CHAP. IX.
HAVING in the precedent Chapters showed the Judgment of t^^ church of Christ,
by way of doctrine and speculation against Heresy and Heretics in general; we
will in ^his place insist in relating the practice of the ^ayd church against
Heretics, consisting in ^he punishments aunciently inflicted upon Heretics,
by the authority of Gods church; from the consideration whereof we may easily
gather, that the church of Christ in those ^ymes infallibly taught, that
Heretics so living, and dying, could not be saved; seeing ^t would never
impose such multiplicity of ^euere punishments upon men, for their houlling of
those doctrines, which might stand with the salvation of the belieuers of them.
And first we are here to observe, that the punishments inflicted upon
offenders by the church, were either Ecclesiastical, or Political, and
Civil.

The first of Ecclesiastical punishments ^or Heretics was Excommunication, by
the which Heretics were driven away from ^he Sacraments, were deprived of the
common suffrages and prayers of the whole church; and finally banished from the
community and comfort of the godly and faithful. This censure of
Excommunication of Heretics is most ancient; seeing that it had (...)
beginning from the first times that coun^ells began to be celebrated for the
extirpa^ion and rooting out of Heresies; and is founded upon all those places
of Scripture in the foregoing chapters alleged, against Heresy and Heretics.

Another Ecclesiastical censure against Heretics, is the depriving them of
all the use of spiritual power, and authority, whether it be of order or
Jurisdiction. This kind of power belongs only to Ecclesiastical Persons or
the Clergy: according heereto, if a Priest became an open Heretic, he was
commanded by the church, not to perform the public lyturgy of the church,
and if he did contrary thereto he was adjudged by the church, to sin mortally.
In like sort a Bishop, leaving his Faith and maintayning any one Heresy, did
thereby loose all his authority of Jurisdiction, and thereupon during such his
state, all his Absolutio^s, censures, punishments, and sentences practiced by
him toward any Person, were adjudged by the church of God, to be of no force
or validity. To which practice of the church In 3. p. q. 39. ar. 3.
Saint Thomas subscribeth in these words. Haeretici non possunt absoluere, nec
excommunicare, nec Indulgentias facere, aut aliquid huiuscemodi; quod si
fecerint, nihil actum est. Heretics (speaking of Clergy men) cannot absolve
any one, nor excommunicate, nor give Indulgences, nor exercise any such like
point of spiritual Jurisdiction; and if they attempt contrary heereto, they do
but practice in vain.

Touching Political or civil censures, or punishments, anciently inflicted
upon Heretics. The first may be, that such men were forbidden to contract any
marriage with other Religious and faithful Christians; and such of the
faithful christians as did marry with them, did sin mortally. This is proved
out of the Can. 31.32.33.
Laodicean council (above touched) prohibiting all such marriages, also all
praying and communicating in Sacraments with Heretics; of which point I will
hereafter entreat more fully.

Another punishment was, that Heretics were wholly restrained by the church,
from all practice of their Religion. This appears from the actions of
Constantine the Great, who was so far from granting liberty of Religion to
the Arians, as that he threatened banishment to all who would not subscribe to
the Nicene council. The same is proved from the like judgment of Iouinianus,
who being elected Emperor by the soldiers, admitted the acceptance thereof
with this condition, and not otherwise; to wit, that all the subjects of the
Empire would promise to keep an entire unity of christian belief and practice.
The like judgment herein is of the Ancient Fathers. And first S. Epist. 33. ad
Mar. cell. soror.
Ambrose (though solicited thereunto by the Emperor Valentinianus) would not
suffer the Arians to have within his Jurisdiction any one Church, for the
practice of their Religion, to be allotted for them. As appears out of
Theodor. l. 5. c. 32.
S. Chrysostom being moved by the Emperor of his time, to grant a Church to
one Gayn as a Duke, for the practice of his Heresy, with great Christian
courage openly withstood the same. Ep. 76.
S. Leo did much reprehend Anatholius (Bishop of Constantinople) for permitting
Heretics to live promiscuously with Catholics. Finally Ep. 29.
S. Augustine did vehemently persuade one Olympius an Earl, that he would
diuulge and put in practice the laws of the Emperor, made against the
Heretics Donatists (who taught the Inuisibility of the Church) that so through
force of the laws they might not be suffered to make any profession of their
Religion.

A third punishment concerns the books of Heretics, which the Church (...)
God ever prohibited to be read indiffere^tl^ of all; but only by such learned
men, (...) were able to refute the Errors and Heresy contained in the said
books. And hence (...) is, that we find, that the fourth Counce^^ of Ca. 18.
Carthage admonished the Bishop that they would read the books of Heretics,
(...) only for necessity. In like sort the seventh C^uncell prohibited the
books of the I conoch Heretics, who did write virulent Treatises against the
Religious use of Images. To proceed further; there were diverse other
chasticements appointed for Heretics in the ancient Church, Whereof see L.
Ariani ca. de Haereticis.
and by the ancient Christian Emperors in their laws; as Bannishment, a
pecuniary L. Cuncti Haeretici.
mulct, or fine; the loss L. Manichaeri.
of all their goods; And lastly, when the insolency of Heretics did grow
insufferable, even death it self; which punishment of death Valentinian and
Marcian (the Emperors) did first decree: of which point see the judgment of
the Council Act. 1.
of Chalcedon, of In c. 5. ad Galat.
Jerome, and lastly of Li. 2. contra literas Petiliaeni c. 83.
Augustine, who ex professo proves, that Magistrates have power to punish
Heretics, even which the sword.

Thus far touching the punishments auncie^tly appointed by the church of God,
against Heretics. Now to apply this to our purpose, I do here wish the reader,
to take into his consideration two things: first, that here is no mention made
in the former authorities, what the Heresies were, against which such severe
proceedings were put in execution; neither is there any intimation in them of
the denial of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion etc. but the said
punishments were extended to all Heretics indifferently, and without any
limitation of peculiar Heresies.

Now that these punishments were not ordained for the denyers of the Trinity,
the Incarnation, the Passion etc. is evident for two reasons: first, because
(as is often above said) the denyers of these supreme points are not Heretykes,
but Infidels or Jews: secondly, because the punishment of death only (and no
inferior punishment above mentioned) was appointed by the church for those,
who once were Christians, but after did fall into Infidelity, by denying those
supreme points of Christian faith.

Secondly, the Reader is to observe, that seeing Heretics, though not denying
the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion, the Decalogue etc. did undergo the
foresaid punishments; the whole Church o^ God (with is governed with the spirit
of the holy Ghost) would never have inflicted upon them, erring only in lesser
matter then about the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion etc. such severe and
rigorous punishments, a^ are above mentioned, if she had thought, tha^ the
defense of those errors (how small so^uer they seemed) could have stood with
the salvation of man's soul: since otherways the church should have discovered
her self (...) be a most cruel Tyrant, and not an Indu^gent mother to her
Children and members.

THE SAME PROVED FROM Arguments, drawn from Reason. CHAP. X.
TO pass from the authority of Gods sacred word, his holy church, and the
Ancient Fathers (the pillars thereof) touching the nature of Heresy and
Heretics, as also touching the unity and Infallibility of the same church, and
the persons disincorporated and separated from it; from all which heads it has
been evidently euicted, that a man obstinatly defending any one Error in faith
and Religion, cannot expect salvation; It now remaynes, that the same be made
evident even by force of reason, that thereby all men enjoying the faculty of
reason, may the more easily subscribe to so undeniable a verity, and say with
the Psalmist heerin: Psa. 91.
Testimonia tua credibilia facta sunt nimis.

Well then, the first and chiefest reason is taken from the causes of true
faith, where for the better conceauing thereof, we are to understand, that
faith is a supernatural habit, not obtained by the force of nature. Therefore
to the belief of any one Article or point of faith two things concur: the
one is the first revealing Verity (as Scholemen speak) which is God Himself:
the second is the Church propounding the article to be believed. Now when we
believe any point of faith, God, who is the first revealing Verity (as is
said) reuealeth it to the church, and the church propounds it, so revealed to
us, to be believed. And thus we believe a point of faith, through the authority
of God revealing, and the church propounding; and where we believe any thing,
though it be true, and not through this authority, this is not supernatural
belief in us, but only an opinion grounded upon other reasons and inducements:
Even as the Turk belieueth, that there is a God, Creator of the world, yet
this his belief is no true faith, but only a mere opinion of a thing which is
true; since this his belief is grounded not upon Gods authority revealing
this, but only upon his Alcaron, being otherwise a fabulous book, though of
the being of one God it speaks truly.

Now to apply this. This first revealing Verity, which is God, (through whose
authority we ought to believe every article) does with one and the like
authority reveal all Articles of Christian Religion to the church; so as it
is as forcibly revealed to be believed that there is (for example) a Purgatory,
or that we ought to pray to Saints, (granting these articles to be true) as
that there is a Trinity, or that Christ was Incarnate; from whence it
unavoidably follows, that who belieueth in the Trinity, and yet does not
believe, that there is a Purgatory, or that we may pray to Saints, has no true
and supernatural belief of the Trinity; but only belieueth that there is a
Trinity, because he so understands, or is persuaded thereto only by his own
reason, or through some other humane motives, according to that sentence of S.
Augustine lib. de vtilitate credendi cap. 11. Quod intelligimus aliquid,
rationi debemus; quod autem credimus, authoritati. For if he did believe, that
there is a Trinity, or that Christ was Incarnate, through Gods authority so
revealing this truth to be believed, by the same authority he would have
believed that there is a Purgatory, or that we ought to pray to Saints; seeing
both the Articles of the Trinity, and Purgatory, or praying to Saints are
equally and indifferently a like propounded by God and his Church to be
believed. Thus we may demonstratiuely conclude, that what Protestant does
believe in the Trinity, and yet does not believe that there is a Purgatory,
praying to Saints, Freewill, the Real presence (admitting them once to be
true) or any other point controuerted between Catholics and Protestants, the
sam^ man has no true faith at all of the Trinity or Incarnation, and
consequently for wan^ of a true and supernatural faith, cannot b^ saved; since
we read Marc. 16.
Qui non credit, condemnabitur. Who belieueth not, shall be condemned. And from
this former ground it proceeds; tha^ 2. 2. q. 5. ar. 3.
S. Thomas, and all other learned Schoolmen teach, that who belieueth not only
for Gods authority, so revealing any poin^ whatsoever, great or small,
fundamental or not fundamental, the same man belieueth not any other Article
at all, with a true and supernatural faith: and heereto accord those words of
Lib. de praescript.
Tertullian against Valentinus the Heretic: Some things of the law and
Prophets Valentinus approves, some things he disalloweth; That is, he
disalloweth all, whilst he disproueth some. Which sentence of Tertullian must
of necessity be true; since who rejects the authority of God in not believing
any one article propounded by God to be believed, the same man begets a
suspicion or doubt of Gods authority, for the believing of any other article,
how fundamental soever.

Another reason may be taken from a distinction of faith, which according to
the learned is of two sorts; The one they call explicit faith, the other
implicit. Explicit faith is that, which all men under pain of damnation are
bound to believe; As, according to most of the Schoolmen, the Trinity, the
Incarnation of our Savior, his Passion, the Decalogue or ten Commandments,
the articles of the Creed. Implicit faith comprehends all those points,
which every unlearned man is not bound expressly and distinctly to believe and
know in particular (though he be expressly bound not to be^ieue any thing
contrary thereto) but is to ^est in the judgment of the church concerning all
such points; and what the church of Christ houldeth therein, he is bound
^mplicitely to believe. This distinction is warranted not only in the judgment
of all Catholic Schoolmen, but also of the most ^earned D. Bar. l. defide and
eius ortis. p 40. Hooker in his Ecclesiast. policy in the preface p. 28. by
Melancton l. 1. Epist. Epist. ad Rege^ Angliae.
Protestants, though they commonly forbear the phrase of explicit and
im^licite faith; and particulerly of D. Field, who ^n these words following,
gives the reason ^hereof, saying: For In his Treatise of the Church in his
Epist. Dedicat. to the L. Archbishop.
seeing the Controversies of Religion in our time are grown in number so many,
and in nature so intricate, that few have time and ^^asure, fewer strength of
understanding to exa^ine them, what remains for men desirous of sa^isfaction
in things of such consequence, but diligently ^ search out which amongst all
the Societies of men ^s the world, is that blessed Company of holy ones; (...)
at househould of faith, that spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God,
which is the Pillar and ground of truth, that so they may embrace her
communion, follow her directions, and rest in her judgments? Thus D. Field.

Now this distinction being presupposed, I thus argue: Both these kinds of
faith are necessary to salvation: Explicit faith, because it comprehends all
those fundame^tall and supreme points of Christian Religion, without which, and
the express and articulate belief of which, a man cannot be saved: And these
be those only, which our Newtrallists in Religion hold necessary to be
believed: Implicit faith of other points also is necessary to salvation,
because otherwise then believing implicitly and inuoluedly what the church
teaches therein, we cannot (according to the former Doctors words) range our
selves to the blessed company of holy ones, the househould of faith, the spouse
of Christ, and Church of the living God. Again, seeing Implicit faith is
necessary to salvation, we must grant, that this Implicit faith has some
Object; This Object is not the Articles of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the
Decalogue etc. (according to the foresaid judgment of the Schoolmen) since
these are the objects of explicit faith (as is above mentioned) therefore
Articles of seeming lesser importance are the object of implicit faith; the
which articles as a man is bound implicitly to believe in the faith of the
church; so ^he is bound expressly not to believe any thing contrary to the
said articles. Seeing then diverse Controversies between the Catholics and the
Protestants are included under this implicit faith, and that the church of God
houldeth of them but one way; It manifestly follows, that the contrary
belieuers of those points do err in their belief, and consequently for want
of this true implicit and necessary Faith, cannot be saved.

3. A third reason may be this; It is proper and peculiar to virtues infused
(and such ^e Faith, Hope, and Charity) that every such virtue is wholly
extinguished by any one act contrary to the said virtue. Thus (for example) one
mortal sin takes away all cha^ity and grace, according to that, Matthew. 28.
He that ^ffendeth moan, is made guilty of all. One act of Despair destroys
the whole virtue of Hope; then by the same reason one Heresy wholly corrupts
and extinguisheth all true ^ayth: Therefore seeing Faith is a Theolo^icall and
infused Virtue, this faith is de^royed with one act of Heresy, whether it ^e
about Purgatory, Prayer to Saints, Freewil, or any other Controversy between
the Catholics and the Protestants: Therefore whosoever denies Purgatory, or any
of the rest (granting their doctrines to be true) is deprived of all infused
faith touching any articles of Christian Religion; whether they concern the
Trinity, or the Incarnation, or any other fundamental point, which he may
seem to believe: But without Hebr. 11.
Faith that is, without true, infused, and Theological Faith) it is impossible
to please God, as the Apostle assures us.

4. A fourth reason shall be this, It is most certain, that what general
propension nature (or rather God himself by nature, as by his instrument) has
engrafted in all men, the same is in it self most true, certain, and
warrantable. As for example, Nature has implanted in each man's soul, a secret
remorse of conscience for sins and transgressions committed, as also a fear
of future punishment to be inflicted for the said sins perpetrated: therefore
from hence it may infallibly be concluded, that sin it self is to be
avoided, and that after this life there is a retribution of punishment for our
offenses acted in this world: since otherwise it would follow, God should insert
in man's soul (idly, vainly, and as directed to no end certain natural
impressions and instincts which to affirm were most derogator^ to his divine
Wisdom, and repugnan^ to that aunciently received Axiom: God and Nature
works nothing in vain.

Now to apply this; we find both by history and by experience, that diverse
zealous and fervent Professors of al Religions whatsoever (both true and
false) have bin most ready to expose their lives in defense of any impugned
part, or branch of their Religion. From which undaunted resolution of theirs we
certainly collect, that this their constant determination of defending the
least point of their Religion, proceeds from a general instinct of God,
impressed in man's soul, teaching each man, that death it self is rather to be
suffered, then we are to deny any part of our Faith and Religion. And thus
according heereto we find, that even the Athenians, who were Heathens (though
they did err touching the particular Object heerin, as worshipping false Gods)
were most cautelous, that no one point should be infringed or violated,
touching the worship of their Gods. The like Religious severity was practiced
by the Jews, as Josephus witnesses. And God himself even in his own written
word, threatens, that Apoc. 22.
Whosoever shall either add, or diminish to the book of the Apocalypse,
written by the Evangelist, from him he will take away his part out of the book
of life. Now ^f such danger be threatened for adding to, or taking from, more
or less, then was set down by the Evangelist in this one book, how can then
both the Catholics and Protestants have their names written in the book of
life? Since it is certain and granted on all sides, that either the Catholic
adds more to the faith of Christ, then was by him instituted, or the
Protestant takes from the said faith diverse Articles, which Christ and his
Apostles did teach. But to return to our former reason. From all this we
deduce, that no points of true Christian Religion are of such cold
Indiffere^cy, as that they are not much to be regarded, or that they may be
maintained contrary ways by contrary spirits, without any danger to man's
Salvation; but that they are of that nature, worth, and dignity, as man is to
undergo all kind of torments, (yea death it self) before he yield, or suffer
the least relapse in denying any of the said verityes.

5. The fifth and last reason, to prove that the maintayning of false doctrines,
now questioned between the Christians of these times, are most prejudicial,
and hurtful to the obtaining of our Heavenly bliss, wherein at this time I
will insist, may be taken from the consideration of the different effects,
which the contrary doctrines particulerly between the Protestants and
Catholics produce in men's souls, touching the exercising of virtue or vice:
Since most undoubted it is, that the believing of such opinions, which of their
own nature do impell, and (as it were) violently draw the soul to vice,
loosenes, and impurity of manners and conversation, cannot stand (considering
Gods infinite hate to sin and sinners) with the hope of eternal happynes.
And the chief reason hereof (besides others) is this: In that the Will (which
is the seat of virtue or vice) does necessarily and irresistably work, as the
Understanding (in which resideth Faith, and all false doctrine) does dictate to
the Will. Now then the Understanding being infected with Heresies, tending
directly to the planting of vice, and eradicating of all virtue in the soul,
it of necessity follows, that the Will must work and exercise it self
according to those false principles, which the Understanding suggesteth to the
will for true; and this with the greater facility in regard of the pronesse of
man's nature (through our first Parents fall) inclined to liberty, pleasure, and
sensuality. But because the subject of this reason is a large field to walk
in, and the truth thereof is to appear by several instances, drawn from
diverse particular doctrines maintained at this present by the Protestants, and
all breathing nothing but vice, dissolution, and all turpitude in manners;
therefore I will reserve the ensuing Chapter, for the fuller manifestation of
the truth in this point.

THE SAME PROVED, FROM the different effects of Virtue and Vice, which
Catholic and Protestant Religion do cause in their Professors. CHAP. XI.
THE first doctrine of this Nature, wherein we will insist, mantayned by the
Protestants, and denied by the Catholics, is the Impossibility of keeping Gods
commandments, according heerto Ser. de Moyse.
Luther says: The ten commandments appertain not to Christians: with whom
Fox conspireth in Act. mon. p. 1335.
these words: The Commandments were given not to do them, but (...) know our
damnation, and to call for mercy to God Doctor Willet also saying: The In
Sinop. Papismi p. 564.
law remains still impossible to be kept by us, through the we^kenes of our
flesh: neither does God give us ability^ keep it, but Christ has fulfilled it
for us. And ^^nally Doctor Whitaker in that his sentence Contra Camp. rat. 8.
: Qui credunt, ij non sunt sub lege sed sub gratia. Quid plura? Christiani
execr^tione legis liberantur. They, who believe, are (...) under the law, but
under grace. What more in this point is to be said? Christians are freed from
the curse of the law. Now then, if Christians be freed from the curse of the
law (wherein the ten Commaundments are contained) how can the breach of them be
any way hurtful to the violators of them? And if the Commandments were neither
given us to keep, nor we have power to keep them, to what end should any man
endeavor to keep the^? Why should the Thief forbear to steal, or the
Homicide to commit murder? whoseeth not how this doctrine discourageth a man
from living virtuously, by bridling his unruly and sensual desires?

2. Touching Chastity: The Protestants do teach, that Chastity is not in our
power: And hence it is, that Luther thus writes: It is Tom. 5. Wittenb. ser.
de matrimonio.
not in our power to be without a woman etc. It is not in our power, that it
should be stayed or omitted* but it is as necessary, as to eat, drink, purge,
make clean the nose etc. To whom (omitting all others for greater breuity) M.
Perkins subscribeth saying: The vow of In his reformed Catholic page 161.
Co^tine^cy is not in the power of him that voweth. Now this doctrine being
embraced for true, how forcibly does it inuit (or rather impell) all people
unmarried (both men or women) to satisfy their lust, by their own incontinent
lives? In like sort, what great encourageme^t does it give to married persons to
violate the bond of matrimony, when either of the persons, through absence or
long sickness, or some other suddayne and accidental impotency, cannot render
the act and due of matrimony? And the parties thus sinning (either married or
unmarried) being expostulated and charged with their offense therein, may they
not justly reply in excuse of themselves, that they are not to be blamed or
rebuked for their incontinency, seeing by their own doctrine and Religion they
are expressly taught, that they have not the guilt of chastity, and that it is
not in their power to live chastely, and continently?

3. The Protestants doctrine of Venial and Mortal sin, does wonderfully
extenuate, and lessen the atrocity and malice of sin, in the belieuers of
that doctrine. For the Protestants do teach, that there is no^ such difference
of sins in themselves, bu^ that the most grievous sins whatsoever, being
perpetrated, and committed by any one that has true faith, are but venial;
and their reason hereof is, because in their doctrine no sins are imputed to
those, wh^ have true faith. Thus accordingly D. Whitaker teaches: De Eccles.
cont. Bellarm. Controuer. ^. q. 5. p. 301.
Si quis actum fidei habet, (...) peccata non nocent. Sin is not hurtful to
him, wh^ actually belieueth: who did learn this of his great master Luther,
thus writing of this point: Luther in his sermons Englished and printed 1578.
page 176.
No work is disallowed of God, unless the author thereof be disallowed before.
All which being granted as true doctrine, it must needs follow, that who shall
take himself to be one of the Faithful (as every Protestant is bound by his
own Religion to believe of himself) shall make small account of committing
any sin; considering he is taught by the former doctrine to believe, that (to
use the words of one of their own masters) Wotton in his answer to the lute
Popish Articles page 92.
Sin is pardoned him, as soon as it is committed.

4. The Protestants doctrine of Reprobation and denial of Freewill, mightily
disanimateth and discourageth the belieuers thereof, from embracing of virtue
and eschewing of sin; for if it be true (as this their Doctrine suggesteth)
that some men are borne even from their mothers womb Reprobats and thrall to
damnation, and cannot be saved; to what end should they seek their own
salvation by a true Faith, avoiding of sin, and practizing of a penitential
and virtuous life? Or if we have not Freewill, with the concurrence of Gods
grace to do well (as the former doctrine instructs) why should we give our
best endeauours to embrace virtue and fly all vice? Since it is not in our
power (according to the Protestants faith) to exercise the one, and fly the
other.

5. To this may be adjoined the Protestants like doctrine of Predestination,
and their supposed certainty of Salvation. For admit, that men be Predestined
without any respect or reference to their works and lives, and that do what
wickedness they can imagine, yet certain it is, that they shall be saved; is not
this Doctrine most potent and forcible to diswade all the belieuers thereof,
from exercising an austere, pious, and Religious life, and to engulfe them
easily in all kind of enormities and sins? and the rather, considering how
precipitious and headlong man's nature is to sin, and to decline all rigorous
and exemplar courses of virtue; especially if so the case stands, that man can
neither advantage or hurt himself, by any such different manner of life. Now,
that by the Protestants Doctrine no sin can endaunger the Predestinate, in
regard of their certainty of Salvation, appears, seeing according heerin we
find D. Fulke thus to say of David's adultery: In his tower disput. with Edm.
Campian the 2. days conference.
David when he committed adultery, was and remained the child of God. And Beza
himself to the like purpose thus writes thereof: In Respons. ad Colloq.
Montisbel. part. altera p. 71.
David by his adultery and murder did not loose the holy Ghost. So powerfully
do these their positions incline men to satisfye their desires in all vice,
impiety, and sensuality.

6. Touching the Protestants Doctrine of Justification by Faith only, which
potentially includes diverse of the other points here set down, and which
position of it own nature excludes from Justification all works (how virtuous
and pious soever,) we find the Protestants thus to say. And first Luther
speaking hereof, bursteth forth with wonderful rashness saying: Tom. 1. prop.
3.
Fides nisi sit sine etc Unless faith be without the least Good works, it
does not justify, nay it is not faith. That Justification by faith only
extinguisheth all exercise of virtue, is justified not only by experience of
these days, but also by the acknowledgme^t even of some learned Protestants:
for thus Iacobus Andraeas (a famous Protestant) complaining and dislyking this
Doctrine, writes: Conc. 4. in c. 21. Lucae.
A serious and Christian discipline is censured with us, as a new Papacy, and a
monachisme: they say we have now learned to be saved by only faith in Christ,
and we cannot satisfy by our fasting and prayer, and therefore permit that we
may give over these, seeing we may be saved otherwise by the only grace of God.

And to the end (says this Author further) that all the world may know, they
be no Papists, nor trust in good works they take course to put none in
practice. With whose true judgment heerin M. Stubbs (an English Protestant)
seems to conspire, saying: In his Motives to good works. printed 1566. p. 42.
The Protestant trusts to be saved by a bare and naked fay^ (deceauing
himself) without good works, and th^^^fore either cares not for them, or at
least sets little by them. And thus much touching goo^ works, wholly exiled,
and banished by the Doctrine of Justification by faith only.

Now that this Doctrine of Justification by only faith does incorporate (as it
were within it self, and admit all kind of sins appears no less, by the
frequent acknowledgments of the most learned Protestants And first, Luther thus
writes thereof: Tom. 2. wittenb. de capt. Babylon. fol. 74.
A Christian baptized is so rich, that although h^ would, he cannot loose his
salvation, by any sinn^ how great soever, unless he will not believe. An^
Luther in another place: Luther in loc. com. class. 5. c. 27.
As nothing iustifyeth, but belief; so nothing sins, but unbelief.

To which Doctrine D. Whtaker (as above is showed) accords saying: Vbi supra.
Sins are not hurtful to him that belieueth: And thus much now touching the
Doctrine of Justification by faith, where we see, even by the confession of the
Protestants, that this Doctrine preuayleth in the professors thereof no less
for the committing of all sin and iniquity; then for the expelling and
banishing of all good works, virtue, and devotion.

7. Touching the Protestants particular Doctrines of Fasting, voluntary
Poverty, and Chastity or Virginity, the three steps of Jacobs adder, by the
which a virtuous soul ascen^eth to Heaven: And first of fasting, Perkins
^eacheth thus; In his Reformed Catholic p. 220.
fasting in it self, is but a thing ^ndifferent, as is eating and drinking:
with whom co^spireth D. Willet in more full tearnes saying: In Synops. page
243.
Neither is God better worshipped by ea^ing, or not eating. Voluntary poverty
is so debased by the Protestants Doctrine, as that the foresaid Willet thus
teaches thereof: In Synops. page 245.
He is an enemy to the glory of God, who changes his rich estate, wherein he
may serve God for a poor: So contrary he is to the judgment of our Savior
saying: Mat. 19.
If thou will be perfect, go sell thy substance, and give to the poor, and
thou shall have a treasure in Heaven.

Lastly, touching single life in comparison of Marriage, Luther thus says:
Tom. 5. wittenb. in exeg. ad c. 7. 1. Cor. fol. 107.
We conclude, that Marriage is as gould, and spiritual or single life as dung.
And D. Whitaker, likewise teaches thereof in this manner saying: Contra Camp.
rat. 8.
Virginity is not simply good, but after a certain manner: it is never better
then Marriage, but in regard of the circumstance, that is, of the troubles
acco^panying Marriage. Now, I here demand with what encouragement can any man
go about to practice these foresaid virtues of fasting, voluntary poverty, and
perpetual virginity, if he be firmly and inwardly persuaded, that the
Protestants former positions (...) Doctrines, touching the said virtues, b^
true, and agreeable to Christ's sacred Institutions.

8. But to hasten to an end in this matter, I will conclude with the Protestant
Doctrines touching Purgatory, and Confession o^ Sins. And as concerning
confession of Sins it is found by experience, that (besides the first
Institution thereof by Mat. 18. and Io^n. 20.
Christ) a man is much debarred from sinninge, through the shame that he is to
endure by confessing his most secret sins to a Priest; as on the contrary, it
much enbouldeneth one to sin, if he be persuaded by his own Religion, that
confession of them alone to God is sufficient.

Touching the Doctrine of Purgatory: How does the denial of this Doctrine open
the sluice to all liberty and injustice? Since by the Protestants teaching, that
no temporal punishment remains for sins once remitted, it takes away all
restitution of things wrongfully detayned, all satisfaction for committing of
former sins, and finally all mortification of body and soul; and to conclude
it freeth a man of all fear of suffering any punishment after this life; and
this under color, that Christ has satisfied for the sins of all the world;
by which reason we might take away prayer, or that Christ prayed for all in the
garden.

But now to cast our eye back upon the foresaid Doctrines. If all the
different opinions of faith, in Controversy between the Catholics and the
Protestants, were merely speculatiue, without any reference to the virtuous or
vicious working and operation of the Will, deryued from them; then with greater
show of reason in a vulgar judgment, it might be auerred, (that supposing they
teach not the fundamental points of Christian faith) they might be either
affirmatively or negatiuely houlden, without any danger of salvation: such
were the Heresies of See heerof S. Augustine Haeres. 43.
Origin, teaching, that the Devils in the end of the world should be saved: Of
Cyprian touching Rebaptization, and diverse such like, from the maintayning of
which points either way, the Will in respect of any external working or
operation drawn from thence, can suck noe poison.

But the Case is far different in the former Doctrines set down above; for
we find that the said Doctrines (which breath nothing but all dissolution and
turpitude of manners) even in speculation do most forcibly and immediately
touch the pulse of the Will; the Will strongly beating, and indeed breaking out
into outward actions of vic^ and lyberty, according as she remains before
infected with the contagion and poison of the former Doctrinall speculations.
Well then, this upon necessary inference being granted, so as the working,
effect, and force of the said Doctrines are in the Will, nothing but liberty,
dissolution of manners, improbitie, sensuality and sin, I refer to the
judgment of any man, whether the said Doctrines be but points of Indifferency
o^ noe, and may be defended either way, without prejudice to the beleiuers
faith, and danger to his Salvation, as our Formallists do auerre. For can it
possibly be conceived that these Doctrines should be reputed as indifferent to
man's Salvation, or in themselves true, which (as is proved) most strongly draw
the will to all vice, against which God has thundered out such dreadful
threats, as where it is said: Psalm. 91. All they that work^ iniquity, shall be
confounded. And again, Ecclesiast. 40. Death, blood, contention, edge of
sword, oppression, hunger, contrition, whippes are created for sinners. And
further, Psalm. 9.10. God sha^ reign snares of fire upon sinners, brimstome
with tempestuous wynds shall be the portion of their cupp^ Matthew. 25.
and our Savior speaking of Sinners says* Depart you accursed, into
everlasting fire. Beside infinite other places of like nature.

Now to the former Premises, may I ad^oyne the Confessions even of Protestants
^hemselues, who confess that the lives of Catholics are commonly far more
ver^uous and of better edification, then the lives ^f the Protestants, who by
their own ack^owledgments, lie groueling in all sensua^itie: For thus even
Luther says hereof: When we were Dominica 26. post Trinitatem.
seduced by the Pope, every man ^id willingly follow good works; and now every
^an neither says, nor knows any thing, but how (...) get all to himself by
exaction, pillage, theft, lying, ^sury etc. to which Confession (to omit diverse
others) In loc. com. cap. de Decalogo. in explanat. tertij praecepti.
Musculus a forward Protestant subcribeth, sayng: Vt verum fateor etc. That
(...) may confess the truth herein, they are become (...) unlike to
themselves, that whereas in the Papacy ^hey were Religious in their Errors and
Supersti^^^n; now in the light of the known truth, they are ^ore profane, then
the very Sons of the world. Which disparity of lives and conversation ^an be
justly ascribed to no other cause, then ^n that the Protestants were ready to
put in ^ractise, what before they had learned by speculation of their own
Doctrines: which ^oint then being thus, I mean that the Doctrine of the
Protestants do depresse virtue, and blandish, contenance, and exalt vice, and
thereupon the lives of the Protestants by confession of themselves, and to the
disedyfying of their followers) are becom^ actually far worse, and less
virtuous, the^ the lives of the Catholics; I here demand how it can be
warranted by any show o^ reason, that these Doctrines of the Protestants
(begetting so great a change from virtue to vice, in their professors) can b^
reputed, but as points of Indifferency? O^ that men believing them, practicing
the^ in their conversation, and finally dying i^ them can be saved? So contrary
it is to o^ Saviors prescript: If thou Mat. 19.
wilt enter into lif^ keep the Commandments. Sin being inde^ so great an
enemy to man's Salvation, as the God himself vouchsafed to be incarnate, (...)
to suffer an opprobrious death, only for the taking away of the sins of the
world.

THE SAME PROVED FROM the fearful deaths of the first broachers of
Protestancy. CHAP. XII.
IN this next place, we will bri^fly take a survey of the particul^^ deaths of
some few of the chief^ Protestants, who have been the first stampers or
broachers of the Controue^sies between the Catholics and the Pr^testants; and
then we will leave to the iud^ment of others, whether those kinds of death
(...) befall (in Gods accustomed proceedings) (...) men, who first did set on
foot and main^yne points and positions of Religion of ^at Indifferency, as
that either the believing (...) not believing of them, may well comfort, and
stand together with man's sal^ation.

To begin with Luther, omitting to ^eake either of his vicious life, or of
the lives ^f others hereafter set down, though con^^ssed and displayed for
such, by many of ^^eir own Brethren; It is certain, that ^uther Cochlaeus in
vita Lutheri. Whose sudden death is also confessed by David Chitracus (an
eminent Protestant) in orat. funebri Christophori Ducis Megapolitani, these
words: Lutherus ipse vesperi mensae assidens, paucis post diam noctem horis
decessit.
dyed very sudainly: for when at ^^pper being in good health, he had fed
^uteously upon great variety of meats, and ^ntertayned his guests then with
him, with ^itty (but dissolute) discourses, the very ^^me night he dyed.

Zwinglius was slain in the wars of Ger^any, undertaken for Religion only, in
which wars he dyed not as a Preacher, but (...) a warrior and armed in the
field; and yet (...) such sort, that Gualterus (an earnest Pro^^stant) says
thus of him: Gualterus in his book inti^led, Apologia pro Zwinglio. p. 31.
Nostri illi etc. ^iuers of us are not affrayd to pronounce Zwinglius have dyed
in sin, and therefore to have dyed the ^^me of Hell.

Cochlaeus in Actis Lutheri 1537.
Oecolampadius (the reputed Bishop of Basil, where he lies buried, and a man
most forward in spreading the points of Protesta^cy) went healthful to bed,
but was found by his wife, dead in the morning in his bed.

Andreas Carolstadius an eminent Protestant, and a great aduauncer of the
supposed Gospel, was killed by the Devil, as certain In their Epistle de
morte Carolstadij.
ministers, even of Basil, do justify.

Iacobus Andreas a famous Lutheran, and in other points an earnest Protestant,
lyue^ and dyed (as Hospinian. in histor. Sacra. part. 2. fol. 389.
Hospinian the Protestant writes,) as if he had had no God, but Mammo^ and
Bacchus; he never praying neither going to bed, norysing from thence, and that
in the residue of hi^ life he showed no Godliness. Who So Za^chius the
Protestant affirms in his Epistles printed. 1609. l. 2. p. 340.
also was once taken in Adultery.

Calvin (the refiner of all Protestancy, and chief supporter of all
controuerted points against the Catholics) dyed being consumed with lyce and
worms, extremely blaspheming against God: of whose death In Theolog.
Caluinist. l. 1. fol. 72. This particular manner of Caluins death is witnessed
by Ioannes Herennius (a Caluinist preacher) who was present as Caluins death,
as he witnesses in his libello de vita Caluini.
Conradus Schlusselburg (a famous Protestant) thus writes: Deus manu sua
potents etc. God with his mighty hand did visit Calvin; for he despayred of his
salvation, called upon the Devils, and gave up his soul swearing and
blaspheming. Calvin dyed being eaten away with lyce; for they s^bred about his
privy members, that none about him could endure the stench, and smell. Thus far
the foresaid Protestant.

Finally Melancthon (a great pillar of Protestancy) made so bad an end, as that
Morlinus (his own scholar, and a forward Protestant) despayred of his
salvation, thus writing in his public Lectures: Si possem redimere etc. If I
could redeem the Salvation of our master Philip Melancthon with the peril of
my life, I would do it: But he is carried to the horrible tribunal of God, to
plead his cause there etc. See hereof also Slusselburge in Theolog. Calu. l. 2.
art. 10.

Now then, seeing all these men believed all the fundamental points of
Christian Religion (as the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion, etc.) seeing
also they were the most principal men, that first introduced and disseminated
Protesta^cy throghout the world; spending their whole lives in spreading and
defending the same, by their wrytings: Finally seeing God did cut them off by
such calamitous, miserable and prodigious deaths (which is to be feared were
but presages of the eternal deaths of their souls) who can otherwise be
persuaded, but that all this was wrought by the just hand of God; not so much
for their personal sins, proceeding of humane frailty (for there were and
are many others as great sinners as they, and yet escaped such dreadful ends)
but for their first inuenting, maintayning, and preaching of the Protestant
faith and Religion, and empoysoning almost all Countries with such their false
and sensual doctrines: which being granted, how then can it with any truth of
reason be supposed, that the positions of Protestancy impugned by the
Catholics, should contain nothing but matters of Indifferency, or that a man
whether he believe them, or not believe them, may alike and indifferently be
saved?

THE SAME PROVED FROM the doctrine of Recusancy, taught both by Catholics and
Protestants. CHAP. XIII.
I Have thought good to draw another argument from the common, taught and
approved doctrine of Recusancy in every Religion; though this head may seem to
have a special reference to the reason before touched, and in part be therein
implicity included; wherein is showed that nature herself has imprinted in
the professors of all Religions, a Religious care punctually to keep and
preserve every article of their Religion.

Now here we are to premonish, that if in the judgment of all learned men
(both Catholic and Protestant) it is thought an action most wicked, and
unlawful, and not to be performed but (without final repentance) under pain
of eternal damnation, that a man should communicate only in going to the
Church, and in hearing but a sermen, contrary to that Religion which himself
belieueth for true; (though this may seem to be colored under pretense of
observing the Princes commandment, and for fear of loosing our temporal
estates,) I say, if this action be thought unlawful, wherein nevertheless the
performers thereof do not punctually undertake to maintain or believe any one
Heretical or erroneous position; how then can it be reputed as consonant to
reason or Religion, that men believing different opinions of faith, and
promiscuously communicating in prayer with a contrary Religion to their own,
should nevertheless all be saved? since the first fault consists (as some
would interpret, though falsely) only in an external and material (as the
Schooleme^ speak) going to the Church of a different Religion; whereas this
other does directly and openly rest in defending articles (at least in its own
judgment) of a Religion contrary to the truth of Christian Religion: for such
is the case herein either of Catholics or Protestants. But before we
particulerly enter into this discourse, we will here insist (as most pertinent
to our purpose) in relating the two most religious Examples of Eleazar, and the
Widow with her seven Sons, recorded in the Books of the Machabees.

Touching the first, we read, 2. Machab. c. 6.
that Eleazar (being a most ancient, grave, and learned Man) was so far from
eating of the meats sacrifized to Idols (according to the prohibition of the
Jewish law) that when certain men, as tendering his old age, and moved
thereto, as the Text says, iniqua miseratione, through unlawful pity,
proffered him other flesh to eat, under color whereof they would tell the
Tyrant King (thereby to save his life) that he had eaten of the sacrifized
meats; that he did choose rather to undergo a most cruel death, then to
feign, that he had eaten of the said sacrifized flesh. And so accordingly he
suffered ^ most glorious Martyrdom; thus speakin^ to God in the midst of his
torments: Vbi supra.
For thy fear (o Lord) I do suffer these things.

As concerning the 2. Machab. c. 7.
Widow with b^ seven Sons: O what spiritual resolution appeared in them
all? Indeed able to upbraid us Christians with our luk-warmnest in professing
our faith. They all suffered most exquisit torments, and in the end most bloody
deaths, only because they would not at the Kings command, eat of Swynes flesh,
which was contrary to the Law of Moses. And this both the Mother (still
exhorting her sons to constancy herein) and all her seven Sonns performed
with such an admirable resolution, both in their answers to the Tyrant during
their torments, and in their patience of suffering death, as that considering
her sex, and the tenderness of their years, it might be truly said, that
weakness was here able to instruct strength, and youth old age.

Now from these two most remarkable Examples, I thus argue: The time of the old
Testament was much inferior in worth, dignity, and many privileges to the new
testament, seeing to them in the Old, things (as the 1. Cor. 10.
Apostle witnesses) did happen, as in a figure; whereas the new Testament
Hebr. 8.
(as the said Apostle affirms) is established in better promises. But now if
in the old Testament, men did choose to endure most cruel deaths, rather then
they would (contrary to the Law) eat forbiden Meats, which in themselves were
lawfully to be eaten, were it not for the prohibition annexed unto them; And
seeing though they had consented to the eating of them, yet this being but an^
external Act or Ceremony, they might nevertheless inwardly have retained and
kept their true belief touching the Law yet since the performance of so small
a matte^ as it appeared in outward show, could no^ be without great sin, and
damnation o^ the party so offending; Shall any Christian think, that now in
the time of Grace, an^ of the New Testament, which time exacteth more
perfection at our hauds ( for (...) Luc. 12.
whom much is given, of him much shall be r^quyred;) that men professing to
belieu^ (with contempt of the Churches authorit^ interposed therein) contrary
articles touching Christian Religion, and dying suc^ their different fayths (in
which the one syd^ must of necessity mantayne a false faith: that men (I say)
of both these sides can b^ saved, it is against all force of Reason, against
the judgment of the Primitive Church, ^ finally against Gods Justice.

And thus far concerning the two fore said examples in the Machabees: Which
Book admitting them for the time, not to be divine Scripture; yet it is
acknowledged o^ all sides, that the Histories recorded in the are true; and
that Eleazar, and the Wid^ with her seven Sonns, performed most worth examples
of piety and Religion; and that they had yielded to the Kings Command in eating
of forbidden meats, they had (as violating the law given to them by God)
without repentance, incurred damnation. And this is the judgment of the
ancient Fathers, Catholic Doctors, and the learned Protestants. But let us
descend more particulerly to the doctrine of Recusancy, and examine whether it
be lawful to exhibit our selves present at that Church in time of divine
service or of preaching, the doctrine of which Church, we hold in our
Conscience to be erroneous, and false.

Now, that this kind of going to the Church of a different Religion, is wholly
condemned as most unlawful and wicked; I first prove from the judgment of the
Protestants, secondly from the resolutions of the Catholics. And to begin
with the Protestants, we find this kind of Recusancy (I mean to be present at
the Sermons or prayers of a different Religion) is taught by De vitandis
superstition. extant in Caluini Tract. Theolog. p. 584.
Calvin, the Alleged by Sleydan Com. Englished. l. 7. fol. 87.
Deuines of Germany, by In Council. Theolog. p. 628.
Melancton, by Peter In his discourse hereof recited by Melancton, in his
Treatise of Council. Theolog. p. 634. 635.
Martyr, and finally (to omit others) by Doctor Willet, In his Synops. printed
1600. p. 612. 613. etc.
who for the better fortifying and warranting of the said opinion, produces
his Testimonies from the authorities of Latimer, Bradford, Philpot, Ridley and
others, diverse of which according to this their doctrine suffered death in
Queen Mary's time, as appears out of the Acts and monuments of John fox. And
thus much for the Protestants.

That the Catholics do with the like or greater fervor teach and practice
this Recusancie, is clear by the example of our own Country; where since
Protestancy was first planted, many scores of venerable and learned Priests
have chosen rather to suffer death, then that they would change their Religion,
or go once to the Protestants Church; their lives being commonly proffered
them, if so they would conform themselves, and leave their recusancy. In like
sort many hundreds of the Laity pay yearly great sums of money for their
recusancy; diverse of them enduring further oppressions disgraces, and
imprisonments only for the same cause, through the malice, rigor, and
couetuousnes of certain subordinate Magistrates under his Majesty (whose
clemency is most remarkable, and whom God long preserve in a holy government
over us) being herein mightily wronged through the false and most injurious
informations of their Adversaries.

Now, that the doctrine of learned Catholics is answeareable to the practice
^eerein, appears from the frequent testimonies of diverse learned men of the
Catholic Church of this time: yet for greater bre^ity, I will insist in the
Authorities only of three, to wit, of Cardinal Baronius, Cardinal Bellarmine,
(the two late lamps of Gods Church) and of Mutius Vitellescus, then but
Provincial, now General and Head of the ^esuites dispersed throughout
Christendom. For some years past, their judgment being demanded, whether the
Catholics of England for the saving of their goods, lyuings, and liberty,
might go to the Protestants Church or no, to hear a sermon only, though
otherwise they did not communicate in Prayer and Sacraments with the
Protestants; for the warranting or disallowing whereof there were several
reasons brought on either side, all which reasons were proposed and expressed
to these three worthy men. These three learned and holy men then (besides
diverse others eminent Doctors and writers, whom I hear omit) did give their
negative sentence therein, whose particular words in Latin, I have thought good
here to set down.

The Judgment of Cardinal Baronius
VISIS, and consideratis quae superius diligen^ peruestigatione in vtramque
partem sunt disputata, reiectis omnino and exsufflatis, quae pro part
affirmatiua fuere proposita, quod scilicet liceret Catholicis adire Ecclesias
Haereticorum, vt superius su^^ proposita, inhaeremus saniori sententiae
posteriori, (...) Ecclesia Catholica antiquitus receptae, and vsu prob^tae;
quod scilicet id facere pijs non liceat. Quam rog^ nostros Catholicos Anglos
amplecti ex animo.

C. Card. Baronius, tit. S. Nerei and Achillei Presb.

That is, I having seen and considered (meaning in the Question of English
Catholic going to church) all those points which have by^ disputed of on both
sides, but rejecting and wholly abandoning all the reasons alleged for the
affirmative part (to wit, to prove that it was lawful f^ Catholics to go to
the Heretics Church,) I do (...) hereto the more sound and later opinion,
which ^^ciently was received of the Catholic Church, a^ allowed by use and
custom; That is, that it is (...) lawful for pious and godly men so to do.
And I (...) treat all our English Catholics to embrace this (...) opinion and
judgment.

Caesar Cardinal Baronius, Priest of the ti^ of the Church of SS. Nereus and
Achille^

The Judgment of Cardinal Bellarmine.
CONSIDERATIS rationibus pro vtraque part allatis, existimo non licere viris
Ca^icis in Anglia Haereticorum Ecclesias adire; mulminus concionibus illorum
interesse; minime au^ omnium cum ipsis in precibus and psalmodia, ^sque ipsorum
Ecclesiasticis ritibus conuenire. I^ me propria manu subscripsi.

R. Bellarminus, S. R. L. Prew. Card. Tit. S. Ma. in via.

Thus in English. The reasons brought upon ^h sides considered (meaning
touching the lawful^ or unlawfulness of English Catholics going to the
^^otestants Church) I am persuaded, that it is not ^full for English Catholics
to go to the Churches Heretics; much less to be present at their Ser^^ns; but
least of all to communicate with them in ^yers, and singing of psalms, and
other their Ec^siasticall rites and customs. And therefore this my ^gment
herein I have subscribed with my own and,

Robert Bellarmyne, Priest and Cardinal of the holy Roman Church, of the Title
of the Church of S. Maria in via.

The Sentence of Mutius Vitelleseus then Provincial, but now General, and
Head of the Order (...) the Jesuits.
VIDI rations, quae in hoc scripto pro vtraq^ part afferuntur, and existimo
non licere vi^ Catholicis in Anglia Ecclesias Haereticorum adire^ puto hoc
debere esse extra Controuersiam.

Mutius Vitellescus Prou. R^^ Soc. IESV.

In English. I have seen the reasons, whi^^ are alleged in this book or
writing, for both part (meaning for going, or not going to the Protesta^^
Church) and I am of opinion that it is not lawful f^^ Catholics in England to
go to the Churches of Heretics: and I am persuaded, that this point ough^ to
be out of all Controversy.

Mutius Vitellescus Provincial (...) the Society of Jesus in Rom^

And thus far touching the sentences (...) these three learned men, delivered
in warranting the doctrine of Recusancy in Catholics.

Now to reflect back upon the promise^ If the going to the Church of another
Religion (for avoiding of temporal losses, (and only to hear a sermon of the
said Religion) be to be accounted a Sin, not be done under pain of
damnation, as being presumed to bear an external conformity to a false
Religion (as by all the former testimonies above alleged is plentifully
proved) though the party so offending, may perhapps truly believe all points of
Christian Religion: with what reason then can it be warranted, that both
Catholics and Protestants, conspiring only in the fundamental points of the
Trinity, Incarnation etc. but differing mainly in all other points of Religion,
yet nevertheless promiscuously communicating one with another in prayer and
the Sacraments, can jointly be saved? especially seeing it is certain, that
the one part defends not matters of Indifferency (as is commonly supposed)
but iniustifiable errors, or rather (to speak as the truth is) manifest and
gross Heresies.

THE SAME PROVED FROM the writings of the Catholics and Protestants, wherein
reciprocally they charge one another with Heresy. Also from the Insurrections,
War and Rebellions, begun only for Religion. CHAP. XIIII.
IF there were no other reason to be alleged, in disproofe and confutation of
this plurality of Religions, them this following, it might seem fully
preuayling in all clear judgments, not wholly darkened with the mist of
earthly and temporal respects. It is this. First, the wonderful and
implacable Bookwarrs between Catholics and Protestants, wholly undertaken in
defense of their several Religions: and yet both the Catholics and the
Protestants profess to believe in the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion
etc. Secondly, the pressures and calamities, with which diverse states and
countries do afflict other states, as also the Insurrection of Subjects
against their natural Princes, only for difference of Religion; not containing
themselves, till they burst forth into open hostility and arms for defending
their own Religion, and subuerting of the others.

Touching the first, good God! how many men on all sides, since the first
appearing of Luther, have spent their whole times, and all their serviceable
years, in writing, disputing, and preaching in defense of their own Religion,
and impugning of their adversaries; accounting the maintayners and belieuers
thereof, as Heretics, and pronouncing eternal damnation against them?
Witnesses hereof are the Libraryes of all the famous universities of
Christendom; the Stationers shoppes in all great Cittyes, and lastly the
Annual Mart of Books returned these many years from Frankford. And is ^t
possible, that so much pains, travail, and labor of writing and otherwise,
accompanied with so great charges, should be undertaken for questions only of
Indifferency, and such, as it imports nothing at all, touching ^he gayning of
Heaven, and avoiding of Hell, what a man belieueth therein, or of what side he
relyeth?

Concerning the second point, which is ^he calamityes, afflictions, and wars,
which livers States, Countries, and Kingdoms ^oe prosecute against their
neighbors, and ^ll originally for matter of Religion; ^s also touching the
open rebellion of the Subjects against their lawful Sovereigns, ^nly for the
said occasion; the last fifty years, as also these very times do give
ouerlame^table examples hereof. Witnesses of this matter (purposely to forbear
the presidents of our own Country) is Scotland, into which Country, Knox,
Goodman, and Bucanan, with other their Agents and confederates first introduced
Protestancy by force, and arms: A point so acknowledged, that Docto^ Bancroft
late pretended A chbishop of Canterbury, as wholly inu^yghing against suc^
violent proceedings, made a book of tha^ subject, entituling it: Of the
proceedings of the Scottish Mynisters, according to the Geneuian rule of
Reformation.

Touching France, who knows not that for this last fifty years, till the
last King of France became Catholic, there have by always almost open wars,
between the State of France, and the Hugnotts of France undertaken by the
Hugnotts only for Religion. And does not the City of Rochell, with some other
Cittyes at this day, stand out against their King, under pretext of defense of
their Gospel?

The occurrents of the Low Countries, and the Hollanders are no less
remarkable herein of whose first taking of arms against their lawful King
only for Religion, In Epitom. Cent. 16. p. 941.
Osiander, an earnest Protestant, thus confesses They of the low Countries by
public wrytings renounced all subjection and obedience to Philip their Lord
and King. And Osiand. vbi sup. 81.
again. When four hundred of them, of good respect, had sued for liberty of
Religion, and could not prevail; the impatient people stirred up with fury, at
Antwerpe, and other places of Holland Zeland, and Flanders, did throw and
break down Images. But of the proceedings and Rebellion^ of the low
Countrymen against their King only for cause of Religion, it is needles to
speak further, seeing it is too well known to all men of any impartial
judgment and understanding.

I will not much insist in the Example of Switzerland, which consisting of
twelve or thirteen Cantons, or Shyres, half of the number of them did See of
this Osiander in Epitom. Eccles. histor. Cen. 16. page 103. as also D. Bancroft
in his survey, p. 13. and Cochlaeus in actis Lutheri.
rise up in arms against the other, and by force of arms did set up the
Protestant Religion among them. And so the half of the Cantons do continue
Protestant to this very day. The battalls fought among them (only for Religion)
were many and most cruel; and in one of them Zwinglius (the chief inciter of
the rest) was slain.

I pass over Geneua, which City (as the whole world knows) did first
withdraw it self from the allegiance of their temporal Liege Lord, only by
reason that against his will and pleasure, they would profess the Protestant
Religion; and so accordingly to this day they have made themselves a State or
Commonwealth, wholly independent of Sauoy; of which City thus D. In his
answer to a certain libel supplicatory. page 194.
Sutcliffe confessedly writes: They of Geneua did depose their Catholic Liege
Lord and Prince, from his temporal right, albeit he was by right of succession
their temporal Lord, and owner of that City and Territory.

In like sort, I pretermit the many like examples of the Commons, rising
against their lawful Princes and magistrates in See Chitraeus in Chron 1593.
and 1594.
Sueueland, See hereof the acknowledgment of M. Fulke in his answer to Farines
declamations. p. 35.
Denmark, See Osiander hereof in Epitom. Cent. 16. page 115.
Poland, and See the acknowledgement hereof by D. Bilson in his true defense
part. 3. page 270. and 273.
Germany; And which rysings, Insurrections, and rebellions were originally
undertaken only for Religion; and have no doubt (since Luthers first breach)
cost the lives in all places of many hundred thousand men; and have actually
deposed and disthroned diverse Kings and Princes of their states and territoryes.

These things then, for their euidency being confessed for true and undeniable
(many of which yet remain fresh in our own memory) of the nature of which
Actions I will not here dispute; only I here urge, that it is more then
incredible, that such rebellions and deuastations of Countries, besieging of
Cittyes, deposing of Princes, slaughter of so many hundred thousands of men,
should be practiced almost throughout all Christendom, within this last
threescore years, only for admitting, or not admitting the differences
between the Protestants and Catholics Religion, if both the contrary parties
were not persuaded, that upon the true or false belief of these Controversies
in Religion, their souls Salua^ion or damnation for all eternity were to
depend; For it is certain, that all these contrary parties did agree and
conspire in the general belief of the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion, death of
our Savior, and reciting of the Apostles Creed: And therefore for these
doctrines such bloody proceedings were not attempted.

THE SAME PROVED, FROM the Protestants mutually condemning one another of
Heresy, and for Heretics. CHAP. XV.
IF Protestants do maintain, that their different opinions severally houlden
among themselves be Heresies, and that the belieuers of them, are for such
their false belief (if they so dye therein) not capable of salvation; then a
fortiori, may we be bold to pronounce, that the Controversies of faith
between the Catholics and Protestants are not of that middle nature, but that
the opinions and sentences on the one side are to be reputed for manifest
Heresies, and such as cannot stand with man's salvation. This inference is most
necessary, since on all sides it is acknowledged, that there is a far greater
disparity in Religion between the Catholics and the Protestants, then there
is between the Protestants among themselves.

Now, that the Protestants do hold one another for Heretics, it cannot be
denied: for to insist first in the Controversies touching the real Presence,
maintained in their sense by the Lutherans, but denied by the Sacramentaries;
we find, that Luther thus writes of the Sacramentaries: Contra articulos
Louanienses. These. 27. tom. 2.
We censure in earnest the Zwinglians, and all the Sacramentaries for
Heretics, and alienated from the Church of God. And again, the same Luther
thus writes, tom. 7. Wittenb. fol. 381. I do protest before God and the
world, that I do not agree with the Zwinglians, nor ever will while the world
stands, but will have my hands clear from the blood of the sheep, which
these Heretics (mark his words) do drive from Christ, deceive, and kill. And
again in the former place; Cursed be the charity and concord of the
Sacramentaries for ever and ever, to all eternity. But Heretics, and men
alienated from the Church of God, and which do kill the sheep of Christ,
during such their condition, are not in state of Salvation. Now, of Luther and
his doctrine, we find this bitter recrimination used by the Tigurine Deuines,
who were Zwinglians or Caluinists: Tigurini tract. 3. contra supremam Lutheri
Confessionem. p. 61.
Nos condemnatam and execrabilem sectam vocat etc. Luther calls us a damnable
and execrable sect; but let him look, lest he does not declare himself an
Arch-heretike being he cannot, nor will not have society with those that
confess Christ. And Zwinglius in tom. 2. ad Respons. Lutheri, thus writes:
Behold how Satan endeauours to possess this man, meaning Luther.

But to proceed to other points: Nicolaus In his Thesib. and Hypothesib.
Gallus (an eminent Protestant and Superintendent at Ratisbone) thus writes of
the contentions between the Protestants themselves. Non sunt leaves etc. The
dissentions that are among us, are not light, nor of light matters; but of the
greatest articles of Christian doctrine, of the Law and the Gospel, of
Justification and good works, of the Sacraments, and use of Ceremonies.

Co^radus In Theolog. Calvin. l. 1. art. 23.
Schlussenburge (an other famous Protestant) alleges Pappus a Protestant)
thus complaining against the Caluinists: Etsi initio de vno tantum articulo
etc. Although in the beginning one only article was called into doubt etc. Not
withstanding the Caluinists are now so far gone, as that they call in doubt
neither few, neither the least articles of Christian Doctrine: for now we
dissent from them, touching the Omnipotency of God, the Personal union of two
Natures in Christ etc.

But to come nearer home: The In their mild defense of the silenced ministers
supplication, to the Court of Parlame^t.
Puritanes here of England thus complain of the Protestants: Do we vary from
the sincere Doctrine of the Scriptures? Nay rather many of them do much more
swerve from the same etc. And thus answereably we find, that the Puritans hold
the Bishops of England Antichristian; whereas the Protestants do teach, that of
necessity Bishops are to be in the Church of God.

D. Willet In his Meditation upon the 122. Psalm.
speaking of diverse opinions, taught by the more moderate Protestants, as
Hooker, D. Couell, and others, thus writes: From this foundation have spronge
forth these and other such wirlepooles and bubbles of new doctrine; as that
Christ is not originally God: and then after he thus concludes: Thus have some
been bold to teach and write, who as some Schismatikes (meaning heerby the
Puritans) have disturbed the peace of the Church one way in external matters
concerning discipline, so they have troubled the Church another way, in
opposing themselves, by new quirkes and devices, to the soundnes of Doctrine
among Protestants.

M. Parkes in his book dedicated to the then Archbishop D. Bancroft, thus
writes of the proceedings of some Protestants here in England: Epist. dedicat.
They are headstrong and hardened in Error, they strike at the main points of
faith, shaking the foundation it self, and ca^ling to question Heaven and Hell
the divinity and humanity, yea the very soul, and salvation of our Savior
himself. And again more plainly in the former place, he says thus: They
have pestilent Heresies: and yet more, They are Heretical and sacrilegious.

To conclude this point of their particular sayings and redargutions herein,
D. In his defense of Hocker page 65. and 74. and 75.
Couell repeating and registring the Positions of the Puritans here in
England, among other of their positions sets down these following: The
Statute congregations of England are no true Churches. And again. The
Protestant Church of England is no Church at all. And yet more: The Protestant
Church of England has no form of a Church.

Now, that all these dissentions among English Protestants cannot be
interpreted only about indifferencyes and Ceremonies, or about Government (as
some Protestants do answer, when they are charged heerewith by the
Catholics,) besides that their own former Confessions are extended to diverse
high articles, the foresaid M. Vbi supra page 3.
Parks plainly and truly confesses the contrary, saying: The Protestants
deceive the world, and make men believe, there is agreement in all substantial
points; they affirm, there is no question among them of the truth.

Now the former point is furthermore made evident, by the reciprocal
deportme^t and demeanor of Protestants amongst themselves; for first (besides
the cha^ging one another with flat Heresy (as is above showed) they do not only
prohibit the In Council. Theolog. part. 1. page 249.
reading of each others books, but also they set down articles of visitation
for the enquiry and apprehending Hospinian. vbi supra.
of such their adversaries; and being apprehended they commit them to prison;
yea further they proceed, not allowing the So relates Osiander in Epitom.
Cent. 16. page 608. etc. Conradus Schlussenb. Catalog. Haeret. l. 13. and
vltimo.
trauaylers of either party common entertaynement, due in all nations to
strangers. Hospinian. vbi supra.
Finally their dissentions are so implacable among them (though all be
Protestants) as that in defense of their several doctrines they have with
great hostility taken This is showed and exemplifyed by Hospinian vbi supra
fol. 395. and 397. in like sort by Osiander in Epitom. p. 735.
arms one against another, as appears (to omit for breuity all other
Preside^ts) by the late memorable example in Holland, of the Arminians and
Gomorists, who only for some difference touching Freewill between them, did
rise in hostile manner against their adversaries; and ceased not that course,
^till Barneuelt the chief of one side and faction was beheaded. All which
violence and extremity of courses would never have been vndertake^, if the
diversity of doctrine (which is the cause of such and so great exorbitancies)
did consist only in things in different of themselves, and such as did not
concern the necessity of salvation.

The said point touching the Protestants dissentions in essential articles of
faith, is lastly clearly manifested, by taking a view of their books written
one against another: (though this method is partly inuolued in the displaying of
their particular condemning sentences above alleged) the number whereof of
amounts to diverse hundreds; yet as desirous to be short and compendious, I
will set down the Tytles only of twenty of them; even from which Titles the
Indifferent Reader may judge, whether the Authors of the^ (being all eminent
Protestants) did maintain the subjects of their said books, to be matters of
Indifferency, and such as may be either way houlden without breach of that true
faith which is necessary to man's Salvation. And further I will forbear to
reckon within this number any book written either for, or against the real
Presence maintained by the Lutherans, because therein they conspire partly with
us Catholics, and consequently the controversy herein arises not only
between the Protestants themselves, but also between them and us. And for
more satisfaction of the Reader, I have also Englished the said twenty Titles,
from which, conjecture may easily be made, in what bitter style the books were
written.

Oration de Incarnatione filij Dei, contra impios and blasphemos errores
Zwinglianorum and Caluinistaru^, printed Tubingae, Anno Domini. 1586.

An Oration, or Speech of the Incarnation of the Son of God, against the
wicked and blasphemous errors of the Swinglians and Caluinists.

Alberti Graueri Bellum Iohannis Caluini, and Jesus Christi. Braptae, 1598. in 4.

The war of John Calvin and Jesus Christ, written by Albertus Grauerus.

Anti-Paraeus: Hoc est. Refutatio venenati scripti a Dauide Paraeo editi, in
defensione stropharum, and corrup^elarum, quibus Johannes Caluinus
illustrissima Scripturae testimonia de mysterio Trinitatis, nec non oracula
Prophetarum de Christo, detestandum in modum corrupit. Francofurti* 1598.

Anti-Paraeus, that is, a Refutation of a ^enemous book, written by David
Pareus ^n defense of the Deceites and Corruptions, ^y the which John Calvin
has detestably ^bused, or wrested the most clear testimo^yes of Scripture,
touching the Mystery of ^he Trinity, and the Oracles of the Pro^hets touching
Christ.

AEgidij Hunnij Caluinus Iudaizans: Hoc est, ^udaicae glossae and corruptelae,
quibus Johannes Cal^inus illustrissima Scripturae sacrae loca and testimo^^ a
de gloriosa Trinitate Deitate Christi, and Spiri^^s Sancti, cum primis autem
vaticinia Propheta^^m de aduentu Messiae, and Natiuitate eius, Passio^e,
Resurrectione, Assensione ad caelos, and Sessione ^d dextram Dei, detestandum
in modum corrumpe^^ non abhorrutt. Wittenbergae. 1593.

Caluinus Iudaizans, or Calvin playing ^he Jew: That is, A discovery (written
by Aegidius Hunnius) of the Jewish interpeta^ions and Corruptions, by the which
John Calvin has not been affrayd to corrupt and ^buse the most evident places
and testimo^yes of holy Scripture, against the glorious ^rinity, the Deity of
Christ, and the Holy Ghost; as also the Predictions of the Pro^hets touching
the coming of the Messiah, ^s Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascen^^on, and
his Sitting at the right Hand of ^od.

Conradi Schlussenburgij Theologiae Caluinisticae libri tres, in quibus, seu in
tabula quadam quasi ad oculum, plusquam ex ducentis viginti tribus
Sacramentariorum publicis scriptis, pagellis, verbis proprijs, and Authorum
nominibus indicatis demonstratur, eos de nullo fere Christianae fidei articulo
recte sentire. Francofurti. 1594.

Three Books touching Caluinisticall Divinity, written by Conradus
Schlussenburge, in which books it is showed (as i^ a Table to the eye) eue^
out of two hundred twenty and three publyke wrytings of the Sacramentaryes,
with special noting o^ the pages, the particular words, and name of the
Authors, that the Sacramentaryes have no true belief almost of any one
Article of Christian faith.

Pia defensio aduersus Iohannis Caluini, Pe^^ Boquini, Theodori Bezae,
Gulihelmi Clebitij and ^ and similium calumnias. Item refutatio Pelagianis^
Anabaptistici Caluinistarum erroris, de Baptismo (...) Peccato Originali.
Adduntur Collectancae plurim^rum Caluini, contra Deum, eius Prouidentiam (...)
Predestinationem. Erfordiae. 1583.

A godly defense against the deceites (...) John Calvin, Peter Boquinus,
Theodor^ Beza, Wilhelmus Clebitius, and their Associats. Also a Refutation of
the Pelagian ^ Anabaptisticall error, taught by the Cal^^nists, touching
Baptism and Original sinn^ Here are also added certain Collections out of
Caluins wrytings, against God, his Providence, and Predestination.

Denominatio Imposturarum ac fraudum, quibus AEgidius Hunnius Ecclesiae
Orthodoxae Doctrinam petulanter corrumpere pergit. Bremae. 1592.

A Catalogue of the Impostures and deceptes, wherewith Aegidius Hunnius does
insolently go about to corrupt the doctrine of the Orthodoxe Church.

Argumentorum and obiectionum de praecipuis articulis Doctrinae Christianae,
cum responsionibus, quae sunt collectae ex scriptis Philippi Melancthonis:
additis Scholijs illustrantibus vsum singularum responsionum, Parts 7.
Neapoli. 1578.

Arguments and Objections concerning the chief Articles of Christian Doctrine,
with the Answers gathered out of the wrytings of Philip Melancthon: together
with Commentaries upon every Answer, divided into seven Parts.

Gulihelmi Zepperi Dillenbergensis Ecclesiae Pastoris Institutio, de tribus
Religionis summis capitibus, quae inter Euangelicos in Controuersiam vocantur.
Hanouiae. 1596.

In Instruction about three chief heads of Religion, called into Controversy
among the Gospellers: by William Zepperus Pastor of the Church of Dillenberge.

Responsio triplex ad fratres Tubingenses, and triplex eorum scriptum de tribus
grauissimis qu^stionibus etc. De Coena Domini, de maiestate hominis Christi,
and de non damnandis Ecclesijs Dei nec auditis, nec vocatis. Geneuae. 1582.

A threefold Answer to the Brethren of Tubinga and their threefold writing,
concerning three most weighty Questions etc. Of the supper of the Lord; Of the
Majesty of Christ, as Man; And of not condemning the Churches of God, before
they be heard, or called.

Ad Iohannis Brentij argumenta, and Iacobi Andreae Theses, quibus carnis
Christi omni praesentia^ nituntur confirmare, id est, aduersum renouatos
Nestorij and Eutichetis errores, Responsum. Geneuae. 1570.

An Answer to the Arguments of John Brentius, and to the Conclusions of
Iacobus Andreas, by which they endeavor to confirm the Vbiquity or presence
of Christ's flesh every where: that is to say, against the renewed Errors of
Nestorius and Eutiches.

Apologia ad omnes Germaniae Ecclesias reformatas, quae sub Zwingliani and
Caluiniani nominis inuidia, vim and iniuria^ patiuntur. Tiguri. 1578.

An Apology of all the Reformed churches of Germany, which through the Envy of
the Name of Zuinglius and Calvin, do suffer violence and injury.

Christopheri Pezelij Apologia verae doctrina, de d^^^itione Euangelij:
apposita Thrasonicis praestigijs Iohannis Wigandi. Wittenbergae. 1572.

An Apology of the true Doctrine concerning the Definition of the Gospel,
against the Thrasonicall enchantments of Ioannes Wigandus: by Christophorus
Pezelius.

Colloquij Montisbelgardensis inter Iacobum Andreae, and Theodorum Bezam Acta.
Tubingae. 1584.

The Acts of the Colloquy at Montbelgard, between James Andrew, and Theodore
Beza.

Veritatis victoria, and ruina Papatus Saxonici, Losannae. 1563.

The Victory of Truth, and the Ruin of the Popedom of Saxony.

Hamelmannia: sieve Aries Theologizans. Dia^gus oppositus duabus narrationibus
historicis Her^anni Hamelmanni. Neostadij. 1582.

Hamelmannia: or the Theologizing Ram. A Dialogue against two Historical
Narrations of Hermanus Hamelmannus.

Christiani Kittelmanni december graves and per^iciosi errores Zwinglianorum, in
Doctrina de pec^atis, and Baptismo: ex proprijs ipsorum libris colle^i, and
refutati. Magdeburgae. 1562.

Ten weighty and pernicious Errors of ^he Zwinglians, in the Doctrine
concerning Sin and Baptism. Collected out of their own books and refuted:
by Christianus Kittleman.

Iohannis Mosellani Praeseruatiua contra venenum Zwinglianorum. Tubingae. 1586.

An Antidote, or Preservative against the poison of the Zwinglians: by Ioann^^
Mosellanus.

De Vnitate personali and supernaturali duar^^ Naturarum in Christo: contra
blasphemam Disp^tationem Eusebij Cleberi Pastoris Saugalensis i^ Heluetia.
Tubingae. 1586.

Of the Personal and Supernatural Unity of two Natures in Christ; against the
blasphemous Disputation of Eusebius Cleberus Pastor of Saugall, in Suitzerland.

De gaudijs aeternae vitae: and quomodo Sacramentarij nobis illa gaudia
imminuant. Erfordia. 1585.

Of the Joys of Eternal life: And how the Sacramentaries, do in part defraude
(...) of them.

Now from all the premises above, I hau^ conclude, that if the several
opinions among the Protestants be not in their judgment matters of
Indifferency; but are by themselves truly reputed for Heresies, and the
maintayners of them not houldden to be in state of Salvation; as appears both
from the Protestants reciprocal co^demnations of one another, as also from the
former Titles of their own Books written against one another; then with much
more reason may the same sentence be pronounced of the many irreconciliable
Controversies, differently believed and houlden by the Catholics and
Protestants: And the rather since (as is above said) there is a far greater
disparity and difference of doctrine between the Catholics and the
Protestants, then between the Protestant, and the Protestant.

THE TRVTH OF THIS FORMER Doctrine, demonstrated from the many Absurdityes,
necessarily accompanying the contrary doctrine. CHAP. XVI.
SVCH is the sweet Providence of the Divine Majesty, in disposal of things,
as that he ever causes truth to be warranted with many irrefragable reasons,
and falsehood to be attended on with diverse gross and inevitable absurdityes;
that so the judgment of man may be the better secured for the embracing of
truth, and remain the less excusable, if in place of truth it entertayne
falsehood and Error. Of the reasons conuincing the infallible truth of our
doctrine maintained in this treatise, I have already discussed above, in the
tenth Chapter. Now here I will a little insist in disclosing the many and
palpable absurdities, accompanying the contrary doctrine: which point will
chiefly rest (besides some other short insertions) in a recapitulation of most
of the former heads or branches, above handled.

For if this doctrine were true, to wit, that every one might be saved in his
own Religion; or that the belief only of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the
Passion, or the Creed were sufficient thereto, notwithstanding the belief of
other erroneous opinions and heresies; Then would it follow, Tit. 3. Gal. c. 5.
Romans c. 16. 1. Tim. 1.
any limitation; but also in some other, they are particulerly restrayded to
certain Heresies, seeming of smaller importance then the denial of the
Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion, the Creed, etc. as is evident touching
the denying 1. Tim. cap. 4.2. Tim. c. 2.1. Joan. c. 2.
of marriage, and of eating of certain meats, and touching the Natures of
Christ etc.

Now, that the denial of other inferior articles of faith then of the
Trinity, and Incarnation etc. is plain Heresy, is demonstrated above, both
from the definition of Heresy, and from the judgment of the Primitive Church.

Hebr. c. 11.
Apostle; which definition of faith comprehends a general belief of all
articles of Christian Religion, and is not therefore to be limited to any one
kind of them. In like sort, it destroys the privileges and dignity of faith,
set down by the foresaid Apostle; who Mat. vltimo and Hebr. 11.
promises salvation to him, that has faith, as also that without faith we
cannot Ephesians. 4. Act. 4. Romans 12. etc.
please God: but such excellencies cannot be ascribed to a Bastard faith, which
belieueth some things true, others false; they are therefore either to be given
to a true entire, and perfect faith in all points, or else the Apostle grossly
erred in assigning to faith the aforesaid privileges; seeing a false faith is
no better, then no faith at all. Again it depriueth a Christian faith of its
true mark or character of Unity, so much celebrated by the Ephesians. 4. Romans 12.
vide Cant. c. 6.
Apostle.

Now then if Unity of faith be necessary to Salvation, how can both Protestants
and Catholics expect salvation, Diameter, then there is repugnancy betwixt
both their beliefes. Therefore if both of them though wanting this Unity, can be
saved, then has the Apostle falsely and erroneously described and delineated
the faith of a Christian.

But to reflect upon the former passages, is any man so stupid, as to dream,
that, that doctrine should be true, which gives so open a lie to so many
unanswerable texts of Gods holy writ, touching the condemning of Heretics in
general, as also touching the definition, excellency, and propriety of true
Faith? It is impossible, it is not to be imagined. Gods word is like himself,
most true, sacred, and inviolable, and therefore it justly witnesses of it
self, that Joan. 2.
scriptura (...) potest solui. And again: Mat. 24.
Caelum and terra transibunt, verba autem mea non transibunt: Heaven and earth
shall pass, but my words shall (...) pass.

But to proceed further touching the for^sayd want of unity, and disagreements
i^ Faith; If every Christian might be saved i^ his own Religion, then might
those be saved, which believe the Articles of the cre^^ in a most different
sense and manner; the^ which what can be more rashely and exorbitantly spoken?
seeing there is but one true intended sense, by the Apostles, of the creed; the
which if we attain not, then do we believe that, which is false; but to
believe the creed in a false sense, is no better, then not to believe it at
all. And therefore it would follow by way of inference, that he might be saved,
who believed not any one article of the creed at all. Now, that the Catholics
and Protestants do believe the articles of the creed in different, or rather
contrary senses (and consequently that the one side belieueth it in a false and
erroneous sense) is above proved in the fourth chapter.

If it be here replied, that the maintayners of this doctrine do so far yield,
that they only are to be saved, which in a true sense believe the creed; yet by
this their restraint they condemn al those others, who believe ^t in any other
sense, different from that intended by the holy Ghost and the Apostles; and
consequently they condemn in their judgment and deprive of salvation, either
^he Catholics or Protestants; since of necessity the one of these do believe
the creed not in the true, but in a false and heretical ^ense and
construction, different from that of the Apostles. But supposing that the
Ca^holikes and Protestants believed the creed in that true sense, intended by
the holy Ghost; yet if our Newtrallists would have the creed the square or
rule, thereby to measure our faith, then mark the Absurdities following.

Newtrallists Religion, he should be saved, who believed none of the foresaid
articles; seeing not any one of them is expressed, or set down in the Apostles
creed; and yet the belief of the said Articles is necessarily exacted and
required to Salvation, in the judgment both of Catholics and Protestants; both
which parties do with an unanimous consent, teach the necessity of believing
the said articles. But to proceed further and to come to the different Articles
of faith, differenly believed by the Catholic and Protestant, and yet not
expressed in the creed; and articles of such nature, as that they are houlden
by the catholics to be instituted by our Savior, as subordinate (yet
necessary) means of the grace of God, and of our Salvation; whereas the
Protestants, as not believing at all the said articles, do wholly disclayme
from acknowledging any such means:

These Articles I have recited above, to wit: That Sacraments in general do
confer grace: That a Child dying without Baptism, cannot be saved; That
mortal sin is not remitted without the Sacrament of Penance and Confession;
That we are to adore with supreme Honor the blessed Sacrament; That not only
faith, but also works do justify man; That a Christian by thinking himself
just, is not thereby become just; That every Christian has by God sufficient
grace offered to save his soul; And that therefore God on his part would have
all men saved; That without keeping the ten Commandments a man cannot be
saved; Finally, that all Christians ought upon pain of eternal damnation, to
communicate in Sacraments and doctrine with the Church of Rome, and to submit
themselves in all due obedience to the supreme Pastor of that Church: In all
which points the Protestants do believe directly the contrary, condemning us
of Heresy, Superstition, yea Idolatry, for our believing the foresaid points.
Now I say, seeing the former articles do immediately touch and concern either
remission of our sins; or grace of our soul; or our Justification; or our
due honor and adoration to our Saviors Body, being accompanied with his
divinity; or Lastly our communion with Christ his church and head thereof; in
any of which (as concerning so nearly our eternal happynes) who erreth, cannot
possibly be saved; And seeing the Protestants (as is said) do in all the said
points maintain the just contrary to the catholics, and thereby do abandon the
catholics acknowledged means of their Salvation:

Newtrallists, that the Catholics and Protestants (notwithstanding their so
different and contrary belief and answerable practice in the former Articles,
so nearly touching man's Salvation) may both be saved? Seeing it must needs be,
that either the catholics shall be damned for setting down certain means of
our Salvation, contrary to Christ's mind and Institution (supposing the said
articles to be false;) or that the Protestants shall be damned for rejecting the
former means of Salvation, instituted by Christ, admitting them to be true.

D. Jewel in his defense of the Apology. Ke^nitius in exam. Council. Trident.
part. 1. p. 74. and diverse others.
Protestants themselves exempt her from error) most truly and insufferably
erred, in condemning certain opinions (which are not fundamental) for
Heresies, and their maintayners for Heretics; and consequently the Scripture
and Christ himself have deceived us, by ascribing to the church an Mat. 18.
Luc. 10. 1. Tim. 3. etc.
infallibility of erring in her definitions of faith, and condemnation of
Heresies, and by commanding us to obey the churches authority and sentence in
all things, as styling her the pillar and foundation of truth. And further it
should follow, that the Church should thus intollerably err both in general
counsels, (the highest Tribunalls here upon earth) as also in the private
Authorities and sentences of all the learned Fathers, in those firster times.

And thus for example, the council of the Act. 15.
Apostles should have erred, in decreeing it unlawful to eat in those times
blood and strangled meats.

In like sort the first council of Eusebius. l. 3. de vita Constant. Epiphan.
haeres. 70.
Nice should have erred, in condemning the Quartadecimani for Heretics, because
they would not keep Easter day, according to the custom of the Church. And to
pretermit all the other Counsels, above alleged, the Council Eusebius. l. 6.
Hist. cap. 33.
of Rome under Cornelius, for condemning the Heresy of the Nouatians (who
rejected the Sacrament of Penance) as also for condemning of Anabaptisme.

And thus far of Councels condemning points of seeming Indifferency, for open
and wicked Heresies. But now here granting that the said points (as they were
houlden by the maintayning of them) were not Heresies, and that the belieuers
of them be saved, then two main absurdities do immediately follow: the first,
(as is said) is the erring of the whole Church of God in co^demning them for
Heresies, they being not Heresies, but true doctrines.

end or purpose were all these Counsels (consisting of many hundreds of the
most grave and Reverend men of all Christendom) celebrated with such labor,
travail out of all countries, and infinite charges, if the doctrines (for the
impugning, resistng, and condemning whereof they were gathered) might be
indifferently maintained and defended on all sides, without breach of true
faith, or danger of Salvation? The erring of the church is no less
manifested, in the sentences and condemnations given by many of the most
ancient, famous, and le^rned Fathers in the Primitive Church (not any one
Orthodoxall Father contradicting them therein) against diverse, maintayning
opinions that seemed, in regard of the Trinity, Incarnation, etc. of small
importance; ^f so those opinions be not Heresies, nor the belieuers of them
Heretics, but men in state of Salvation. And thus according heerto Flo^inus,
though he taught God to be the Au^hour of sin, might be saved.

In like sort the Heretics, who in S. Ie^ome his days denied the possibility
of the Commandments; The Manichees, who ^enyed freewill; The Eunomians, who
^aught that only faith does justify; The Ae^ians, who denied prayer and
sacrifice for the ^ead, and took away all fasting days; Vigilantius, who
taught that Priests might marry, and that we ought not to pray to Saints;
Iouinian, who held marriage better then virginity; The Donatists, who taught
the Inuisibility of the Church; And finally (to omit many others for breuity
sake) the Pelagians, who denied the necessity of Baptism in Children. All
these men (I say) might be saved, notwithstanding their former doctrines, if so
it be, that every man might expect Salvation in their Religion* And yet we
find, that the foresaid men were branded for wicked Heretics, and their
doctrines for damnable Heresies (as in the seventh chapter above is showed) by
Ireneus, Jerome, Epiphanius, Philastrius, Augustine, Theodoret, and others;
diverse of which holy Fathers, writing catalogues o^ Heresies did place the
foresaid doctrines and their Authors within the said catalogues, and this they
did without any reluctation o^ gainsaying of any other ancient and learned
Father of their times.

many such others, should deservedly be reputed for Heretics, for their
condemning of true Doctrines for Heresies, and the belieuers of them for
Heretics; and on the contrary side, Florinus, the Manichees, the Eunomians,
Vigilantius, Iouinian, the Donatists, Pelagius, and many other such, should be
accounted for their teaching of true Doctrines, Orthodoxall Authors; and might
have justly complained of their insupportable wrongs, and indignities
proceeding from the pens of the foresaid fathers: An absurdity, which I think
no man, enjoying the benefit of his five senses, will allow; And yet the
admittance of our Newtrallists Paradoxe, inanoidably draws on this infere^ce.

Heretics have made choice of those their heresies, and do maintain them most
frowardly against the whole church of God, not submitting their judgments to
it) must of necessity follow, that if those men could be saved, then Heretics
(continuing Heretics) are members of Christ's true church: then which, what
Paradoxe can in it self be accounted more absurd? or in the judgment of
learned men more incredible? considering with what acerbity of comportement,
the Apostles and all the Orthodoxall, learned, and pious Fathers, both in their
wrytings and otherwise, have in all ages entertained Heretics, as above I have
manifested.

Omnifidians, yet observe how repugnant it is to all reason, and otherwise
absurd eue^ in it own nature. I will here pass over diverse reasons
alleged in the precedent Chapters, and insist a little in some few of them.

Newtrallists) is no true supernatural faith, seeing it beleiueth nothing
through the authority of God and his church, both which reveal and propound
all articles alike and indifferently to all men to be believed: Now what more
cross to reason, then that a bare opinion not relying upon any supernatural
grounds (as neither having God for its Reuealer, nor the Church for its
Propounder) conceived only through moral inducements (and therefore ever
standing obnoxious to error and mistaking) should be able to purchase eternal
Salvation to man's soul?

works of virtue, piety, and mortification? for it is most contradictory in the
very terms, and no less repugnant to Gods sacred word, that, that doctrine
which 2. Pet. 3.
promises liberty, and Iudae verse. 4.
transferreth the grace of God into wantonness, should be accounted the Mat.
7. Luc. 13.
strait way which leads unto life.

Antiochus, Herod, Maximinus and others) who first broached the Doctrines of
Protestancy, if the said Doctrines had either been true in themselves, or at
least of that coldness and indifferency, as that they might comport and stand
with the souls salvation? No. God is just, and withal merciful, and therefore
never extraordinarily punishes, but for extraordinary sins. Poor men that
they were, who comparted (as it should seem) both in the diuulging of their
mendacious and lying Doctrines, as also in their unexpected and sudden deaths
with the false Prophets 3. Reg.
of Achab! But to hasten to an end, in the enumeration of the Absurdities,
following the foresaid Paradox of salvation in every Religion; and to come to
that, which, within its own largenes, inuolueth many improbabilities.

Recusancy jointly taught on both sides; and in vain have so many scores of
Reverend and Learned Priests, and others of the Laytie, in our own Country
(whose blessed souls I beseech to pray to God daily, for the remission of my
many sins) suffered cruel deaths, in the late Queens reign, only because
they refused to present themselves at the service of the Protestants. But they
are gone, and most happily gone; for Tertul. de Praeser.
Clauis Paradisi sanguis Martyrum. In vain likewise, these later years have
diverse lay Persons endured (contrary to his Majesty's natural inclination,
most prone to mercy and commiseration) great losses, disgraces, and
imprisonments only for the said cause.

points of Indifferency, and such as may stand with their souls eternal
Happiness?





blood, of Women and Children; and all this originally and principally for
matter of Religion: I say, in vain, and most injuriously have all these
attempts and actions been undertaken, if the disagreements in Religion (for
which they were undertaken) between Catholics and Protestants, were of that
reconcilable nature, as that the professors on both sides (notwithstanding
their diversity of faith) might jointly be saved.

What can we now reply heereto in the behalf of our Newtrallists? Shall we
say, that the most learned men of all Religions, that Kings, Princes, States,
and many hundred thousand subjects of Christendom, were (and still are)
actually mad, and out of their senses, in menaging these their deplorable
attempts for Religion? and that the all-reconciling and peaceable Newtrallist,
who (through his pliable stern of disposition in these spiritual matters) is
become of the halfe-bloud with the Atheist; and who wants (as is commonly
noted) both learning, grace, and virtue, is particulerly enlightened by God, in
setting down what articles of faith are only necessary to man's Salvation, and
what are to be reputed but as accessory, and of smaller importance? To such
straites (we see) is the defense of the former doctrine driven unto. Seeing
therefore this doctrine of our Omnifidians, or rather Nullifidians (for indeed,
while they seem to allow all Religions, they take away all Religion) is
encompassed on all sides with so many notorious absurdityes (as are displayed
in this Chapter,) and seeing it cannot be true, except there be a retrogradation
of all matters here on earth, and a turning of the world (as they say) vpside
down; that is, except the most learned become most mad, and the most
ignorant most wise; Therefore since such comportment and carriage of things is
not sorting to Gods Providence and Charity toward manking, let every man (who
thinks he has a soul to save, or loose) undoubtedly assure himself, that
there is but one true Faith or Religion, wherein he may auaileably expect
salvation; and that the saving faith of Christ (wherewith the soul is
clothed) is like unto the inconsutible garment of Christ, both being incapable
of division, renting, or partition.

Now for the greater illustration of this point by way of similitude, and as
tending toward the closure of this treatise; Imagine that a man pretends
right and title to certain Lands, and takes advice of all the learned Lawyers
and Cou^sellours of the whole Realm, to whom he shows all his Evidences;
some of which Evidences do carry a title only in gross and in general, others
prove a more particular, and more restrained right to the said Lands: Imagine
further, that upon the diligent perusal of these Evidences, the joint consent
and judgment of all the said Lawyers, should after their long and serious
Demurrs, conspyre in this one point; to wit, that for the recovering and
obtaining of the said Lands, the foreshewed Evidences in general are not
sufficient alone, seeing diverse other men, not having any true interest in the
said Lands, may nevertheless insist and urge their like general claim; but
that with the help of the said Common Evidences, he must more punctually rely,
for the gayning of his presumed inheritance, upon other more particular, and
personal Conueyances and Assigments.

Now all these learned Counselors agreeing in this sentence, and fortyfying
their judgments herein, with their own experience in the like case, with the
new Reports warranting the same, with the authority of all the ancient,
learned, and Reverend Judges before them, and lastly with the force of reason
confirming no less; If some one Empericke Attorney or other (skillful only by
a little experience in making a Nouerint vniuersi) should step forth (armed
only with impudency and ignorance) and pronounce the foresaid sentence of all
those learned Sages to be false; and that the party pretending right to the
said lands were sure by his general Title and Evidences only, to obtain the
same, all other his more particular Evidences being but unnecessary and
needelesse theerunto; who might not here justly contemn, and reject the rash
censure of such a fellow? Or could not the party clayming the former
inheritance, be worthily reprehended, if by rejecting the grave Counsel of the
learned Lawyers, and following the aduyce of this ignorant man, should finally
loose all claim, title, and possibility to his said Inheritance?

Our case is not much unlike heerto: We all pretend a right to the Inheritance
of the kingdom of Heaven (for we read, lac. 1.
Coronam vitae praeparauit Dominus diligentibus se.) Our title in general
thereto is our belief in the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion, etc. (the
belief whereof is most necessary, but not sufficient.) All emine^t men for
learning (both Catholics and Protestants) do prove from the Scriptures, from
the authority of Gods Church, from the nature of Heresy, from the definition of
true faith, and from diverse other principles and reasons above expressed, that
no man can attain to his heavenly Inheritance, by believing only the former
fundamental points of Christianity, if so he have not a true, and particular
faith of many other less principal Articles of Christian Religion.

Now comes here a dissolute, gamnelesse, and ignorant fellow, not
practiced in any kind of good literature (for it is observed (as above is said)
that all our most forward Neutrallists are me^ for the most part void of
Learning, Virtue, and Conscience) who pere^ptorily out of his Pythagorean
chair (that is, without any proof) affirms, that a belief in general of
the Articles of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion, is only sufficient
to man's salvation; and that the doctrines of Purgatory, Freewil. Real
Presence, and other Controversies between the Catholics and Protestants, are
not in any sort necessary to the purchasing of our eternal welfare, what way
soever we hold, but are to be reputed (in respect of that end) points
indifferent, vnauayleable, and as the Greek is, merely (...), or Bye-matters:
Who would here not commiserate the folly, and ignorance of such a man; but
especially pity the souls seduced by so blind a Guide?

THE CONCLUSION of the whole Treatise. CHAP. XVII.
HITHERTO (Good Reader) it is sufficiently (I hope) demonstrated, that every
Religion, though professing the name of Christ, and believing in the Trinity,
the Incarnation, and the like fundamental points of christian Faith (if their
belief in other secondary and less principal points be erroneous) cannot
promise to it self any security of Salvation; and consequently that the
controuerted articles at this day between Catholics and Protestants touching
Purgatory, Freewill, Praying to Saints, Sacrifice etc. are of that great
importance, as that the professors on both sides (to use the phrase of a
blessed martyr Camp. in december rationib. rat. 10.
in the same case) vnu^ caelu^ capere non potest.

It now remains to show, that seeing at this day, there are originally but
two different Religions among christians, to wit, the catholic Religion and
the Protestant, (within which are included all its branches and descendents;)
whether the catholic or the Protestant Religion is that, wherein a man may be
saved. But seeing this Subject is most learnedly and painefully entreated ^f,
by many Catholic writers, who from (...) authorities both Divine and humane
have ^efragably euicted the truth of their own ^eligion, and falsehood of the
Protestants ^ofession, (and consequently that in the ^atholike, not in the
Protestant faith, the ^ules eternal happynes is to be purchased;) ^erefore I
do remit the reader for his grea^er satisfaction therein to the perusal of the
said ^ookes; and particulerly to the studying (ra^er the^ to the reading only)
of that most ela^orate, learned, and unanswerable Work ^f the Protestants
Apology of the Roman Church.

Only before I here end, I must make ^ould to put the Reader in remembrance,
with that the Protestant Religion in this former Treatise (though but casually
and incident^y) is most truly charged; to wit, doctrinall speculations and
positions in the Protestants faith most strongly move t^ Wills of such, as
belief them, to all vice, ^^berty, and sensuality.

What then remains, but who will expect salvation, should seek it only in
the Catholic Church? it being that Arc erected by our second Noe, within
which who truly believe and live virtuously, are exempted from that universal
deluge of eternal damnation. For only in this Church is professed (...) taught
that Faith, to which by long pres^iption, and a continued hand of time, is
pe^liarly ascribed the name Catholic: Pacian. Epist. ad Symphron. quae est de
Nomine Catholico.
Ca^olicum istud, nec Marcione^, nec Apellem, nec Monnum sonat, nec Haereticos
sumit autores. That ^yth, which was prophesied to be of that ^lating and
spreading nature, as that to it all Esa. 2. and expounded in the English Bibles
of the year 1566. Of the universality of the Church or faith of Christ.
Nations shall follow, and which shall have the Psalm. 2. and expounded of the
Churches universality, by the foresaid English Bibles of the year 1576.
end of the earth for its posession, from sea to sea, Psalm. 72.
beginning Luc. 4.
at Jerusalem, among all nations. that Faith, the Professors whereof shall be
Dan. 2. in which is included the uninterrupted continu^nce of the Church.
Kingdom, that shall never be destroyed, but ^all stand for ever; contrary to
the short cur^nts of all Heresies, of which S. Augustine ^us writes: In psalm.
57.
Many Heresies are already dead; ^ey have continued their stream, as long as
they ^ere able; now they are run out, and their ryuers ^e dried up; the
memory of then: (that ever they ^ere) is now scarce extant. That faith, the
mem^ers whereof, in regard of their ever visible ^minency, are styled by the
holy Ghost, A Esa. 2. whereby is proved ^he Churches ever visibility.
mountain prepared in the top of mountains, and ^alted above Hills: with
reference whereto ^o wit, in respect of the Churches continu^l visibility) the
foresaid S. Tom. 9. in Ep. Joan. tract. 2.
Augustine ^ompareth it, to a Tabernacle in the Sun. That ^ayth, whose union
in doctrine both among the professors thereof, and with their head is even
celebrated by Gods holy writ; sin^ the Church of God is therefore Romans 12.
Cant. 6. Joan. 10. which places prove the Churches unity.
called o^ Body, one spouse, and one sheepfould: which pr^uiledge S. Epist. ad
Damasum.
Hierome acknowledges b^ his own submission, in these words: I d^ consociate,
or unite my self in Communion with the Chair of Peter; I know the Church to
be builde^ upon that Rock; whosoever does eat the Lamb out of this house, is
become profane.

That faith, for the greater confirmation whereof, God has vouchsafed to
disioyn^ the settled course of Nature, by working d^uers stupendous and
astonishing See examples hereof in Jerome in vita Hilarionis. Athanasius in
vita Antonij. Theodoret. hist. l. 5. c. 21. Eusebius histor. l. 7. c. 14.
Zozomenus hist. l. 3. c. 13. August. l. de ciuit. Dei 22. c. 8. and l. 9.
Confess. c. 7. and 8.
miracle^ according to those words of our Sauiou^ Mat. 10. in which words o^
Savior makes miracles a sign of true faith, or of the Church.
Go, preach you, cure the sick, raise the dead cleanse the leapers, cast out
devils etc. A Prerogative so powerful and efficacious with S* Augustine, as
that he expressly thus confesset^ of himself: Tom. 6. contra Epist. Manichaei
cap. 4.
Miracles are among those things which most justly have houlden me in the
Church^ bosom.

To conclude, omitting diverse other Ch^racters (as I may term them) or signs
o^ the true faith; That faith, which is of the force, as to extort testimony,
and warra^ for it self, even from it most capital and designed enemies;
answereably to that, Deuteron. 32. which words include the confession of the
Adversary to be a note of truth.
Our God is not as their Gods are, our enemies are even witnesses; since the
Protestants no less from their own This is proved, in that Protestants, do
not rebaptize Infants or children of Catholic Parents, before baptized: now
these Infants are baptized in the faith of their Parents, as all children are,
even by the doctrine of all Protestants. But if this faith of Catholic Parents
be sufficient for the Salvation of their Children dying baptized therein, then
much more is it sufficient for the salvation of the Parents themselves: since
it is most absurd to say, that the Catholic faith of Parents should be
auaylable for their Children or Infants, dying baptized therein, and yet not
auaylable for the Parents themselves.
practice, then from their According heerto (to omit the lik testimonies of
many other Protestants) D. Some in his defense against Penry. p. 182. thus
writes: If you think, that all the Popish sort, which dyed in the Popish
Church, be damned, you think absurdly, and dissent from the judgment of all
learned Protestants. With whom D. Couell in his defense of M. Hookers five
books of Ecclesiastical Policy p. 77. thus conspireth, saying: We affirm,
that those who live and dye in the Church of Rome, may be saved.
acknowledgment in words, do ascribe to our Roman faith the hope of Salvation.
Of which subject see most amply in the foresaid learned book of the Protestants
Apology, Tract. 1. Sect. 6. subdiuis. 1. and 2. and 3. as also Tract. 2. cap.
2. Sect. 14.

To this Faith then, with an indubious assent, adhere both living and dying;
fly Newtrallisme in doctrine, as the bane of all Religion; fly Protestancy,
as the bane of Christ's true Religion, and say with Pacian. Ep. ad Symphron.
Pacianus; Christianus mihi nomen est, Catholicus vero cognomen; illud me
nuncupat, istud me ostendit: A Christian is my name, a Catholic my Syrname;
that does denominate me, this does demonstrate me.

FINIS.

