THE SHIELD OF our Safety: Set forth by the Faithful Preacher of Gods holy
Word A. Anderson, upon Symeons sight, in his Nunc dimittis.

Seen and allowed.

Micha. 2.11. If a man walk in the Spirit, and would lie falslye, saying: I
will prophecy unto thee of Wine and of strong Drink, he should even be a
Prophet of this people.

Imprinted at London, in Fleetestreate, beneath the Conduite, at the Sign of
S. John Evangelist, by H. Iackson. 1581.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, by Gods appointment, the Bishop of
London, Anthony Anderson, the Preacher of Gods holy Gospel, wysheth all
heavenly help in Christ our Lord.
AS THE BENEFITS OF GOD to this Nation (Right Reverend) are mo then many, so
above al are we bound to pray and praise greatly the Lord Omnipotent, by
whose mighty hand, Satan is from us banished in his old Popish pride, his
chief Instrument the Romish Antichrist so fully slain, by the daily breath
of Gods holy word, that never is he like in such sort with us to be revived.
The providence of God has appointed this to be the time of our Christian
translation, Colo. 2.13
and her Majesty (our gracious Sovereign Elizabeth) his Noble Nourse, to his
English Church, taking from us in one hour, both Pope, Cardinal, and
persecuting Prince. And has from the gates of death drawn her, and now set
her chief among the princes of the earth: For the loss of her Graces Sister
some Papists do sore lamente: but for the gain by her Majesty now, both one
and other may rejoice. For again is verifyed the old prophecy of David:
Psalm. 68.11
God gave the word, and great was the company of the Preachers. Kings of the
Armies did flee, they did flee, and she that remained in the house divided the
spoil. Though ye have lain among the Pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a
Dove, that is covered with Silver, and whose feathers are as yellow Gold. For
God has given sufficient matter to her, and to all other, to tell of our
delyuerie from the innumerable Hosts of Popish Locustes, which in the
pestilent days of late Popery, pinched us in her Noble Grace, and her Grace to
the terror of us. But are not these Armies and their Kings fled? they are by
the mighty hand of our Christ scattred, banished and dead, that sought the
desolation of our English Israel, and our most godly Hester has obtained in
mercy, her self and christian subjects, Esther. 3.4.5.6 7.8 9.13.14.15.16.
these present Halcions days. From God by her hand we enjoy this most
pleasant seeds time of the Gospel, now well near full twenty three
years. By her Majesty's faithful care in bounden duetye, our decayed
Jerusalem is mightily repaired: yea, though Sanballat and Tobiah spyte it,
Nehe. 4.
and seek to hinder it, yet Noble Nehemias goes on with all. GOD grant us
her loving subjects to join with the Jews in this, namely each man in his
calling to build to his power, in the house of the Lord: that we may be the
Mansions of the holy Ghost, and to have our weapons ready in hand, and
earnest hearts in true loyalty to her Majesty, 1. Cor. 3.16. etc. 6.19.
to fight against his and her enemies, for her, and then our defense,
wheresoever they shall assault us. And let us not be afraid of our Popish
adversaries, which is to them (says saint Paul) a token of perdition, and to
you of salvation, Phil. 1.28.
and that of God. Would God in these buylding days, we had not in authority
in sundry Shyres: yea, in the heart of this Realm, spyghting Sanballat, and
menacing Tobiah. But as the Gospel by such, receives some hinderance: so I
trust in the Lord, that were they better known to Nehemias. As for her
earnest zeal to his truth, she cannot (by their surmised traynes and feigned
faith to her godly growth in Christ) be stayde from his labors in her
heroycall heart, fyrmely planted to increase. So through her kingly power, she
would not admyt such the seats of Justice for peace, which are sons of
War to Gods Church, but contrary with God her Lord, thruste these mighty
from the bench to the Bar, and by David's example cut of the wicked, Psalm. 101.
or at least weed them out of the City of the Lord. Yea, even as many as
have evil will at Syon, and that my diligence with others my Brethren may
appear, Mala. 27.
at whose mouths people should ask and have knowledge, and that also some at
least hereby might be profited, I have to my possibility set Plough on gate,
and furrowed this land, that after follows, as appears. And albeit many
other could have far passed this my tyllage, yet perceiving the clouds to
houer toward Harvest (God for Christ's sake pardon our sins, and preserve
Elizabeth our christian Queen) and this fertyle ground so long to lie fallowe,
I after some vewe of my seeds, whether they would abide weather, and well
agree with the land, sanctified my Plough with christian and earnest prayer,
and have laid open my labors, to the skillful survey of godly husbandmen. And
doubt not that good fruit, and much increase shall be fall to the Reapers.
Which labor ended, I deemed best to shrowde my trauayling Plough, under your
Lordships learned Shelter, assured that whatsoever frowning weather then shall
assail it, as nipping frost, carping cold, Romish rain, hateful stormye
hayle, or other wynters wind so ever can come, well hapt should my poor
Plough be against al these, and where need is at all opportunity, the same in
right to be defended. Another cause why I presume my simple Pen, to your
learned L. is to offer hereby a token of my good will, and duty to your good
L. and that from your old Country man receiving this little, by it your godly
disposition may be again as it were desired, to stretch your former hand, to
help Gods house in Lecester shyre, but specially in Northampton shyre, where
(God it knows) need is both of sowing and weeding, I speak of experience.
And if this my bold enterprise, your L. will vouchsafe favorably to accept: and
if by your great skyl in Gods husbandry thought fyt for the lower sort (for
whose sake chiefly I have done it) you will publishe the same, and allow it for
sound, I shall account my self more and more bound, and endeavor my hand to
such godly further labors, as his holy will has determined. The Lord for
ever bless you with this old Father Symeon, whose words follow, and give
you with Gods whole Church, his and our common consolation Christ our Lord,
that he may be yours, and you for ever his. Amen. From Medborne in
Lecestershire, this 12. of December. 1580.

Your L. humbly in Christ. A. Anderson.

LORD now let thou thy servant depart in peace, Luc. 2.29.
according to thy word. For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou
have prepared before the face of all people. To be a light to lighten the
Gentyles, and to be the glory of thy people Israel.
THE Evangelist Saint Luke (after he has by sundry approved Testimonies,
wytnessed to Gods holy Church, the order and birth of Jesus Christ, borne of
his mother the most holy Virgin Mary) does purpose the description of Christ
his Office and Function. In cause whereof he first cyteth the gratulatory Song
of old Father Symeon, who does most pythely set down the parts of Christ's
office, and valor of his nature to his Godhead annexed. Namely given of his
Father, to be our only sufficient and Omnipotent Messiah, given and not sold,
prepared of the Father, not at all purchased by man or Angel, to be the
Salvation alone of Jew and Gentyle. To the Heathen that lay in darkness,
Gods lantern and light, and to his kinsmen the Jews, their greatest cause of
glory. But only Symeon thus faith: And what is he, and his authority, that
we should build our Faith on his warraunt? For answer I say: Give ear to
our Evangelist, who by the spirit of God writes, and thy Question shall
fullye be answered. For thus writes Saint Luke. Behold there was a man in
Jerusalem whose name was Symeon. Luc. 2.25.
This man was just and feared God, and waited for the consolation of Israel.
And the holy Gstost was upon him, and it was declared to him from God by the
holy ghost, that he should not see death, before he had seen that Anointed
of the Lord. And he came into the Temple by the motion of the holy Ghost, and
when the Parents brought in the Babe Jesus, to do for him after the custom of
the Law, then took he him up in his arms, and praised God, and said: Lord
now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word. etc.

Symeon I grant, is not here adorned of the Evangelist with Princely style,
Honorable title, or said to descend of Noble parentage. Happily he was of
baser birth and mean estate, of the vulgar sort, not exalted to office,
place of credit in the Common wealths Regiment, or to worldly riches. And here
in does Gods spirit continue his well be gonne course in the birth of this
Babe Christ: Who himself though king and Lord over all, yet in earth borne,
is wrapped in sorye clowtes, laid in a Manger, whose Palace was the horses
stable, and his shrowde against the extreme wynters weather, was the breathe
which the Ox and Ass naturally breathed. A poor beginning: yea, but
glorious, though to the world ignomious, and in the accounts of the Atheists
of our days ridiculous. But so also to poor Shepherds watching their Flocks
by night, not to pompous Princes, to the learned godly Magi, not to the proud
contentious Phariseis, did the same spirit manifest our Christ's Nativity, the
Gentyls light and Isreal's glory. So likewise brought to the Temple, he is not
pompously received of the high Bishop, but lovingly embraced by his pore
Prophet Symeon, upon whom the spirit of prophecy, Luc. 2.36.
in stead of worldly pomp at this instant was restant. By an old and poor
Wydowe also (but a Prophetisse) the daughter of Phanuel of the Tribe of Aser,
the lowest amongst the twelve Trybes of Israel. This is not done to the
contempt of the mighty Monarks and Noble persons of the earth fearing God, but
to the glory of his holy name, and the comfort of the poor despised
Christians in the world, that flesh and blood should not have else where to
rejoice, but in the Lord. ^. Cor. 1.26 27.28.
Again, that the eyes of men (being opened) may see, that not by many mighty,
many ritche, many wise, and Potentates of this world, but by himself in his
own power and wisdom, he uses the base and beggarly things of this life, to
be his preaching Prophets and faithful witnesses, by them to bring to
confusion the glorious wisdom of the world, and the pride thereof. This poor
man tho, is enobled with most honorable tytles, as to be Just, Symeon^ style
and dygnitie.
godly and religious, waiting for the consolation of Israel, and to have the
spirit of God upon him, all which words as they set forth the excellency of
this holy Symeon: So are they of us further to be considered, for as much as
they be to us the very assured marks infallible, by which we may certainly
know the faithful adopted sons, and trusty servants of the living God, from
the counterfeyte Christian and ungodly Atheist. But he is called Just, and that
of Gods spirit, which cannot lie. First, Symeon is just in Gods sight by the
will and grace of God. Secondly, he is just in life amongst the sons of men:
But what shall we say? Was Symeon so just in the eyes of the Lord, that in
him could no unrighteousness be found. Or was he called just, for that he
justly fulfilled the commandments of God? Or else was he just by imputation,
because his sins were not laid to his charge? I answer this demand.
Symeon is not so just in the sight of God, that in him can no unrighteousness
be found, for no man is free from sin (as Solomon says. Pro. 20.9.
) Who can say my heart is clean from sin* If the Fountain which is the
heart of man be corrupted, the conductes his members and actions, must needs be
infected therewith. Truly in Gods sight, neither are the Stars clear without
shadow, or the Angels just in this respect. Job. 15.14.
Where shall we find then an earthly man, that can stand in and by himself
thus just before the Lord? Nay, the best regenerate person, is many ways
corrupt, No man just before God.
and his actions full of sinfulness: yea, his best works are impure, far
short of that they should, unworthy Gods sight, much more his loving
acceptance, but most unworthy the accounts of righteousness. In one word, we
and our works (always our selves and valor respected) are (though regenerate
children) as menstruous clothes in Gods eyes, Esa. 66. 2. Luke 17.10.
and our selves very unprofitable servants. Neither was Symeon just, as
fulfylling justly all the commandments of God. For that neither could he, nor
any other before him, or since his time to the end of the world, can there be
any (Christ Jesus excepted) which shall or may do in perfection the
commandments of GOD: And therefore Symeon, nor any other man can challenge to
him or them in truth and deed, as having won the same, the title of
righteousness. But on the other side, they are all found Transgressors, Romans
3.10
and accused of guyltinesse, when as in their best works they are faulty, and
not able to do all, but offending in every one, they are worthyly pronounced
guyltie of the whole. No, not Abraham in that best approved work, when he
wyllinglye in Spirit (though not without sharp conflicts in body and mind)
offered up his son (as the word of the Lord commanded him) has warrante to
vaunte of righteousness before God, or was thereby justified in his syghte,
but by his Faith, Romans 3.28.
as by the hand wherewith he apprehended his righteousness in Christ. Or may
any person object (in right) as opposite hereto, The words of James declared.
By the papists abused
the saying of James the Apostle, was not Abraham justified by works? For
James does not in that place dispute the means of man's justification before
God, but requires that good works be to Christian faith adjoined, as by which
grace holy men on earth, do approve that, which God in the Heavens before,
through the undoubted faith in his Son Jesus Christ, has imputed to his
beloved children: which may easily appear in the Apostles own words: Show
me thy faith out of thy works (says he) and I will show thee my faith by my
works. Iam. 2.18.
As if he had said. Thou which boastest to have faith, show me that am but
man (and therefore know not thy state before the Tribunal seat of GOD, or
his graces in the inward man, by which means I cannot judge of thee) Show me
I say thy faith by his works in thee, and I will believe thee then to be a
faithful Christian. Gene. 22.16.
This sense Moses also testifies the Angel (or rather the Lord by his Angel)
to approve which stayde the hand of Abraham from the sacrifycing of his
son. Touch not thy son with violent hands, for now I know that thou
fear God, because thou have not spared thine only son, for my
commandment sake. To conclude, the Epistle written to the Hebrews, does
attribute this great work of Abraham to the excellency of his faith, saying.
By faith Abraham offered up his son Isaac. Heb. 11.17
It rests therefore, sithe Symeon is not able to fulfill the law, but
fails in many points thereof, and therefore guyltie of all. Sith also that
those good works which he does, be polluted in Gods sight, as proceeding from
him self, by which means he is become in himself unjust before God, that
now his righteousness consysteth herein, that his sins be not laid to his
charge, according to the saying of the Psalmist. Psalm. 31.1.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins be not
imputed to them. Thus was Symeon unjust in himself, but just in his
consolation Christ Jesus, and that because he fyrmely believed in him, by whose
merittes and death on the Cross, the Fathers justice is answered, Symeons
sins raunsomed, mercy to him procured, his daily sins not laid to his
charge: because by imputation, he is accounted for just. And in the same manner
are all the elect of God alyke blessed with him. And so likewise all the works
of Gods saints are impure in his sight, if tried by the phan of his spirit,
before his Tribunal seat. But such is his fatherly benign mercy, that in
and for his son Christ, he accepts us, and then our holy actions for just
(as he accepted Habel and his sacryfice, but he regarded not Caine, Gene. 4.
and therefore not his sacryfice) and also he casts our iniquities quight out
of his remembrance. Ezec. 18.


Secondly Symeon is called pius godly, religious, Iere. 31.22
or fearing God. This is proper to the child of God, if justified by his
grace, then to live in his fear, that is in his obedience. Tit. 2.12. Luke 1.
We are also redeemed to this end. That we should deny ungodliness, and
walk in purity of life, in holiness and righteousness before our just God,
all the days of our life. So says the holy Ghost in the mouth of Zachary
the good married Priest. So did the same holy man of God and his good wife, by
virtuous life express the graces of Gods holy spirit in them, as testifyeth
Saint Luke saying: Both were just before God, and walked in all the
commandments of the Lord without reproof. Luc. 1.6.
Here have thou (good Reader) the true description of a godly man, namely he
that being justified by Faith in Christ, walks (though he cannot perform in
perfection) in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord. Dear Reader,
we glory that we be called christians, but only this is a true christian
life, of which here thou haste heard. Our wants in this profession in these
our days, bewray from top to the toe, in the Court and thence through the
Country, from the Nobility, to the Plowman and his mate. The greater
personages boast and brag of great tytles, Lordships, Baranies, Offices and
liberties, of bewty, birth, bravery, manhood, chyualry and force, of cunning
skyll, learned tongue. But unless my Lords, ye rely upon Symeons lore,
unless ye be worthyly endowed with his style: unless ye be just before God,
walk in all the commandments of God, not only to do holyly, but to be holy
your selves in deed. Undoubtedly your honor, and all your other pomp in
pride, shall you change for horror, weeping, howling and gnashing of teeth, and
so shall all flesh that lives not in the fear of God. Math. 25.30.
What benefit was it to Dives, now boiling in Hell, that he was endewed with
all worldly Epicurious pleasures? Luck. 16.
as gorgious houses, costly array after the fashion, diversity of dyshes, and
the world at will. Or what advantage to the other Ritchman, Luck. 12.
that pulled down his Barnes to make them greater, and said to himself. Now
soul be merry, for thou have goods and lands in store for many years. But
how did he possess this large and new builded frame? Thou fool says the
spirit: This night shall they take thy soul from thee, and who shall then
possess thy goods? Shall not the wicked ritche men likewise have their heaven
in this life? Shall they not after the hour of death, with Dives lie in the
Helles like sheep, and say. Sapi. 3.
There was no green pasture which we went not through? (whereby they note in
natural life their courtly pleasures) We left no token of virtue behind us
(in this they signify their wicked life buried in contynuall security.) We
thought these men fools (vz Symeon and such other the sons of God.) Whereby
they utter their ignorance of godly men, and their own freedom from
godliness. These are they which we persecuted, scorned and cruelly entreated,
but now see how they are taken with the just. By which the holy ghost
seals up the natural disposition of all Atheists, to their grievous and
irrecuperable condemnation: Wherefore beloved Reader (Noble and ignoble,
Courtier and Countryman) seek the Lord early, and while he is to be found,
attain to his service, who by his grace will endue thee with justification,
Esa. 55.
and holiness, with obedience to his holy law, and delight to dwell therein,
Ephe. 1.14
because his holy spirit is his Arrha and earnest penny given thee, for thy
assurance of his love and favor toward thee. So shall your Nobilities more
increase, your state most surely stand, your selves with Symeon shall be
famous to your posterity, and a good example for the age to come. Amen.

Thirdly, he is said to wayght for the consolation of Israel. The Evangelists
purpose is, Symeons joy.
to show us wherein the joy of this old father consisted. Namely that whether
he did eat or drink, or whatsoever he else did, therein he neither took more
then was meet and sufficient, or made his b^lly his pleasant God, or any
worldly thing else, but that his joy was fixed in his feeling faith, fastened
in the Messiah our anointed Christ, which he knew by the study of the
Scriptures, to be at hand, by whom he saw his sins to be forgiven, and
his whole Country and brethren with him to have their full and only
consolation. And here again is noted Symeons justification, in that he
believed in Jesus Christ, promised in the word of God, to have the
forgiveness of his sins, and in him eternal life. His fyrme fastened faith
is here noted under this word (He waited) which expresses as well his
constancy as his fortitude, against those perilous times wherein he was. The
commonwealth of Israel so ruyned, and the Church of God in Iewry so corrupted,
that it might seem all her hope of recovery from their woes, or consolation
in their hearts to be utterly extinguished. We may not forget here how the
Evangelist significantly notes the corruption and degenerate condition of the
City Jerusalem, which sometimes being the holiest place under Heaven, is now
become so estranged from her God, so plunged in security and sin, Shadow of
Englands security.
so hardened in heart against the truth, and so ignorante of her estate, that
neither she feels her present misery, or wayteth for her consolation Christ
the Messiah. Only this one man in a whole City is here named to feel the
one, and with long expectation and pacient abode for the Lords leisure, hops
after the other, and that because he had the warrante of God, by his holy word
for the same, and was filled with the spirit, whereby he was in mercy
preserved from that deep and just judgment of blyndnesse, wherein the wicked
Pharysies, and the whole people and Princes of Iewrie (a few with Symeon
excepted) were overwhelmed, which is vehemently noted by the Evangelist in this
word Ecce, behold. O beloved England thou may lawfully mourn, fostering a
great number of such people, which be as wandering, as careless, as bold in
their sin, and hardened in heart, as ever were the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
They talk of Christ, and they are myraculously preserved by this our Messiah,
but as in their deeds they do deny him: So they count him to them either
unprofitable, or think him not their consolation. For truly they desire not
his presence, they hate his Gospel, Iere. 3.19.
and that because their deeds are evil. Neither desire they his coming: But
as the thief imprisoned, wysheth the Judgment seat ouerturned, the law with
his Princes and power dead, and the day of his execution never to come: Even
so do these Caterpillars of the earth, whose consciences do accuse them
guyltie, and fearing his judgment, they desire rather that he were not at al,
then that he should come to give them the reward of sin, Eternal death, the
assured stypende to al wicked actions and thoughts, Romans 6.23
to Princes first, and to whomsoever men and women, which in like wickedness
join with these Princes and profane Pharysies of Jerusalem. Surely like
desolation shall overthrow them, if they seek not Christ in time by
repentance, and with Symeon wait for their consolation in him. Note with me
(gentle Reader) in the commendation of this good man, that the spirit of God
joins righteousness and Religion in one yoke together, saying: No godliness
of life, no right Religion.
Symeon was just and religious. Hereby he teaches us, that these two are so
lincked and connexed by the Finger of God, that they cannot be separate in
twain, but of like necessity with the Sun, which has his Globe, his light
and his heat so conjoined, that wheresoever the one shyneth, the other cannot
but warm, and as the soul and body are so compact in one, that the body
cannot but perform the pleasures of the same: Even so in whomsoever true
Righteousness in Christ is, in him also there cannot but be the true fear of
God, and holiness of life, which is the singular serving of our God, in the
inward desire of our hearts unfeignedly, and here called Religion, or true
godliness. Psalm. 116. Act. 4.20
I believed and therefore I spoke (says David) We cannot but testify the
things which we have heard and seen (says the Apostle) I determined to hold
my tongue (says Jeremy (the preaching Prophet) the peoples obstinacy was such,
and my dangers so great, but the word was as fire within my heart, as a
burning fire shut up within my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I
could not stay. Again, I will be their GOD (says the Lord by his Prophet) and
they shall be my people. Iere. 20.9. Ier. 31.33.
They shall not but serve the Lord to whom he is God. Again, I will pour
clean water into you, and you shall be clean, yea from all your filthynes,
and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. A new heart will I give you, and a
new spirit will I put into you, and I will take away the stony heart out of
your body, and will give you an heart of flesh. And I will put my spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and you shall keep my
judgments and do them. To conclude, it is the Lord Christ, which has
created his servant after the Image of God, in righteousness and true
holiness, which is the perfect new man, in whom both these graces be joined,
Ephesians. 4.24.
as Paul says to the Ephesians. So that true righteousness, will effectually
show faithful holiness, in one and self same Christian. But as for such as
only have Christ in their lyppes, and deny him in their deeds, whose whole
course of life, is set upon sensual appetite to worldly lusts, and yet can
cry Lord, Lord. Thou know dear Reader, what the Lord has denou^ced
against them. Luc. 13.26
We have eaten and drunk at thy Table (say these men) yea we have preached
and taught in thy name, and therein cast out Devils. But they have this
sentence: Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not: That is, I
approve not your acts for godly, or you for mine, therefore depart from me
into the Lake of burning fire that never shall be quenched. These be those
Atheists of our days, which because the gracious Prince, and godly laws, lay
hand to the Plowe of the Gospels profession (the which the Lord in mercy
continue and increase) therefore to win favor in the Court, and to maintain
their carnal countenance, they will be Temporarij, for the time Gospellers,
they will hear the Preacher, they will curteouslye salute him, they will give
him seemly entertaynment, they will turn the Popish face into the inward
mind, and be covered with this cloak to fawn upon the gospel. But mark
their lives, and either they be manifest contemners of Religion, hating
reformation of their wickedness, or they do privily shoot out their arrows,
Psalm. 120.23.
even tongues as whote as burning coals, into the ears of Princes and
Potentates against the Lord, and his truth, and against his faithful
servants in deed, which either by preaching, exhortation or pen, seem to
sommon their conscience to a better consideration of belonging duty to their
God. Then say they: Come let us imagine some devise against Jeremy, Iere.
18.18.
for the law shall not perish from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise,
The practice of Atheists.
nor the word from the Prophet. That is, the Roman Church cannot err, or
the holy Pope (saving thy reverence good Reader be deceived) and therefore
whosoever speaks against that, as far as we may keep credit in these
days, and though it be with some stayne. Come let us smite him with the tongue
(let us slander him and accuse him, for we shall be believed) and let us not
give heed to any of his words. But let not Jeremy be afraid: For Esaias says.
The enemy shall come like a flood (vz joined together vehemently working) but
the spirit of the Lord shall chase him away, and Christ our consolation (do
we wait for him giving bread to our brethren in due season) shall come to
Sion, and unto all them that turn from iniquity in Jacob, says the Lord in
the former places. Wherefore I eftsoons say to you, Flesh, blood, earth, and
ashes, not wise in God, deceyuing your selves. If ye live after the flesh,
Romans 8.13
ye shall dye, but if by the spirit ye mortify and kill the deeds of the
flesh ye shall live, which be these: Adultery, fornication, Gal. 5.19.
uncleanness, wantonness, ydolatry (which in our days is Popery) Witchcraft,
hatred, debate, emulation, hypocrisy, wrath, contention, herisies, envy,
murder, dronkennes, gluttony, and such like, you shall live eternally. Further
here are convinced every such, which not caring for any Religion at all, take
part of neither side, but accounte themselves Gods good servants, if they lead
an honest cyuill life amongst men. But in Symeons commendation to be Gods
seruante, we find this principallye noted, that he was just and religious. To
these we add all hypocrites, which professing outward shadows of feigned
holiness, do spend their waste labors in men's tradicions, for the observance
whereof, they make no care to transgress all bounden piety and service to
God, obedience to Princes and godly Magistrates, or obsequie to their natural
Parents or loving brethren. But Christ says, these worship him in vain. Mat.
15.9.
Remember well the provident care of the Evangelists pen, that he does not
commend to us Symeons good life first, but his state from God, and his religion
in God, as if hereby he would tell us, yt we are not precisely to tie our
selves, to immitate this or that kind of work of the saints (for works shall
not be wanting in the children of God as we have said) but that we should
seek to follow their faith in Christ, First grace, then graciousnesse.
and be zealous in his Religion, walking therein with a right foot, upright in
the sight of God. Gala. 2.14
We have here also to consider the diverse natures of earthly men, according to
the spirit whereby they are led, whether of sin unto death, or of
righteousness unto life. Romans 6.16
And this note I give upon the report that Symeon waited for the consolation
of Israel. The sons of Simon Magus the Pope, and his adherents, as carnal
Gospellers and Popish Atheists, do wait also and seek for all opportunity,
but it is to have wherewith to satisfy their worldly lusts, and that is their
expectation. When will the new Moon come (say they) that we may sell our
corn dear, Amo. 8.5.
and chafe for corn, and sell our brethren for small tryflying pleasures and
valors, to suck the blood of their Tenants and inferiors. The fruit of carnal
Gospellers.
These men can and do first pull down Tyllage, and dyke in pastures, with
Lammas cloking Closes, they drive the poor p^wman to feast with pease bread
on Christmas day, even this year it was so. These wait, but it is for the
dear year. Some of these, now buy Corn in Markets, having great store of
their own, to breed a dearth, and in the latter part of Summer, when the
same is established, Such mind such purpose
then bring they forth their corn to fill their lucring lust. Yea, and David
expects Bethseba her coming to his call. And Iesabel the euente of her
Deuillishe devise, against Noble Naboth, for his Vyneyarde made Achab sick.
Herodiadas that dancing Dame, also wayteth, but it is for fytte opportunity,
when best she may by the caperous footing, and unwomanly vawting of her
Daughter, to beg at Herod's hands, the head of her reproouer the holy
preacher of God John Baptist. Whose grant in delight of such perilous
fantasies: shall force the fleeting times retire, to be a wayling witness of
this Princes wicked decree. Judas did wait in like manner, but to betray his
master Christ: And the Pharisees expected opportunity, to crucifye the Lord
of life, and yet to keep quiet in the common wealth. 2. Tim. 4.10.
Demas a follower of the Apostle Paul wayteth, when best he may under
pretense of religion become ritche, whereof failing, He forsakes him and loves
this present world. Alexander the Copersmythe and Demetrius wait, to revenge
the overthrow of Diana her shryne, Act. 19.23 2. Tim. 4.14. 3. Epist. 9. verse.
and therefore become they enemies to the Apostles. So does Diotrephes to stop
the Truth, though John the Euangeliste does write the same. The Pope and his,
will not permit the word of God to come to light, for then his kingdom must
decay. The Satrapas do wait for time, Dan. 6.
that Daniel may by Act of Parliament, be cast into the Lions Den, and a
law for his destruction to be established, as the law of the Medes, Daniels
lotte.
which cannot be broken. But because they cannot obtain this in christian
Cyrus days, they wait for another Bull to bring in a Cambyses, which shall
utterly forbid the buylding of Jerusalem. Athalia wayteth also after the Kings
seed, 2. Reg. 11.1
the Scarlet Romanist expects her time, when to broyle once again Iehosophat
his posterity: but Iehoidah our high and eternal Priest, shall cause the
Kings Commission at length, to cast her out of the house of God, that all
christian Lords and Captains, may bathe their obedient blades in her thirsty
blood. Oh that the house of Israel had not waited the departure of Iehoiadah,
2. Chr. 24.17.
supposing with more ease, to dissuade virtuous Ioash from the Lord. The
departure of godly Bishops the decay of Religion.
God grant our godly Ioash to be daily thankful to God for her delivery, and
to continue the godly counsel of Iehoidah, I mean her Majesty's honorable
Counsel, learned Bishops and godly preachers, and to stop her gracious ears
against the wily charms of such (as seeking to bring some sort of these
states to contempt) would do their best to draw us to their former Idolatrye,
the door of our utter desolation. Finally, the wicked wayteth but to wallow in
all sin and Epicureous life, saying: Let us eat and drink, 1. Cor. 15.32.
to morrow we shall dye, take our pleasures whylst we live, for after this, we
know not what shall become of us. But Symeons brethren are far and sure set
another way, they wait and look for the Heavenly knowledge of the Lord,
wherein is eternal life, for Christ their consolation to dwell in their hearts
by faith, John. 17.3
for his holy spirit, to keep their bodies, Souls, and Spirits blameless,
unto the day of consolation, when Christ with his Angels shall come to receive
them to glory. They use the world as they whose minds are else where set, in
the heavens, from whence they wait for their Savior. Titu. 2.13
They live in hope, and wait by all means to overcome the world, the flesh
and the Devil, and they abide patiently ye evil degenerating days of our
life, Hebr. 12.
and meekely bear the cross of Consolation, heavy to the flesh, hoping that
the event shall be to their God glorious, to his Church commodious, and to
themselves in him prosperous. 1. Pet. 2.12
They finally wait to live so, as the enemy which backbyteth them, may by
their example be trained to rejoice in the day of their visitation. And last
of all, when God the Father (with whom their life is treasured up in Christ)
will by his beloved son appear for our full redemption, Collos. 3.
that all we that longly wait in Spirit and Truth for his coming, to cut
of these days of sin, and end this wretched world, may lift up our
heads, with assured comfort, Luc. 21.18.
because we shall then be with this our Symeon, and the whole elect of God, for
ever after glorious, brought to our Fathers kingdom, the inheritance of our
only consolation Christ Jesus, and likewise our inheritance in him.

Furthermore, we are precisely to stand in this, No health but in christ.
that besyds Jesus Christ, there is no consolation, and without sincere faith
in him nothing but desolation, and eternal woes. The way to rest in this our
Redemption by Christ is with Symeon to fix our faith absolutely in him for our
Salvation, without which we shall neither feel comfort in him, or rightly
serve him. And before I pass this point, as the meaner sort have had in Symeon
a plain pattern of holiness: So I thought to give the Ritcher and more Noble
personages, A Noble pattern to the Nobles of England.
an example of Nobility to follow in this case. And the same is noble Joseph
of Aramathaea, the Disciple of Jesus, and the same was ritche: Luke says of him
thus. And behold there was a man named Joseph, he was a Counselor a good man
and a just, etc. Luc. 23.50
He did not consent to the counsel and deed of them which was of Aramathaea
a City of the Jews: who himself also waited for the kingdom of God.

Matthew thus. And when even was come, Math. 27.57.
there came a rich man of Aramathaea, named Joseph, who had also himself been
Jesus Disciple.

John says. He was Jesus Disciple, Ioh. 19.38.
but priuilye for fear of the Jews, for he doubted that if he should confess
Christ they would cast him not only out of Counsel, but out of the Synagoge.

Mark the Evangelist says thus. Mar. 15.24
Joseph of Aramathea an honorable Counselor, which also looked for the
kingdom of God, came and went in boldly unto Pilate, and asked the body of
Jesus.

This noble Counselor by all the Evangelists is thus discribed. First, his
dwelling place is to us noted, which was a famous City of the Jews, for
Joseph was of Aramathaea (supposed to be the same which was also before called
Ramath, laid out for the City of the Levites by Samuel the Prophet, sytuate
about the Mount Ephraim, near to Lydda, which after was called Diospolis.).
Secondly, his condition and life, by condition Noble, for he was an honorable
Counselor, either of the Sanhedrin, or called to Pilats Counsel. Concerning
godly cyuilitie, he was honest, a good man and a just. Touching his Religion,
he was a disciple of Jesus, and waited with Symeon for the kingdom of God, that
is, for his redemption in Christ his Lord and Master. Concerning his faithful
service to his Master Christ our Lord, he withstoode the Counsel boldly (as
did also Nicodemus) and when he could not prevail, he openly refused to give
his consent to them in the death of Christ (for the Evangelist speaks of a
thing that was known to all men.) His infirmity was somewhat great in deed,
that he durst not confess Christ for fear of the Jews. But his modesty was
more, that being of such place and power, he resisted not the Magistrate by
sword for the cause of Christ, being a subject to that tyrannous power, or
with haultie words, or conuitious speech, gave counterchecke to their curssed
blasphemies, but manifestly refused to allow of that murdering Sentence. To
give you this man wholly in his virtues. As he refused to kill Christ by cruel
sentence. So Christ being slain, he shows himself more faithful and bold
in the cause of Christ, then either the Virgin Mary, or any other of the
Apostles. For as saint Mark says. He went with great boldness to that
dissembling Tyran Pilate, in the heat of the Jews rage, and honorably
obtayneth the body of Jesus to be buried and the same lays in his own grave
honorably prepared for himself. This was to his state very dangerous. For in
that he makes suit to honor him with burial, whom the Presidente, Princes,
and people of the Jews, had condemned to death, and subscribed thereunto, what
might they account of Joseph other, then that this his peticion gave flat
condemnation to their present action? What was he? and where dwelte he? That
did or durst beg with boldness the bones of the beloved Bucer, which the
Papists in their rage and great solemnity burnte at Cambridge? By this
measure, how bold and aduenturous attempt this was in this Noble
Counselor, his honor, riches, place, and calling considered. Besides this,
Joseph might have found some better and more easy way to have obtained his
purpose, to have done that honor to the slain body of Christ, whom he durst
not confess during his life. As he might have observed the Jews, where (their
cruelty ended) they would have cast the dead body of our Savior Jesus
Christ, and by night have privily conuayed the same to his Sepulture, or to
have procured favor of the Centurion for money, to have bought the body of
the Lord, which possyblie might as well have come to pass, as the high Priests
to corrupt the Soldiers for money, Mat. 28.13.
to say that his Disciples stole him away by night. This might flesh and
blood in infyrmitie of Nature, have persuaded this Princely Peer in God. But
the wisdom of God has otherwise determined, and therefore at a sudden
changed the heart of Joseph, and of a privy and quaking Disciple, made him an
open and most Heroycall spirited Soldier, all which holy Luke testifies of
purpose, in these words. Luc. 23.50
Tum ecce vir nomine Joseph, etc. As if he would say, behold now a
marvelous matter and sudden mutation, A christian courage in a Noble
counselor.
beyond the expectation of all men, come to pass. When the matters of Christ
the Lord were thus in hand, that he was crucyfied, slain, and dead upon the
cross, and there hanging was of all men neglected, his lovers and friends for
fear hyding themselves, and some other of them standing aloof, weeping the
miserable day, and beholding with grieslye grief, the most pitiful case of
our despised Christ, no man daring to offer himself for the glory of the
father, to honor the bloody body of his dead son. Then even then, did this
grave Counselor, ritche servant and faithful Disciple, cast of the
cowardishnesse of his flesh, and armed with the spirit of God, professed
himself alone to be the servant of Christ, in the myddle of his enemies,
and at Pilates person, he stowtely (but wisely and with reverent duty) beggeth
the body of his master, not any longer fearing the loss of goods, credit,
office, dignity, or caring for any perrill that might to his Noble person, or
honorable house thereafter befall. O Noble christian Counselor. And note well
ye Noble servants of Jesus, the Lord your master who has the hearts of Kings
in his hands, and does turn them as he does the Tides of the Sea, Pro. 21.1.
and Ryuers of water, did so humble the heart of Pilate to his Counselors
request, that speedily he obtained his godly desire. And that more is, where
Joseph thought himself alone to have this cause in hand, there the Lord of life
does in the moment of time, join to him a most Noble Pharisie named Nicodemus,
God gives good success to godly labors, far beyond all expectation.
a teacher of the Law, that so both estates, Spiritual and Temporal, may
perceive that the Lord does keep them in power and favor with princes and
potentates, because they should with courage do the Lord service: yea, even
in dangerous seasons, if Christ be either accused, prysoned, or any way else
evil dealt withal. The heroycall hearts then of christian Counselors, and
Noble Christians, Courtyers and Gentlemen of credit, should (though alone)
make humble and earnest and eftsoons peticions, to the Deputy of our head
Christ, for the godly members of the same: God will join with them, and
enclyne the hearts of the hardened for his sons glory, and grant aid unto
you in his business beyond your expectation, and your selves shall find
favor with God, for your labors in his Christ.

Now in Joseph his person and also in Nicodemus, there are two things to be
well and deeply considred, for want whereof many do to their great hindrance
from God, take evil example not rightly given. First therefore, we are to
consider, what be the things in these men to be followed of Noble men, women
and others. Secondly, the hyndring evil, A right eye is to be had in the
deeds and lives of godly men.
which many do presumptuously take as offered in the persons of these men, to
be received without reproof. The thing to be followed (that so this faithful
service to God may appear to the more Noble christians) is: that they be
endowed with their exampler Joseph, his spiritual quallities and christian
habit, which makes them truly brave and bewtifull: yea, so as neither
Silks, Veluets, Silver, or Gold can do, and that is that they be in person
honest, not given to the notable vices, following for the most part forreyn
Nobility, (so I call al those by carnal birth enobled, in whose heart God by
his spirit and word bears not the sovereignty) as Idleness, the mother of
al evil, surfeiting, drunkenness, whoredom, chambring, wantonness,
blasphemous oaths, filthy and rybaldous talking, and covetous cruelty over
their sore oppressed Tenants, and inferior people, and such like: but that they
be given to the custom of honest and chaste life, sobriety of mind and
manners, comlynesse of apparel, agreeable his dignity, moderate diet and
frugall hospitality, loving hearted, and using upright dealing with all men,
assured that as their persons do far excel the lower sort, so God
requires more regard of them. Luc. 12.48
For to whom much is given, of him shall be much required. And let them make
this reckning, if they hunte counter herein, the very heathen Nobility shall
rise against them to judgment. It is said of the severity among the old
Romans in judgment, that if an old person or famous Senator (al if greatly
for his deserts were to be renowned) became in any sort to be the example of
ill to the common weal, he should have severe censure. Lucius Antonius Lucius
Antonius
was cast out of the Senate house, for that having married a Maid, he cast her
off by deuorce, without the counsel of his friends. Fabritius Lucius Censor
adjudged Cornelius Rufinus, Cornelius Rufinus.
who had been twice Consul, and twice Dictator, unworthy the fellowship of
Senators, because he had ouercuriously decked his Cubborde with Silver plate,
as gyuing thereby a superfluous example to his fellow brethren and others
Duronius Duronius
also was removed the Senate, for that being Tribune, he did dissolve that
reasonable law set down before by the Senate, which did restrain the lashing
prodigality in fumptuous feasts and banquets. These and such other examples
the Stories deliver us. But who thinks these men (were they in these days)
worthy such severe censure, being Noble and well deserving? Or who is of
Julius Caesar's Julius Caesar.
judgment, holding it most honorable for a noble man, or of higher calling, by
virtues to excel others, and also so to guide his family, that his household
may be free from all suspicion of evil. O that our christian Gentry were
come to this heathen man's perfection in this point. Or that our Bishops would
in all their houses begin this dance. What is asked of the Nobility.
Well Joseph must begin to do it, and also to be just in his dealing with
all men, which consists in the equal gyuing to every man his own, and to
do to others, as they would they should do to him. And to the vtterest of his
authority and power, Mat. 7.12.
he must follow the counsel of the noble prince and Prophet David, himself to
defend the fatherless and people in righteousness, and the poor with equity,
save the children of the needy, and subdue the oppressor, redeem the pore from
deceyte and vyolence, and accounte their blood dear and precious in his eyes.
But if (O Noble princes) happily you cannot in your office and authority do
always as you would, yet be sure that ye never give consent to the wicked
counsels of other in their evil, or to wincke at the wresting of the Law, for
the favor of the unjust party, or fear of the mighty, or in hope to have
like friendship of others, in your disposed quarrels.

Thirdly, ye must with Joseph be Jesus Disciple, Christianity ought to be
joined with Nobility.
and openly by your acts confess his glory, ye must be religious and godly,
have your faith fyrmely set in Christ the Lord by the warrante of his word. Ye
must not keep amity with such as would draw your honors and souls to
strange Gods, as to Idolatrous Popery, etc. Deuteronomy. 13.
Thus shall the holy Ghost work in you the true fear of God, drive away
tymerousnesse, and animate you with heroical boldness in christian offices,
that you shall not respect the faces of men, but the will of God, and your
alegiance to his Magistrate set over you, and your allotted office to Gods
Church, that in all respects you shall reach thither your helping hands, if not
as you would, yet as you may, with peticion and peace, never consenting to her
hurt, though wicked times will not permit you power to her help. So shall you
reign with your Master Jesus Christ noble and glorious.

The hindering matter, as received from Joseph and Nicodemus, is after this
sort used. These were virtuous noble men, wise, and godly (say the
Nicodemitans Nicodemitans.
) they were moderately minded, no hot spur gentlemen, they came in lesser
show then the Apostles after Christ, but they were as well beloved as the
rest, wherefore let these forward men go on themselves, we will come softly
after. Yea sir, rather come an elle behind the Law, then step one ynche
before it. So did Steven Gardener, and is commended of bloudye Bonner in his
preface to Winchesters Book, de vera obedientia. And when he came to the Law,
it was not because he was wylling to live therein unfeignedly (as his revolt in
Queen Mary's days approved) but that he was not yet come to that height,
which he and his holy father looked after, and saw no better mean to keep out
of so honorable a place, a faithful pastor, then to counterfeyt Religion for a
season. And by this mean in deed Satan by him so prevailed, that Popery never
could be cut down, albeit, it was effectuallye cropped. But this excuse by
Joseph and Nicodemus is absurd, for how can the children of men, by the
sins of the godly, walk the way from sin? This can be no other then the
pathway to Hell. Nor are we to follow the actions of the holiest m^n without
judgment, A sure imitation.
but measuring his life by the line of Gods word, take the matter agreeing
there to for thy example, as saint Paul gives us in charge. Follow me, Ephe.
5.1. 1. Cor. 11.1.
as I follow Christ. No Paul, no further, though thou be the Doctor of the
Gentyls and chosen vessel of GOD. But those steps of the saints, which are
neither allowed nor approved by the word of GOD, those cast behind thee, as
the evil by nature dwelling in such holy men. It was sin in Joseph to
conceal his profession in Christ for fear of displeasure either of prince or
people. For this is required by the word of the Lord of every one, that we
believe in our hearts to justification, and confess with our mouths the Lord
Jesus to our salvation. Romans 10.9.10. 2. Tim. 1.8. 2. Tim. 4.16.
And Paul exhorts Bishop Tymothy, not to be ashamed to confess Christ. And
in the same Epistle he charge his companions to have forsaken him, in that
they did not assist him at his first answer, and because it was an horrible
sin, he prays GOD it be not laid to their charge. Now as it is proper to
the Scripture, Psalm. 1.
to compare a Christian, by and to a virident tree, in sundry places. We may
safely set this difference between Joseph and Nicodemus, and all the
Nicodemitans in these times. Joseph and Nicodemus were green branches, fast
grafted by the merciful hand of the Fathers election, John. 15.1.
into the virident Vine Christ Jesus, whose branches having less sap of his
spiritual operation at the first, and for a time having more knurres of carnal
corruption. The master of the Orchard, the heavenly father, proyned them
daily more and more by his loving spirit, so that as they continued in his
profession from the first hour to the end: Even so in very short time they
became so fruitful, that they were found more profyitng, then they which did
bear the praise before them: As you have heard, when Christ his daily
Disciples shranke from him, and some contrary their honest promise denied him
in his own hearing, then these branches gave forth the fruit of their
increase in God. They stood fast in Christ and that openly, that the princes
and people might know them, to belong to the ignominious (but yet glorious)
and crucified Christ. This was the end of their former study, and argued a
continual going forward in godliness. And if you measure your time of
schooling with theirs, you cannot but blushe to challenge them for your
Patrons. For in three years they so profited, that they confessed Christ before
kings and men, not regarding loss of life, lands, goods, or whatsoever might
befall: yea, and that in the sharpest hour of Christ his persecution.
Nicodemitans defined.
The Nicodemitans (that is to say such persons as skant crept from some part of
Popery, can be drawn no further to truth) were seeming branches I grant, of
the Vine Christ, if outward show might warrant them, but such whose virident
life is now gone, and they are because not grafted in him, decaying and
departing from evil to worse, and as they were earnest, and are now neither
hot nor cold, which is a dangerous state. So not long fed with the lively
sap of Gods spirit, Apo. 3.16.
they become more and more wythered, and cannot with their supposed fellow
branches, bring forth either fruit in increase, or yet so much as in times
past they have done, for that they have by fleshlye persuasion of credit to
themselves, Quenched the spirit of God in them: 1. Tess. 5.19. Mat. 13.6.
so as in time of persecution, they flatly fall away, as thoroughly wythered,
when the increasing Joseph stands the brunte in boldness, by the spirit
that grows in him. But the end of these men is (says Christ the Lord of
truth) to be cut off and cast into the fire. O England, England, John. 15.6
be not deceived, thou have been a scholar with Joseph, England enjoying the
Gospel full xx. years, remains yet retchlesse and ignorant.
Simeon, and Nicodemus, not three years, but by times forty years, in the
school of Christ, and now these last twenty years contynually without
intermission or play day, have thou under her graces Majesty, and most happy
government, been vertuouslye and abundantly taught in pureness of doctrine?
But how art thou increased? How followest thou Joseph, Simeon, and Nicodemus?
Truly even as the shadow does the sun. For the shadow runs as fast as
he, but never higher then the earth, even so we run and post with speed,
but still upon the earthly minds of gross fantasies, and therein counteruayle
we the sun, which swiftly runs in the Heaven, to his appointed course.
Heb. 5.12.
We are come to this increase, that when for time we should be apt to receive
stronger meat, we are not able to digest the diet of Infantes, which is
sucking milk. When Paul, vz Gods teachers by doctrine in truth, should lead
us further into perfection, we cry out still, we are Joseph's, Heb. 6.1.2
we are Nicodemitans, we are not yet past the doctrine of the beginning of
Christ, the foundation of repentance from dead works, of faith toward God,
etc. We also abuse this sentence of Paul. Heb. 5.14
Strong meat belongs to them that are of age, which through long custom
have their wyts exercised to discern both good and evil. So we confess there
are a people, to whom more perfection belongs, but we keep our selves from
that number. For we (the Ministers) can scarcely in the Country get our people
to come to the beginnings of Religion, so much as to send their servants to
learn the appointed Catechism. But if age should breed perfection, are we not
older in the Gospel then Joseph was? Have not we under the gospel (since K.
H. days) past the years, which over ran the Hebrews (after Christ his
death) before this Epistle was written unto them? Centu. 1. lib. 2. 10.
Yes verily, for it was written by the author thereof, as it seems from Rome,
about. 25. years after Christ's death. And if custom could do it, how
conversant have the scriptures been with our wits now this nineteen years
together? And if in three years Joseph and Nicodemus became so strong, how can
we for shame say, we are like to them, which in ninteene years are (in the
bowels of this long taught land) not able for the most part, to give a reason
of our faith and hope. And the better sort of us are even rather staying from
farther, then standing fast to that we have. We be less loving, more cold
then we have been. It may be said of England as the Stories report of the
Jews, who when they came to Jerusalem, Nehe. 4.17.
by the commandment of Cyrus King of Persia, the were so whote in buylding
the decayed City, that they (beset with enemies) held their weapons in the
one hand, and labored with the other. Behold fear of the enemy could not
drive them from the Lords labor. And when the Samaritanishe ypocrites offered
to help them, they were so zealous, that though they hungered the fynishing of
the work, yet would they not admit an hypocrites hand, to touch the buylding
of the Lord. And when they were complained upon, and subtyle devises made to
stay their labors, they continued their buylding still (manger the enemy) even
as the king had commanded them. But after a time of rest, they began every man
to build up his own house, and let the house of God lie vnfynished xvij.
years, till the Prophet was sent to Zorobabell the Prince, and Iohosua the
high Priest, Hag. 1.1.
to excite them to their increase in former labor. And is it not so with
England? In the first of her Majesty's reign, how vehemently, how zealously, A
general decrease (in respect) in England.
how diligently labored we to repair the decayed Church in England? It was a
heaven to see princely Peers and Noble bloods, provoke the multitude to
embrace the Gospel. Popery was beaten down, her brood removed, and Gods true
Ministers placed, Idolatry extinguyshed, and the Churches beset with the
Sacrifice of the Gospel, which whote beginning, has of the sudden received
such a cool, as we are now wholly given to the buylding of costly bowres and
houses of pleasure. But as for Gods house, either in our own soul, or the
common Catholic Church, we commit it to ye reverend Bishops, and Ministers of
God (except a reserved seed) which join with Noble Nehemias, Zorobabel and
Esra, to assist our most Christian Cyrus, the principal Nourcing mother to
Gods children this day in all christian lands, in the redifying of Gods house
in our days, whose gracious beginning with good progress hitherto, the Lord
has prosperously blessed, his name be praised therefore, whose heart the Lord
yet more and more inflame in him, and direct by his holy spirit contynually.
And to many of our Fathers and Brethren of the Clargy, we may say as the
spirit spoke to the Angel and Church at Ephesus. These things says he that
holds the seven stars in his right hand, Apo. 21.2.3. etc.
and walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, I know thy works
and thy labor and thy patience, and how thou can not forbear them which
are evil, and have examined them which say they are Apostles, and are not,
and have found them liars. And thou was burdened and have patience, Apo.
2.1.2.3. etc.
and for my names sake have labored, and have not faynted. Nevertheless, I
have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first love. Remember
therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works: Or
else I will come against thee shortly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of
his place, except thou amend. The Jews from Key cold persons, became hot and
cruel enemies, so that in whose defense they stood to their great peril at
the first: once making stay of their increase, they thrust the sword into his
bowels. For they fell from God, they crucified his son, and took the
Regiment of his Church into their hands, excommunicating and murdering his
Apostles, Disciples, and whomsoever confessed his name. But their end was
desolation by the just judgment of God, yet so as he forewarned them by his
son Christ, called them to repentance by his Apostles, continued his power of
salvation to them, to say his holy Gospel during forty years. But when they
continued more and more obstinate and rebellious, having hearts past feeling,
he gave them and their City Jerusalem, into the hands of the Romans, Vespasian
and Titus, being the Rod of his anger, for their utter destruction, that they
which would not receive Christ coming in his fathers name, (of whom they much
bragged) should by his judgment receive them, which came in their own names,
for their private glory and earthly commodity. For the Roman Deputies,
partly by eager avarice, partly by cruel oppression, grievously vexed them. And
the Jews dreaming still of a delyuerer (whom they imagined to be some Noble
warrior) were ready to run with every Traitor, that would lift up his head,
and take to himself the Title of Messiah. In the which seditions, ever they
had the worse (as reason is such should) and many thousands of them were
slain. But when no otherwise they would be pacified, the Roman power was
sent with Commission utterly to destroy them. Whereto was Vespasian sent, who
began his wars in Galilea, committing to fire and sword all that was before
him. From thence he came to Jerusalem, and by the Soldiers in that siege
chosen Emperor, he went to Rome, and committed the wars of the Jews to his
son Titus, which Titus like a vigilant Governor behaved himself, and left
not the slaughter, til he had fulfilled the prophecy of Christ to that City.
He cast a banck about it, having 30. Castles or Turrets in it, Luke. 19.
from whence he battered down the City, he compassed them on every side,
finally he destroyed them and their children. For the Lord by him caused the
hunger to be such, as the mothers were compelled to kill, roste, broyle, and
eat their own borne children. He raced the City down to the ground, and so
of that most floorishing City, Josephus de bell. Iud. 6.14.
the Flower and Diamonde of the East, he left no more but a small Monumente to
the posterity of the Romans over so strong a defenced Bulwark. That is to say
three Towers, called Phaselus, Hyppinus and Mariamnes, with part of the West
wall. The men which escaped, were for the most part taken prisoners, and most
of them after, either sold to base bondage, or were for the pleasant prospect
of the Romans, cast unto wild beasts in their public sportes to fight and
be devoured. These things came to them in deed, but are written for our
sakes, 1. Cor. 10.6.
that both Prince, Potentate, Prelacie and people, should be terrifyed hereby.
As also the Church of Ephesus is a notable example for the Church of England to
behold. That Church sometime most honorable, but now most horrible, wrapped in
the Dungeon of Turkishe Paganism. God cannot in justice but plague in
severity, the backslyding from his word. And that does he in two sorts. 2.
Tes. 2.11
that they should believe lies to their damnation, which would not receive the
Truth to their Salvation, when it was sent them: And also he gives them to
their own hearts concupiscence, the same to satisfy in most fylthy lusts, that
not only God, but nature it self shall be despised. Romans
1.21.22.23.24.25.26.27.
For men against themselves, and women and men against the use of Nature shall
defyle themselves most filthily. A heavy judgment. Psalm. 78.
and finally the raging Seas shall overthrow the Egiptians, which were great
persecutors of the people of God. The Wyndows of heaven shall open and drown
the whole world, which would not repent, Genesis 7.11.
but grow into worse and worse. Vespasian and Roman Titus shall utterly
subvert the hard hearted Jerusalem. Ephesus shall yield his obedience to his
destroying enemy, which would not return to his former love Jesus Christ, and
the zeal of his Gospel. The Angels Candlestick, the Church and the Ministry
shall be cast out, Apoc. 2.
and Mahomet and Sergius shall occupy their function and place. O England,
love, love, love, and fear. Fear God as thy father, kiss and embrace his
son thy Christ and consolation, Psalm. 2.12.
least he being angry, cause thee to fear, when thou do feel his terrible
judgments, by which thou shall perish, if his anger be kyndled, yea but a
little. Return to thy first love, and do thy first works, else will he come
shortly, as he says to Ephesus, which argues that he is ready. Wherefore
repent: yea, though the most, in countenance of the best, neglect the love of
God, yet know that Symeon and Joseph do expect the kingdom of God, and
Consolation of Israel. And such only have the spirit of God in them, as had
these holy men, by which they are trained always to the presence of Christ,
and approved his servants. These shall not see death, till they have in heart by
the eyes of their faith, joyfully seen Jesus, to be the light of the Gentyls,
and the glory of Israel, John. 17.2 Esa. 9.2.
and the salvation by the Lord, set for the whole salvation of God. Last of
all, this is worthy to be thought upon, that Symeon is brought by the Spirit
of Gods motion into the Temple, at the very instant, when Christ is thither
brought to be offered to the Lord, and that al things there were done according
to the Law. 1. Sam. 9.16 Psalm. 31.15. Luke. 1.8. John. 17.1. Ephe. 1.10. Mar.
14.41
The worldlings would think this to come by chance, but the Evangelist says,
he was led thither by the holy ghost. For it is God which does with his
general providence behold all things, and guydeth every man's actions to his
appointed season, and the very moment of times, he directs to his several
work at his good pleasure. By this heavenly providence, and not by chance,
came the servant of Abraham to the City of Nahor, Genesis 24.
in that momente of time, when Rebecca came out of the City to water her
cattle, Gods providence guydeth as and our actions, not blind chance.
and for this cause did God bring forth that Maid at the same instant, that by
this occasion she might bring the manne to her father, by whom she should be
sent to Isaac for his wife. And Saul went to seek his fathers Asses, but the
Lord brought him to Samuel the Prophet, which did expect that hour his
coming. 1. Sam 9.16.
For the Lord had by Oracle told Samuel, that he would send Saul unto him,
and that he should annoynte him king of Israel. David was brought hereby into
the battle, 1. Sam. 17.
what hour the great Giant Golyath did vaunt himself in blasphemy against the
Lord, and by which means he might be brought to that fight, which the Lord
had foreappointed for him, to the glory of God, the victorious fame of David,
and the joy of Israel. By this guide came the Wydowe of Naim to the gates of
the City, Luc. 7.12.
with her dead son to burial, at that moment when Christ entered the gates of
that City, and was by him restored to life. And by this is holy prouydence,
are our Fathers gone before us, and we not borne until this age of the world,
wherein he has appointed his son Christ to be more amply revealed by the
preaching of his word, then at any time he has been since ye Apostles time.
This only remains, that with heart and will, by the motion of his holy
spirit, we jointly enter our Churches, where Jesus Christ is graciously
offered, not into our arms, but into our hearts and souls, not in a body
subject to myseries and death, but in the Majesty of his word, which is his
eternal power, Romans 1.16. 1. Cor. 1.18
to bring us by his light to that salvation assured in him, and to engraffe
quietness in Conscience, persuaded in his truth by the testimony of his said
spirit, of the full forgyuenesse of our sins. That we shall with new raised
hearts, as men risen from a most deep Dungeon of death, most joyfully with
Symeon sing and say, in heart and truth: Lord now whenever thou call us
from this natural life, 1. Cor. 1.30 Ephe. 1.7. Mat. 20.28.
at thy good pleasure thou let us depart to quiet rest, in christian
peace. For the eyes of our faith have and do see Christ Jesus, and receive him
as he is to us in mercy given, our only ransom and full matter of our
spiritual health and celestial joy, to whom with thee our best father, and
the holy spirit, be praise and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Thus much received by the Gospels words touching Symeon, now let us lend
ear attentively unto the words delivered us in this his joyful song. Thus he
says.

Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word.
For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. This old holy fathers song,
conteyneth short words and long matter, wherein he gives the Lord his due
praise by public speech, in ioyed heart, and after the example of the former
church, for the present benefit received, according the faithful promise of
God (that he has not departed to his Fathers, before he saw the Lords
Christ) he sings the Lords truth, and blaseth the honorable arms of our
Captain Christ, manifesting his power, efficacy and glory, in this his pithy
encomia. That done, he sets down the perfect platform of a quiet
conscience, and the ancor of her health, in the middle of many miseries, in his
own person saying: Now Lord all if by the Roman Tyranny, thy people of
Israel have been sore oppressed, our faith sore assaulted, so that twixt hope
and sorrow, we have waited for Consolation in thy promise: Now that thou have
given us thy Christ our glory. I joy so much in him my Savior, that death
shall be to me welcome, and my departure shall be in peace, because by this
Christ my Consolation, Gods wrath to me is pacified, my syns in him pardoned,
my self for him of my heavenly father dearly beloved, and my soul shall rest
in joy, for I am thy servant, wherefore Now let me I pray thee depart in
peace, I am satisfied that I have seen thee, and the days of my age are in
thy hand. But whereas Symeon says: Lord Now does thy mercy let me depart
in peace, he plainly shows, that until he perfitely had the fruition of his
hope, he was in auxietie and grief, and walked with a heavy heart for the
affliction of Israel. This argues not an absolute weakness of faith in
Father Symeon, but rather expressly an ardent expectation of the promise of God,
nothing pleasured with the foreign matters of this life, albeit they should
abound to him. But by travail in fight, against temptations in worldly
pleasures, he hungreth and spiritually thirsts in approved hope, the Lords
promise, enduring the grief of present oppression, assuredly by faith to reap
the reward of his pacient hope, because he had the word of God (a most
faithful Norice thereto) for his warrante. 1. Pet. 2.2.
For thus said the Lord by Revelation to Symeon. Thou shall not dye, before
thou have seen the Messiah Christ the Lord. Luc. 2.26.
Note here (good Reader) the nature of Gods promises given to his chosen
children. They are not performed at the first hour, but they are deferred
longer then our selves would desire, and they are not performed till the faith
of the parties be perfitly proved, and by the opposite occurrents sore
exercised.

God the Father promised the coming of his beloved son Christ (here embraced
of Symeon) at the fall of Adam and Heuah, Gene. 3. Genesis 22.18 Gal. 3.8. Esa.
64.1. Mat. 13.16 Luke 10.24.
and renewed it to Abraham, and by his Prophets continued the same, but the
time prolonged, forced many of the best fathers to cry: Oh that thou would
pierce the heavens and come down, and to say: Oh Lord send thy glory unto
Syon, and thy saving health unto Jerusalem. And as our Christ does testify,
many kings and Prophets have desired to see Christ, and have not seen him, or
could the times enjoy the performance of this promise, till the fullness of
time by him set were come, Heb. 1.1.
and that by contrary presumptions, the faith of his children were thoroughly
exercised. But when the time by his divine wisdom appointed was come, then
did he faithfully give the same Messiah into the world, that Symeon and the
godly then might bear witness to us his children now, of his everlasting
faythfulnesse. In this word (Now) lies an Emphasis, as if he had said: The
word of my promise has fed my faith, and stablished my hope, to wait for
this our consolation Christ: and sithe in thy mercy thou have performed the
word of truth: Now let me depart in peace. Here is to be well marked the force
of true and lively faith, it does persist in one, it rests upon the promise
of the word, The force of true faith.
albeit that heaven and earth should seem to run on heaps together. This is
that most excellent gift of God, that excels al virtues in whatsoever man.
Ephe. 3.17
Pray the Lord therefore to give thee faith in Christ (christian Reader) and
Christ thereby to dwell in thee, then shall thou abide steadfast in hope, after
the word of Gods promise, whatsoever obstact shall arise against thee. The Lord
by his servant Moses promised the Israelits delyuerance out of the bondage of
Egypt. Exodus 4.29.30.31.
But straight ways with this promise arose such presumptions to the contrary
(as the hardness of Pharaos heart and cruelty their oppression, and more labor
thereby, their sharp correction for wants in work, and in the hour of their
deliverance, his huge army persecuting them on the one side, and the high
Mountains and swallowing Seas to hold them in on the other side) that it might
have seemed to Israel, Moses warrant from God, to have been rather a dream of
their desolation, then the day of their delyuerance. But they (by this spirit
confirmed in faith) did suppress the present calamities by the Ancor of hope,
which from the ship of their believing consciences, in these terrible Seas
tossed, they cast and fyrmely pitched, upon the word of promise, which thus
they had: vz I will in a mighty hand, and outstretched arm deliver you.
Whose pacient perseverance, the same Jehovah approved, when most tryumphantly
he caused the senceles seas, in the faithful answer of his merciful promise,
to obey his voice in the mouth of a man (far inferior to Pharaoh) at whose
commandment they became against their nature serviceable to his people: Exo.
14.21.
for they reared themselves as a lofty wall on either side, and the sincking
sands were turned into a most firm ground and pleasant green path, Hebr.
11.29.
for the Israelites safety, in this their most miraculous passage. After
whose ariuall on the other shore, the said Sea did return to her former
course, and in the sight of the Hebrews, gave to the Egiptiacall Tyranny, his
just reward by the hand of God, which herein drowned Pharaoh and all his host.
And (dear Reader) thou have no less promise, Exo. 14.27.28.
but much greater to thee, being a christian Israelite: Namely that by faith you
shall be delivered from the power of spiritual Pharaoh, the power of darkness,
Col. 1.13. Romans 3.24.
and be translated into the kingdom of the Son of God, in whom thou shall
be justified, and shall have forgiveness of thy sins, shall be at peace with
God, shall have Christ thy sanctification, justification, and redemption. 1.
Cor. 1.30.
Thy Lord, thy peace, thy salvation, thy light, and thy glory. Thy self shall
approach the throne of grace with quiet conscience, beholden of the father for
his blessed and therefore beloved son, for a citizen of the heavenly
Jerusalem, Ephe. 2.19 Romans 8.17
an heir of that kingdom, yea a fellow heir with Christ Jesus. And this is
that peace, which Symeon felt and saw with the eyes of his faith, when he
said, he now went to his Fathers in peace. But every opinion received in or
of Christ, is not this regenerating faith.

There is a faith attributed to the Devils. The Devils believe (says S. James)
but they tremble and quake. Iam. 2.19.
There is a faith said to be in the hypocrites of the earth: but James calls
that a dead faith. And Paul to Timothy, Iam. 2.17.
Fides ficta, a fained faith, a faith all one with the Devils: and of some
called an historical faith. James joining them together, says of them thus,
speaking to the counterfeite Christian. Thou delightest in thy self, and
take pride herein, that thou art persuaded that there is but one God, and the
same thou hold for thy God, against the error of Paganism, which defend
many Gods: Thou do this right, and hereby thou do far excel them, but
yet art not thou ascended one step from the Devils faith, who believes even as
much, and that Jesus Christ is the holy son of God also, and the Redeemer of
the world. But in that he believes God, and Christ to be God, and cannot
believe in God, that is as Augustine has it, to love God, and to walk in his
fear with obedience, they do al tremble at this name, as the thief before the
Judge, and so do Hypocrites, which have but fictam fidem, a feigned faith. Let
no man object that the godly also do fear God. For it is easily answered,
their fear in God is coupled with faith and love in GOD, with hope and
perseverance in constant faythfulnesse, and obedience to his word. But in
Devils, in wicked men, and in hypocrites, there is nothing but fear and
desperation. For as they believe, they love not, they obey not wyllingly,
wherefore wanting his Spirit, they have no boldness, they hope not, but fear,
and look for his anger, not for his mercy, because they cannot but be most
cruel, against his beloved members.

But the faith which Symeon and all the just have in God and Christ, is not
(...) an opinion, True faith descrybed.
which leans to one part, yet so as he stands something doubtful of his
side, but it is (...), so fyrme and stable, so sure an assente, and consent to
the word of truth, by the working of the holy ghost, that no doubt can drive
us from our, Ancor hold in Christ. And this gracious faith is the gift of God,
which by the bright beams of his truth, in his holy spirit, does not only
shine and press into our hearts, the word of our salvation and faith in
Christ, but does inflame and transform them, and makes them of an old
substance a new creature, that thus knowing God, they love him as their
father, they worship and honor him as God, they tremble at his word, least
they offend such a most loving father, they walk in his statuts and
ordinances to do them, and put their whole trust in him, and in the word of
his truth, though their sin, their conscience and Satan's malice do accuse
them: yea, though infynite temptations, to the contrary of Gods loving favor
do assault them. As that their sins might alter his good purpose, or that
their weakness in faith might change his mind and love toward them, yet
(having this promise by Symeon. 1. Cor. 1.30 1. Pe^. 2.24.25. Heb. 9.12.
Christ is our peace, our light, our salvation, our glory, by Paul our
sanctification, justification, and redemption, by Peter our Bishop and high
Priest, by whose strypes we be made whole, by the Epistle to the Hebrews, our
sacrifice which once for all offered, has found eternal redemption, Hebr.
10.26. 1. Ioh. 2.2.
after whose Oblation, there remains no more offering for sin. Finally, our
Mediator and Advocate, and the full reconciliation for our sins, and the
sins of the whole world) yet I say notwithstanding such former assaults,
these present promises do seal us up, and we conclude by our faith in Christ,
after the assured word given unto us, in the Pen of Paul. There is no
condemnation to them which be grafte in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.
which live not after the flesh, but after the spirit, and we be so
stablished by hope, that tryumphantly we stand the accusation of Sin, Romans
8.33 34.
Satan and Hell, saying: It is God which iustifyeth, who can condemn? It is he
that is dead: yea, but which is risen from death, is set at the right hand of
God, and makes intercession for us, his spirit teaches us to pray, and in us
does work effectual suspiration, and supplications, with hope to receive
most certainly the love of God, and in this manner with Symeon, Joseph of
Aramathea, and the rest of Gods elect, we daily wait for and expect with
patience, the redemption of our bodies, Romans 8.23 Luc. 21.28
that is the day of the last Resurrection. And this our lively faith, has this
love so conjoined in us, that we do love our Christ, because he loves us
first, and walk in the effects thereof before him and our brethren, 1. John.
4.10.
through the same his love, and therefore also tryumphantly against Satan,
Sin, Pope, and Hell, Desperation and Death, we say in heart: Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ, shall oppression, shall extremity, shall
persecution, famishment, Romans 8.35
nakedness, peril or sword (as it is written, For thy sake are we al day
slain and brought as sheep to the slaughter) but in all these we are more
then conquerors, in and by him that loves us. So are we with Paul persuaded,
that neither death, nor life, Angel, principality or potentats, neither
things present or to come, neither things above, or yet below, or any other
creature can separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. And this is that our faith, which is far differente from the Jews,
condemns the Pagans, conuinceth the Papists of Heresy, and apprehends
Christ Jesus, which is our peace, our salvation, our light and eternal glory.

Further note here, that as this christian faith is not without these works of
hope and love: So do we learn that they proceed of faith, as they whose
nature cannot be separate from the same. We are justified by faith (says
Paul) and therefore have peace with God by Christ, Romans 5.1.
by whom we have access by Faith into that grace wherein we stand, and
glory in the hope of the glory of God: Faith has two daughters, Hope and
Love.
Behold the Apostle does plainly affirm us to have access to God, and peace
in him, and the hope of glory by faith in Christ. But more plainly to the
Ephesians saying: We have access in hope which is by faith. Ephe. 3.12.
Here is hope said to be conceived of the spirit, and borne of faith. That
Charity also is borne of her, as her second daughter, 1. Tim. 1.5
Paul to Timothy does witness thus. The end of the commandment is love,
out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. And how
can it be, but love of force must proceed of faith. For thereby we behold the
Lord our God, to be our best, good, most mighty, wise, and best belouing
father, in whose love he has given us his only begotten son to dye for us,
and with him has given us all things. How cannot (I say) then this Charity
to break out of us, in floodes of love to our good God, and elect brethren
for him in every such office, as the rules thereof requires at our hands? But
still observe this for their order. Faith is the Noble parent, the daughter of
Gods holy word, whose father is Gods spirit, begotten in the bed of a
christian heart, and hope is the first Daughter of faith, Ephesians. 17.
expecting the fruit of Gods faithful promise, and cannot be drawn from her
mother, because she is holden by the holy ghost, nor thrust down to distrust or
doubtfulnesse, for that she is sustained in her mothers lap, the most assured
faith in God. And love is the last daughter and of longer contynuance. For
when the mother and her elder Sister shall give over their office, having
attained their reward and promise, this virtuous love in the saints of God
shall never cease, 1. Cor. 13.13.
but continue in the heavens with them for ever. And thus has love of us her
due commendation, but so as she is set orderly in her besytting place, against
the cauils of al Papists and Atheists whatsoever. Further, to thee which art an
old man, our aged Symeon stands a perfect pattern to follow. That not thy
gray hears, but thy grave and godly conversation may with him approve thee in
the house of God, a man venerable and worthy regard. A Lesson to old men.
His steps to lead thee, are his faith in Christ, his fear in GOD, his godly
life, his love to his Country, and his desire to depart these miserable days
at the will and word of God. But in his godly life, th^e is by the Evangelist
set down for great and chief, that he followed his guide the holy Ghost. O
ye old fathers whose gray heads do sommon your toyled Souls to the Tribunal
seat of God, take care that ye follow Symeons trace, in the obedience to Gods
holy spirit. For they alone are Gods children, Romans 8.14
which are led by his spirit, and thereby do mortifye and kill the lusts
of the flesh. It is enough and tootomuch, that you have spent the days of your
youth after the wanton guyse of fleshlye lusts. Learn to say with Paul, when
I was a child, 1. Cor. 13.11. Psalm. 19.12 13. Ephesians. 24 7
I did as a child, but now I am a man, I have cast away childishness. Pray
with holy David: O Lord forgive me the rebellion of my youth, and lay not my
presumptuous syns against me. Rejoice with Sophocles, that Nature has bid
adue, to the fleeting feats of fleshly affects. Cast away whoredom and
lascivious delights, A Christian cautar.
and above all delight not in thy former evils, but reprove thy self in them,
Ephesians. 5.11
and condemn thy heart for them. Joy in God, and beg earnestly for repentance
at his hands, Luke 15.21
and ask mercy with the prodigal son for thy wasting days past thee. Defye
the receypt of Satan's baytes, which now (that Nature cannot ruffle as to fore)
do inflame thy heart with conceypt of fryuolous and fylthy joy, for the evil
done deed so long time paste. Ephesians. 4.29
Let no fylthy communication proceed out of thy mouth, nor have thou any
fellowship with the works of darkness, but rather reprove them, For so shall
thou be learned in Christ. Be not so far from the duty of an old christian
Father, that a Heathen, though a cyuill natural man, may well condemn thee. A
notable and pythie saying of Cicero.
Fylthy lusts (says Cicero) is hateful to green days, but most odyous to
gray hears, as of which comes two pestilente euilles: It breeds common
cry of shame and dishonor to the aged, Eccle. 9.25.2.
and their example gives beastly boldness to youthful intemperance. There be
three things (says the wise man) that God hates. A poor man that is proud, a
rich man that is a liar, and an old Adulterer that doteth. The Preacher
Ecclesiastes, Eccle. 11.9.
derydingly says to a young manne (which old men are in wisdom to record)
Rejoice in thy youth, let thine heart cheer thee, walk in the ways of thine
heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: But know that for all these things God
will bring thee to judgment. Doctrine for young Gallants.
Therefore take away grief out of thine heart, and cause evil to depart from
thy flesh, for chyldhood and youth are vanity. Hereto shall it much profit
you, you elder fathers, if with Symeon ye enter the Temples of God, where his
word is daily preached, his graces exhibited, and sealed to you in his
Sacraments. Where (with the just) your contynuall prayers shall be acceptable,
and receiving fruit in Christ. Where shall this counsel of the Lord be given
you, to your eternal good, forth of his holy word. Remember now thy Creator,
Eccle. 12.1.
etc. whylst the evil days come not, nor the years approach, wherein thou
shall say: I have no pleasure in them. A little after: when the keepers of the
house (vz the hands of the body) shall tremble, and the strong men (that is the
legs) shall bow themselves, and the grynders (the teeth) shall cease, because
they are few, and they wax dark (vz the eyes) that look out by the
Wyndowes. And the doors (lyppes or mouth) shall be shut without by the base
sound of the grynding (that is, when the the chawes shall scarce be able to
open) and he shall rise up at the voyee of the bird (namely he cannot sleep
half the night) and all the daughters of synging (that is the wind pypes or
deafness of ears) shall be abased. Also they shall be afraid of the high thing
(every thresholde shall be hard to stryde over) and fear shall be in the way
(the Palsye shall cause the bones to tremble) and the Almonde tree (that is the
gray head) shall floorishe, and the Grasshopper (that is the least weight) shall
be a burden, and concupiscence shall be driven away, for man goes to the house
of his age (even to his grave) and the Mourners go about in the street,
whiles the silver cord is not lengthened (meaning the Marow of the back bone
of the synewes) nor the golden Ewer broken (the little skyn that covers the
brain, which is in color like Gold) nor the Pitcher broken at the Well
(that is the veyns at the liver not dissolved) nor the wheel broken at the
Cesterne (that is, nor the head with the heart, from whence he draws his
powers of life, make an end of their office) and duste return to the earth as
it was, and the spirit (note that the soul incontinentely goes to joy or
tormente) to him that gave it. Vanity of vanities, says the preacher, all is
vanity. This most excellent counsel, ye Noble Lords and loving Countrymen
(whose young days are now, or already well near spent) shall you have in the
house and word of God, contynually to your Christian consolation in Christ, by
repentance and faith in him, not only to joy with Symeon, but with the whole
Church of God, to say most assuredly: Lord now let thou thy servant depart
in peace, etc.

Further consider (gentle Reader) that Symeon speaks here of natural death,
when he says he departs in peace, and yet he calls his death, not a
destruction, but a departure. And a departure for three causes. departs from
this life, and has no more fellowship with those that live on the earth, or
they with him, as men with men to be benifited. departs from his body for a
season, and has no more participation therewith, till the day of Resurrection,
but this is also a departure, for the soul dies not with the body, but
lives, because she is immortal. Now Lord thou let me depart in peace, but
all this warrant has he from the spirit of God: wherefore he adds according
to thy word. Eccle. 9.5.6.
But as concerning the first departure Ecclesiastes says. The dead (departed)
know nothing at all, neither have they any more a reward: For their remembrance
is forgotten. Also their love and their hatred, and their envy is now
perished, they cannot by their love profit those left behind them, No profit
after death from the living in earth.
or yet by their hatred (had they any) do them hurt. And they have no portion
of all that is done under the sun. This doctrine considered, the forged frame
of popish Purgatory must needs fall out of our hearts. For if of those
prayers, which daily in popery be made for the dead, the departed have no
portion, how vain a thing is it, to imagine a purgatory, from whence our
friends Souls are fetched, by our sundry deeds for them? As by Trentals,
Diriges, Requiem, and restles Masses, Alms deeds, Popes pardons, and prayers
for all christian souls, with Aue Maria Amen. Whose pelf, young babes can
scoff, and say in these days. Come tie the Mare Tomboy. A cake, a cake for
all christian souls, De profundis, Salve Regina Godfather. But if of these
dead works under the sun done, the departed have not their portion (as the
spirit of God in this Canonical Scripture says they have not) how wicked an
opinion is popery? Even a damnable synke of most blasphemous false doctrine: At
the hour of death he had his judgment, Luc. 16.26.27.28.29.30.31.
Dives is presently condemned to Hell, and Lazarus from sentence sent to
Abraham's bosom, and thence cannot remove, though the cries of the dead be
many, or the necessity of teaching the living never so great. They have Moses
and the Prophets, Eccle. 11.3.
says Father Abraham, let them hear them. And as the Tree falls East or
South, and so lies: Even so as a man is found by the spirit of God, at the
hour of his death, so shall he be placed in the day of his Resurrection, when
the soul shall be reunited to his body. Thence forth in body and soul, for
till that day only the soul has the judgments censure, to receive the
reward of their state in this mortal life. And this is most fyrmely proved,
by the words of our Savior in John thus. Ioh. 5.28.29.
The hour shall come, in the which all that are in their graves, shall hear his
voice, and they shall come forth that have done good unto the Resurrection of
life, but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation.
Mark well he says not they whose friends have done well for them, they being
dead: but he says, they which themselves have done good, shall go to life.
Again, he affirms the state of the dead to remain always one, and the
self same that it was at the hour of death: For he says not, unless their
friends by their prayers, their devotions, their deeds, and their other Pelf,
has changed their condition since death. But thus the Lord of truth, which
cannot lie Christ Jesus says. They, they, which have done evil, and dye
without his special gift of repentance, they shall go to Hell. And thus shall
the matter stand in the day of Judgment, says Christ in the Gospel after
saint Mathewe. Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me ye curssed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, for I was an hungry, and you gave me no meat, etc. But
percase they might answer, our friends gave penny dole for us, during the
days of the world. But still this answer they shall have. Depart from me ye
curssed into Hell, you (I say you) gave me no bread. O poor Papists forget
not, Math. 25.1.2.3. etc.
how that the Virgins which had no Oil themselves, but hoped after Oil of the
wyser Virgins, were denied, and had the gates of the Bridegroom shut up against
them. Seek therefore by the Gospel of God, to nourishe thy faith in Christ,
by whom thou shall be at peace with God, and in a most quiet conscience, thou
shall end a godly life, and make a joyful departure. Otherwise, albeit thou
have the Popish Oil of all the Virgin Priests and saints in the world, it
cannot help thee, thy departure shall be the beginning of sorrow, and an
absolute departure from God, his Angels, Saints, and saved creatures, and
shall have thy portion in the Hels for ever. Be not deceived, believe the
truth. God grant thee with us so to do, and to live in truth all the days of
thy life, and in perfect departing from spiritual death, which is sin and
iniquity. For after thy departure here hence, thou shall be as free from the
state of the living, and the acts and deeds of them for thee, as the wicked
and dead in sin, are free from righteousness, and estranged from the life of
God.

Secondly, we have said that the soul is immortal, and therefore cannot dye.
For the holy Scriptures do every where record it. Thou shall not leave my
soul in Hell (vz in grave says David) neither shall thy holy one see
corruption. Psalm. 16.8.
As this Scripture serves chiefly to Christ, so does it to all other his
members. Again, the Preacher says, deuyding the soul and body a sunder. The
body (says he) shall return to dust from whence it came, but the soul to him
that gave it. Eccle. 12.
And Christ Jesus says in John: Verily, Ioh. 5.24.
verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes in him that
sent me, The soul sleeps not with the body.
has eternal life, and he shall not come into judgment, but has passed from
death to life. This place as it most plainly proves the immortality of the
soul, saying: He has everlasting life, he has passed from death to life
(which cannot be once dreamed to be spoken of the body, for that passes from
life to natural death, and to the sleeping grave.) So does it refell those
Heretics, which either deny the immortality of the soul, or imagine the
same to sleep till the day of judgment with the body. And to this end serve
the words of Paul. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. But the
Story or Parable of Dives and Lazarus, Phil. 1.23.
most lively expresses the one and the other, Dives in body is sumptuously
buried, Luc. 16.
but his soul is presently in Hell in torments, and behold he sleeps not,
for he feeling his terrible pain, is exercised in beholding the joy of his
late despised Lazarus, and calls for succor, and makes peticion for his
Brethren which yet remain a live, all which approve the soul immortal, and
not to sleep a senseless death with the body. So the body of Lazarus cast
in some Dytche or open Field, his soul by the ministry of Angels, Math. 8.11
is taken up into Abraham's bosom, where he sleeps not, but enjoys the
pleasant comfort of the Heavens. But possible thou would ask me then, how
these places can stand with those which affirm the soul to dye, and also say
that the godly after death do sleep? As that soul that synneth shall dye. We
confess for answer, that the soul is not altogether immortal, as our God
is, and not all subject to death, and we confess that there is a death
wherewith the wicked soul shall be overwhelmed, and so is the soul (but after
a spiritual sort) both mortal and immortal. The death of the soul, is when
his life is not in him: Man's soul mortal and immortal.
the life of the soul is Christ Jesus, by whose spirit the godly do live in
soul a life to eternal life. Of this life speaks Paul thus: I live, yet
not I, Gal. 2.20. Colo. 3.3. 1. John. 5.11.12.
but it is Christ that lives in me. And to the Colloss. Our life is laid up
with God in Christ, when Christ which is our life shall appear, we shall
appear with him glorious. That soul that has not Christ, has not life, but
is already dead, though in body he lives. For the wrath of God abides upon
him. Understand then, that this word Death, is mente not of the substance of
the soul, which cannot dye, but of her condition, which shall lie in the Lake
of fire and shall burn, and live for ever, which is called the Second death.
Revel. 20.14. Ephesians. 3.17. Ephe. 2.1. 1. Tym. 5.6. Tess. 4.13.
By faith Paul prays, that Christ may dwell in our hearts, and affirms
Christ by faith to live in him. Ergo without faith the soul is dead, living in
dead works, and dead sins, as the unprofitable Wydowes are dead in soul,
though alive in body. To the place of Paul where he says. He would not have
us ignorant touching them which sleep and such other places of scripture. We
must interpret him to speak of the body and not of the soul, for as when the
soul is joined with the body, he always waketh, when ye body takes rest: So
disioyned, much less he is said to sleep. And the body is said to sleep,
not in respect that the soul lies dead or sleeping within him (for we have
proved the soul to be with God) but in regard of his rising again, when the
soul shall return to his former body at the day of judgment. And by the
sleep of Death, he awayteth the retire of his mortal life, by the
reconiunction of his self soul and body sanctified in Christ, the life of
the body, with whom till then, the souls of the saints reign under the
Altar in heaven, not sleeping but waking, and crying upon God. How long Lord
holy and true, do not thou judge and avenge the blood of them that dwell on
the earth? These were the souls of them says John, Reave. 6.
which lay under the Altar (which is Christ) that were killed for the word of
God, and for the testimony they maintained. Behold ye cruel Papists, you
have killed the bodies, but the souls of our English saints are with their
Protector Christ, Genesis 4.10
and their blood does beg you vengeance if ye repent not. Abraham's Bosom.
Thirdly, Symeon calls Death but a departure, because for a time only, the
soul taking leave of the massy flesh, as we have said, does depart to the
rest in peace, prepared for him in his consolation Christ: Namely the Bosom of
his Father Abraham, which by Solomon is called the hand of God. Sapi. 3. Apo.
69.
The souls of the righteous (says he) are in the hands of God, and the
torments of Hell do not touch them. And by John, the Heavens and the Altar
which is Christ, and by Christ Paradise, as to the Thief, saying on the
Cross. This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. And in Mathewe, he
descrybeth Abraham's seat to be in the kingdom of heaven. Luc. 23.43. Mat
8.11. Ioh. 14.23
And in John our seats with him in the heavens, as in our Mansion house. But
never in the scriptures is the place of our dead godly fathers, called either
Lymbus or Purgatory, but contrary they affirm there is no pain to them. And
Purgatory has the same pains (the Papists which feign that place say) that
Hell has: only this is the difference, that they which be in Purgatory, shall
come thence, by the merits of the Church and purging in fire, and in Hell there
is no redemption. Wherefore the godly fathers were not in Purgatory pains, but
in the hands of God, which is a Paradise of most pleasure. And whereas by the
Apostle Peter, they go about to prove their Fathers Lymbo, as whence the soul
of Jesus Christ brought them, that place does neither affirm the natural
Soul of Christ to go to Hell after his death on the cross, or else that he
did bring thence the souls of the fathers. For his spirit discending, left
all those there which he found (not in a feigned Lymbo but in the paynefull
Helles.) For thus says the Apostle. He suffered in the flesh, but was quickened
in the spirit, 1. Pet. 3.18.19.20.
by the which he also went and preached unto the spirits that are in prison,
which were in times paste disobedient in the days of Noah, etc. The Apostle
says, not that Christ in his natural Soul went down into Hell, but he says
that by that spirit which raised him to life, he preached to them that are in
prison. Now again, he says not he fetched out the souls of the fathers,
which were before his coming in this prison, but he says his spirit preached
unto them that still are in prison. So far from delyuerie are they, that they
as obstinate Rebels remain in their former torments. Now then the reason
stands thus. By what spirit Christ was raised from the dead, by that same
spirit he went, or came to the spirits that are in prison: but Christ was
raised not by his own soul, but by the divine spirit of God (even by the
operation of the father.) Therefore by his divine power, Ephesians. 1.17.18.
and not in his human soul, he came unto the spirits that are in prison.
Again note, it is one to say he delivered the Jail, and an other to say, he
made an exhortation to the prisoners. This their alleged place (were it the
soul of Christ) yet proves not a delyuerye, but a preaching to them, that
now was that Savior borne, dead and crucified for the redemption of the
world, which by his spirit in the mouth of Noah (for one hundred and twenty
years space) preached to the disobedient in his days, had they believed. That
it was not the soul of Christ which quickened Christ from death, but the Divine
power, these places approve. 2. Cor. 13.4. Romans 8.11.
Although he was crucified by infyrmitie, yet he (was raised and) lives by
the power of God. Again: But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus to
life dwell in you, he that raised Jesus from the dead, will also quicken your
mortal bodies, because his spirit dwells in you. And again: Act. 4.10.
Be it known to you al, and to the whole people of Israel, that by the name of
Jesus of Nazareth, whom ye slew and hanged on high, whom God raised up from
death, by this man stands this person sound before you. To the Romans also
we are commanded to believe in him, Romans 4.14.
which raised Jesus Christ from death. And in the vj. chapter thus. As Christ
is raised up by the glory of the father (where note, that not by the soul of
Christ, but by God the father Christ was raised up) so let us walk in a new
life. And to the Ephesians. Ephe. 1.17
Always in my prayers I pray for you, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the father of glory, might give unto you the spirit of wisdom, etc. And a
little after, that ye may know what the hope is of his calling, and what the
riches of his glorious inheritance in the saints is, and what is the exceeding
greatness of his power toward them that believe, according to the working of
his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the
dead, and set him on his right hand on heavenly places. These places
sufficiently expound our Apostle, or rather assist his affirmation which
says, that he suffered in the Flesh, but was raised in the spirit, that is,
by the Godhead of the father, by which spirit in his deuyne nature, long
before he had our humayne nature upon him, he by his Prophets taught the
inobedient then, as by us his Apostles (says Peter) he preaches to you in
that spirit at this present. Yea, and also to the very damned in the Hels,
(no doubt) at the death of Christ, by the deuyne power of his holy spirit,
was the glory of his cross opened to their greater condemnation, which
contemned their salvation in him, as the godly fathers and their sacred bodies
in great comfort, by his power were raised sundry from their brethren, to
testifye the glory of this our crucified Christ, raised up by his father, and
set up with him in glory. Add to this, this place of Peter is so far from
warrante to that Popish opinion, that the soul of Christ, fetched forth ye
souls of the godly fathers Adam, etc. That of the flat contrary he says,
they to whom this spirit came, were disobedient. And that thou should not
dream of Christ's soul after his death herein, he sets thee the time when
this office was fulfilled, saying: In the days of Noah, while the Arc was a
preparing. Last of all (...) the godly learned Beza, does interpret qui sunt,
which are, not which were in prison, according to the efficacy of the greek
word. And the Apostles purpose, is not to tell us that they were in prison,
what time Christ by his spirit in the days of Noah, preached unto them (for
then they were men in natural life as Noah was) but he will give the Jews to
understand, that all were drowned except eight persons, because they were
disobedient unto his word. All whose souls that then were damned, now at the
writing of this Epistle (and at this present and ever shall be) though their
bodies be rotten and dust, are in prison. So now most justly they receive
damnation, which refused their salvation in Christ, preaching unto them in
spirit in the mouth of Noah, not having as yet our nature upon him. We
conclude therefore, that Abraham's Bosom is a place of celestial comfort, a
Paradise of pleasure unspeakable, the hand of God, deuoyde of Hellish or any
torments: the Altar of joy: the kingdom of God: John. 14.2 Ephe. 1.18.19.
Christ's fathers house, where he says are many Mansions: even the inheritance
of the just. Lo, to this place went the holy father Symeon departing, whereof
persuaded, he departed in most assured peace in conscience, and with God, who
in his Christ with him being satisfied, by his holy spirit, settled the heart
of Symeon, in most quiet rest.

That the souls departed, walk not after death in earth again.
But yet or I pass from this word depart, for that I writing this, a most
slanderous report is raised of an honest and virtuous Minister departed this
life, that his soul now walks at this day in his Parsonage house, it shall
not be unprofitable (Christian Reader) that I say something to the beating
down to death this error. It is an old sinister opinion of men, that the
souls of the dead depart not so from us, but that after buryall they walk in
the earth, and appear unto men, exhorting them to this or to that, as Gregory
of Rome reports in his Dialogues. Yea, the Apostles might seem to be combred
with this error, saying: when they saw Christ upon the water, it is a Spirit.
Act. 12.15.
And when Peter knocked at John Marks mothers door, they said to Rhoda the
maid, it is his Angel. This had they of the vulgar opinion, received from
Pithagoras, teaching the souls of men to return into the bodies of others,
either for correction or reward. And thus (deluded) Herod hearing of Christ,
supposed John Baptist to be risen again, Mat. 14.1. Mar. 6.14 Luc. 9.7.
whom he had beheaded. And the better sort of the people dreamed Christ to be
Helias, John Baptist, Jeremy, or some of the Prophets, all which we see were
most untrue. But as touching the departure of the soul, once separated from
the body, that it returns not, or can possibly into the world, the story of
Lazarus does affirm. Dives desires that Lazarus might come to help his
tongue, Luc. 16.
but it is denied that they which be in joy, can come to the Helles. He then
desires that the soul of Lazarus may go to his brethren that are in the
earth, and may teach them to beware, but he receives this answer. They which
be here cannot come hence, and they which be there cannot come thence. And they
have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, and if they will not hear
them, neither will they believe though one should (which is impossible before
judgment) come from death again. Esa. 8.19.20. Deuteronomy. 18.
The Prophets do forbid us to ask counsel of the dead, and God likewise in
the law, and here Abraham does send us to the Prophets and to Moses books
for our instruction, denying most constantly that any souls of the dead shall
walk again, to teach or terrify us: All they which depart this life, be
either godly or wicked. If they be godly, then are they by imputation just, and
the souls of the just, Sapi. 3.
are in the hands of God. And godly Lazarus cannot be permitted (no not to do
much good) to come from Abraham's bosom. But if they be wicked, they lie in the
Hels like sheep, and thence cannot Dives or his fellows come, though heaven
and earth should run together. But thou will say, what shall we say to this,
there is much iumblyng in such a house, and there is seen lively such a man
walk before us, Chrisost. hom. 29.
whom we cannot but say to be our friend departed to all our senses
judgment? To this I answer with Chrysostom upon S. Matthew. What shall we
say to those voices says he, which say I am the soul of such a man? The
Devil, not the soul of the dead it is, that after buryall walks to deceive
men.
Say it is not the soul of the dead man, but it is the Devil, which does
feign these things to deceive the hearers thereby. These are says he, old
wives Fables and fryuolous tales. The souls of the righteous are in the hands
of God, and souls of Infants, etc. But the souls of sinners are straight
way, after their departure, called to their place, as plainly appears
(says this father) by Lazarus the righteous, and the wicked rich man. Lo,
this is no new doctrine, by us devised, but an old truth by the Fathers
concluded, through the warrante of Gods word, that the souls of men departed,
be placed presently at the hour of death, out of which place they cannot come
again to men in earth, Whether Samuel apeared to Saul or no.
before the day of judgment. But the Papists seem to press us with the
apparition of Samuel to king Saul, at the cuniuration of the Pythonisse. To
whom we soundly answer, that Samuel appeared not to Saul, but Satan abusing
the king, told him that he was Samuel. But here again they say, see how
these men deny the plain Text of scripture. Does not the holy book of GOD
twice say: 1. Sam. 28. Eccle. 46.
Samuel appeared unto Saul? we acknowledge the scripture to call the Spirit
that apeared, by the name of Samuel. And albeit against the second place as not
Canonical, we may lawfully except, August. quest. 3.
yet we answer with Augustine (ad Simplicianum) the Bishop of Millaine. It was
not says he, the spirit of Samuel raised from his rest, but it was some
fantasy, or imagination of the Devil, which the scripture notwythstanding
calls Samuel, as Images be called after the names of such persons as they do
represent. Who doubts (says this father) to name the Images of the
Philosophers pictured upon the wall, saying: this is Cicero, that is Salust,
and this is Achilles, and this manne is Hector, this is the flood of Simois,
and that is Rome, when these be nothing other, but bare pictures upon a painted
wall. No marvel therefore though the writer of the sacred Stories says he,
call this Image of Samuel, by the name he represented, or that the Devil could
transfigure himself to the shape of a holy man, which has power also to
turn himself into an Angel of light. But Turtullian says. Absit vt animam
cuiuslibet sancti, etc. God forbid that we should believe the Devil to have
power to call up any soul of the saints of God, much less of his holy
Prophets, for we are taught, that Satan does transform himself into an Angel
of light, with what ease then into the shape of a man of light, so he
calls Samuel, because he is a member of Christ the true light of the world,
yea he does says he, affirm himself to be God, and works great and
prodigious things, if it were possibly thereby, to seduce the elect people of
God. That learned father Peter Martyr says, that Samuel apeared not to Saul,
but it was an imagined shape, which by the delusion of Satan, was brought unto
Saul, and as we call it a Ghost, and he gives probable reasons to approve
his assertion. Diverse reasons proouing Samuel not to appear to Saul.
First sith the case so stood with Saul, that God would neither answer him
(being often provoked) either by Oracle, by Prophet, or yet by the Priest, it
is to be denied, that he would appear to him by the dead, especially
considering himself in his most holy just law, to have forbidden the same in
these words. Let none be found among you, Deuteronomy. 18.10.
that makes his son or his daughter to go through the fire (betwixt two
fyres, by a superstitious ceremony thereby to be purged) or that uses
Wytchcraft, or a regarder of times, Popish purgatory and her priests, build all
upon the report of the dead, as their Fryrie books declare, wherefore
accursed for abominations.
or a marker of the flying of Fowls, or a Sorcerer, or a Charmer, or that
counsels with spirits, or a Southsayer, or that asks counsel at the
dead. For all that do such things are an abomination to the Lord, and because
of these abominations, the lord does cast them out before thee. Secondly, this
must be done either by the will of God, or by force of Magical Art. This was
not the will of God, for his written will does prohibet the same, and Satan's
Art cannot have power against the will of God. Thirdly, if this Spectrum were
Samuel, then did he appear either wyllingly, or by force, he could not come
to Saul wyllingly, for the hearts and obedience of the saints of God alive and
dead, do concur with the will of him their father. But in this apparision,
the Prophet should have yielded to satan, against Gods will, but to say he
came against his will, is more then wicked: nay to say he came at al, is
pestiferous, when Abraham affirms constantly, that neither Heaven, or the
place of Torture, can yield from them the souls of the departed. To conclude,
this matter of Samuel, your unholy law of your like holy father, does refell
this opinion, as a fantasy of no reputation. It was not says this Decree,
Samuel that apeared to Saul, but the Devil, Decret. pontif. 26. que. 5. cap.
and he says it is an absurd and unworthy matter to hold, that so holy a man from his nativity, could by Deuillish art be drawn to so wicked a man
as Saul was. But this was says the Decree, the fallacies of satan, hereby
compelling men to dream, that he had power as well of the holy men's souls as
of the wicked. Thus by the scripture of God, by the testimony of godly
Fathers, by probable reasons, and lastly (O Papist) by the Popes Decree, thou
do see how this was not Samuel, but the delusion of satan, and is called
in the storye Samuel, respecting thereby the mind of Saul, supposing this
Spectrum to be Samuel. And as the golden Mice and Emraldes, 2. Sam. 6.4.5.
which the Philistines laid in the Arc of wytnes, are called Mice and
Emraldes, and yet are but the shape and Figures of them, made by the art of
the Philistines cunning. Even so the shape of Samuel set before Saul, by the
deceytfull art of the Pythonisse (because he stood for Samuel) is so called in
the holy story. To this I could add further proof and authority, but I
suppose this sufficient to a godly minded man, and also further testimony of
Fathers, to deny that any soul of man walks in this world after the hour of
death. Athanasius an old learned and godly Father says, Atha. li. de ques. 9.
13.
that the wisdom of God will not permit the souls to return before the
judgment day into this world, least by such means the Devil should take
upon him man's shape, and should (into the form of dead men being transformed)
say he were the soul of such a one raised from death, and by such deceyte,
should teach many lies and false opinions, to the destruction of the Church.
Augustine says, that if the souls of the dead could walk with men in earth,
his godly mother Monica, Aug. de cura pro mor. ca. 13 Illirius Cent. 2.
who trauayled from Sea to land to be with him, would never now after her
death be absent from him. No truly the souls of dead men cannot walk in this
world. For presently at the hour of death, as the old Father Ireneus also
says, they are placed, the godly in joy, the wicked in perpetual pain. But
the Papists object yet against this truth, and say, that this Samuel did
foretell to Saul, what should become of him in that battle, and that he and
his children should be slain, and Saul himself should be with this Samuel.
These things say they, the Devil could not tell, for the Devil knows not
things to come, it must therefore of necessity be the true Prophet Samuel,
which being the Lords Prophet, could therefore foretell of these things. But
all this is easily answered: This objection stands upon trembling props, as
thus: The Devil foreknoweth not things to come, but this knew before hand,
that Saul should in the overthrow be slain, therefore was not this the
Devil, which by the Pythonisse was raised. By the same reason may I say this
was not Samuel, Esa. 41.23.
for the holy scriptures do attribute this alone to God, to tell things
before they come to pass, yet for all that, the same place does nothing
derogate, but that the Devil may foreknow, and also declare some things, or
that they come to light. For sometime he receives commission of the Lord, to
plague this Country, Devils do foreknowe many things.
and that person, as the rod of his love or anger, and standing among the
saints of god, he hears the sentence, which had, swiftlye and easily he can
utter, before the execution be done. For the Devils can most speedily as the
wynd, ouerrunne the earth, and therefore by Tertullian they be called Volucres.
But having authority to plague Job, Job. 15.16.17.
could he not have told Job, what should have become of him before he brought
the Caldes, the four wyndes, the fire, and death to his children, and
sickness to himself? yes verily, sent to be the lying spirit in the mouth
of Achabs false Prophets, with this warrant, 1. Reg. 22.21.23. etc.
that he should prevail, was it not in his skyll to utter Achabs destruction,
as Micha did, before it came to pass? yes certainly. But the Lord will not
use the person of the Devil to be his Prophet, and therefore his deuyne spirit
spoke in the mouth of his holy afflicted servant Micha. So no doubt did he
know Gods counsel uttered touching Saul, whose end the Lord had determined
to be at this time perfected? and therefore of the Pythonisse demanded, gives
answer thereby, to bring Saul into greater desperation, which was Satan's
glory. Further, the infernal spirits be also called (...), which name some of
the old fathers (as Tertullian, Lactantius and others) affirm them to have
asciendo, of knowing much. But does Demon the Devil know of his own present
knowledge things to come? No, for that is proper only to God, who
comprehends all times, all men, all things, and their whole actions, now and
to the worlds end, in his present eye and skyll. They are to him as present
as though they were now done before our eyes. All things are open and naked
before his Majesty. 1. Cor. 12.2
This knowledge of the Devil therefore, is of an other inferior sort, and yet
not all after one manner. To men in earth is given by skyll some foreknowledge
of things to come. As first they consider the causes, and so certainly judge of
the effects to follow. Some causes necessarily draw their effects, some by
interception of occurrent matter are cut of, so that the effect can in no wise
follow. The causes drawing their effects, give men their warrant to foretell
of that to come, whose cause cannot but bring the same. So the expert
Astronomian, by his skyll in art Mathematical, and seeing the conjunctions
and oppositions of the celestial parts, can and do many years before, for mo
then many after to come, truly and euydently foretell of the Sun, and
several Eclypse is of the Moon, al which in truth and deed shall follow and
come to pass. The other are not of like certainety, and yet do men not doubt
to judge by them, for that the causes contynuing, the effect must needs
follow, but the cause cut off, the effect is taken away. As for example, that
man is a contynuall prodigal person, a common dronkarde, and a great
whoremonger. If these causes continue in him, it is of necessity, that beggary
shall be his best end. So do the Sea men by the maiden heirs also (so they call
the little disperpled clouds, whose ends return vpwardes, much like unto
our Gentles frysled heads, in these monstrous days, a token no doubt of
sudden storms to come) presently deem of a tempest to arise. The Physician
by the prognostication of the pulse, does foresee the euente of his pacient in
his weakness, and such like. But if this knowledge be granted to be in wise
and cunning learned men, much more is it to be granted to infernal Spirits,
which are not dulled by the gross humors of men's nature. Add to this their
ancient experience in matters, their causes and effects done and come to pass
in the world, since the beginning of the same, all which they have in perfect
memory. And if experience of passed things, do cause old fathers warely to
wait the success of like matters to come, and are preferred before the green
head for wisdom: how shall we not be forced to yield, as much and more to
the Devil, whose days are before accountes (and yet not without time) and
memory passing ripe? Moreover, they have a substance swift as the wind, and
before the Swallow, Deuilles swift as the wind.
can flee the circuit of the earth, and what is done this day in the
extremity of the East, can hereby declare it speedily after in the Weast.
Further, they are placed in the heavenly air, Ephe. 6.12
as in a most high Turret of watch, whence they may behold the actions of men
a far of, and declare the same instantly, as it were by prophecy. And once to
make an end hereof: I say, they see the prophetical scriptures, and by their
skyll in them admeasure the acts of the Church, through which knowledge they
become very ripe runners in things to come. Yet notwithstanding, The Devil
deceived.
they are often deceived, and most of all deceive those which rest upon their
answers. For the Lord does in his, change the hearts, and so the acts of men,
from yt they were, by which Satan's foreiudgement is prevented, of sorrowful
event to follow: yea, and often times in the twinkling of an eye, he stops
the causes, and their effects. As who would not have said when the three
children were cast into the burning oven, Dan. 13.
that they should have perished by fire, but even there and then began first
the best argument of there long life, where and when the Angel, even the son
of God was sent to stop the cause and cool the flames, and in the mydst of
them to preserve his servants, and their clothes from hurt by flame or smell
of smoke. But this could not the Devil foresee. Again, God in his divine
wisdom does suffer and appoint the bodies of his saints to be consumed to
ashes in the fire, and to death in other extreme persecutions, so as Satan by
this means is most often blinded, and knows not what to say. They are
deceived also many times, partly for that they know not the will of God,
further then it is made known to them, partly for that they cannot deeply
enter into the hearts of men. For that is only proper to God, to be the sercher
of the heart and raynes. Ier. 17.
And many times they do deceive by ambition their worshyppers, in cause they
would seem ignorant in nothing. But to rely upon our answer to this
objection, that the Devil cannot foreknow. Thou see (gentle Reader) what
has been laid before thine eyes herein, and thereby may perceive that he is
not altogether bereaved of foreknowledge, but many ways enabled too in some
sorts, and by degrees therein. And touching Saul's case, Satan knew very well
by that was in proof practiced, how the matter stood between the Jews and
the Palistins, he saw the Israelits army weak and half discomfited, he saw
that Samuel had prophesied Saul's deprivation, and that Samuel had anointed
David in his succeeding place, and therefore he concluded Saul to be with him
the morrow after. But Saul he killed himself, Ioh. 8.
and so became the son of his father Satan, which is a liar and a murderer
from the beginning, and expresses himself herein, to be both at once. A liar
in that he says he is Samuel, and is not, but the false deceyuer Satanas: a
murderer in that kylleth the soul of Saul, by feeding his fantasy in that
abomination, which is forbidden by the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18.
namely that any should ask counsel at the dead. And so have we I trust
sufficiently answered that scruple, whether the Devil can predicere, foretell
of things to come. No necessity therefore that this Spectrum should be Samuel,
when as so plain proof is, that Satan does know much, and can also in sundry
ways foretell (which to the ignorante seems prophecy) of matters hereafter
to be performed. This known, the second prop (to say yt of necessity this was
Gods Prophet Samuel) falls of himself down to the dust. Neither did the
Prophets of God at any time prophecy, till they had received from the Lord
his good pleasure, wherefore they always say. Haec dicit Dominus. Thus says
the Lord. Or is the Lord so scanted of Prophets, or prone to consent to the
wickeds desire, that from the dead he will and must call up his departed
servants. Nay both of these is denied, in that story of Dives and Lazarus. Luc.
16. Esa. 8.19.20.
They that live, are denied of the appearing of the dead, and for enstructions
they are sent to the law, and prophetical books of Gods holy scriptures. To
determine this disputation, the Prophets, saints and servants of God, refuse to
take divine worship given unto them. Apoc. 19.10. Act. 10.16 14.4.
But this Spectrum did take it, and reprooueth not the same, an absolute
conclusion, that it was the spirit of Satan, and not the Prophet of the Lord
Samuel, who rightly said, that Saul in soul should be with him on the
morrow, which is the place of all abject Murderers, which from true religion
fall to his opposite, Hebr. 6.4
Idolatry (as says the Apostle.) It is impossible that they which were once
lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of
the holy ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God and of the powers of
the world to come, if they fall away, should be renewed by repentance,
seeing they crucify again to themselves the son of God, and make a mock of
him, And an other place. Hebr. 10.26.
If we sin wyllingly, after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for syns, but a fearful looking for of
judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour the adversaries.

Apo. 14.3.
To return to our holy Symeon, he says he shall now depart in peace, for why?
as saint John says. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord (or for the
Lords cause) even so says the spirit, for they rest from their labors, and
their works (that is Gods merciful reward) follow them. In this sentence, all
fear of death to Symeon, and trembling at the Popish Purgatory, Three perfect
consolations against the pretensed Purgatory.
is taken away from the children of God, and that by three most assured
affirmations. First he says (...), which imports by and by, presently, no
delay or interception, but even from the very instant of death, and the last
gasp, as Christ also has promised the godly (though in themselves sinners)
shall pass from death to life. Secondly, to assure us hereof, he says, the
Spirit of God says so, which cannot lie or be deceived. Thirdly he says, we
thenceforth rest from our labors. Now the labors of the godly, are afflictions
of mind and body, sorrows, pains, torments and terror of conscience, and such
like. But from all these at the hour of death, the sons of God in Christ,
ending their life, do take their quiet rest. Therefore Purgatory, which is
said to consist most of these labors, cannot touch those or any of them,
which are else purged in the only Purgatory to a christian soul or body. Heb.
9.14 1. Ioh. 1.7. 1. Pet. 1.19. Revel. 1.5.
Namely the blood of Jesus Christ once shed upon the cross, by the which he
has in his own person, purged our souls from all sins, and not in a popish
Purgatory, of an imagined fire, which is no other but the Hels, whose nature is
ever to burn, and to tormente: but never to purge those that be thither
condemned. This Christ was Symeons purgation and consolation, peace and glory,
in whom, and to whom, all that believe in him aright, shall to him with Symeon
at the hour of death, depart in most comfortable and quiet resting peace.

Some read this place thus. The godly fear not, but rather desire at Gods
will to end this life.
Lord now let thy seruante depart in peace, etc. As if hereby he had made
peticion to the Lord, to end these days of sin in his body, and to take
his life from him, which reading is not without profitable doctrine. For it
teaches us, that after Christ the Lord is once faithfully embraced of us in
heart that be godly: Ephe. 1.18.
there remains no joy to that earnest meditation of the heavenly life, which
enflameth love, to hunger the day of dissolution, and with Paul to say: I
covet to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. And for our enstruction, there
be in this reading, three things to us not improfitable. First, that the elect
of God fear not death, as do the wicked, whose consciences accuse them given
to condemnation: but they at the Lords leisure desire it, because they know, 2.
Cor. 5.1.
if that they were delivered from this earthly tabernacle, they should be
possessed of the heavenly with Christ. And here let no man object unto me, the
fear which was in Christ against death, from which he prayed three times in
the Garden to be delivered: For we deny it not, Mat. 26.37. Mar. 14.35. etc.
Luc. 22.42. etc. Hebr. 2.18
but to man's nature death is yrkesome, and our Christ herein does verily teach
us, that he is of our nature, a natural man with us, tasting our infyrmities,
that he might have the more compassion of us his members. And ye which most is,
the Lord Jesus had not to fight against natural death only, but he was to
sustain and fully bear in his body, the syns of the whole world, and for
them he was to feel in his soul and body, the whole wrath of God the father,
for the chasticement of our peace, Esa. 53.
was by his father fullye laid upon him. Wherefore if that thou being one of
the causes of this terror (having earnest consideration of thy horrible sins
and) do lift up thine eyes to God, lookeing upon him without Christ, as
thine angry judge (which who can abide) cannot but be eaten up of all sorrow
into despair: Psa. 130.3.
How greatly our savior Christ then was caused (which had the burden of the
whole world of sin laid upon him) to pray for delyuerance to his fathers
will, thou may by thy self give sentence. Yet was he not afraid to dye, as
the wicked are which have no hope, but assured of his resurrection, he says in
joy of heart and peace of conscience: Math. 26.39.42. John. 17.2
Father thy will be done. And again, he desires death, Venit hora glorifica
filium. Father the hour is come, glorifye thy son (that is to say by death)
that thy son may glorify thee in his resurrection. Take not this for an
object to thy duty, in desire to be cut from the days of sin (or desire to
be with Christ) which is a sign of infidelity, (Christ having by his
suffering slain sin, hell, and death to, and for thee) but remember and
learn hereby, how horrible a thing it is to fall into the hands of ye living
God by sin, which sin wrought in Christ such terror, and that because he
took the pains due to all sin upon his person on the Cross, thereby to
become our ransom and mediator) as being a very natural man, as he is truly
God, sweat in the agony of his soul, Luke. 22.44.
before his body was apprehended, bloody drops. O sin most horrible. And be
assured, that if by infydelitie, popery, and carnal trace, thou crucifye a
fresh the Lord of life, this horror shall not profit thee, but thus treading
under foot his death most auayleable and glorious: Thou shall dye a death
immortal and ignominious: But the hearts of the regenerate sons of God
fear not death, because they are assured by his spirit to live with Christ.
This is the cause why so many Martyrs wyllingly give their bodies to the fire,
and other deaths terrible to the flesh, Phil. 1.29.
because his spirit which makes them on this wise to confess his holy name,
goes with them through the midst of the flames, and corroborateth their hearts
most constantly to wade through the valley of this shadow of death by faith
in him. Secondly, the children of God, Hebr. 12.
for the most part, are so far from fearing natural death, that they
desire and covet the same, as the last remedy against the enemy Satan, 1. Cor.
15.26. Romans 7. Ephe. 1.14 Luke 21.28 Romans 8.23
as the day of delyuerie from the body of sin, and lastly as the door of
entrance, into their eternal redemption by Christ. The wicked we grant to
hunger for death many times, but it is not to shut up the shop of sin: but by
that mean to end the days of their deserved shame. And hereof come so many
murderers, Judas children, which ashamed to live, being charged with a most
guyltie conscience, do hang, drown, or cut their own throats, which is the
force of Satan in them, as thereby beginning their endless sorrows, but in
the godly there is this mature moderation: for as they most hartilye with Paul
desire to be dissolved: So they submit themselves most humbly to his word of
decree, Phi. 1.21.22.23. etc.
in their appointed course, regarding the place they have, and the office they
bear, wherein their life God will use longer then their desire, to the profit
of those to whom he has given them, for his honorable instruments to the
benefit of his beloved Church. Wherefore they restrain their peticions in
Symeons line thus. O Lord when it pleases thee, according to thy word, for
my days are thereby numbered, which I shall not pass. Note here that no Papist
in the perswation of Popery, can say unto his soul: Now shall I depart in
peace according to thy word. No Papist in Popery can dye in peace.
For neither has Popery, or any part thereof warrant thence, or does that
profession work peace in the conscience of his pacient at the hour of death,
but far the contrary. For if when Satan feeds their ignorant humors, and
with pleasure draws them to ye profession, they never therein can find sure
foot of stay, to quiet their minds for sin: How shall they thereby feel
that necessary bulwark, and Ancor of health, at the instant of natures
farewell, when that subtle Serpent does now no longer dally, but draw them
into despair? showing them the multitude of their sins, their security in
evil, their ignorance in God, their doubt of his favor (which is an (...) in
Popery) his severe justice, and their forlorn estate? Then ask they, by what
means shall I pass his judgment? By Masses says one, by the Popes pardon
says an other, by the merits of the saints says the third. But then does
Satan sharply fight against the wounded conscience, and opens the truth, as
thereby further to pierce his conscience to death, and enforcing to his heart,
these things cannot help thee, thy trust is vain in them. Against which
temptation, what help in Popery? They are feign to cry, this is thy help even
Jesus Christ, but then his comfort is cut short, in that they pull his
meditation from the Lord crucified, and lay on bed before him a brazen
Crucifixe. They tell him that his friends shall pray for him, and the Church
shall be plied with Trentals, to deliver him from Purgatory, which doctrine is
most troublesome, and so the poor Papist, for all that Popery can do, dies
thereby most doubtful of rest, if not most fearful of eternal pain.
Consider this well, there is not the best treasure in Popery, that does
warrante thee peace in death. If the death of Christ be not sufficient hereto
(so say they most blasphemously) where then shall we have it? in the Mass. No,
for then would that sacrifice sometime cease: But so long as the world
endures, even so long will they (if God overthrow not their seat) continue
that dead sacrifice, for the dead soul, in whose cause it is daily song or
said. Does not this argue a doubt of valor in the Mass? And also of the peace
of the soul, for whom it is called Requiem? Is not this true? Can this work
peace in the heart, Popery yields no quiet, to man's conscience.
when the best account made, at the foot thereof, he fyndeth an arrearege,
which his soul is to answer in burning fire, and flaming brimstone, in a
Purgatory of pain, whence he cannot by all the cunning of Popish art, know
when or how to be delivered? Small quiet in conscience to a poor Papist, which
sees no remedy, but that he must from life to death, from earthly troubles,
to hellish pains, without intermission to be boiled in lead, and imprisoned by
Devils in pains incurable. O poor heart be wise in God, embrace his word,
believe in his Christ, walk in his statutes by the grace of his spirit, so
shall thou be assured that the popish Purgatory is Hell, from whence no man can
be delivered. So shall all terror of death be drawn from thee, Luc. 16.16
Ephe. 1.13.14. 1. Ioh. 5.10 Romans 8.1.
for his holy spirit shall seal thee up to redemption, and the witness shall
be within thee, against Sin, Satan, Pope and Hell, that no condemnation can
come to thee, which by faith art ingraffed into Christ, whose life is not to
walk after the wicked flesh, but after Gods holy spirit, guyding thy soul
and body into true righteousness and sanctification, during thy natural life.
By this rule only shall thou obtain peace, but to the wicked says the
Prophet (vz to the Papist living and dying in Popery) there shall be no peace.
Esa. 48.22
What is become of our forefathers in Popry.
Are they all condemned? No, God forbid. When Achab and Iesabell had ouerrunne
all Israel with Idolatry, so that Helias supposed himself only to stand for
the cause of God, 3. Reg. 19.
the Lord answered that he had reserved seven thousand, that is to say a
great multitude in every part of Israel, which did not bow the knee to Baal.
Nero was a most cruel persecutor of Christ's Church, and yet saint Paul
witnesses Jesus the Lord, Phil. 4.22
to have his Church even in his persecuting Court. But ye will say, these
were drawn by preaching of the word, but in Popery the word is kept hydden
from the people: It is so. Yet we doubt not, but as at the last hour, the
spirit of God lightened the heart of the thief upon the Cross, Luck. 23.40.
Ezech. 18. Ephesians. 1.4.5 Ioh. 1.9. 1. Tim. 2.4. Ephesians. 1.18. Heb. 1.3.
so that in yielding to death, he saw Christ only to be his life: So the same
most loving father, who wylleth not the death of a sinner: has even in the
hour of death, and in all the days of Popery, turned the hearts of as many,
as were predestinate before all times, in Christ to live eternally. And that
our Christ which lighteneth all men that come into the world, and would have
all men (that is to say of every country, nation people, and families some) to
be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth: Has also illuminated the
hearts of all those, whom the father has by his spirit drawn out of the
Dungeon of Papistrie, to this brightness of his glory, whereby they have with
the eyes of their faith, seen this Jesus Christ, to be the only salvation of
Jew, Turk, Pagan, Papist, and Gentyle, and consequently have in heart felt
him for theirs, to their great and synguler consolation. After which sight
they have in the integrity of their souls, 1. Cor. 3.12 Phil. 3.8.
accounted all the hey, timber, stubble and Popish stuff, as fylthie doung,
and patiently abode the pain of death for their former ignorance, and rest in
hope of eternal peace, and in the assurance of his spirit, that their sins
in his blood are washed away. They are persuaded, that death is to them life,
in cause whereof, they have in Christ banished that fear which brings
paynefulnesse, 1. Io. 4.18.
and with Symeon have said. Now Lord let us thy servants depart in peace: for
the eyes of our mind, now in the agony of our soul (has through the day
spring which from an high has visited us) perfitly seen the Lord thy Christ
to be our saving health, ^uc. 1.78.
in whom we depart to thee, who never before this hour, in these days of
ignorance could attain to this grace. But now Lord receive us in peace,
through Christ our lord our God of peace, and the same to all his chosen
children. The prouydence of God in time of Popery, feeds this our sentence of
the forefathers, thus blessed in the days of ignorance. In that he conserved,
and during those times continued among men, the Symbol of our faith, which
very many at their death have constantly repeated, and by open declaration,
have affirmed, in that faith to end their life. But this Symbol preaches
only the glorious faith in God the Father, God the son, and God the holy
Ghost, In Popery no salvation
wherefore I conclude, that many of our forefathers were in the days of Popery
saved by faith alone in Christ, and that by Popery, no man may or can be saved.
For the whole course of the Romish Religion, is to disperce, Mat. 12.30
and not to gather together the saints of God, to the unity of faith and
knowledge in the son of GOD, but to hayle to the faith of Rome (which makes
as many Saviors, as the sun (shyning) gives shadows) which can in no case
permit a man, either to rest alone in the death of Christ, or to assure
himself of salvation in him. But to attain life, Popish Treasures.
the Papists must fetch the treasures of the Church of Rome, part whereof is
the blood of Martyrs, though some of them be notable Traitors. It is to plain,
that they make such, not Mediators only, but Saviors also from sin. Who can
forget this solemn Anthemne to that Traitor Thomas Becket, sometimes Bishop of
Caunterbury, which the Popes Portuse, and all laten Primers have farsed in
them, for men in prayer to use? In the Popish Primers.
Tu per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te impendit, fac nos Christ scandere quo
Thomas ascendit. That is: grant us Christ by the virtue of saint Thomas his
blood, which he shed for thee, to ascend whether Thomas is gone, where note
that Christ has but that office, which else they give to Peter: Namely to be
the door keeper, and to admit those souls into heaven, which claim it by the
blood of Barrabas (I should say Thomas) and they do refuse, because they do
distrust the ransom of Christ, our only way to life. Oh horrible and most
abominable blasphemy. Ioh. 14.6.
But dear Reader. No man can come to the father (says our sufficient Savior)
but by me. And therefore praying for the Papists conversion, if it be Gods
good will, let us as Paul does exhort us, Heb. 12.19
seeing by the blood of Jesus we may be bold to enter into the holy place (into
heaven) by the new and living way, which he has prepared for us through the
veil, that is to say his flesh, and seeing we have an high Priest over the
house of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in assurance of faith,
sprinkled (made pure) in our hearts from an evil conscience, and washed in our
bodies with pure water. Let us keep the profession of our hope, without
wavering, for he is faithful that promised. And let us consider one another,
to provoke unto love, and to good works, not forsaking the fellowship that we
have among our selves, as the manner of some is, but let us exhort one another,
and that so much the more, because ye see the day draws near. Let us expect
his coming and love the Lord, so shall we not fear any perrill of death. And
God grant our English Papists once to see, and be ashamed of their
wylfulnesse to damnation, sleeping in the bed of the whore of Babylon, Revel.
18.
which is prepared to desolation and perpetual fire, And to embrace his
Gospel, which is the only joy of soul and solace in death, ^^t. 3.17.
the path to life in that Savior, in whom God the father is only pacifyed.

The second note is, that the godly are so far from fearing natural death,
that on the contrary part, they humbly many times at the hand of God, can
earnestly pray for it, and wyshe it: yea, and eaten up of grief for the days
of sin, they lament that they are not disburdened of the body thereof.
Finally, in desire of the full accomplishment of the body of Christ, that the
same his Church might be thoroughly glorified, in heaven (as she is in part) and
in earth perfitly sanctified. The saints in this life, pray for the
dissolution of the world, and Christ to come with speed to judgment. For the
first Paul prays thus: I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, and
our Symeon here. Lord now let thy servant depart in peace. Secondly, in the
seventh to the Romans, Paul cries out of sin, lamenting and saying: O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death, that
is, from this lump of fleshly sin and death. Where note (gentle Christian)
that the saints of God are subject to the miseries of sin, but so as with
grief and anguishe of heart, they carry that lump of death. Yet they in
pacient mortification, by his holy spirit, wait his time set for their
delyuerie, and earnestly desire the same. Note also the right end of this
peticion, which by the wicked and desperate is abused: A due respect in the
desire of natural death.
The godless cumbred with piercing sting of conscience, ashamed of their
state, and looking for his heavy judgment, do also desire and cry for death.
So do the poor ignorante persons, which in prison, in Gallyes, or Iayles, and
pyning in pain. The poor oppressed: the needy which cannot have to satisfy
the hungry, and cry of their children, and selves: the sick pacient, which
long has lain of an incurable disease. These and such like desire death, but
it is not to the right end, for which it should be desired. They only have
respect to the present pain or shame, and to fynish that, they do not only
desire, but the wicked desperate persons, in despite of God his holy law, and
instinct of Nature, do with the pernicious knyfe of perpetual pain, bereave
for a time, the sorrows of this sinful corpse. But such desperate death, is
the purchase of Hell with Judas, Achitophel, king Saul, and such others. Now
the true and lively end of this peticion in the elect of God is. That least
they should by to much acquaintance with finne and death, become resty in the
bed of her delight, and so be slain, Sap. 4.11.12.
sleeping with Holophernes, in dronken pleasures of the flesh (the same daily
more and more assaulting them) they do pray for death, as for the last remedy
and perfect victory, against sin and Satan. Yet so as I say, still they do
by faith in hope suppress the dolorous grief of sin in life, with the
continual meditation of the inward joys received by grace in Christ, and
therein solace themselves, as with the earnest penny of their Fathers
possession, which they are assured of, when the Lord in mercy shall call them
to himself by death. Till when, they punish this body of sin, least it
should prove to lusty, 1. Tim. 5.23.
but they nurrish nature weakened, that she may the sooner and the better yield
the office, which their several callings do require. And this is the heavenly
end of our desire to die, that so we may receive to our selves that life,
which now is treasured up for us with GOD in Christ, which is our only life.
Col. 3.1.2.


And thirdly, the love and longing desire, which in the saints is apparent,
for the whole and perfect joy of the Church, the Apostle S. John manifests
in these words: O Lord come quickly, Apo. 22.17.
which there is approved by the Lord, who to the comfort of his Church,
seals up this prayer with Amen. Saying: So be it, Behold I come quickly.
Amen. Lord perfect us in thee, and shortly end these days of sin, for thy
holy names sake Lord Jesus, and give us, that truly call upon thee, thy
eternal glory. Amen.

Last of all, when Symeon says: Lord now let thy servant depart in peace, he
does teach us to abhor all troublesome and murtherous kind of death. And
does convince all those guyltie of this precept (Thou shall not kill) which in
any manner have slain themselves for any cause. Symeon abhors al troublesome
and murdering deaths.
And does forewarne the Church of God, to fly such damnable enterprises, which
are no other, but the persuasions of Satan, and the act herein is the obsequie
of his deadly will. Though Symeon desire to dye, and that death is to him
comfortable, in that he has seen in body and soul, the Savior of the
world, come now in flesh to save his Church by the ransom of his blood,
(which faith only makes death desired in heart) yet will he not shorten his
life by sudden cruelty, to be a Felondese: But he will dye as has ordained
the will of God: And therefore he adds, according to thy word. What shall we
then say to them, which else have their great commendation, in that to avoid,
some the days of tyranny, some other the sight of Gods church persecuted, or
to avoid the purpose of synful persons, or the infamy of sin, or thereby
thinking to glorifye God, have from the consistory of the heart, given
commission and commandment, to the violent hand, to cut in sunder soul and
body, by murdering stroke of merciles arm? Truly I say, that neither Cato,
Razias, Lucretia, Curtius, or his like, are sure warrants to thee, or yet the
Donatists, which to bring the Christian Bishops into contempt, would offer to
kill themselves rather, then to provoke the Emperors sword against them,
which they spoke to win more ease, when the godly Bishops craved his aid
against their pernicious pollution, and yet would they be accounted (...). Cato
in kylling himself thought to be rid of Caesar's tyranny, by which means he
offered himself to Satan's bondage: yea, he conuinceth himself of folly, when
he exhorts his son to obey and seek the peace of Caesar, from whom he ran
by murdering death. If it were good and a wise part for his son, to obtain
the Princes favor, why not for the father also? His impacience which could not
suffer himself to live a bearing subject, was a thousand parts worse then the
Tyrants cruelty. But thou which fear God have another rule, if the Prince
be never so cruel, thou art commanded to pray for him, that thou may live a
quiet, godly, and honest life, 1. Tim. 2.12.
which thing says Paul in that place, is good and acceptable. What? to kill
himself from Nero his tyranny, being a persecuted christian? No, but that God
will under his Regiment, give thee at length a quiet life. For the same cause
Jeremy sends by Baruck, Baruk. 1.11.12.
exhortations to the afflicted Jews in captivity, under Nabuchadnezar, that
they should pray for his life, Persecuting Princes must be prayed for: How
much more ought we to call upon God for such as profess his Gospel.
that they might also live quyetly under him. And the Apostles do arm us to
patience, and unto forbearing of tyranny, with long suffering, as well by their
own example, as doctrine. But in no ways have they either slain themselves,
to be rid of prisons, Irons, cruel murder or tyranny, but have sought by
all means rather to maintain their life, to do more good therein to the
Church of God, then to hasten their end by violent stroke. For this cause did
Paul exhort Timothy to patience, willing him to suffer adversity, to do the
work of an Evangelist, 2. Tim. 4.5.
and to make his ministry known. He tells him that he is now ready to be
offered to dye for Christ, but he fears it not, or will preuente Nero his
cruelty, by his own hand, but will live till the day of his dissolution,
which the Lord has set for him, rejoicing in that such tyranny shall speed
him to that crown, which is laid up for him at the end of his lawful fight,
2. Tim. 4.8.
and fynished course. And the same reward he assures al other with him, which
love the appearing of Jesus Christ. He also is glad of that natural life
wherein, though under the most fierce Lion, (so he called Nero for his cruel
tyranny) he may yet more profit the Church by the preaching of his word. And
when the Iaylor at Philippos, awaking out of sleep, saw the prison doors open
(wherein Paul and Sylas were fast in the inner prison chayned, and straightly
committed to his charge) drew his sword, Act. 16.^7
and would have killed himself (adiudging it better to dye at once, then by
many torments of the cruel Romans, to be tormented to death, for the escape of
his prisoners, which he supposed to be fled) Paul cried unto him, do thy
self no harm, for we are all here. Note well: when as by this means (the
Iayler slain) Paul and Sylas might the better have fled, yet had they rather
abide in the Prison still, and afreshe to enter into the Iron Gyues, then they
by silence would seem to approve this wicked act, that the Iayler for fear
of the Princes power should murder himself. By which suffering, both the
Iaylors life was saved, Satan banished, the Iaylor and his household baptized,
and the Apostles the next day delivered. This miracle that the earthquake
came, the prison doors opened, their Irons loosed, and the gate set free,
seems rather for the life and conversion of the Iaylor, then for the
delyuerie of the Apostles. See then by how great a miracle, God does command
to subject our selves to the yoke of great tyranny to conserve life. Wherein we
shall be more profitable to the Church, then we can by death avail her. And
also to avoid Cato his rigor, The godly for the preservation of life, may
crave aid of an Heathen Magistrate.
and in pain to preserve our selves: yea, and at the hands of such power, to
ask aid for the preservation of our life, to his glory, and the Churches
profit (which ever ought to be the end of such desire) if we see that
unlawful might would depryue us thereof, rather then by any means to suffer
the pryuate hand, to spoil the public Church, and christian common wealth,
of a faithful and profitable member, in and of the same: Thus did Paul
imprisoned at Jerusalem, when the high Priests and Counsel had consented to
the conspiracy of those forty men, Act. 23.14
which had made a vow, not to eat or drink, till they had slain Paul, when
the Captain should bring him forth on the morrow to the Counsel: Lo, then
Paul admonished hereof, prays aid at the Roman power (which now had him in
prison) to co^serue his life, from ye murdering hand of these men, because
that was forbidden in this. Thou shall not kill. O dear brethren, be well
instructed in this point. No cruelty, tyranny, or Popish oppression is cause
sufficient for us, to become with them most cruel to our selves. We are
commanded by Christ, if they persecute us to flee: Mat. 10.23. Hebr. 12.1.
if arrested by authority, constantly to endure the cross. And it becomes
us with patience to run the race that is set before us. We may not cut it
shorter by private and monstrous death, looking (says the Apostle) unto
Jesus, the author and fynisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right
hand of God. Consider (says he) therefore him that endured such speaking
against of sinners, lest ye should be wearyed and faynte in your minds. Ye have
not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin. Lo, the holy ghost is not
glorified by kylling of our selves, least we should be compelled to Idolatry.
But in that we resist sin, until our blood be taken from us by the tyrannous
power of bloody sentence. And if saint Peter will not have us to suffer as
murderers, 1. Pet. 4.15
much less would the spirit of God in him, Why in part no christian ought to
shorten his time.
that we should by kylling our selves be murderers in deed, which is most
horrible and absurd, and flat opposite to the law of God, in the body of
the Scripture, to the instinct of Nature which hates death, to the church of
GOD, which is the wife of the preserving Christ, and not the slave of the
murderer Satan, and finally against the Prince and common wealth, where the
party dwells, to all whom he is borne to obey in christian duty, Answer to
the objections of Razias, Curtius, Cato, Lucreace.
and not to himself. Dear brother therefore in all extremity foster thy life,
and with patience run that race of time, which God in his mercy to thy
glorious life in Christ has set thee, and be assured that if after his example
thou suffer with him, likewise by his warrant in truth, thou shall reign with
him in eternal peace and felicity. The example of Razias the elder of
Jerusalem, 2. Mar. 14.4.
who first wounded himself, and when he saw it was not to death, cast
himself from the height of his Castle, and yet having life ran to the Rock,
and pulled out his own bowels, and cast them upon the blasphemous Tyran
Nicanor his Soldier, crying upon God and died (and as this because he would
not fall into the hands of his tyranny) this example as it is private, so it
may not tie us to follow it. That frivolous prayer for the dead in the same
Book, which was the private fact of a Captain, because both their acts are to
be condemned (though in this Apocripha ouertly commended) which thing the
story does, either because the author would lessen the crime in the men, or
that the parties supposed their facts lawdable. And the author of these books,
is afraid to stand the judgment of the Canonical scripture in these points,
as apeareth when he makes this peticion, as it were for favorable
construction, in the last chapter of the second book of Machabees, 2. Mac.
15.39.
saying: If I have done well as the story required, it is the thing that I
desired: But if I have spoken slenderly and barely, it is that I could. And
that he has thrust in sundry Schema of his own (of which these two have their
part) it appears to the end he would beautify the story: For thus he says.
As it is hurtefull to drink Wine alone, and then again water, and as Wine and
water mingled together is pleasant and delights the taste: So the setting out
of the matter delights the ears of them that read the storye. But how far
short this is of Gods spirit in the Scriptures, which is not doubtful but
Amen, so be it. Again, how far from the commandment of those words: Thou
shall not kill, is the example of this Razias, be thou judge (indifferent
Reader) thy self, conferring them together. Neither can the excuse by
Augustine and others made, that something was lawful for them which is not for
us, wype this bloody body, when as the same commandment was then, which now
is. Thou shall not kill. As for languyshing Lucrece, I leave her to her
Torquine, whose adultresse she seems, and to her self a murtheresse. But to
us godly and chaste Susanna, is a contrary and christian example. But Curtius
for the love of his country, cast himself into the gaping gulf, by whose
death the earth reclosed: yea, but this was Satan's art, to whom this Noble
and valiant Champion was to serviceable. We are to fight for our Country, and
to spend our lives for our Prince, but in the wars to do our best against
the adversaries, and not to cast our selves desperately to death by Satan's
delusion. But some will say. Did not Christ seeing that no way else mankind
could be saved, most wyllingly give himself to death for man? And so did
Curtius. Yea, but as Christ said, I lay down my life for the people, and take
it to me again. So did he it in most noble order. First, he obeyed his fathers
ordinance herein. A body have thou ordained me: Lo, I am here to do thy will
O God. Secondly, Heb. 10.5.
he nailed not himself on the cross, nor thrust himself to the heart, or
crowned himself with thorn, but quyetly took this cruelty at the
Magistrates hand, which did (manger their hearts) perform that, which the
deuyne counsel had determined. Act. 2.23.
Let Curtius show this order, or like warrante to his case in truth, and you
shall have answer. Sampson freed from self murder.
As for Sampson which pulled the house upon his own person, and all that were
therein. This appears to have warrante from God, as well in that his strength
being taken from him, was at this moment of time restored to him: as also God
did by this judgment, execute his wrath on them, Iud. 16.30 Psalm. 1.1. Heb.
11.32
which were obstinately set in the chair of Scorners. And to conclude, his
acts are warranted to proceed of faith, in the cononicall Epistle to the
Hebrews. Furthermore, Sampson is not to be taken as a private person, but he
was in deed the Lords Magistrate, which office he best executed in the office
of his death, wherein the Lord by his hand, did revenge the blasphemy of the
Philistines and their Idolatry. And did also perfect that curse which by the
Prophet David is given to those, Psalm. 109.
which do afflict them whom the Lord does scurge. This horrible sin is
craving vengeance, vntitl it be powered out, even to the dredges of the Lords
angry cup. Amos. 1.11
Wherefore Amos does threat Edom, for that Israel being exiles, they used them
most cruelly, which God says by the Prophet, he will not leave unpunished.
So did the Philistines to Sampson, whom God had delivered into their hands
for his sin and whoredom: They put out his eyes, and cast him in prison,
and proclayming a Popish feast day to their Mungril God, that Idol Dagon
(which was in form above the Navel like to a man, but from the belly like to
a Fish) they gathered themselves into his Temple, to praise him for their
victory of their enemy Sampson. The house was full of men and women, and there
were all the Princes of the Philistines, and upon the house top were 3000 men,
which looked down into the house to see Sampson play, whom these wicked
Philistines made their jesting Fool. But as David has said: Let his days
be few, and another take his office, Psalm. 109.
for he remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the poor helpless man,
the beggar and the broken hearted, that he might slay him: So came it to pass.
Their days were few, for even the hour of their most triumph, was the moment
of their utter destruction. Sampson prays to the Lord: O Lord Iehoua
remember me. In which words he confesses Gods power, his own sins, and
calls for mercy, as by the same words did the thief upon the cross. Luc.
22.42.
He expresses his faith as well in that he makes prayer to God (for without
faith it is impossible in heart to call upon God) as in ye presently after he
assayeth to do that which he had prayed for. And with the thief he was
received to mercy, and his prayer heard. For his desire was granted him, he
pulled down the house, and so in his death he slew mo persons, then he did
during the days of his natural life. Sampson cannot be charged, says that
godly and learned Martyr. Peter Martyr Iudi. ca. 6.
For he sought not his own death (but by the spirit of God he roycally bente)
he desired and executed herein, the judgment of the Lord against his enemies,
which by this way he knew should come to pass. The Apostles acts and Sampsons
he tyeth together, putting on their persons, saying: If we teach as we have
begun, the Gospel of Christ: without doubt we shall be slain. Well they
continued tho their preaching, they were slain, and yet are not the causes of
their own death. So (says Martyr) Sampson did not rashly cast himself to
death, but faithfully followed his vocation, like as the hearty Soldier,
albeit the Coward say unto him beware, go not, there are arrows, Spears,
Gunnes, and shot innumerable, wherewith ye shall perish. They answer, what
if? We go not to seek death, we go to defend our Country and goods, and to
be revenged of our enemies, to follow our calling: Even so (says he) did
Sampson, and was thereto led by the spirit of God. Ambrose says, that
Sampson herein was the Image of Christ, who as he lived, he much vexed and
wounded the Devil, so by his death he tryumphed against him. The Philistines
he compares with the Jews, and Sampson with Christ as a figure of him. The
Philistines in the victory against Sampson, received their utter ruin and
decay. And the Jews crucifying Christ, cast themselves into eternal
damnation. The end (says Peter Martyr) in nature was both one, but in
condition sundry, twixte the Philistines and Sampson. In nature they both dyed,
but in condition, the Philistines in surfeiting, cruelty, and Idolatry are
destroyed. And Sampson ends his natural life in repentance, in faith and in
prayer to God. Sampson had fallen in deed says he, but he is turned unto God,
he calls upon him and was heard. As for these his words: Let me loose my
life with the Philistines, he spoke them not of despair, but he hereby humbled
himself before God, for that he had so greatly neglected his function and
calling, beseeching God hereby to be aduenged of the Philistines, who had put
out the eyes of Gods magistrate, not because they would this way punish his
trespass, but this they did in despite of Israel, and that he should no more
be able to do them violence. And justly (says master Bucer) did he sorrow
for the loss of his eyes: Bucer. in Iudic. cap. 16.30.
For in that he bare the person of the Lords magistrate, the injury done to
him was to the great loss and damage of the Jews common weal. In this that
he desires to dye (says he) he expresses his earnest, and that godly and
good devotion and zeal, to the people of Israel, and to the glory of God. For
the Lord would not that he should live any longer, therefore he rightly
desires death. And because he was now so contemned of the Philistines, and
with him the whole people of God, and God himself also, so as these enemies
began to insult against God in great pride, he did also right and justly ask
that the Lord would take vengeance on them. Wherefore the Lord Iehoua heard his
prayer, favored his endeavor, and gave him good success. By this we gather
says Bucer, his death to be acceptable and approved with God, Sampsons death,
acceptable to God.
otherwise his holiness would not have given Sampson such success. And by
this we see says he, that not every one which cast themselves to extreme
death, for the good of the people, are to be condemned, but such only as
without warrant from God, do murder themselves. It was Sampsons office, to
save and deliver his charge Israel, from the tyrannous opression of the
Philistines, and sithe he could not by any possibility else do it, this way he
rightly fynished his function. So did Christ says Bucer, offer himself to his
enemies, from whom he might have been delivered. Where again, Sampson is by
the spirit of God with Jonas, appointed to be the figure of Christ. Sampson a
Figure of our savior Christ.
And in sundry points Bucer sets down this figure, as he represented
Christ, chiefly in that he was the delyuerer of Israel: So in these things also
he became a lively Image of ye most noble Mossiah. His conception was by the
Angel to his mother Manoah, with a special declaration foretold. So was
Christ to Mary, by the Angel Gabriel. The mother was barren, and brought forth
no children: So was the Virgin not bearing, till she brought forth the Lord
Jesus. All his life he was a Nazarite, that is separate from the world, and
dedicate to God. So was Christ Jesus. The spirit of God wrought wonderfully in
miraculous things with him. And that he embraced strange persons, which in
deed was sin in the figure Sampson, yet therein does he not most unseemly
figure and shadow Christ's receyte of the Gentyls. Also that he suppressed the
enemies of God, and by a secret and unknown way, and by his own hand, and
in his death overthrew his destroyers. Herein he was a most lively shadow of
our Christ, who by his death brought true Israelits life, and wherein the Jews
thought to have the victory, as in murdering of the heir, Mat. 21 38
therein they lost the inheritance, and were cast into utter destruction, etc.
Further, he did rather begin, then make perfect the delyuery of Gods people
from their foes: Even so our savior Christ did daily more and more after his
death, then before, work the redemption of his children by the knowledge of
the Gospel, from the hands of Satan, and shall perfect the same in the day of
our resurrection. Again, Sampson more vexed his adversaries by his death, then
he did during his fight with them in life: Mat. 27.64.65.66
So were the Phariseys and Jews more troubled, Christ lying in his grave, then
they were when he in preaching every where wrought their confusion, wherefore
they spared no pain to seal and set watch about the Sepulcher: Last of all,
Sampson did so enter into the delyuerie of Israel, that by this beginning, his
successors might with more increase profit the same: So our savior Jesus
beginning to preach the Gospel, and having in his death wholly destroyed the
power of Satan, gave blessing unto his Apostles and Disciples, and so to his
Church, to enlarge the borders of his spiritual body, more then in his own
person, himself brought to pass. Thus you see how Sampsons life and death is
sanctified, being the shadow of Christ, and delivered from the ignomy of self
slaughter. Of that last example of Jonas, who wyshed the Maryners to cast him
into the Sea, Jonas. 1.2.
the storye reports it Gods action. First by casting of lottes, then by
staying the Tempest, and thirdly, in that the Lord had prepared a great Fish
to swallowe up Jonas, but chiefly the time of his buryall in the belly of the
Fish, which (the text says) was three days and three nights. And this man,
this Prophet, and this his burial, does Christ allow for his image of burial
in the heart of the earth, saying: As Jonas was in the Whales belly three days
and three nights, Math. 12.40.
so shall the son of man be three days and three nights, in the heart of
the earth. This act as it is here allowed of Christ for a figure of his burial
and death: So Jonas being the Lords Prophet, knew from his God, that this way
he should appease the sea and tempest, and therefore submitted himself to the
ordinance of his good God. Now upon this place in Jonas, Hierome holds that
we ought not to cast our selves into death, but stowtely to withstand, except
(says he) it be to conserve chastity. Where it seems, he would for
chastities sake permit a man or woman to kill themselves. Euse. lib. 8 cap. 17.
fol. 197.
Ancient Ambrose leans on that side also. And Eusebius Cesariences tells us
of a modest Matrone, called Sophronia, the Governors wife of Rome, whose
beauty bereaved Maxentius the Tyran of his modesty: whereas he should have
defended marriage, he most wickedly sought to defyle the same, and sent such
letcherous Courtiers, as he himself was, to fetch to his lust this bewtifull
Dame: Sophronia told her husband, who after heavy pause cried: And what shall
we do? To this Tyran either we must yield, or else we must lose our lives.
But when she perceived her husband for fear of death, would deliver her to
the adulterous bed, she subtly said to the Baudes which were sent, stay in
a little until I dress me comely, for so Noble a man as Maxentius the
Emperor, and I will go with you, she enters her chamber, she prays to God,
and with a sword she kylleth her self, so keeping her chaste promise to her
christian husband. The godly father Augustine makes stay at this, but in the
end he says: the Law of God is most worthy and sure, which says: Thou shall
not kill. And we are rather to commend the godly policy and christian act,
The storye of godly Dorothea.
of the other christian Virgin Dorothea of Alexandria, mentioned by Eusebius in
the same chapter, who being for Christ's cause led to death in this Maxentius
tyranny, was by his fylthie messengers assaulted to break her Virginity with
the letcherous Lord and Prince Maxentius. But this golden answer she gave
him. It were a most wicked thing (says she) to take this temple of God, my
body once dedicated to his honor, and to cast it now either to Idolatry or
fleshly lusts. Secondly, I am condemned to death for my Lord Christ and loving
husband, by your masters sentence, and am preparing my self thereto. What?
should I now yield to wickedness and lust? But this is far vnsytting your
Lords estate, to alure me (a poor condemned prisoner) to so lascivious life,
and by fugred words from tyrannous heart, to counterfeyte such fair promises.
And if I could be thus bewitched to damnation, yet how could I be persuaded
of the softness of Maxentius heart, that cannot be mollified in the flowing
Ryuers of our christian blood, which every day he so cruelly sheddeth. But now
this Tyran was more set on fire by these godly denials, and would have forced
her, had not she wisely for the time persuaded him, from whose face (as by
intermission for a time escaped) she privily fled, forsaking her house, her
riches, and all she had, and that in the night time, with her chaste body, from
the face of so fylthie a Prince, and corrupted Court. This Matrone had both
regard to her religion (and therefore would not offend against it, which
says: Thou shall not kill) and to her chaste conversation also, which caused
her to fly from that satanicall synke of Venus Court. And for the Romish
Matrone I say, her heart God might enclyne to him by repentance in the
twinkling of her death, and so in her Christ vouchsafe her pardon: But I
cannot see her act to be soundly warranted, when as we may not do an evil,
that good may come thereof. Romans 3.8. Deuteronomy. 23.25.
But surely the violent force to adulterous act, is both by the law of God
and man, laid upon the oppressor only, and the oppressed is set free. If a
man find a betrothed maid in the Feelde, and force her, In forced extremity,
the compelled in this syn guyltlesse.
and lie with her, then the man that lay with her shall dye alone, and unto the
maid thou shall do nothing, because there is no cause of death in her. For as
when a man aryseth against his neighbor (says the Lord) and wounds him to
death, so is this matter. Again, she cried, and there was none to succor her.
Lo, the violator of virginity shall dye, and the deflowred being hereto forced,
showing her whole and contynuall power to the contrary, she is by the law of
God adjudged innocent. Here is then the lawful remedy against rape and
pollucion. Not with Lucrece to yield and then to kill, or with christian
Sophronia, to fall into an extreme misery, to avoid a pestilente mischief,
but with best advised Dorothe to flee, and if you cannot, with chaste Susanna
to fall into the hands of Gods direction, to use all power ye may to keep your
bodies impolluted. But in no wise kill your selves, for that is repugnant to
the law and will of God, which kind of death, whatsoever your good intentes
be, God has promised to revenge upon the impenitent. And to conclude this
matter (wherein for the dangerous subtyltie of flattering temptation) I have
said somewhat the more. I say as Father Augustine said: If we shall to avoid
sin in us, deem it lawful to kill our selves, we should not suffer our
bodies to live one little while after baptism. For what is he that lives and
synneth not? Not lawful to kill our selves, thereby to shun sin.
But he that kylleth himself, or others with bloody hand (that is without
lawful authority from his God and Magistrate) let him hear what the almightye
says thereto. Surely I will require your blood wherein your lives are, at the
hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man, even at the
hand of a man's brother will I require the life of man, that is to say,
whatsoever it be that takes the life from man, whether it be your selves that
kill your own life: whether it be a beast that flayeth you, or if it be thy
own brother that murthereth thee, thy self, that beast, this thy brother shall
answer his blood for thine. Look for this ye tyrannous opressors, ye Popish
murderers, and beastly butchers of Gods saints, ye blind guydes and dombe
Dogs, ye idle shepeards, ye obstinate heretics, ye thieves and murderers for
men's purses, ye brawlers and fyghters, and you that kill your selves tremble
and fear. So then we may not for any cause, by how much soever we should
seem to praise God, or to avoid danger of the heathen, or yet to keep our
bodies chaste from sinful bed, by any means lay violente hands upon our
selves, thereby to bereave our life, for that act is damnable. We are to hate
and flee from syn as from a Serpent, and to desire the Lord to end the days
thereof, Eccle. 21.2
and to deliver us from that evil Satan and his body of iniquity, yea and
that by death, but yet so that the same may be to us in peace, estranged from
al violence in our selves, and always according to his word. To this our holy
Symeon gives us instruction, to whose succeeding words, we will give ear,
which give to us the cause of his peticion thus.

For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. During the days of Isreal's misery,
Symeon ever hoped after release, whereby he teaches us, how plunged in Popery,
we should expect the return of Gods holy gospel, whereof we have in our
childrens days, had eftsoons the experience. God make bs thankful therefore.
And this is natural that after Winter comes Summer, after stormy tempest,
serenious season, and after the darkness of the night, the bright shyning day.
So is it also the spiritual course of God in his Christ, from time to time, as
the testimony thereof in the scriptures is most apparante. We now are with joy
of heart to embrace the Halcion days, our Summers warmth, this quiet reign,
the shyning countenance of Gods good favor to us, mauger the malice of all
Romanists at home and abroad, and with effect (but not in vain) to receive the
light of the gospel, yet plentifully casting his blessed beams, least we have
greater cause to say, when we see darkness again to shadow the sun beams
of righteousness. Lord that we were with Symeon dead in peace, from the
miserable deaths we are like to feel, in the sword of thy wrath. And now
says Symeon, that as well my bodily eyes, as the inward of my soul, have
seen thy saving health: Now Lord for this cause shall I dye most wyllingly.
But if so the natural sight of Christ, as yet an infant, and subject to
infyrmities, whose glory yet was holden in the body of the little Babe,
wrought such and so great joy in heart, and assurance in death to this good
Symeon, how much more ought the same Christ to work in us quietness of
conscience, now that he is glorified, and the fullness of our life perfited in
him? 2. Cor. 5.16 Heb. 1.2.
We do not in deed behold Christ now any more after the flesh, or that
way to embrace him in our arms: But he shyneth the beams of his fathers
glory into our ignorante hearts, and in the bosom of our faithful breasts, he
makes his habitation. By his holy gospel he shows himself face to face,
and not by the infyrmitie of his flesh, but by the divine power of his holy
spirit he teaches us, purges us, and pardons our sins, and changes us
to a life most meet for his holy presence. And to be short, he is so absent
from us in body, that we may with boldness spiritually approach to his grace,
Heb. 12. Romans 5.1.
set on the right hand of his father in glory. Lo this is that christian sight
and heavenly presence that we have of our Christ. And if this cannot work in
us a wyllingnesse to dye with joy (because our sins by Christ's death
purged) we shall reign with him eternally, then are we a thousand times more
hard then the Adamant, blinder then the Moules, and more unkind then the
unnatural Jews, it is very significante that Symeon says: No man saved, but
by his own faith.
Because mine eyes has seen, etc. In which words are laid up this Emphasis,
that not other men's faith could work this comfort in this good father, except
together his own eyes in faith, had seen this Babe to be his savior, Abac.
2.4 Gal. 3.11. Hebr. 10.37.
according to the Prophet Abacuck his saying: The just man shall live by his
faith. Note he says not by the faith of the Church, or by the faith of another
for him, but he says: he shall live by his own faith. For the faith of an
other man cannot save thee, or yet the faith of the whole church. Or that which
more is, Christ will not save thee, or can his death be thy life, unless thou
in thine own heart fyrmely believe in him. Wherefore let not the Papist longer
deceive thee, which teach it sufficient, though thou know not what to believe,
if thou yet believe as their Church believes: which is the greatest danger
to thy soul that possibly can be, either to rest in the later Romish faith
since the days of Popery, or not to believe upon assured knowledge of Gods
promise, in the warrant of his word thy self. For the holy scriptures do
condemn al those, which themselves effectually believe not in christ, and
promises salvation to him that believes. 1. Pet. 2.7.
To you which believe (says Peter) he is precious, but to them which believe
not, he is the stone which the buylders refused, which stone shall crushe his
enemies that believe not al to powder. 1. Ioh. 3.36
John says: He that believes in the son of God has eternal life. But he
that believes not, the wrath of God abides upon him. And Christ our Savior:
He that believes in me has eternal life. Again: Ioh. 3.18.
He that believes not is condemned already, that is to say: it is impossible,
but he that dies, not believing, shall be damned. And to the Gallathians Paul
says. Gal. 3.26.
Ye are all the sons of God, because ye have believed in Christ Jesus, but as
many as rest in the works of the law, are subject and under Gods curse. By
this special gift in every man's own soul from God, is he made the son of
God, and by no other mean is God his father, upon whom he may call with
boldness, in and by his spirit, as the child upon his Parents, and shall be
heard. For thus the Evangelist says: As many as believed in him, he gave them
prerogative to be the sons of God. The word that was preached to Israel in
the wilderness profited them not (says the author to the Hebrews, because it
was not mixed with faith in those that heard it: yet in the wilderness God had
his Church ( Moses Aaron and the rest) which believed, notwithstanding the
faith of this Church, could not save the other Israelits which believed not: No
more can the faith of the church of God, now save them which are not
conglutinate by the same spirit, in the faith of Christ, and love in him, by
which the whole body growing together by synewes and joints, does increase to
an holy temple in the Lord. But without this conjunction, no faith, Ephe. 2.21
no salvation, or can the works of such please God, in whose hearts Christ
dwells not by faith, as says the scriptures, without faith it is impossible
to please God. I deny not, Romans 14.23. Genesis 18.
but the faith and godliness of some, may temporally bring some benefit to
the Infydels, as the Cities of Sodom had been saved, if there had been found
in them but ten just persons. And for Helias sake, the wicked king Achab,
Iesabel, The faithful may obtain temporal blessings and bodily health, but
salvation is the gift of God, to him that believes only.
and that persecuting kingdom Samaria, had rain to fertyl the soil, which
three years had lain barren. Also the Evangelists report the faith of them,
which bare the man taken with Palsye, much to profit his health, to whose
faith the Lord Christ gave respect, and not chiefly their work, and healed
the man. But to the man he said: My son thy sins are forgiven thee. This
word (son) approoueth the Palsye man to believe in Christ, by which faith
his sins are forgiven him, as by his bearers faith his body was healed. Luc.
9.8. Mar. 2.3. Mat. 9.1
I also comfortably confess, that the faith of our father Abraham, does so
much profit his posterity, because of the covenant of God with him, and his
seed after him, so as they are imputed to be gods children, and that so long
as they continue in that covenant. But when they degenerate from their fathers
faith, Genesis 17.
God cutteth of this imputation, and that the child borne of contrary
parents, as the father an Infidel, the mother a christian, 1. Cor. 7.14. Abac.
2. Ezec. 18.20.
I say with Paul that the child is holy, through the faith of the believing
parent. But to justification it is established, that every man should be saved
by his own faith. To this says Ezechiel. The righteousness of the righteous
shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself. To
this end serves that whole excellent Chapter, to the reading whereof I refer
thee. The prayers of the faithful do much prevail to those, that yet are not
fully brought to Christ. Yea, and the ardent zeal of others faith, does
inflame the souls of their brethren, to follow their steps in Christ, and the
prayer of one faithful man, does promise avail to another, for increase in
faith. Ephe. 6.18 19. Phil. 1.19.
Wherefore Paul prays for all saints, and desires them to pray for him. For
by the prayers of the Phillipians, he persuades the trouble of the false
Prophets to turn to his salvation, that is their prayer to God for his
patience, shall profit him to bear the cross with silence, Iam 5.16
which brings peace in Christ. And so in such sort it is that James says.
The prayer of the just avails much, wherefore pray one for another, that ye
may be saved. But if God by his grace give not this grace into man to believe
and suffer for him, that man cannot by other men's faith be saved, as we have
sufficiently proved, wherefore Symeon rightly rejoices, that his proper eyes,
to say the eyes of his faith, and also of body, have had the experimented
persuasion in his heart, that this borne Babe Jesus the Virgins son, is his
savior. But let no man dream here, that Symeons solace is of that, that only
he saw with his bodily eyes, the body of Christ. For notwithstanding that
sight, had he not with the eyes of his faith beholden Christ for his only
Savior, he had died most sorrowful. What did it profit the Phariseys, Jews,
Pilate, Caiphas, and the tormentors of Christ, that they saw him whom they
pierced? No more then it does the Traitor having sentence of death pronounced
against him, to look upon the face of the Judge, hasting the expectation of his
final decree. Such is the comfort to all those Papists, which dream and
deceive the world, in this imagination, that Christ's body is to our sight
offered really, corporally, flesh, blood, and bone, as he was borne of the
Virgin Mary, in the sacryfice of their dead Mass. A reproof to the Popish
Mass
For as the Jews were condemned for this sight, because then when they so saw
him, they crucified him: So are they Papists, when as with the Jews, the
Popish Priest, if he could show thee in deed, the body of his Christ in
his abominable Mass, does in sacryficing Christ every day, so often crucify
him afreshe. For says the Hebrews, where so ever Christ is offered, there he
is also dead, that is to say, again crucified. Their comfort is endless
woe, in the same Epistle descrybed thus. He that despises Moses law, Heb.
10.28
dies without mercy, etc. Of how much more punishment suppose you shall he be,
which treads under foot the son of God (as do the Papists, for where God
has exalted him on high, no more subject to death, they kill him every day at
their Mass, and eat him (they say) in that cake) and counts the blood of
the Testament, as an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and does
despite that Spirit of grace. Hebr. from the 7. to the. 11. cap.
Herein the Papists are also touched, for Paul says, the holiness of this
blood, is once only to be offered, no more to be offered, because in that one
Oblation once for all offered, he has made perfect for ever, those which be
sanctified. They do despite also the Spirit of grace, which says in the same
Chapter. Now where there is remission of these things, there is no more
offering for sin. Yet the Popish Priest, will every day iterate this
Sacrifice, wyping thy eyes with this miste, it is an unbloody sacryfice. For no
more may Christ be offered bloody. But I ask the shaven Gentleman, whether he
offer truly the body of Christ or no? If he say he does, then I ask him
whether the same body that rose from death, and was crucyfied? To this if he
say yea: then again I say, wheresoever that body is offered, he must of force
in blood be offered, for so much as he has reunited the same to his soul, and
Godhead, and is not a spirit without flesh and blood, as he says to Thomas.
Lu. 24.39.
Secondly, if you could and do offer his body without blood, An unbloody
sacryfice can never take away sin.
you must of force new again kill him, and tread a fresh that glorious Wine
press, which ye deny to do. Thirdly, if your sacrifice be an vnbloudye
Sacrifice, then cannot it obtain forgiveness of sins (which is the color
ye have to offer it, but your own lucring lust is the cause of it) For the
Apostle says, that without blood, Heb. 9.22
there is no forgiveness. And without a testament, there is no promise, and
whersoeuer this Testamente and body is offered, there of necessity must be the
death of the Testator. But you challenge the Testamente to have forgiveness of
sins, by your daily sacryfice: it follows of necessity then, that in this
your sacryficing Testament, you must again kill Christ the Testator. For thus
says the text. For where a Testament is, there must be the death of him that
made the Testament. And if you will reply that Christ is alive, and you kill him
not which cannot die, and yet ye offer him, I say first, that in the sacrifice
of Christ's Testament, unless he dye, the Testament is of no force, so long as
he lives that made it. And then I say it is most absurd, to say that you can
offer Christ, and not make him to suffer death again. When as the text says:
Christ is not entered into the holy places, Heb. 9.24
that are made with hands, which are symilituds of the true sanctuary, but is
entered into very heaven. (Mark where our Christ offered is? not in the priests
hands) to appear in the sight of God for us. Not that he should offer himself
often, as the high priest entered into the holy place every year, with other
blood (now mark to this reason) for then must he have often suffered since the
foundation of the world, Where and whenever Christ is offered, there and then
he is also slain, and again crucified: But he can no more dye. therefore can
he no more be offered.
but now he has appeared once to put away sin, by the sacryfice of himself.
Note how elegantly he says, by the sacrifice of himself, not of other after,
or for him, has he put away sin. And forget not that he says, Christ is
not gone to heaven, to the end he should be often offered, where the daily
offering of the Popish Mass is denied by Paul, to be the offering of Christ,
and that, that Oblation is against the will of God, who has ascended the
heavens, because he will no more be offered (for he can no more be slain) and
for that he has obtained, in that his own sacryfice already for us eternal
redemption. And last of all he says, that whenever Christ is offered, he is
therewith slain. O Lord, Hebr. 9.12
if with pure eyes we could look into the book of life, the word of God,
how could this doltish damnable doctrine of Rome devour us? and this is most
certain, The corporal presence of Christ's body, not so profitable to be with
us.
that this corporal sight of Christ's body, should rather hinder then help us?
For Christ says, unless yt he be taken from us, his holy spirit will not
come to us, and if we have not the spirit of God in us, we are none of
Christ's. Ioh. 16.7. Rom 8.9. Act. 3.21. 1. Cor. 15.25.
This corporal presence is absolutely with a cloud taken from our eyes, and is
at the right hand of God, and shall contain the heavens, till his enemies be
made his footestoole. But the last enemy is death, therefore till death, by the
dissolution of the world be slain, shall the corporal body of Christ
inhabit the heavens, from whence the faithful (and not from the priests head)
do look then for him their savior, whose coming shall be with glory, and
therefore not inuisiblye in a Popish cake. Thy sight, knowledge and faith in
Christ, now he is ascended, must therefore be no more carnal, 2. Cor. 5.7
but only spiritual, as Paul teaches thee saying: we walk by faith, and
not by sight, nevertheless we are bold, and love rather to remove out of the
body, and to dwell with the Lord. Again: Henceforth know we no man after the
flesh, Verse. 16.
yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we
him no more. Finally, Symeon saw Christ borne, and was blessed. But we believe
in him with Symeon, that is dead, yea risen again, and set at the right hand
of God his father, and makes intercession for us, upon which sight our Savior
has pronounced, in check of Thomas sturdy faith: Ioh. 20.29
Thomas thou beleeuest because thou have seen, but I say unto thee Thomas,
blessed are they which see not, and yet believe. This faith in Christ is the
special gift of God (I tell thee once again good Reader) and ryseth not of
our selves. 1. Cor. 3.14. Mat. 16.17
For the natural man cannot perceive the things that be of God. Thou art (says
Peter) the son of the living God. Truly beloved Peter, but who gave thee
this faith? Not flesh and blood, but my heavenly father (says Christ) which is
in heaven. It is given to you says Paul to the Philippians, not only that
you should believe, but that you should also suffer for his sake. This is
nourished and increased by his word. For faith comes by hearing (not of a
Popish Mass, Romans 10.17.
or Saraphicall Doctor but) of the word of God. By the ministry of preaching,
and not by daily sacryficing is this obtained. How shall they hear without a
preacher (says Paul) he says not without a Massemunger. By his Sacraments
and prayer the same increased, wherefore pray earnestly with the Apostles: Luc.
17.5.
O Lord increase our says. And if thou would learn to know that faith
which only iustifyeth. This it is, to believe undoubtedly the Symbol of thy
Creed, or more shortly, to believe God to be thy good God, that goodness from
whom all goodness comes, to be in Christ thy best beloved Father, thy
Christ to be thy brother, Lord, and only savior, by whose death and life,
thou art in him freed from sin, death and Hell. The holy Ghost, to be the
Lord and giver of life, thy comfort and Arha of salvation, thy Guide, What
faith it is that iustifyeth.
and author of all goodness in thee, and that power by whom thou do thus
believe, by the rule of the word and promise of God, and by his holiness
sanctified do live, and love this thy good God and thy brethren for and by
him. And as the fruitful tree in his time gives profitable fruit: So do
thou in this his spirit by thy good works profit his church, and glory thy
father which is in heaven. Mat. 5.16.
This is that faith which iustifyeth, and is the only gift of God. The Lord
grant it sound, perfect, stable, experimented, and always steadfast, as well
in the author of this book, as the Readers thereof, for Christ's sake our
Lord. So shall we see Christ's day with Abraham, embrace him with Symeon,
depart in peace, and rest in joy.

All other opinions besides this, or not fyxed in this, are called faith, as an
Image bears the name of a man: But as the Image is without life: so such
faith not adourned with good works, as James says (is an Image of faith) a
dead faith. This faith working by love, Faith compared to a Vine.
is by Barnarde compared to a Vine thus. Faith is the Vine, christian life be
her branches, Psalm. 2.
and good works her clustering Grapes. And Chysostome compares it as
elegantly to a Lamp writing upon Matthew. For as a Lamp burning, gives light
to the whole house: So does faith give light and intelligence of God and
Christ, to the soul of man, but as in a Lamp, fire and Oil are joined
together: so in the shyning Cresset of a good conscience, are contynually
resiant faith and good works. True faith and good works, resydent in a good
conscience always
Notwithstanding as the Tree is before the Apple: so does faith go before good
works. So the Apostle connexing Faith, Hope, and Love together, gives faith
the first place. And Augustine in his book de fide and operibus says. Except
faith go before, a godly life cannot in any wise come after. Cap. 7.
If we be Virgins, having our Lamps thus burning, we shall be sure to enter
with our Brydegrome Christ into his heavenly chamber: Mat. 25.10
But in no case can our Oil do any others good, for our own works shall
follow us, good or evil, they shall not be imparted to others. Apoc 14. Ioh.
14.
If we become such Vines, our father will proyne and purge us (when he cutteth
down the wythered Images and dead branches) and will make us more fruitful.
Last of all note here, that Symeon having seen the Salvation set by the God
of heaven, stays his conscience in him (which is the true nature of lively
faith) and though there be infynite saluations sought for by men, yet he
hungreth after Gods salvation, and says: Now I have enough, let me Lord depart
in peace. For my eyes have seen thy salvation. He that has Christ, has
life. No Christ, no life.
So dear Reader, having by the mercies of god, once with the eyes of our
faith, in heart seen and confessed Christ our salvation. Though the Jew, the
Pharisey, the Turk, the Panyme, Papist, and carnal Atheist, have their trust
in broken Cysterns, which can hold no water: yet do thou stand with Symeon,
and the just in life, to the end of death in persecution and pleasure, to this
the salvation given of God, to Jew and Gentyle, even the Lord Jesus. And say
to kings and Prelates, there is no other name given under heaven, wherein we
can be saved, but the name Jesus. Act. 4.12.
Nor can other foundation be laid, then which is already laid, even the Lord
Jesus. Or can any man attain to iustifycation before the just father, by
other then his beloved son, in whom alone he rests (for our sins well
pleased? Neither are we from the pyt of perrillous death in Hell, redeemed by
Gold or silver, but by the blood of this immaculate and undefiled Lamb Jesus
Christ, which most worthy is called a Savior, 1. Pet. 1.18.19. Mat. 1.21.
because he saves his people from their sins. For mine eyes have seen thy
salvation, says he. The word that he uses is (...), which imports much
more, then in one word can be expressed. Namely Christ to be that saving matter
of health, which he had appointed alone to all his chosen servants, from the
first Adam, to the last borne child of a woman.

We will now by thy patience (christian brother) dwell with our saving health
Jesus Christ a little, and from his holy word learn first, what is this
salvation, and why he is called a Savior. Secondly by what means he saves.
Thirdly from what he saves. And last of all, who they be, which by this
Savior are saved. And by that we have fynished these questions, I rest in
hope, thou will praise God for his glorious son Jesus Christ, thy
omnipotente and only Savior, of God our father, given to all people, nations,
kyndreds and tongues.

What and who this Salvation is, Luc. 2.10.
the Evangelist S. Luke in three words descrybeth, to the Shepherds keeping
and watching their sheep by night, thus: Behold, I bring you tidings of great
joy, for this day is borne to you the Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Why
he is called a Savior, the Angel shows to Joseph saying: Mat. 1.21.
Thou shall call his name Jesus. For he shall save his people from their
sins. Which one sentence answers all these our former questions. Who is
this Savior? even Jesus. Why Christ is called a a Savior.
What is this Jesus? Christ the Lord. Why called a Savior, because he shall
save his people from their sins. From what saves he? from sin. Whom
saves he? his people. But let us to our greater consolation pierce this matter
a little further. And first who, and what is this Savior, which the Father
has set to be his only salvation to Jew and Gentyle? It is as we said,
Jesus Christ the Lord. And this Jesus is not that Iehosuah, which by him
reigned, or yet the son of Syrach, or Jesus called Iustus, or any of that
sort, all which were very godly men and children of this life. But this Jesus
Christ the Lord our salvation, is the only begotten son of God, begotten of
the father before all worlds, of the same essence or being, nature and
substance with the father, coeternall and coequal, and also very man borne of
the Virgin Mary, which humanity is so conjoined with his Deity, that it is
for ever inseparable. And to be short, in him his fathers full glory to us is
represented. Lo (dear Reader) this is the state of thy Savior, even no other
then God himself, the second person incarnate. To approve Christ to be God
consubstanciall and coequal, what should I need to thee, which being a
christian, Christ God by scripture proved.
do ex professo, by his spiritual grace, fyrmely believe the same. Yet that
thy faith herein may be the more steadfast, and thy conscience assured, I will
give thee some testimony thereof out of the book of God. First Esaias the noble
and Evangelical Prophet, says in the person of God: Esa. 43.11.
I, even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior. Again, the whole
45 chapter of Esaias, but specially the 21 verse, denies other Savior then God,
as thus: There is no other God besides me. But Esaias in the fathers person, thus
speaks of, and to Christ Jesus. I will also give thee for a light to the
Gentiles, Esa. 49. Iere. 23.6.
that thou may be my salvation to the end of the world. And again, Jeremy
calls Christ the son of David, the lord our righteousness. Now then, sith
there is no God but one, no other Savior and righteousness but the deuyne
power, it must necessarily follow, that Christ Jesus our Lord, being this
Savior and righteousness, is very God coequall with the father. The same
Prophet also says of GOD thus: The word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, Esa. 45.23.
and shall not return: that every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue
shall swear by me. But Paul to the Philippians does truly apply this to
Christ, saying: Phil. 2.9.10.11.
He has given him a name above all names, that in the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, both of things in heaven and in earth, and under the earth, and
that al tongues should confess Christ to be the Lord, to the glory of God the
father. Therefore conclude soundly, that Jesus Christ is very and perfect GOD
with the father. Does not John say: Ioh. 1.14.
The word (which is Christ) was God, and the word became flesh. Therefore
when we worship the son Christ, and honor him as God, we do no injury to the
almighty God and jealous father, but thereby truly honor him, as the Apostle
says: The father has given all judgment (that is all right and
administration of power and glory) unto the son, Ioh. 5.22.
that al they which honor the father, should honor the son also. And of such
jealousy is the Lord God of his honor, that he will not imparte it, or any
part thereof to any other beside himself, as Esaias testifyeth, Esa. 42.
I am the Lord (that is of my self) and my glory will I give to no other. But
he gives his glory to his son Christ, as Christ witnesses thus: Father
glorifye me, with the glory which I had with thee, Ioh. 17.5.
before the world was. Therefore Christ is of self substance with the father
God and glorious. Also Christ says: All that the father has are mine. Ioh.
17.18.
But ye Father has deuyne nature, Ergo so has Christ our Lord his son.
Again Esaias says: In him shall the Gentyls trust. Esa. 11. Iere. 17.
But Jeremy accursseth al them that trust in man, but blesses them that hope
in God. Therefore of necessity Christ is God, for he has assured us often
times blessed if we trust in him, saying: He that trusts in me, has eternal
life. Again, Ioh. 6.47
he that truly forgiueth sins is God. But Christ does truly forgive sins.
Ergo he is God. Paul calls Christ our hope, and to the Romans our GOD,
which is to be praised for all worlds. Romans 9.5 1. Ioh. 5.20
And the deuyne Evangelist S. John, calls Christ the true God, and eternal
life. And a hundred such authorities might I bring thee (good Reader) out of
the holy book of God, but any one thence truly aleaged, is a sufficient
bulwark to the conscience, against all the fyrie darts of the Devils
temptation. That Jesus Christ borne of the Virgin, is no other then the second
person, and only begotten son of the father, consubstantiall, coeternall and
coequall, these places make known. Paul receives from the Psalmist this
warrante thus: Unto which of the Angels said God at any time, Psalm. 2.7. Hebr.
1.5.
thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. Which words he most aptly
applies to Jesus Christ. And what can be more manifest then that most deuyne
witness of the Father, and testimony of the holy ghost, at the baptism of
Christ our savior, where from the heavens he thundered these words to his
Disciples and the Jews, of Jesus Christ: This is my beloved son, in whom I
am well pleased. Mat. 3.17. and 17.5.
The Lord Christ is of the same substance with the Father coeternall, destinct
from the father, but not separate. Cirillus in Ioh. 6.1.
To use the words of the ancient father Cirill. It is no absurdity, to say
that Christ is destinct from the father, Christ of one substance with the
father.
as the running water is from his Fountain, the Sun beams from the Sun,
the heat from the fire. These Images so pass from their substance, as they
are ever of and with the same, as the Sun beams are destinct from the Sun,
and yet not separate from it: The River so comes from the Fountain, as it is
the self water and not separate, but destinct by running from the Fountain.
But as no simile can in all points hold his Analogian with his matter by him
resembled: So let us go to the warrante of the word, where the mouth of our
God shall teach us this Homonsion, that Christ in his deuyne nature, is
consubstanciall, coeternall and coequall with his father. Esa. 53. Ioh. 1.1.
Ioh. 10.30
Coeternall. Esaias says: His birth day who can reckon. John says: In the
beginning was the word, that is the son of God. And our Savior: My father
and I are one. One in substance, eternity, power, equality and glory. This
Christ is coequal with his father, Zacha. 13.
also the Prophet Zachary does affirm in the fathers person thus: Arise O
sword upon my Shepherd, and upon the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of
hosts. Smite the Shepherd and the Sheep shall be scattered. Behold, he
calls the Shepherd thus to be stricken his equal, Mat. 16.16 Ioh. 6.69.
which Shepherd the Evangelists testifye is Christ Jesus, the son of the
living God. This Jesus coeternall, consubstanciall, coequall, and his only
nature, beyond all time, and without beginning as he is God. In the fullness
of time, took our nature upon him also, and became manne, that so he might be
this Shepherd that should be beaten, and his sheep scattred, that the little
ones might be brought to him there Lord and Savior.

This Christ was promised to Adam at his fall, Apo. 12.9. Genesis 3.
in condemnation of the old Serpente Satanas. The seed of the woman shall
break thy head. The Serpents head is the power of Satan, which the body of
the scriptures testifye Christ to have trod under foot. And Christ is here
called Seed, to testifye the truth of his human nature. Christ called seed
and why?
And the woman's seed, not the seed of man, in respect of his conception and
nativity, without the seed of man, of the Virgin Mary by the holy ghost. And
in as much as she was the true seed of Adam, Abraham, and David, it must needs
be that Christ coming of her, must also verily and in deed of her nature be
partaker of ours, and be very man, as he is verily God. Gal. 3.17. Mat. 1.12.
Luc. 3.23.24. etc.
Wherefore Paul to the Gallathians affyrmeth Jesus Christ to have taken flesh,
and to be of Abraham's seed. Mathewe and Luke do draw by lyniall discente the
woman's seed Christ Jesus, to be of the natural seed with Adam, Abraham, and
David, and of their flesh and blood, and so of the same fleshy substance,
sin excepted. To conclude, he was conceived by the holy ghost, increased in
his mothers womb, was borne of her, sucked of her breasts, grew as a child to
man's estate, and into increase of godly grace in his humanity. He also had all
the instruments of our Nature (sin only excepted.) Wherefore we worthyly
curse for Anathema, Valentyne, Maryon, Eutiches, Appelles and Manachae, with
all other their adherents and fautors, which derogate from the deuyne, the
humayne nature in Christ, and do faythfullye conclude with Paul to the
Philippians, Phil. 2.6.
when Christ was in the shape of God, he thought it no robery to be equal
with God, but he humbled himself, and took upon him the shape of a servant,
and was made like unto man, and was found in shape as a man, he humbled
himself and became obedient unto death, even to the death of the cross. For
by this and that we have said, it appears sufficiently, that our Savior
Christ is very God, and very man consubstantiall with his father, and of self
nature with us, sin only excepted.

But least any man should dream that I join with their pestiferous Arius,
Bulling. deca. 4. ser. 6.
who taught that Christ the son of God received only our flesh without a
soul, and the Deity to stand in stead thereof. Or with Apolinarius which
grants Christ to have a soul, but not endued with her qualities: I say as
the scripture says, that Christ in his humanity consists of two parts, of
perfect soul, and perfect flesh, with the whole mind, reason and judgment of
the soul, Mat. 20.28. Mat. 26.38. Ioh. 12.27 Luc. 22.15
etc. The son of man (says Christ) came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give his soul for the redemption for many. Again: My soul
is heavy unto death (says our Savior) Now my soul is troubled. I have
desired to eat this Pasouer with you before I suffer. All which to be sorry,
heavy, troubled, and affectionate, are passions of the mind, and proper to
the soul, and approve Jesus Christ to have with us animam rationalem, a
reasonable soul and humayne flesh subsisting, as that holy father Athanasius
has it in his Symbol of our most christian faith, with whom we also say
Christ is God, of the substance of his father before all worlds, man of the
substance of his mother borne in the world, perfect God and perfect man, of a
reasonable soul and humayne flesh subsisting. The which Deity is so knytte
in unity, that after his death in his resurrection, he reassuming to his
Godhead his soul and body, is ascended in the same up into above all heavens,
on the right hand his Father, Christ's natural body but in one place.
but yet not confounding the substance of the Deity, or of his humanity, but
each nature still and always keeps his proper quality: As for example,
Tertul. li. de car christi. August. ad Dar. Epist. 57.
his Godhead to be in all places at one instante, and his body to contain
only one place, as to the holy Scriptures Saint Augustine subscrybeth to
Dardanus. We must take heed (says he) that we do not so preach the deuyne
nature of Christ, that we take away the truth, that is the true property of
his body. As he is God (says he a little after) he is every where, but as he
is man, he is only in heaven, yet for the conjunction of the two natures in
Christ, sundry times in Scripture, that is spoken of the one, which is proper
to the other: As in example: No man ascends into heaven, Ioh. 3.1.9
but the same which came from heaven, even the son of man which is in heaven.
And yet was not Christ ascended, but in earth: not glorified, but subject to
death: But because of the conjunction with the deuyne nature, that is
communicated to the humayne nature in speech, which in deed and truth was
only performed in his Deity. Again, Act. 20.2
ye are bought with the blood of God. Who knows not that this actio^ was
performed in the humane nature of Christ? But because he is very God, and the
nature of his humanity so connexed, that it is inseparable, therefore this
Conionian and participation of the two natures is often used. And for this
cause we say God is borne, dead and crucified for us, when the humane nature
only was so. But perhaps it may astonie thee, when I say that the two natures
in Christ be inseparable, and yet the Godhead is in many places. Where his
humanity is not, nay his divine nature in all places, and his humane nature
only in heaven. But consider in thy self a perfect mirror and image hereof.
Thy soul and body are of two natures, the one a spirit, the other a compact
form of flesh, the one mortal, the other cannot dye. Yet during life they are
inseperably knit both natures in one, and in such sort, as either nature
notwithstanding, do keep their sundry condition. The body sleeps, but the
soul is always waking: the body eats and drinks natural meats, the
soul only feeds of the word of God: the body is sick and dies, the soul
is for the most part best healthy, when the body is nearest death, and most
lively when she is discharged of the body of sin by death: Again, the soul
resting with the body, is also the self instant by her powers, at the vtmoste
parts of the world, and above the clouds, whether she has daily access by
faith and invocation, yet for all this, the body is but in one place: So is it
in Christ. He is risen, he is not here, Mar. 16.6.
says the Angel to the women, which came to annoynte Christ in his grave.
This was spoken of his humanity, now glorified. But according to his deuyne
nature, himself has said: Wheresoever two or three be gathered together in
my name, Math. 18.20.
there am I in the midst of them. Thus thou see who, and what is the Lords
salvation. Namely Jesus Christ the Lord, perfect God, the only begotten son
of God, eternal, equal, and of self substance with his father, God and man,
borne of the Virgin Mary, ascended up in glory, reserving thee each property
of either nature, not confounding the persons, nor deuyding the substance.

Now rests it to see also somewhat more of the valor of thy Savior in his
deuyne nature, his valor to thee, which best thou shall perceive by those noble
names (according their effects) which the sacred scriptures attribute unto
Christ, The valor of Christ in himself, and to us.
our one and only God, with the Father and the holy ghost. First, he is called
Tetragramaton or Jehovah, which signifies that Christ our god with his father,
is of his own essence and being, has power and life in himself, not needing
the help of any other, but is that sufficiency, which plentifully satisfyeth
all others of his fulness. To be short, the eternal god without beginning and
ending. In whom we live, move, and have our being. Act. 17.28 Apo. 1.11.
He is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, which contains all in all in
himself. He is also called Adonay of the Hebrews, which of a certain
conceyte, would not pronounce him Tetragramaton or Jehovah rarely, but in place
thereof set this name Adonay (that is ineffable) which all the Interpretors
expound by Dominus, Lord. And rightly is Christ with his Father called Lord.
For he has given the Regiment of heaven and earth unto him. Mat. 28.18 Col.
1.16.
And besides him there is none, to whom all things visyble and inuysible ought
to yield their obedience. And to this name is added Sabbath, which some
interpret the Lord of powers, some the Lord of Hosts, the god of battle. He
it is which overthrows with his might, all power that sturteth up against
god, and with his army does he pull down the pride of mighty kings and huge
Nations. This is that Michael who with his army of Angels, beat down Satan
from the heavenly habitation of God in his church militant. This is that
Emperor and Monarche, Apo. 12.7.9.
to whom all kings shall stoop. This is that most tryumphant conqueror, who
with most simple and small creatures, has, can and will, overthrow myghtie
Giants, huge armies, puyssant Princes and mighty Monarchs of the world. In
his camp are infinite Angels, Thousand thousands ministered to him (says
Daniell) and ten thousand thousands stood before him. Dan. 7.10
Behold of what Majesty this christ our Lord of Hosts is, of what force and
power, when as one Angel of these infinite thousands, could and did in one
night, destroy and kill in the host of Sennacherib (which cruelly beseeched
the Lords city Jerusalem) one hundred forescore and five thousand of fyghting
Soldiers. With water, darkness, Frogs, Flies and Grasshoppers, he wasted and
destroyed the pride of the most fertyll land Egypt. With the noyce of
Chariots, he drove to flight the kings of Ashur. And who is able to withstand
his might? For in his army all the Planets and Stars, the wyndes, fyrie
lyghtes, Ice, Frost, Snow, rain, Fire and water. Al Devils in Hell, the air
and Fyrmament, all men and kings and all their powers, and at one word all
creatures in heaven, earth and Hell, visyble and invisible. All these are his
to use, at his good pleasure, where he will, when he lust, and during his set
purpose, executing his vengeance upon his enemies, but the defense of his
Church.

Sometime also he is called Aelion. 1. excelsus, high. As David says. Psalm.
113.
The Lord is high above all Nations, and his glory above the heavens. Again,
who is like the Lord our God, that has his dwelling so high, and yet abaseth
himself to behold the things that are in heaven and earth. Even unto this high
throne is our Lord Christ ascended, above all heavens, and set at the right
hand of his father on high, to behold the things that are done in earth. From
this height he saw Damasco her myserie, and Saules pride and from thence
stroke this cruel Tyran to the earth, in the mydst of his force and
servants, whose brightness stroke Saul with blyndnes, but in great mercy
wrought his conversion, and of persecuting Saul changed him (and that because
he had chosen him) to preaching Paul. And also of a most zealous Pharisey in
blyndnesse, made him most fervent in the Gospel of God, to all our comfortes
which be Gentyls. For this our Lord Christ Aelion, most high has consecrated
Paul above Peter, to be our especial Apostle, both at Rome and else where in
the round world

Our Savior Christ our God, Iere. 20. Esa. 42.
is also called of the Hebrews El. to say of his great strength. For
whatsoever he will do, that can he do. For which cause he is called by the
Prophets: The God of strength, and the mighty Lord or Gygante. Sometime also
Eloah (and of the Trinity in conjunction we may say Elohim) which signifies
God our Christ in his deuyne nature, to be always and every where present: in
heaven and in earth, and in peace and war: in persecution and preaching
peace: in works and plays: in acts and thoughts: in life and death: in all
places at one and self instante. Of whose presence the Psalmist says thus:
Whether shall I go from thy Spirit, Psalm. 139.
or where shall I flee from thy face? If I ascend into heaven, thou art there,
if I go down to hell, thou art there also. But if I shall take the wings of the
morning, and dwell in the farthest part of the Sea, even there shall thy hand
govern me, and thy right hand shall behold me. And Paul aptly pronounces
our Lords presence to the Athenians, Act. 17.28
testifying him not to be far from them, but they in him rather, saying: For
in him we live, move and have our being. And it seems probable for this
cause, the Grecians to have called God Theos, and the Latins to have formed
thence this word Deus. As one learned affyrmeth Theos to come of (...) of
redynesse and running to and fro, and so is God called by such a name, as best
can express his presence, who is never absent from mortal men in earth, but
to every man in all places gives all things that they possess. Of which his
liberality, some suppose him to be called Deus a dando, for that he gives to
all men that they have. God our Lord and Christ is also called Schaddai (.i.)
sufficient in himself, and the sufficientcy to all creatures, that whosoever
has him to their Lord, has all sufficientcy to body and soul, to this, and
the life eternal. And in our tongue we call Christ in his deuyne nature God,
that is the most principal and best good. Lastly, he is called the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob, insinuating unto us, from whence
the holiness of these Fathers with their faith came. And also that as we are
the posterity of the Noble Abraham by faith in Christ: So is he to us our
best, good, and most excellent God, so that with Paul we may conclude our
selves in him most virtuous, Romans 8.31.32.
sufficient and blessed, saying: If God be on our side who can be against us.
It is God that iustifyeth, who shall condemn? Again, if he has given us
Christ, how shall he not give us all things with him? And by him we shall be
more then Conquerors. Lo, this god is thy Jesus, whose power is pressed and
ready to thy best good, if thou faithfully put thy trust in him. He is also
called the Lords Christ, which word Christ, Luc. 4.18. Esa. 61.1.
imports his honorable Function, by the excellent Ointment above his
fellows, even the holy ghost, by which he is anointed of his father, to be
the king and Priest of his Church for ever, according to this saying: Heb. 7.17
Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchesidech. So then he is
called Jesus of the word Iesehak, and so called as the Angel testifyeth,
because he saves his people from their sin. Mat. 1.21.
The word Christ is a greek word, which answers the Hebrewe vocable
Messhiah, anointed. In old time with the people these persons: Prophets,
Priests, and Princes, were anointed with Oil, Wherefore our Jesus is called
Anointed.
signifying the plentiful graces of Gods spirit, given to those called of god
to these Functions, and also into what perilous dangers, and hard battles
they were to enter, which truly exercised that several calling. By which
Oyling they were as with a Symbol put in mind, what courageous Champions they
ought to be in their offices. This was the cause why the noble Champions,
before the pryse playde, were anointed. But in as much as the Lord Christ had
a greater enemy then all other Champions, and therewyth a most deadly fight
toward, whose body and soul was to stand in the battle of death upon the
cross, against his fathers justice for the sins of the whole world, Satan's
malice, and man's corruption, Hell and Death: it was most necessary that he
should before this cruel combat, have a more precious Ointment, then had his
shadowing fellows, preaching Prophets, sacrifycing priests, and ruling
Princes. Wherefore he was anointed with the holy ghost. The spirit of God is
upon me (says Christ) because he has anointed me that I should preach the
Gospel to the poor, etc. Esa. 61. Luc. 4.18.
This sentence expresses Christ's priesthood, kingdom and preaching office. He
is sent says he to preach. His kingdom, he is anointed to deliver the
oppressed. His priesthood, he is given to heal the broken and wounded hearts
(with sin and iniquity) by the sacrifice of his death upon the cross.
During his life he preached the gospel, Romans 1.16
which is Gods power in Christ to salvation to every one that believes. In his
sacrifice of himself upon the cross, he performed both the other. By his
death he healed our infirmities, Esa. 53. Col. 1.20.
for the chastisment of our peace was laid upon him. In his death he obtained
the victory (having fully answered the Fathers justice) against sin, death
and hell, and spoiled principalities and powers, and has made a show of them
openly, Col. 2.15.
and has tryumphed over them in the same cross. He has forgyuen us our
sins, put out the hand writing that was against us, he has taken it out of
the way, and fastened it to his cross, has translated us from the power of
darkness, into the kingdom, whereof he is king of kings, and Lord of Lords:
vz the body of his Church, of which he is the only head. Whose kingdom is
threefold, of power, of grace and of glory. Of power, for all Nations shall bow
the knee to this Lord of Lords, and king of kings, Christ the anointed king
and priest. And who so will not kiss the son (Christ Jesus) shall perish,
whether Prince, Psalm. 2. 1. Romans 14 17.
Potentate, Preacher, Magistrate, people, or pestilente Pope. Of grace, which
(he says by Luke) is within us, and consists (as Paul says) in
righteousness, Christ the high Bishop of our souls.
in peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. His kingdom of glory, as well in that he
gloryously arose from death, and ascended above al heavens, as that he shall
appear most gloryouslye to have governed all things, when he shall call before
him to judgment all the Nations of the world, and give to them their portion
in his right justice due unto them. This Lord Christ and Savior, is also the
high Bishop of our souls, the one and only priest, that has fully taken
away our sins, in the sacrifice of himself, upon the altar of the cross
once for all, and all ages, there and then offered. Of whose priesthood David
long before prophesied, in these words. Psalm. 110.
The Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou art a priest for ever, after
the order of Melchisedech. By which words the Apostle Paul, purposing to prove
Christ the said priest, thus speaks: This Melchisedech was king of Salem,
Heb. 7.17
king of the most high God, etc. He is the king of righteousness, after that,
he is called the king of Salem 1. king of peace, without father, without
mother, without kyndred, and has neither beginning of his days, nor end of
his life, but is like unto the son of God, and contynueth a priest for ever.
And that rightly, for Christ the son of God is our righteousness and peace,
and the king of Salem, even of the peaceable church, and tryumphante kingdom
everlasting. He is without father in his humanity, only being conceived by
the holy ghost, of the woman's seed: without mother in his deuyne nature,
begotten of the fathers own nature, without beginning of days or end of
life. For he is God for ever. And though in his humanity he suffered for us,
yet his Godhead could not dye, but remains immortal for ever. This Jesus is
both king and priest, not after Aaron, but according to Melchisedeches order,
for all times to come. And as the holy scriptures has mention of no mo such:
So is he the only priest of God, for the salvation of his church, and there
can besides him be none other, who gave himself to dye for us, and by whose
only death, we be all saved that believe in him.

The mean whereby this eternal Priest saves his people, is by tryple
operation, How our Christ saves us.
all which have their force from the action of his death. First, in gyuing
himself a ransom for their sins to God his father, and by his bloody
sacryfice once for all offered, he fully acquyteth all his people of all their
damnable debt. Secondly, by the preaching of his Gospel unto the sons of
men, as whereby he is depaynted thus crucified for them, and thereby they
brought by his spirit, to believe the forgiveness of sins in his blood.
Thirdly, by that he remains the only Mediator for his people to his father,
so reconciling the world to God, and guydeth his people by his spirit, in the
paths of righteousness for his holy names sake. 1. Pet. 2.5. Mat. 20.28.
Thus is thy sovereign Lord and Christ, thy high Priest and Bishop of thy
soul, thy (...), to say the price of thy redemption, by whose sacrifice alone
upon the cross, God the father is justly paid the price due to him for all
our iniquities. For the which cause also, that he is the price of thy
Redemption in his death, he is of God constitute for thy only Mediator, as
Paul says to the Hebrews, and saint John: If any man sin, Heb. 9.15. 1.
Ioh. 2.2.
we have an Advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
reconciliation for our sins, and not for our sins only, but for the sins
of the whole world. Where note that the Apostle says, and for this cause is
he the Mediator of the new Testament. Hebr. 9.15.
Namely for this cause, that through his death, men might receive the promise
of inheritance. He that dies for man's transgressions, is only the Mediator
for their sins. But Christ only dies for man's transgressions, therefore
Christ is the only Mediator for man's iniquity. This is the Apostles reason.
And further, this priesthood so dwells still in Christ, that no inferior
creature may be enstalled into that function. For he lives for ever, and
therefore contynueth a priest for ever, after the order of Melchesedech.

Whersoeuer then any man or Angel, would take upon him this office, to be a
priest to offer sacrifice in the Church of God. For thy sins know thou that
he is not thy (...), thy redemption, and therefore cannot be thy sacrificer.
Besides this, that sacrifice of Christ is thy (...), the absolute price of thy
ransom, and therefore no need of further payment to God by sacrifice. Christ
has fully paid the ransom for our syns, therefore can there be no more
offering to God for sin.
Thirdly, neither need nor can that sacrifice of Christ's death and body, to
be iterate or offered of fresh, for that were to kill Christ again, and to
make less the valor of thy redemption, by which thou art redeemed fully, and
for which cause Christ is called in the holy scripture, thy (...), to say an
absolute price of thy redemption, by whom and whose price, thou have by faith
in him, the whole forgiveness of thy sins. Heb. 10.18
And where this Remission is (says the scripture) there remains no more
offerings for sin, but we may with boldness enter into heaven, not by an
other sacrifice, but by a new and living way, namely (says he) by faith in
Christ's flesh and blood once thus offered, who remains our high priest with
God. Lastly, were there a sacrifice remaining to be offered for sin, we had no
priests or any one man, or Angel in heaven or earth, that could be a fit
Sacrificer for the same. For besyds that a true Sacrificer for sin, by whose
Sacrifice iniquity shall be away taken, There can be found as a meet man no
Priest in earth to offer sacrifice.
must be the sacrifice himself. There are also certain Noble qualities must
inhabit that man, which can be a sacrifycing priest for sin, and the house
of GOD, which are by the Apostle to the Hebrews, set down on this manner. Such
an high priest it became us to have (says he) which is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the Heavens, which
needed not daily to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then
for the sins of his people, for that did he once, when he offered up himself,
for the law makes men high priests, which have infyrmitie, but the word of
the oath which was since the law, makes the son who is consecrated (namely
the only priest of God) for evermore. Now dear Reader, if it be of necessity
that we should have such a Priest, to offer sacrifice for our sins, and that
no other can take that office to pacify the father (whose justice changes
not, or is by affection altered) how can it be that either the Iewishe, or much
less the Popish priests can be to us men of good warrante, to pacify his
wrath for our sins, with and by their daily counterfeyte sacrifices, when
they have neither warrante from thy holy written word, or be, The Pope very
vnfytte to offer up sacrifice for sin, his Cardinals less, his priests
least, but his irreligious all to bad.
or can be such men as it becomes our priests to be? Can the Pope or any his
brood be found (in truth and search of his own friends) holy, harmless, and
undefiled? Is he in all sorts separate from sinners, or are his priests? Is
his dwellings above the Heavens, or have not his Friars, Monks, Bishops,
Cardinals, and Popish prelates, the fertyll soil of every Nation, to plant
their dwelling places in? Do they not need to offer sacrifice first for their
own sins, which of all other are most acquainted therewith? And do they not
in the daily sacrifice of their blasphemous Mass, first offer for the Pope,
then for the king, Bishop and themselves, and then for him, her, or them, for
whom they are for that time hired? These therefore can be no lawful priests
to offer for sin, were there any such sacrifyce to be offered. The law of
Moses made such men priests, as were subject to death. The Popish law
anoyleth such as are wrapped in infyrmities: but the law of the oath of God
(which is the gospel) makes the son of God Christ Jesus, only the
sacryfycing priest of his Church, who is without sin, deuoyde of infyrmitie,
holy, harmless, undefiled, higher then the heavens, separate from sinners,
once for all offered, a full price in sacrifyce to his father upon the cross,
for the syns of the whole world, which can no more be offered, or any other in
place thereof, is not subject any more to death, but lives to make intercession
for his church to God his father for ever.

Now we have to consider also, from what it is that this Savior Christ
delyuereth us. Truly from the Fathers wrath, from the chains of sin, and
her reward, which is eternal death. Of which deliverance Zacharius speaks
in his Song, Romans 6.23 Luc. 1.74.
that we being delivered from the fear of our enemies, might serve him
without fear, etc. But when it is said he delyuereth us, it is imported we
are first in thraldom, Man's state without Christ, thraldom and most misery.
and bound from liberty: Even so are the sons of men by nature thralled
unto the wrath of God, bound in chains of sin, and subject to the curse of
everlasting death. Therein borne, in it living and lusting death by the
contynuall desires thereof. Ephesians. 2.3.
But Sin, sin, is the cause that Gods justice cannot but give us wrath, and
his wrath cannot (proceeding from his justice) but cast the sinner into the
prison of eternal pain, where is darkness, sorrow, weeping, torments, and
gnashing of teeth, the worm that dies not, and the anger of God. And this
sin is, and may be said to be of two kinds, the one proceeding from the
other. Original and Actual. Original comes with the lump of massy
poisoned flesh, Original sin and actual.
which our parentage has brought to us, from the loins of our first father
Adam. And he becomes synful by the breach of Gods holy law in Paradise,
has begotten by sinful seed, his children in sin, who by succession have
increased the world to this day from his sinful loins, to beget us sinful
creatures, of our sinful mothers. And thus are we guyltie of Adams sin,
called Original, the beginning sin. For like as out of a poisoned Vessel
can be drawn no other lycour but poisoned. So from the poisoned seed of Adam,
can proceed no other then like corrupted matter, for man's propagation and
offspring. And again this word sin, signifies generally the disobedience to
God, the offending of God by the breaking of his most holy commandments. This
difference is between Original and Actual sin, the one we bring with us in
flesh, as guyltie by birth of our fathers transgressio^, as the Apostle says:
By Adam all men do dye. The other is, that our selves in mind and body do
commit daily against our God and his holy law, which we do either in mind,
1. Cor. 15.22.
in will, in heart and affection, in tongue or hand, in soul or body, in one
or both. The first does infecte all other that come from his first root. For
like as leporous parents of their bodies cannot but beget, and the children
which are borne of them, are defiled, as well with the parents leprosy, as
contaminate with their own natural corruption: Even so are the posterity of
Adam infected with the first fathers leprosy in sin, and steyned with their
own actual offenses and iniquity, which one lamenting says: And great is
that Original sin, Barnardus
which does not alone infect the person, but corrupts the whole nature of man
also. The second which is actual sin, dwells in the body of the sinner
alone, and hurts others, no otherwise then when they be pertakers thereof,
either by joining in fact, or consent, by suffering or not regarding the
poison thereof, the end of both is death everlasting. Romans 6.23
How horrible that sin is, the Scriptures do tell. Sin breaks our
covenant with God, provoke anger of God, The fruits of sin in man.
seperateth his love from us, hasteneth his justice, procures our perpetual
destruction, caused Christ to come from heaven, and he the son of God to
suffer death for us, most wretched creatures, which else should have perished
in sin. Is of that nature, that if we wyllingly fall into it again, we
crucifye Christ anewe, and there is no more looking for redemption, but a
fearful waiting for the wrath of Gods furye, fire and vengeance. Finally, it
is the work of the Devil, and he the author thereof, who is the utter
aduersarye of God, and we his sworn enemies, and Gods famylye. How
intolerable a matter it is for the Queens seruante of her privy chamber,
from beggary exalted far above all bravery, to become Traitor to her grace,
and in her secret chamber to violate his faith, who sees not with darkened
eyes? How much more ugly is he, and most intolerable is his case, that casts
dyrte by sin every day into the face of God, by carnal concupiscence,
courtly carnal lusts, and fylthy actions. Well, from all this yet he the Lord
Christ saves his people, 1. Ioh. 1.7.
even his blood does wash their souls and bodies from every sin, and his
death does purge our consciences from dead works, Heb. 9.14 Esaias. 1.
to serve the living God. Of this delyuerance Esaias says: Wash you, make you
clean, if your sins were as red as Scarlet, I will make them as white as
Wool, Iere. 31.
says the Lord. Jeremy: Your sins and iniquities will I remember no more.
Ezechiel: Ezech. 18.
At what time soever a sinner does repent of his sin, from the bottom of his
heart, at that time will I put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says
the Lord. Repent (says Christ) and believe the Gospel. Mar. 1.15. Romans 1.16.
The gospel (says Paul) is the power of God (to deliver from sin, Satan and
Hell, and to bring) to salvation every one that rightly believes. 1. Tim. 2.4
Finally, this is the will of God, that all men should be saved, and come to
the knowledge of the truth. Behold a most ample delyuerance offered in Gods
mercy to all, but only his people have the fruition thereof, and that because
they come to the knowledge of his truth in their souls taught of God, by which
they are delivered from error and sin, Gods malediction and burning Hell. Ab
omni peccato (says saint John) from every sin as well actual as original,
1. Ioh. 1.7.
and that by the blood of Christ, for these be his words. Christ's blood does
still daily wash, flowing from the Fountain of his death, away al our sins.
The blood of Jesus Christ does wash (where note he does not say, has
washed, but the force thereof does wash, no more offered, but believed) from
every sin. Confounded, or converted at Gods good pleasure be all they, that
in Popery, or else, derogate from the sacrifice of Christ, this true validity,
this mighty and most perfect operation, and do give to their abominable
Mass, and self merittes the greater glory, Acurssed are all they that rest
upon the Mass for reconcyliation.
leaving Christ skante the reast: Namely that they hereby deliver men from
actual sins, and Christ's death only from Original trespass. O horrible
blasphemy, what Devil bewitcheth men to this madness? But good Reader,
remember as we have said, thy deliverer must himself be thy Lutrosis price
of redemption. Paul thy Doctor in truth tells thee, that Christ Jesus is
only he, 1. Cor. 1.30
saying to the Corinthians: Christ is made to us of God, wisdom and
righteousness, and sanctifycation, Math. 20.28.
(...) and the price of thy redemption. And our Savior says of himself thus.
The son of man is not come to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give
(not to sell as Popish priests do their sacrilegious Masses) his life (...),
for the ransom of many. The word Lutron say Beza and Erasmus in their great
Annotations, sygnifyeth the price of Redemption, that is, that thing which is
given to redeem those that be in captivity, which in English we call a
Ransom. Christ says he, is come to give himself to his Fathers justice for
this Ransom. But he has given that which he came to give, therefore by his
gift to his Father (we that believe in him) are raunsomed and for ever saved.
For he has paid as much as could or can be for us asked. Thus then thou
see (good brother) that we are raunsomed by Christ from all our iniquity,
and from every sin, and as the Apostle says: Heb. 10.14
all which are sanctified (by the faith in his blood) are made perfyte for
ever. They which be perfitely whole by Christ his death our medicine, need not
the Popish Physician. Mat. 9.12.
But we by Christ's death our medicine, are perfitly whole. No need of the
Mass, for it is Popish physic and trashe.
Therefore no need to us of the Popish Physician. For there is full
forgiveness of our sins in the sacrifice of Christ, to al ages that believe
in him. Therefore there is no more offering for sin.

Lastly, we are to remember whose sins the Lord Christ thus pardons, and
to whom is this Savior, vz his people, Math. 1.21
as the Angel says: He shall save his people from their sins. Now who they
are which be Gods people, I have sufficiently said in my Book of Benedictus,
and here they may be placed into these branches. Generally and specially.
Generally, all the people, tongues and Nations of the whole earth are the
Lords, as David says: The earth is the Lords and all that therein is, Psalm.
24.1.
the round world and they that dwell in it. The special people of God are
they, which be consecrate to him in holiness, which be of him predestinate to
life, chosen in and for Christ to salvation, sanctified by the holy Ghost,
redeemed by their Savior Christ, justified by his grace and death, peaceably
preserved by his aid in earth, and glorified by his truth in the heavens.
These are they of whom the Apostle says: The Lord has this sure seal, 2.
Tim. 2.19.
he knows who be his. And only these in him (their (...)) are saved from
their syns, the rest have condemnation abiding them, and that of themselves.
For he being the savior of the whole world, as Christ himself affirms,
John. 8. Ioh. 6.44
I am the worlds Savior: The same general sort (from whom these special by
the Father of heaven to his Christ are drawn) refuse their saving health in
him. They say with the proud Jews, we will not have this man to reign over
us. Come let us kill him, and prove whether he be the son of God. This is the
fruit of ignorant blindness, from which Christ came to deliver man, but
because the World loved darkness more then light, John. 3.19.
and refused the light when it was sent them. Therefore this is their
condemnation, says our Savior Christ.

Text.
Which thou haste prepared before the face of all people.
To be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of thy people
Israel.
In the verses before said, the man of God Symeon has opened one most
comfortable and true title of Jesus Christ, affyrming him to be our savior:
And now he prosecuteth his purpose, to show the same Savior to belong to all
Nations and people without exception. And also that their faith may be the
more confyrmed in him. He says that this Christ our Lord is prepared of God
our father, to be our Savior, our light and glory, which thou have prepared
before the face of all people (says he) to be a light to lyghten, etc. At the
first entering into these verses, we must consider that Symeon in them, gives
to Christ two most notable Epithits, names and tytles. He calls him the
light of the Gentyls, and the glory of the people Israel. The world he also
deuideth into two people, Jews and Gentyls, and unto all and every of them he
preaches this one Christ, to be prepared of God the Father for their saving
health, direction and glory.

But first let us note the mark that Symeon shoots at, even that which the
whole scriptures of God do: Namely to pretermitte all others, and only to
preach unto us from God the father alone, his only begotten son Jesus
Christ, to be our Savior, our light, guide, Shepherd, Bishop, Prophet,
Priest, Prince and Lord, which always is the work of the Father, to draw to
his son Christ, saying: Ioh. 6.44 Mat. 3.17. Mat. 17.5.
This is my beloved son in whom (not in any other matter or man) I rest well
pleased, hear him. The holy ghost in like manner bears witness of Christ,
preaches him, and teaches no other doctrine, 1. Cor. 3.11 1. Pet. 2.6. Ephesians.
2.20.
then first he gave to the Church. The Apostles lay him the only foundation
and corner stone of Gods house, denying all other to have such place in the
conscience of man. Peter calls the Pope and all other only to Christ.
Peter the Apostle (upon whose person that Antichrist of Rome, falsely
fathereth all his usurped authority) calls al men living stones, unto this
stone Christ, and calls him the stone only precious. That sinister doctrine,
which is laid upon this buylding, shall vanishe away, but all opposite to
the same, Gal. 1.8.
is thereby most flatly accursed, with the bringer and begynner thereof, be
they men or Angels. Hereby then is Popery proved guyltie of high Treason,
against the truth of God, which flat against the course of Gods book, and holy
church, sets into the consciences of men themselves, and their inventions
for Gods, their Saints of all sorts for lyghtes, and guydes, helpers and
Saviors, to the glory of their Pope, and ignominy of the Lord of the house
Jesus Christ. It is not Mary Gods mother, his Apostles, Angels or men: but
only and alone Jesus Christ, that Symeon says, GOD the Father has prepared,
and erected as it were upon an high place, that all men might see and perceive
him, to be to them al their only Savior, light and glory.

Secondly, our Salvation is by Symeon deuinely here alone given to Gods
provision, not man's devise, saying: He has prepared, and therein his great and
inestimable mercy is made manifest, who while every man falls in lust from
God to damnation, in security without remorse, God our good Father yet
prouydeth for them all, his one and alone saving health, an other himself,
even his only begotten son Christ our Lord. To this end is the Parable of
the Kings banquet, Mat. 22.4
where the Fatlings are killed, and al things made ready before the guestes be
called, so that their is no other thing for them to do, but only to obey the
voice of the Caller. Our Redemption is in Christ, the preparation in God the
Father, our grace to embrace and receive it, in the holy ghost. This was the
faith of the Patriarchs and first fathers. Thus David confessed, saying: Thou
do prepare a Table before me in the sight of mine adversaries. Psalm. 23.5.
This was the doctrine of Christ's Spirit in Zacharius lyps, that the mercy
of God gave and prepared us this light of the Gentyls, Luc. 1.78.
the day star from an high, and not for our proceeding works, which all were
malicious as Paul says to the Romans, or for our succeeding merits, Romans 5.8.
which are menstruous and fylthy in gods eyes, but of his own synguler love,
Esa. 64.6. Romans 8. Ioh. 3.16.
gave he us his prepared Christ for our Salvation, as this our heavenly light
and glory says: So dearly God loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten son thereto, that as many as believe in him should not perish, but
have life everlasting.

Thirdly, he has prepared him to be a Light to the Gentyls, and the glory of
Israel. Three things in the former Verse are to be noted. First, why Christ is
called Light. Secondly the use of this light. And thirdly to whom he is a
light given, to be made known unto: Namely unto the Gentyls.

Christ is most worthyly called light, not only because he is the engraven
form and brightness of the Father of lyghtes, but also because he gives
light, Col. 1.15. Ioh. 1.9.
and does illuminate the hearts of all things that come into the world, called
so not only for the light and life he gives to the body, Christ is our only
light.
but also and most specially, for the heavenly light of Gods knowledge, which
he engraueth by his word and spirit, in the hearts of all men, but most
effectually in the Elect and chosen children. Of which light and illumination,
the Evangelist John speaks in the gospel, saying: Ioh. 1.4.
In him was life, and this life was the light of men, and this light did shine
in darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it. By the word life, he
means all living power, which at this day is to be seen in all creatures,
as well endued with natural reason, spiritual wisdom, as savage creatures
and senseless things, trees, plants, herbs, grass, corn, etc. Each of
these has his proper life, and of Christ the Creator, the light and life of
all things. And for that no man should suppose this light, whereof he speaks,
to concern the life and light, which ever is common with the bodies of men and
beasts. He adds, that this life was the light of men. So teaching us, what
life we are to receive of him, we being blind and ignorante darkness: Namely
the lightning of our minds, with the word of his truth, whereby our hearts do
see in perfect wise Christ Jesus to be the day star from on high, Luc. 1.7.8
sent of his Father to give light to us Gentyls, that were in the door and
prison of darkness. Esa. 42.7.
Symeon had respect (no doubt) calling Christ a Light, to the Prophets which so
spoke of him: Namely that Noble Esaias, Esa. 42.6.
saying: I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine
hand, and I will keep thee and guide thee, for a covenant of the people, and
for a light of the Gentyls, that thou may open the eyes of the blind, and
bring out the prisoner out from the prison, and them that sit in darkness, out
of the prison house. And again: Esa. 49.6.
It is a small thing that thou should be my Servant, to raise up the Tribe
of Jacob, and to restore the desolations of Israel, I will also give thee for a
light to the Gentyls, that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the
world. Now in this Parable, there be two things worthy the note. First, that
all men in themselves, as well Jews as Gentyls, be mere darkness. The other,
that God the Father in heaven and earth, has given no other to illuminate
mankind, with the light of nature, of God and true godliness, but his only
begotten son Jesus Christ, and him only to the whole world, as himself
witnesses, Ioh. 8.12.
saying: I am the light of the world. And most lively is our Christ
represented by the glorious Sun, which being in his Sphere far above,
Christ our light, shadowed forth by the Sun.
performs al his office enjoined him without default, to the circuits of the
whole earth and Seas, and that to the ends of the world. And by the way note
(good Reader) how the Lord takes apt occasion by the time and place, where he
is, to teach himself, that he is to the hearts of men. When he was at Jacobs
Well with the woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4.10.
he took occasion by the Metaphor of water, to teach her the lycour of life.
By the desire the Jews had to earthy bread, and therefore followed him, Ioh.
6.15. Luc. 5.3.
he began to teach himself to be the bread of life. And teaching in the ship by
that miracle of Fishes, he taught the Apostles the way to catch men. The same
thing he uses in these words: I am the light, etc. For teaching in the
morning in the Temple, the Sun now shyning most brightly, bewtifying the
place to the great delight of the beholders, he calls them from the
terrestrial, to the son of righteousness, affirming in him to find the
true properties of the glorious son in deed. First, as the Sun is a most
pure Planet, most bright and clear, defiled with nothing wheresoever it
shyneth, but makes the dark and fylthy places more open to the eyes of men:
So Jesus Christ, the brightness of his fathers glory, Col. 1.15.
is of nature most pure and holy, and albeit he has taken our nature upon
him, lived amongst us, did accompany with sinners to their good, and abhorred
not to eat with Publicans, yet was he nothing defiled thereby, but by him these
fylthy persons made wholly to know themselves, and through him were illuminated
and fully sanctified. The Sun, that is to say the light, does so shine, that
himself may be seen of us, and does make all other living creatures to see by
him: So Jesus Christ our light, does so manifestly in his nature appear, that
the insensible heavens and earth do know him, and he does so power by his
spirit, the beams of his brightness into the hearts of his beloved, that
they by his spirit and resplendishing Scriptures, both perfitly (as flesh
may) know God the Father, and his Christ, and all things else, which be either
necessary, or expedient to their salvation in him, besides whom there is none
other. Act. 4.12. Psalm. 36.9.
This compelled David to say: With thee (O Lord) is the Well of life, and in
thy light, shall we see light. Through christ's light we see God to be our
father, and him the lord to be our Savior.
And as the light discovers darkness, and refreshes the toyled bodies, in
former obscurity: Even so Christ removing the former ignorance of God in us,
banyshing the terror of conscience, does most magnificently recreate our
senses, and refreshe our spirits, renouate our conscience, quiet our soul,
and replenishe us with joy. And like as the light does not only in darkness
of night guide our footesteps, but helps us aright to our whole business: So
Christ that eternal word of God, is the Lantern to our feet, and the light
to our labors, Psalm. 119.
in that the doctrine and precepts thence shyning to us, do direct our dark
souls into the paths of righteousness, and that for his own names sake. And
as light (banyshing darkness) opens to man's eye many things, which in mircke
midnight were not only shadowed, The commodities of light.
but also sheltered and so unknown, that many adulters, thieves, murderers
and wicked persons, by her were covered, John. 3.19.
and now by light disclosed (for which cause naturally they love darkness and
hate the light) So Christ having by his word of most cleerenesse and heavenly
power, banyshed from Realms, Familyes and persons, the darkness of ignorance,
makes known to them their syns, and reproves their errors, accuses the
corruption of man's nature, and plainly makes us see, that all those things
which without him we most embraced, are most filthy and horrible. And this is
the cause, why all such as wallow in wicked life and false Religion, do hate
Christ in his Gospel to this present day, Ioh. 3.19.
but to their utter ruin and self condemnation. Lastly, as one shyning Sun
serves the universal world, and is the only Fountain of light to all
lights in the same: So the bright son of God our righteousness Christ, is
the only author of spiritual light, whom the Father of lights has only
given to the whole world. And he does lighten every man that comes into the
world, Ioh. 1.9.
neither will he admit any copemate to be joined with him, What church is not
guyded by our light Christ only, is eclypsed and bloody to Christ and his
members.
but keeps the whole Regimente in and to himself. For as the Moon (the
figure of Gods Church) receives at the hands of the Sun her light, and is
so much darkened, as she wants of his brightness: So the Church of God, not
kept with the countenance of Christ's shyning face and Gospel, is wrapped in
the wayne of darkness, but lightened by his truth, she is most glorious, and
her natural spots shall not deface her: yet both Moon and Church remain to
be light by him, else as opposite to him, they are either dark or bloody, or
one or both. Let no man object to me, Lightened by Christ, her spots do not
hurt her.
that the Apostles are called also lights of the world, for that has the
true light imported in mercy to them by borrowed speech, as we may call the
Lantern a light, Ephesians. 5.25.26.27.
because the light shyneth by and through it, unto the whole household: And so
are the Apostles called lights, not because they are the light Christ, How the
Apostles and preachers of the word, are called light.
but because they bring unto us the true light, that dwells in them, which
does also by them and their labors (preaching and writing) shine into the
utmost parts of the earth, to the great comfort of all those that love the
same. To conclude, great is the mercy of our good God, seeing the darkness of
the world so great, that no otherwise it could be discovered and removed, gave
unto us this his own son, whom he has made to us the only light of God, to
Jew and Gentyle, that we should not for want of safe conduction, perish in
our wandering passage.

Now the use of this light, and whereto he is given us of God, Symeon does tell
us and says: it is that he should be revealed unto the Gentyls, and to be the
glory of the people Israel. Two things also the good father tells us in these
words. First yt the ages from time to time should know, that this one Christ
is to all them, and people in them, the one and only salvation, light, guide
and delyuerer, Christ is to all ages, the the one and only light to life.
sygnified by the two Nations by him named, Jew and Gentyle. The like does
Esaias before naming the Gentyls, and adds and health to the utmost parts of
the world. So Christ himself concludes, saying as before is said: I am the
light of the world, that is to say, of every place in the world, of all
sorts of men, women and children therein, and whosoever of these do desire and
seek at me aright for health and life. But says Symeon, this light is sent to
be revealed, and made known to this world. For the same cause Christ first
preached it: John Baptist and the Apostles were sent to manifest him thereto,
that as salvation was wrought by him: so they by faith (which comes by
hearing the word revealed) might apprehend it in him. Of which more a little
after, God so wylling.

But possibly some man would ask me, if Christ be the light and Savior of the
whole world, The cause of our great blindness in so clear light
how it is that so many therein are notwithstanding still blinded, and so
condemned? Christ answers (drawing his general speech to a special, which
only receive health by him) in the eight of John: Ioh. 8.12.
He that follows me, walks not in darkness. It is not ynnough that God
has made his son our light, unless we embrace and walk therein. And this
is the condemnation of the world (says Christ himself) that light came into
the world, Ioh. 3.19.
and men loved darkness rather then the light. The nature of these men is, to
hate the light, and to absent themselves from it, least their deeds should be
made manifest thereby. Lo, it is not that these want in the world that they
hate it, but for that they lust after their own will, to live wickedly still,
and therefore they refrain it: yea, and to their power restrain it also. But
here they are convinced in conscience, that the gospel is light, and they are
the sons of darkness, drawing to themselves damnation. I ask again, and if
Christ be the light of the world, The worlds darkness, what it is.
what is the darkness then of the same: It is a profitable question, and it
may be answered thus. The darkness of the world reprehended by Christ,
walloweth in two myrie and dangerous doungeons, that is to say, in false
Religion, and filthy conversation, both which Christ the light, calls
darkness, in that he says: Light came into the world, and men loved
darkness more then light. John. 3.19.


That a Religion or worship of God devised of man's brain, without warrante of
Gods word, is darkness, and the author and fautors blind, it is more then
apparente, to him that has but half an eye. Therefore the teachers thereof be
called blind guydes, Math. 23.24. Ephesians. 4.17.18.
the hearts embracing it, blinded, and the whole which follow it, in much pain
to themselves, walkers in the vanity of their darkened minds to their own
damnation, what intent, purpose, or seeking soever they have to serve God. But
amongst many the former false Religions, the Romish is not the least, Romish
Faith, the root and bottomless pyt of darkness.
from whose Pope and Clergy, has come the Cup of fornication, whereof all
Princes have drunk (not as the saying is till they stare, but yt which more
is) until they became stark blind, through yt greedy draught of excecating
ignorance. Apo. 17.4
And to prove the Religion of Rome a false, corrupt, and humane blind
Religion: First I say, I speak of the latter Rome, who has as an Apostata and
fylthy strumpet, run far away from her first faith, and faithful husband
Jesus Christ, and his covenant the gospel of God. Rome is run from God.
That the Church of Rome now is become an Apostata from her former faith, it
shall appear to all that measure her Religion, with that faith delivered to
that Church, and of them received by the pen of Paul, in his Epistle sent to
Rome, extante in the Lords Testament, Paul teaches it folly and wickedness.
Romans 1.23
To serve the immortal God, by the image of a mortal man. Is not the Church of
Rome fallen from this faith now? Does not her chief joy consist in Images of
mortal men, and seeks and commands men to serve God and saints, by and
before them, neither fearing Gods prohibiting law, or Paul their chief
Doctors proclamation, from his master Christ. Paul and Rome then believed,
Romans 5.28
that man was justified by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the Law.
But the Church of Rome now denies it flatly, and condemns them for
Heritiques, which be of that judgment. Rome did then (as Tertullian says)
acknowledge one God the Creator of all things, Tertul. de prescript Hereticorum.
and Christ Jesus the son of the Virgin Mary to be the son of God, to have
suffered death and to arise again. She did join the law and the Prophets, the
Gospel and the Apostolical Epistles together, and from that Fountain she did
drink her faith, she baptized with simple water, she was adorned with the
gifts of Gods spirit, she fed her people with the Euchariste (note he says
not Rome offered up the sacrament of Christ's body for the sins of the people.
But Rome receives it of the Lords institution, and fed her people therewith)
she exhorted her flock to the faith, by the constancy of Martyrdom in her
example, and against his order and institution she admitted no man. But what
does Rome now? Even as the Samaritans, The Papists believe with us, as the
Samaritans did with the Jews.
joined with the Jews in some and sundry points, but varyed from them in many
most wickedly: So does new Rome with Gods Church (in old Rome and ours now)
they join in some principal points of our Religion, as in the Trinity and
unity of persons, of the profession of the holy ghost, etc. But if ye once
come to the office of Christ, the fruit of his death, the valor of his
Sacrifice, the authority of his word, the contynuance of his sole priesthood,
and the truth of his sacraments, they flee from you as far as East from
weast, and utterly deny the ancient faith, and most fylthylye corrupt the
true administration of Gods mysteries, as men that never had heard of such
matters. Charge them with the scriptures, and they would compel them to stoop
to the false gloses. Offer them the name of Paul, and he is as odious in heart
to them, as a venomous Serpent to a woman, Genesis 3.
betwixt whom God has for ever set a perfect hatred. Notable is that saying of
the learned Lodouicus against the blyndnesse of his time in the latin Church.
Lodo. viues in li. 13 de ciuit Dei. cap. 2.
Augustinum vetustas tuetur, etc. Augustine is safe for his age. But if he and
Paul were alive again, he should be shaken of as a badde Rethoritian, or a
poor Gramarian. But saint Paul should be taken for a mad man, The Romans now
would call Paul an Heretic were he alive.
or else for an Heretic. This learned man (approved by them) thus openly
conuinceth them of flat Apostasye, and horrible blasphemy. Neither let any
man object to me, that this Church of Rome could possibly never err so
wickedly, for thou see by comparing them with the other (as before) how they
are degenerate, and Paul himself in his Epistle to the Romans, Paul feared
the Apostasy of Rome.
does warn that church of the same, which after came to pass, vz. that she
should take heed, for as God had not spared the natural branches, his Church
in Iewry: Cap. 11.21.22.
So they in that church of Rome should not be high minded, but stand in awe.
He exhorts them to consider Gods sharpness toward them that are fallen
away, and his goodness to the church of Rome, and other Gentyls, that they
may by grace remain in their received goodness. Otherwise says Paul: Thou
also (though thou be the church of Rome) shall be cut off. Then sir there is
fear in Paul, of the errors and departing from the faith, which after came to
pass (I say in the Church of Rome) and remains at this day so, as one of
the Popes Legates, called Cheregatus, Io. Sleda. lib. 4. Io. Sarisb.
sent by Adryan then Bishop of Rome, to the great assembly of the Empire at
Norembirge in Germany. 1523. by his masters warrante, said thus, in ye
assembly. A sacerdotibus iniquitatem populi duianare multis nunc annis, etc.
That is, the iniquity of the people grew from the priests, and that now for
the space of many years, there have been great offenses committed in Rome, and
all this plague and mischief have followed unto all the inferior Rulers of
the church, even from ye high throne of the Popes (saving thy reverence good
Reader) own holiness. Fasciculus reru^ sciendarum.
And in the late Counsel (or conspiracy rather) at Tridente. Cornelius Bishop
of Bitanto has affyrmed the like. Al filthynes from the Pope.
They have brought to pass (says he) that godliness is turned into
hypocrysie, and that the savor of life is turned into the savor of death.
Would God they were not gone wholly with general consent, from Religion to
superstition: from faith to infydelity: from Christ to Antichrist: from God to
Epicurisme, saying with wicked heart and filthy mouth. There is no God.
Neither has there been this great while any pasture or Pope, that regarded
these things, for they all (both Pope and Prelates) sought their own, and not
so much, as one of them (neither Pope or Cardinal) sought for the things that
pertayne to Jesus Christ. By this sufficient witness of their own (good
Reader) thou now see, as the church of Rome may err: So in deed and truth,
she has for many years erred, and that most fylthyly. Examine the chief
points of her Religion, wherein she most gloryeth, and thou shall find them
either to have their beginning and warrant of man's mortal brain, or if
borrowed from Christ's word and institution, the same greatly corrupted,
shadowed and abused. Chose what point thereof that lyketh thee best, and it
will so appear in euydent proof, The opinion of syngle li^e in priests
examined.
in apparent truth. As for example. The syngle life of popish priests, is a
principal point of their profession. Against which we will fetch no other
witness then themselves, and their allowed Doctors, to prove that this opinion
and most stricte yoke (which not many of them are, or can he able to bear) is
far short the warrante of God, and devised of their self invention, rather
Ex diametro, Priests syngle life, is an humane constitution, against God and
holy scripture.
right against God and his sacred word. First Hierome says, that Paul does
not command christian men to put away their wives. The words of this Father,
their Church Doctor as they challenge him, are upon the words of Paul. Let
every man abide in the vocation wherein he was called. Ex hoc habentibus
vxores. etc. Hereby S. Paul byddeth not married men to put away their wives
says Hierome. Hier. co^tra Iouinianu^ lib. 1. Did. 31. Quoniam.
Ergo say I, Christianity or the Gospel compels not syngle life. Further
in the sixte counsel at Constantinople, it is thus set down: Following the
old Fathers, and diligence of the Apostles, and the constitutions and laws of
the holy fathers, from henceforth we will that the lawful marriage (of priests
and Bishops) shall stand in force, not in any ways dissoluing the lawful
marriage bed with their married wives. Note, he says that the marriage of
Bishops and priests is the order, diligence, and laws of the Apostles and holy
fathers, and says their marriage bed is lawful, and therefore will not they
compel syngle life to the Clergy. But yet more, a most dear friend to the
Pope, and gatherer of his fragmentine law, called Gratian says hereof. Copula
sacerdotis, etc. 16. Ques. 2. sors.
The marriage of priests says he, is not forbidden by any authority, either
of the law, or of the Gospel, or of the Apostles. Saint Ambros expounding
these words of the Apostle: Ambro. in 1. Cor. 7.
Touching Virgins I have no commandment, says: Si Doctor gentium non habuit,
quis habere potuit? If the Doctor of the Gentyls had no commandment of the
Lord touching Virgins, what man else then could ever have? Clemens
Alexandrinus says, all the Epistles of the Apostles, all which teach
sobriety and continente life, Clem. strom. li. 3.
whereas they contain innumerable precepts touching Matrimonye, bringing up
of children, and government of house, yet they never forbad honest and sober
marriage. The Apostles never forbad honest marriage.
And to suffice this matter, I will stay with the testimony of the Popes own
Legate Slatere Cardinal Caielanus, whose words are touching this matter thus:
It cannot be proved either by reason, Card. Ca. in quodli. contra Luthe.
nor by authority (speaking absolutely) that a priest synneth in marying a
wife. For neither the order of priesthood, in that it is order, nor the same
order in that it is holy, is any hindrance to matrimony. For priesthood
breaks not marriage, whether it be contracted before priesthood, or afterward.
Setting all Ecclesiastical laws aparte, and standing only unto those things,
Pano. de claric. co^iuga. cum olim.
which we have of Christ and his Apostles. Abote Panormitane says: Single life
is not of the substance of the order of priesthood, nor of the law of God. The
long practice in the church of Rome, approoueth marriage in Ministers or
priests, holy and lawful, and syngle life in Popish priesthood compelled,
to be a corrupt law after long time by tyranny thrust upon the Clargy. Pope
Damasus writes that many Popes of Rome themselves were married priests sons:
Sundry the Bishops of Rome mary^^ priests children.
As Syluerius Pope was the son of Syluerius also a Bishop of Rome: Pope Dens
dedit, was the son of Steven a Subdeacon: Pope Adrianus, Ex Damaso ad Hieron
ex Platina and Nan clero.
the son of Thalar a Bishop: Pope John. 15. the son of Leo a Priest: Pope
Hosius, Steuens son Subdeacon: Agapetus Pope had one Gordeanus a priest to
his Father: Pope Gelasius, was the son of Valetius a Bishop: Pope Boniface
the son of Iocundus the priest. Pope John the 10. was the son of Pope
Sergius. The second Syluerius was the son of the Bishop Ormysda. Anno Domini.
524. Pope Felix. 3. the son of Felix a priest of Rome. 474. Pope Theodorus
was the son of Theodorus Bishop of Jerusalem. 634. And Policrates Bishop of
Ephesus does show, that seven of his parents did (linially discending)
possess the Sea and Bishopric of Ephesus before him, and he himself was the
eight. In the time of Pope Alexander. 3. there was a controversy in England,
for the Patronage of a Benefice, betwixt the Prior of Plympton in Devonshire,
and one John de valle forda. The Judges were deputed, Richard Archbishop of
Caunterbury, and Roger Bishop of Wynchester, before whom the Prior of Plympton
proved his right thus. A Jury patronatus in England proved, for the Benefice
of Plymoth by the succession of married priests children.
There was says he, a priest of Plympton called Alpheidge, and had the
benefice of Sutton, now called Plymouth, of the Pryor of Plympton. This
Alpheidge had a son called Sadda, which also had the benefice after his
father, and after Sadda, was there another priest called Alnoldus, which also
had the benefice, this Alnoldus had a son called Robart Dunpruste, D. Barns
ad. Henr. Regeni. 8.
which after the decease of his father Alnolde had also the said benefice. And
after this Robart Dunpruste, Wylliam Bakon his son, likewise enjoyed the same
benefice. And so feast thou good Reader, both abroad and at home, the Church
of Rome to have practiced in priesthood, holy matrimony without check. Damas.
did. 56. cap. osius. Polid. de invent rerum. li. 5.
For all these and a great many more, the Popes law testifyeth to be the sons
of Subdeacons, Deacons, and priests, and have borne the Myter in the Church of
Rome. Polidorus Virgilius says, that the restraynte of priests marriage, was
first attempted in England, about the year of our Lord. 970. and was concluded
in the Romish Church after Anno. 1100. and never before: Fabyan page 293.
So that as Fabyan testifyeth, Bishops and priests lived with their wives in
holy Matrimony, after Christ's ascension, about a thousand years together.
Is not this a plain proof, Priests marriage lawful a thousand years after our
Christ's ascension.
that syngle life is lately, not yet 600. years ago, grown into the Church,
and so the invention of man, compelling men to that extremity, which neither
God or his Church does command. Virginity (says Ambrose) is a thing that
may be counseled, but not compelled. These Romanists do command that
herein, which themselves keep not, as Orygen says so long fythe, Non solum,
etc. Orig. in mat. tract. 24.
Not only they do not that they teach, but also cruelly and without mercy,
they command others to do, that they be not able, not consydering or waying
each man's strength. Such be they says he, that forbid men to marry, and from
that thing that is lawful, drive and force men to an immoderate kind of
uncleanness. Hier. aduersus Iouinia^. li. 1.
But they are condemned of their chief Doctor Hierome, who says thus: Si quis
consideret virginem suam, etc. If any man consider that his own Virgin, that
is to say, his own flesh, grows proud and boyleth unto lust, and e^^n of
stay it, there is said upon him a double necessity, either to take a wife, or
to fall. If a Papiste would replye, this in the laytie lawful, but not in the
priests, which have vowed chastity and syngle life, let him remember what his
own rule, written in his fathers law the Popes Decree says. In malis
promissis, etc. 22.9.4.
In an evil promise break thy faith ( 1. thy oath) in an dishonest vow change
thy purpose, that thou have unadvisedly vowed, see thou do it not, it is an
evil promise that is kept with wickedness, etc. But to help this darkness,
the Papists use a mistie reason, Holy marriage, no let to godlynes in Ministers.
amongst sundry Paradoxes, Marriage is (say they) an hyndrance to priests in
their office, therefore may they not marry. Yet the old fathers gathered forth
of the vewe of holy scriptures, example that marriage was no let, but a
furtherance rather, and in deed to godly life. Chrysostom says, Chri. 1.
Ti. hom. 10.
although marriage has much trouble in it self, yet may it so be taken and
used, that it shall be no hindrance to perfect life. Cont. Iudeos and Ge^t. To.
3 page 363.
Again he says: Excuse not thy self by thy marriage. Thy Lord was at the
marriage feast, and honored it with his presence, and yet do thou blame
marriage? And say thou that marriage is an hynderance unto godliness? I tell
thee marriage is no manner of hyndrance unto godlynsse. Wylt thou know that it
hyndereth not to have a wife, and to have children? Had not Moses wife and
children? Behold Peter, a pyller of the Church, he had a wife, therefore find
no fault with marriage. Again Esaias (says he) the beholder of celestial
Seraphins, who notwithstanding, he had company with his wife, yet he quenched
not the grace of God. Again, Esaias had a son and a wife, that thou may
understand that marriage is not evil, but that fornication is evil. Again,
Aug. in ques. nou. and vet. Tes. q. 127
what did marriage hinder thee? No, thy wife is given thee to be thy help, and
not to deceive thee. Augustine says, most holy Samuel begat children, and yet
nothing abated the merittes of his righteousness. Zacharias the priest in his
old age begat a child (to say John Baptist) wherefore then is that thing
accused, which is proved to do no manner of hurt. Ambr. in 1. Cor. 7.33.
Again Ambrose says, we see both Virgins to be careful for the world, and
married persons to be careful for the works of the Lord. But so far says
godly Chrysostom, is marriage from hindering, that it much helps to
godliness, and administreth great comfort. For it represseth the rage of
natures fury (says he) suffceth us not to be dashed and toste as the waves of
the Sea, Marriage an help to godliness in priests.
but causes that our ship may happily arrive into the Haven. Christ. in genesis
ho. 21.
And for that cause has God given this comfort unto mankind. To be short,
the learned priest Gregory Naziancene, testifyeth of his fathers help by
marriage (being the Bishop of Nazianzum) on this sort. Euah that was given to
Adam for an helper, became an enemy, etc. Nazian. in Ehitaph patris.
My mother being given to my father of God, became not only his helper, for
that had been no great wonder, but also was his leader and Captain, both by
word and by deed, trayning him to the best. And albeit in other things, it
were best for her to be subject unto her husband for the right of marriage, yet
in Religion and godliness, she doubted not to be his maystres. Thus have these
fathers proved marriage, and marriage of priests to be no hindrance to
godliness, but a godly help thereto. Wherefore we may conclude, that as syngle
life compelled, without consyderation to each priest and minister of God, is
without the will of God in his word. So is that restraynte of marriage the
doctrine of the Devil, as Paul says to Bishop Timothe. 1. Tim. 4.3.
Let no man make his excuse by his wife or children (says Chrysostom) etc.
For this excuse and this pretense, is the craft and deceytfulnesse of the
Devil. But the Pope restrayneth marriage, therefore the Devils Doctor. Happily
hereto it will be said with Augustine: Aug. con. Faus. li. 30 ca. 6.
He forbids marriage, that says marriage is evil, and not he that sets
before things being good, an other thing that is better. Consider yet I pray
thee this doctrine of the Pope. Qui in carne sunt, etc. They which be in the
flesh, Did. 82. posuisti.
cannot please God. But they which be married, are in the flesh: Therefore they
which be married cannot please God. Apol. 183.
Syricius the Pope calls marriage vice, letchery, and fylthy lust. One
Louaniste says, the East church maintained a school of fylthynesse, in cause
of the priests marriage there defended. To call marriage vice, letchery, fylthy
lust, to say that in marriage a man cannot please God, to call those Infidels
that marry, as Inocentius did 82. plurimi does, to say it is a School of
fylthynesse, I suppose is to speak more then much evil of marriage, and does
say it is evil. The Pope and the Papists with him thus speak of it, therefore
they give forth herein the doctrine of the Devil, and compel by his doctrine
their fylthy syngle life. And as the Apostle says; when the Romans their
forefathers thought themselves wise, they became fools, and turned the glory
of the immortal GOD, Romans 1.22
to the image of a mortal man, etc. Wherefore God gave them up to all
fylthynesse: Even so of right it is come to pass in the Roman papists now, to
have the like judgment, that they may reap the fruit of their iniquity, and
that the blind guydes and like led people might perish together, John. 3.
that refuse the light Christ and his gospel, and embrace by love carnal this
deuillishe doctrine: What fruits this syngle life brings to the world in the
Popish Clargie, Filthy fruit of Popish syngle life.
I blushe to speak. I will not therefore tell of those 6000 childrens heads,
which when saint Gregory the first as they call him (the worste Bishop of Rome
in deed, of all that went before him, but the best of all which have
succeeded his place and dignity) did draw his Fish ponds in Rome, in stead
of well grown Carps, were taken up Isay 6000 childrens heads, to the reproach
of all popish fruit, in popish priestly syngle life. This fruit is
whoredom and murder, upon which occasion Gregory repented, that he had given
precept of syngle life, remembering the senten^e of Paul. It is better to marry
then to burn, 1. Cor. 7.9
he there to added (drawing back his wicked decree, seeing it an occasion of
great whoredom and murder) It is (says he) better to marry then to give such
occasion of murder. Epi. cont. O^^g. her^s. 42.
We may say of these Chaplains and their fellows, as Epiphanius said of such:
They refuse marriage, but not lust or pleasure for they esteem not chastity,
but hypocrisy, and yet the same hypocrisye, they will have called chastity.
Can the Popish Clergy he painted more plainly: I trow not certainly, Much
less will I say then either their deserte or cause craves, this that I have
said does sufficiently set forth this to be mere popish darkness, and that
suffices our purpose at this time. Trust me (good brother) as in this point
thou may easily perceive their tretchery: So in the remnante of their
Religion, there is neither truth, nor true godliness.

Now concerning the second branch of the word darkness, which is corruption
of life. If thou will ask, The darkness of England.
and what corruption? I study to say, not for want of cause, but where to
begin. I leave to speak of forreyne Nations, and would to God we had no
cause to descry the sickness of our selves. England Lord grant her
repentance. Esa. 1.5.6
Oh the sins of England. They are (as Esaias says of his time) from the top
to the sole of the foot there is no health. The princes and Nobles wax weary
of the word of life, they may not abide to be touched at the quick. Secondly,
such rather wish that the word should have no preachers to reveal it, then
their iniquity should be made known to their amendment by it. I know the
Lord be praised, that we have sundry doughtie David's, that yet will humbly
hear with noble hearts, How princes and noble men must be reproved of sin.
the Prophet Nathan to reprove their ill, so he does it by some pretty shadow,
as Nathan did. And truly noble persons, are to be used with reverend regard
(their sin not nourished) least as we slide from Nathan his example, we do
less good, then either our desire, or their condition may require. So be there
also hawtie hearts in honors seat, to whom John Baptist cannot without great
hatred and like displeasure, reprove those things in them, which the whole
world cries out upon. This is corruption, but would to God this and the
rest were far from all our Nobility. The poor tenants cry out of some, as
done to beggary by unreasonable fynes, racked rents, great enclosures,
privation of their ancient Commons into Parkes and pastures, not for fallow,
but for well tallowed shamble Dear. Oh vile debase of Noble state, to
acquainte themselves with grasing art, and Butchers skill, or to destroy for
woole and Lamb, the Lambs of Christ, bought with the precious blood of the
son of God. Act. 20.8.
The Courtly pleasures, and Venus Court is an horrible darkness of these
days, women be changed into men's aparell, that is thought a Courtly comlynes,
which the almightye God does condemn in his law, for great abomination: The
woman shall not wear that which belongs or pertayneth to the man (says the
Lord) (as Dublet and breeches and such like) neither shall a man put on women's
apparel, Deuteronomy. 22.
for all that do so, are an abomination unto the Lord.

Give ear to this you Courtly Madams, which dance in men's Dublets to the
want of womanhood, The Courtly guyse in wantons.
the breche of this law, and the offense of good people, which rather then to
do, you ought to abstain from your fantasies, were your lewdness herein
lawful. Whether ye eat or drink (says the Apostle) or whatsoever ye do,
do all to the glory of God (not to your own flaunte, 1. Cor. 10.31.
and vain glorious shows) give none offense, neither to the Jew, nor to the
Grecians, nor to the Church of God. Mark this you cannot replye, and say. Who
has to do with us, who shall comptroll us, we are the masters of our selves.
For even in those things which be lawful and indifferent, the more Noble, the
greater care you ought by the rule of Gods holy word, In indifferent things,
the help or hurt of our brethren, is chiefly to be respected
to have to your actions, for ye cause of your brethren, which be either Gods
enemies as the Jews, who may not receive offense at you, or Grecians, popish
worldlings or wanton Atheists, which seek to be of the fashion, though it be
against god, or yt the people of God, by your insolency be grieved, the danger
whereof is not small: Whosoever (says our master Christ) shall offend one of
these little ones which believes in me, Mat. 18.6.
it were better for him that a Mylstone were hanged about his neck, and he
were drowned in the depth of the Sea. Yea greater care, the noble, the mighty,
the rich, the proud, one and other ought to have of their godly brethren,
then of their own members. Woe to the world (says our Christ in the place
before coted) because of offenses, for it must needs be that offenses shall come,
but woe be to the man by whom they do come. Wherefore if thine hand or thy
foot cause thee to offend, cut them of from thee, it is better for thee to
enter into life halt or maimed, then having two hands or two feet, to be cast
into everlasting fire. And if thine eye cause thee to offend, pluck it out,
etc. Lo christian, thy bodies desire must to her great loss, give place to
thy brothers good estate. David therefore prays the Lord, to shut up his eyes
from beholding of vanity. For hence it is, Psalm. 119.
that the concupiscence of the heart (being produced by the conducte of the
eye) does lust after the pride of this world, without regard of God his
people, his or our enemies, or our own dear brethren, whom either we strain
with their sorrow to sore after our Courtly guyse, Two evils in outrageous
apparel.
or else we grieve their consciences to behold our too to much vanities. And
this is monstrous, that that which is to us a signification of our first
fathers sin, in whom we all are damned to death, should be to us a delighting
pleasure, and the same which was given to cover our shame, Genesis 3.21. 1. Cor.
15.22.
we should abuse to our great confusion. For most true it is that apparel,
whereof we now pride so much, was and is the accuser of sin, for our first
parents were naked before they sinned, and were not ashamed, because nothing
gave cause to blushe, they free from sin, and being made to the image of God.
But having transgressed his commandment, they saw their nakedness and
sinful bodies by eating of the apple, The cause of apparel is sin.
and did blushe, for shame, blushing and confusion are the fruits of sin, to
whom now some couerture was necessary, as well to keep the less honorable
parts secret, as to defend them from the parching sun and Winters cold.
Genesis 3.21.
Wherefore our good God, gave to either of them a coat of peltes or skyns.
This simple sufficient attire condemns two sorts of persons, the Adamits
which run naked, to counterfeyte Adam and Heuah, which thing if God would to
have had in use, he had not given these naked creatures these needy coats. The
other are our lusty Gallants of either sex, that to to much do glory in their
apparel, which is and ought to be to them, a preacher of their fathers shame.
In our attire we ought to keep modesty and comlynesse, each man in his degree
(as their is great difference) the which to exceed, is thus to walk in
darkness. First, they inuerte the use of aparell, that is either a bound
beyond their calling, or take pride therein, which only ought to defend their
bodies, as is said, and to put us in mind of our frail condition. These
blind men are like to those fellows, chayned with heavy yrons, for some
horrible murder, and yet do brag of them, as of matter worthy much glory,
and therefore set them forth to show in all bravery. Secondly, the delight of
brave and costly array, does marvelously increase the pride of the lurking
heart, which once enflamed, is never content, but causes us to forget our
state and condition, it enuyeth others more gaye, and despises all such as to
us be attyred in inferior sort. Evil branches of a naughty tree.
Thirdly, proud aparell, as it satisficeth fleshly appetite: so is it very
offensive to the most beholders. Add to this, it bewrays a lewd heart, a
light person, a vain mutable man, delighting change in vanities, and such a
one is ever inconstante in all his ways. Neither did godly Judith deck her in
proud array, Iudi. 10.1.
till she purposed to spoil curssed Holophernes. And cruel Iezabel sought to
allure Iehu his heart, by her sumptuous show in bravery. Fourthly, you break
contemptuouslye this commandment of Christ: Be not careful what to put on,
etc. If not for necessaries, Math. 6.
how much less for these superfluous vanities, which shall bring woes and Gods
everlasting curse, to them which be faulty herein. Lastly, the judgment of
God aprooueth his hate hereunto, which beats down justly so many to
beggerie, from former great patrimony, by their sinful excess in costly
aparell, and does also often throw us into those Country plagues, whose
fashions we have most favored, in the strange guyse of monstrous attire. But
perhaps these Courtly Ladies and Gentiles will do, as our Lord Christ says,
the Pharyseis did. They did hate the present teachers, and yet they made much
of the Monumentes of the Prophets, Mat. 23.29
whom their forefathers murdered. And it may be that these our rich and
mighty Gallaunts will say, what have these prattling preachers to do with us?
why should they correct us? let them keep them to the Text of Scripture. Well
then, we will in this point pleasure you, Mark ye lusty Gallants.
and to end withal, only give you the Scripture Text, which would GOD ye
would take heed unto, Luc. 1.78.
till the day star Jesus Christ apeared fully in your hearts. Thus says this
scripture then against this dark corruption of pride, in the rich practiced,
for want will not permit the hawtie hearts of the least able to atchyue hereto.
Now hearken to you Nobles of either sex, ye Gentiles and rich in lands and
possessions, for now the Lord himself speaks unto you: Esa. 3.11.
Woe be to the wicked (says the Lord) it shall be evil with him, for the
reward of his hands shall be given him. Children are Extortioners of my
people, and women have rule over them (as Iezabel had of her husband Achab, to
spoil Naboth of his Vineyarde, for her prides sake) O my people, they that
lead thee, cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths. The Lord
stands up to plead: yea, he stands to judge the people. The Lord shall
enter into judgments with the ancients (that is the Rulers and governors) of
his people, and the princes thereof, for ye have eaten up the Vineyarde, the
spoil of the poor is in your houses (the case is something changed in our
days, for the spoil of the poor by the mighty covetous rich, is for the most
passed their hands into the Merchant Vserers house, Entrest eating up both
stock, state, gain and substance) what have you to do, that you beat my
people to pieces, and grynde the faces of the poor says the Lord (that is,
they show all cruelty and extreme impouerishment of them) even the Lord of
hosts. The Lord also says: Because the daughters of Syon are hawtie
(christian women proud) and walk with outsteetched necks, Read and beware to
offend the Lord.
and with wandering eyes, walking and mynsing as they go (they tryp on typtoes)
and making a tinckling with their feet. Therefore shall the Lord make the
heads of the daughters of Syon balde, and the Lord shall discover their secret
parts. In that day shall the Lord take away the ornament of the slyppers and the
Cawles, and the round tyres of the head, and the slops (be they linen or
sylken secret breeches) and the head bands, and the Tablets, and the ear
Rings, the Rings and the Muflers, the costly apparel and the vayles, and the
wymples and the crispine pinnes (wherewith these monstrous heads in heir be
frisled, beyond Natures disposition) and the Glasses and the fine linen, and
the hoods, and the Lawnes. And in stead of sweet savor, there shall be stink,
The plague of pride and superfluous apparel.
and in stead of a gyrdle, a rent, and in stead of dressing of the heir
baldness, and in stead of a stomacher, a gyrding of sackcloth, and burning in
stead of bewty. Thy men) that is to say, your fond husbands which fed your
follyes) shall fall by the sword, and thy strength in the battle. Then shall her
gates mourn and lament (their pride) and she being desolate (void by conquest
in war of her Governors and Nobles) shall sit on the ground (in sadness and
sorrow) The days of our pride in deed may boast of antiquity, as here we
see, but therewith the preachers warrante is declared, by the Sermon of this
imboldened Esaias, in whom the promise of God, to all his Ministers in the
person of Jeremy was apparente. Thou therefore trusse up thy loins and arise
(says the Lord) and speak unto them al, that I have commanded thee. Ier.
1.17.
The Preacher shall be destroyed first, if ^ee wynke at others syn.
Be not afraid of their faces, lest I destroy thee before them. For I, behold
I, (a notable warranting consolation to Gods Preacher) I this day have made
thee a defenced City, and an iron pyller, or walls of Brass against the
whole land, against the kings of Judah, and against the princes thereof,
against the priests thereof, and against the people of the land, for they shall
fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee, for I am with thee
to deliver thee says the Lord. Christ is the light, his word and preachers
manifest the same: He is given of the father to be revealed unto men. And
though kings and men seek to stop the same, he shall prevail in his weak
instruments, at his good pleasure, mauger their malice. Wherefore ye dark
Doughties, and Damsels Fears, which turn day into night, and night into day,
lie in Beds of Iuory, Esa. 5.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.15. Amo. 6.4.5.
and quasse carowsse in Goblets of Gold, which despise to have the light of
the Gospel, to pierce your hearts, that increase your Instruments of Music
above David's number, and have no compassion on Joseph's imprisonmente and
miseries. Suffer this word to be revealed to you, seek it, hunger after it,
eat it: In taste to flesh and blood it is bitter, in digestion hard, Iere.
15.16.
but in operation sweet, pleasante and most profitable. The nature of Gods
holy word.
It is more sweet (says David that Noble Gentleman and king) then Honey or
the Honey Comb. Psa. 19.119
It is more precious then Gold and Silver. For it is the Lantern to thy
feet, and the light to thy paths. It is the immortal seed, 1. Pet. 1.23. Ia.
1.18. 1. Pet. 2.2.
that begets unto God: It is the Milk for Babes, and bread of Gods
children: It is the muniment of Gods war, whereby all strong holds, vain
imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted against God, is thrown
down: 2. Cor. 10.4. Psalm. 19. Romans 1.16.
It brings into captivity every thought, and conuerteth the soul, to the
obedience of Christ. Finally, the word of God now preached, is the power of
GOD to take vengeance of the disobedient, and to bring to salvation, all them
which love, live, and believe the same. This word by the Prophets remains,
crying out of the darkness of the ritche, so that we may see, how as a Canker
covetousness has festered into the whole progeny of the worldly more wealthy.
Micha. 2.
Woe unto them (says Micha) that imagine iniquity, to work wickedness upon
their beds, when the morning is light, they practice it, because their hand
has power. And they covet Fields says he, and take them by violence, and
houses and take them away (a Town is turned into a Sheepecoate) so they
oppress a man and his house, his blood and kyndred, even man and his heritage.
But against this Family have I devised a plague, wherout you shall not (says
the Lord) pluck your necks. They shall lament dolefully over thee and say: We
be utterly wasted. The Destroyer shall be destroyed, this is his just plague.
What darkness is this that so many Noble men, men of worship, and men of
wealth professing the Gospel, shall read this and not see it, shall hear and
not understand this, but the covetous cares and pleasures of this life, has
choked his word in their hearts, and therefore they rise and turn on the other
side against the Lord of life. But what is the darkness of the common sort.
Truly one with the best sort (as the world counts best) ignorance of God
and his word, and cruelty one to another. For as for whoredom and such
gross sins, they are so common as skante they are thought worthy reproof:
Robery in a Gentleman, is wrapped up with helas, it was need in him: Great
darkness.
Theft is good shift for tall fellows to live by: Whoredom is called the work
of Nature, and drunkenness good fellowship, etc. O Lord shine into this
doungeon of darkness, with the beams of thy revealing truth, that our hearts
may once hate to sleep in this bed of sin and security, for thy Christ's
sake. But as their is a lyking general (except of Gods chosen) and mutual for
these evils: So is there else a pestilent hate among these sorts of men. For
the Rich men (as Micha says) are full of cruelty, Mich. 6.12
and the inhabitants of the land speak lies one to another, there is to day,
no trust in man's tongue: The worlds fashyon.
We are become Coosoners one of another, there is but deceyte in our mouths.
The good men perish amongst us, and there is none righteous in earth. Men lie
some in wait for blood, 7.2.
others hunte as with a Hay net, to catch his brother. The Judge judges for
rewards, the great man speaks out the corruption of his heart, and so
against the poor it is shut up, Mic. 6.13.74.
that no man dare whisper against him. Therefore will the Lord make us sick
with smyting, and desolate because of our sins. The day of our watchmen and
visitation comes, then shall be our confusion. Again, Gods church is
spoiled, the people by impropriations robbed of their Pastor, by whose
spiritual feeding, this bread of life should work salvation by Christ in
them. This is presumptious darkness. Ioh. 2.15.
Christ drove out those which bought and sold in the Temple, and said that
they made it a den of thieves. But what will he do to these, Impropria^^ons,
the seed of ignorance in godly knowledge, and a great cause of Gods anger over
us.
which buy and sell the church it self, and al her maintenance? From God and
his Ministers to Atheists, Papists, and curssed worldlings: that live of the
Churches spoil, and hate the Lord thereof, his word and ministry. David
says: He hates all those that have evil will at Syon. Antiochus for spoiling
the Temple, had a shameful end. Let not these in this, look for a happy
blessing. Will a man spoil his Gods? (says the Lord) but you have spoiled me,
Mala. 3.8.
and yet you say wherein have we spoiled thee? In tithes and offerings have you
spoiled me (says the Lord) ye are curssed with a curse, for ye have
spoiled me (says the Lord) even this whole Nation. Note well beloved, this
darkness is more pestiferous, in that it does beget the ignorance in learned
letters, and of Gods truth to the posterity to come. For who is he that seeing
the Church so spoiled, will send and set his son to school to be a
preacher, when the reward of that holy learning and place, is next unto
beggary? except the high Roumes. This is Gods judgment for ignorant
darkness. But when shall I make an end, a whole volume would not sufficiently
set forth the worlds darkness, and humane frail conditions. For the preachers
are to the people as a merry sound, Ier. 5.13. Eze. 33.32.
(as the Prophet says) of one which syngeth a pleasant song: And so it is
now. All our endeavor is to mark the Preachers cunning, his Eloquence and
synguler gifts, and when the Sermon is ended, we think sufficiently to have
answered all our duty, if upon the conceived delight of his well digested
order, The love of this time to Gods word and ministers.
and sound delyuery, we can, and do give him his due commendations, but the
cause wherefore God sent him, or he spoke to our amendment we regard not, but
as we came so we go, and continue as we were, as not having heard at all Gods
prophet sent amongst us. This universal old and most horrible darkness. The
Country has received the Courtly vice, night is turned into day, and day
into night, to bed at midnight, and up at the noone day. The Sermon Bell does
lull these Babes a sleep, and Satan laugheth at their swynishe slumber. Halas
this sin. Idolatrous feasts are daily kept, the Church Saint must have his
wake day, which is all spent (being the Lords Sabbath) in Bearebating, Bacchus
cheer, and Venus fylthy sports. This execrable darkness in England without
restrainte. Every man seeks praise one of another, and therefore can they not
believe, Ioh. 8.47.5.44.
and seek the only praise of God. This flattering darkness. The holy
Ministry is holden in contempt (Christ and his Father despised in them) their
patrons many, Poling Patrons.
are become Latrons, and pryue the preachers portion to serve their own
provision (it is enough for the priest to have ten powndes by the year, and
for this too, he shall besides carry a dyshe to his masters Table, or else
stand at the dresser, orderly to set out the messes of meat, and supply the
Clarke of the kytchyns place, his Service and Homilyes he must cut short, and
measure them by the Cooks readynesse, and dynner dressing, the roste near
ready, the kitchen boy is sent to master Parson, to bydde him make have, the
meat is ready, and his master calls for dynner, he comes at a beck, not
daring to deny or make longer stay, least his delay might cause the Cook to
burn the meat, and he be called of master and men, Sir John burn Goose.
These Parsons must begin and end Gods deuyne service at their Patrons
pleasures) This sacrilegious darkness. Again, Gods Ministers have taken to them
womanishe hearts, they do not, or dare not reprove the rich and mighty of
their iniquity. This is our spiritual sin, of which Chrysostom says:
Chrysostom.
Reprove the myghtie in sin, and they will fear thee, be afraid of them and
they will despice thee. O Lord amend this tymerous darkness. To be short,
every man in private talk, accuses his brother of darkness and sin, yea
one and al, and yet no one almost, will submyt himself to the censure of Gods
word, or abide thereby to be reproved. This Catholic darkness. Finally, we
walk after wicked counsels, we stand and abide in sinful ways, Oh return
before ye sit in scorners Chair, which cannot be reclamed, for of all other
this is a most curssed sin, and desperate darkness. O Lord be merciful unto
our gracious Queen, and show the light of thy countenance upon us, and be
merciful to us, illuminate our hearts aright, that we may once see our sin,
and utterly cast of these deadly works of darkness, for thy Christ's sake our
only Lord and Savior. But Sir (says the Temporal, as the world calls
them) has your self and Clergy some imunitie and pryuiledge, from these dark
and mistie clouds of sin, whereof you have so sharply said? Not in so deep
drownings I trust: But are we free? No, no, God knows. The priests lyps
should preserve knowledge, Mala. 2.7.
at his mouth should the Lords people fetch the will of God, for he is the
Lords messenger and Angel. But halas of the most we may say: Esa. 56.10.
The watchmen are al blind, they be al ignorante dumb Dogs which cannot
bark, Clergy syn.
they lie and sleep, and delight in sleeping, and these greedy Dogs can
never have enough, and these shepeards cannot understand (the reason is) for
they all look to their own way, every one for his advantage, and for his
own purpose. There is an other sort, of whom may be said, once professing
God: They are gone out of the way, Malac. 2.8
they have caused many to fall by the law. They have broken the covenant of
Leuy, says the Lord. And now harcken to the plague of Harding, and such
papisticall backslyding priests. Therefore have I also (says the Lord) made
you to be despised, Why the Clergy is despyced.
and vile before the people, because you kept not my ways, but have been
parciall in the law. To the best of our godly Bishops and learned brethren may
it rightly be said, as was said to the Angel, the Bishop of Ephesus, by the
spirit of God. Thou haste left thy first love. Apo. 2.4. Psalm. 36.9.
God grant them, and each of us his light, wherein we shall have light, to
remember from whence we are fallen, that we may repent and do the first
works, which we did before we were promoted to our places, and preferred to
others, as well, if not better deserving, least the Lord return shortly, and
remove our Candlestickes. Zorobabel and Iehosua waxed very slack in the
buylding of Gods house, Hagge. 1.
but warned by Haggeus the Prophet, they stopped not his mouth, depryued him
not of his place and Function, or shut him up in prison: but gave ear unto his
word, and rowsed up their slothful bodies to the Lords labors, which when
the common people saw, they stack to their godly Prince, and holy learned
Bishop for life, with tooth and nail, to the fynishing of the Lords work.
Contrarily, Jeroboam, Achab, Herod and such others, neither would hear the
Lords Prophets, lend them liberty, or grant them life. Good Lord defend
this age, thy church and people, from this most horrible darkness. Shine into
the hearts of thy lights, our godly learned Bishops, and preachers, that their
light may so shine unto us, as we by them may be procured to gloryfie thee our
father which art in heaven, to whom be praise and glory, for ever and ever.
Mat. 5.16.
Amen.

This light Christ and his word, is given of the father to be made known (as
has been said) unto the Gentyls, A light to be revealed unto the Gentiles, and
to be the glory of the people Israel.
and to be the glory of the people of Israel. Where we have to note, that his
word is not to be kept hydden, or secret. If a man be blind, and a perfect
medicine be sent him, if no man tell the same unto him, if it be not applied
with purpose to his eyes, or place to heal, how can he but remain in his
former blyndnesse still? Even so the blind world cannot be brought to see the
light of God, albeit Christ the light is sent unto it by him, unless by his
spirit and word, the same be revealed unto men, and aptly aplyed to their
several darkened consciences. It is known that God would have of all Nations,
1. Tim. 2.4
tongues and kyndreds to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.
Hereto he has given Moses, his Prophets, his Christ, and his Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors, Doctors and teachers, Ephe. 4.11
that Christians might by the knowledge of the light, be brought to his unity,
and to feel by faith their consolation in him, both Jew and Gentyle, and if
after so long preaching thereof, the light of the Gospel be yet hidden, it is
hyd to them that perish, 2. Cor. 4.3
whose hearts the God of this world has blinded, lest by the word they should
be converted and saved. But as God has given his son, by his word to be
made known: So Antichrist the Pope his adversary, seeks by all means and
ways, to hyde this knowledge of the truth from men. And therefore he locketh
up from the people of God the word of God, into the Coffer of a strange tongue,
which of few is understood, The Popes practice.
and of them not without long study, and many years travail. To this end
all prayer and serving of God, is in the Church subject to Romish tyranny,
tumbled over in the Laten tongue. But this is quyght against Gods purpose, 1.
Cor. 14.40. and 14.19.
Symeons word, and Christ's most holy Testament. Let al things be done in the
Church to edyfying (says the Apostle) I had rather speak five words in the
Church, that the people (says he) might understand me, then ten thousand in
a strange tongue. When thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he which
occupyeth the place of the unlearned, say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, which
is the blessing here spoken of, seeing he knows not what thou say? Again,
when the whole Church is come together in one, and all speak strange tongues
(as the English man to pray in the Laten, Hebrewe or greek tongue, not
understanding it) there come in they yt are unlearned, or they which believe
not, will they not say, 1. Cor. 14.23.
that ye are out of your wyts? But if all prophecy, (namely speak in a known
tongue to that place, to edyfying, to exhortation, and consolation) he is
rebuked of all men, and is judged of all, and so are the secrets of his heart
made manifest, and so will he fall down on his face, and worship God, and say
plainly, that God is amongst you in deed. Whereupon the Apostle thus
concludes. If any man speak a strange tongue, let it be by two or three at
the most, and that by course, and let one interpret. But if there be no
Interpretor, let him keep silence in the congregation (which speaks
languages) and let him speak to himself and to God. No Laten in the English
church, because it cannot edyfie those, which understand it not, though it be
the scripture of God that is read or prayed, unless there be to reveal it,
and do presently interpret the same. This is Paul's conclusion. The Popish
Mattens, Mass, Euensong, Complyn, Pryme, Hours, Mass book, Manuel, Grayle,
Antiphonor, and Portuse, all of Popish matter, and Laten tongue, is to be
banished the Church of England, and else where in the house of God. So as Rome
it self ought to have the service pure, and in that language, which the
symplest Italian, can easily at the first hearing perceive, and well
understand. But what says the Romish Frye to this? Popish reasons for the
service in the Laten tongue.
Forsooth in the law were many Ceremonies used in the temple, which the
ignorant laytie never understood, and yet they were continued in that church:
So though the Laten tongue be unknown to the most, it may also well enough
stand in Christ's church now. In answer hereto I say, it is untrue that the
people were ignorante of the Church Ceremonies. For every Father was
commanded to teach his children, Exodus 12.
what sygnified the pascall Lamb. The Feasts of Pentecosts, of Tabernacles,
they understood, and the ceremonies in them, their Sacrifices they knew, some
to be ye Sacrifice for syn, some of Reconcyliation, of peace, and all these
Rites, Ceremonies and Sacryfices, were executed in the Hebrewe tongue, by the
ordinance of God, which was the natural language of the Jews. And if there
were some sygnifycations there, that concerned not the vulgar sort to know,
what is that to keep us from the knowledge of the praises of God in deuyne
service, which ought to be known of every of us? We require not our people to
understand all secrets, but we reprove the Church of Rome, because she does so
estraunge Gods people, from the knowledge of his true service, that she will not
spare them in that church so little, as the understanding of the bare words,
in their native speech. Let them show us the like warrante for this sin, as
the Jewish priests had for their holy Ceremonies (all which were prescribed to
them by the word of the Lord) and they have said something. But this they
cannot, and therefore are most wicked, and their service abominable, and to
all that understand not their Laten tongue improfytable. Enchyrid Hosij. cap.
34.


Again, others with Hosius say, where Paul says: He speaks in vain, that
speaks to a congregation in an unknown tongue, he in that place (say they
speaks of preaching, and not synging, or saying Gods deuyne Service, but the
words of the Chapter. 1. Cor. 14. most manifestly does convince them. For
their is eftsoons mention made of praying in a strange tongue (Verse. 14.15.)
and says he: How shall the unlearned to thy blessing, that is to thy prayer of
thankesgyuing, say Amen, if he understand not what thou say? Wherefore this
defense is most slender, and a falling proppe of Popery. Neither are they to be
heard, which say the Church has power to order this matter. 2. Cor. 14.37.
For Paul in the Chapter says: If any man think himself to be a prophet or
spiritual (whether prince, Pope, or priest) let him acknowledge that the things
which I write (here against praying and preaching in a strange tongue) are the
commandments of the Lord. And can the Pope then, or may he, or general
Counsels, change the Lords Decree in the Church, and that against the Lord
and his commandments? Has the Church the wife such authority over Christ
her husband? This is the duty of the beloved wife to hear, The Churches
office and duty.
and to obey her husband. Hear O Israel, hearken and give ear (Oh daughter,
says the Father to his church, in the shadow of Salomons marriage, to Pharaoh
his Daughter) consider enclyne thine ear (to Christ thine husband) forget
also thy fathers house, Psa. 45.10
and thy people (the Romish Church) so shall the king have pleasure in thy
bewty: For he is thy Lord, and reverence thou him. To hear, to obey, to
forsake thine own institution, constitution, Father, Pope, and Popish people,
that give thee the laws of Romish Egypt, is the duty of Gods Church. But to
change the laws of God, to comptroll the husband Christ's commandment, to
keep him under, and set himself aloft in the Temple of GOD (as does the
Romish Church) is the sign of a strumpet. Judge therefore (good Reader) now,
of this Church of Rome, and what she is, which contrary to Christ's
commandment, in the church of God, sets up hypocritical service in a
strange tongue.

Again, some of them say, for children, Milk is the best, because they are
not able to digest strong men, therefore the Laten tongue expedient in the
church. But I pray you Sir, is it your purpose, if we be Infantes, so to keep
us still? For when shall your Laten service, which you call Milk, be taken by
your ordinance from us: And how prove you that your Laten service is milk for
Christian Babes? Milk nourishes and feeds, but how edyfyeth the Laten
tongue man's christian soul, when his inward heart cannot perceive the meaning
of his outward words? Again your service is exhibited (you say) to GOD, and
will you feed the Lord of truth with Popish Milk? Is not his Majesty able to
receive stronger meat? But from what breast (I pray you) proceeds this
Milk? Neither from the espoused Syon, or was it drawn from the Dugs of the
first mother, the Primative church, either in Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, Antioche,
or else where. Syon had her service in her own tongue in Hebrewe, the East
Churches in the Greek tongue, which was their natural speech, yea and Rome it
self in the Laten tongue, Gods service ought to be to each Nation in their
common language.
which is the ancient Roman language. And there is no other greater reason in
deed for the Laten service, then that hereby they would seem to challenge al
Nations to be of their church, and subject to their Kingdom. But God having
all Nations under his government, does speak to each Nation in that tongue
which they understand. Esaias. 6.
Esaias saw the two Seraphins, and heard them praising God, in a tongue that he
understood, Holy, holy, holy. When Christ was borne in Bethlehem, the Angels
were heard of the Shepherds, Luc. 2.14.
and understood to sing: Glory to God on high, in earth peace, to men a good
will. Which song to Gods praise, had it been sung in a strange tongue, the
simple Shepherds had not understood the same. Since therefore the ordinance of
God, the practice of his church, the use of the tryumphant Church (to which we
ought to be like) does sing and pray in a known tongue, to them with whom,
and for whom they do pray. What church is that but Antichrists, which
degenerating from all these, does hyde the praises of God in a strange
language? Some Papists are so hateful, that for warrante of their Laten
service, Romish Church, Antichrists Church.
they abuse this sentence of Christ: It is not good to take the Childrens
bread, and to cast it unto Dogs, by which assertion, vnwyllingly they
confess, Matthew.
that to have the service in a known tongue, is to have the bread of Gods
children. Well then: God having wrung this truth from your lyps, we will accept
the bread of our Lord, to say, our service to us English men, in the English
tongue, and do leave to your infancy, A Popish blasphemy most horrible.
your chyldishe Milk of popish Laten service. But are those men for whom
Christ has shed his precious blood, no better in your account sir but Dogs.
The spirit of God uses not to dwell in the bodies of Dogs, but the children
of God are the Temples of the holy Ghost. O horrible blasphemy, 1. Cor. 3.10
to call these holy Vassels, caryon Dogs. But ye are those dyrtie Dogs, which
be Canes muti, ye can not speak the praises of God in a known tongue, ye byte
and devour them which do, ye are the Devils Mastyues, which are reserved to
eternal chains, Iudae Epist.
if God grant you not repentance. For it is not the property of a Pastor to
hyde the word of god from the people, but of Satan's Consisers, which you
Papists are. We may say to you as Hierome your great Doctor says, of your
Fathers in times past, and of the Valentinian Heretics. Barbaro simplices
quosque terrent sono. With a barbarous unknown tongue and sound of words, they
fear the simple, that whatsoever they understand not, they may the more
esteem and have in reverence. And least the Reader should be offended, that I
call the Laten tongue hereby barbarous, let him know how the Apostle holds
every tongue barbarous, that is not understood of him, to whom it is spoken,
saying: Unless I understand the power and meaning of the words, I shall be
barbarous to him that speaks, 1. Cor. 14.11.
and he that speaks, barbarous unto me. But the Lord in his great mercy, as
he has given his Christ to be made known to Jew and Gentyle: So has he in
these our happy days and present state, by the contynuall preaching of his
word, most worthyly wrought the glory of his name. Psalm. 8.
So that out of the mouths of sucklings and babes (yea from old wythered
stocks, and as it were dead stones) Gods holy spirit flows in England, and
myghtily sets forth the praises of our Christ his light to us Gentyls, and
full glory to Israel, that embrace him, to whom therefore be eternal praise.
But for that this light cannot be apprehended by humane capacity, it is
requisite that we seek the means by which we may apprehende the same. The
first hereto is, that we have the true Interpreter of the word in our hearts,
even the spirit of truth, whose it is to teach us, and lead us into all
truth. This Spirit is obtained of God for Christ, by earnest and vigilant
prayer. I will pray the Father (says Christ) and he will give you another
comforter, even the spirit of truth, Ioh. 14.16
and he shall lead you into all truth, and shall abide with you for ever. So as
Christ has given us example, we must daily pray the father for this Spirit,
to illuminate our senses, that we may understand his word aright. Psalm. 119.
Open mine eyes (says David) that I may consider the wonders in thy law.
Teach me thy iustifications, and give me understanding, and I shall search thy
commandments. And Paul the Doctor of the Gentyls, in all his Epistles,
prays for the understanding of the will and word of God, which comes by
the light of the holy ghost. Collos. 1.9
I have not ceased since the first day I heard of you Collossians (says
Paul) to pray for you, and to make peticion, that you may be filled in all the
knowledge of his will, with all wisdom and spiritual understanding. Also for
the Ephesians he says: Ephe. 3.14
For this cause I bow my knees to the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom
is named the whole family in heaven and earth, that he will for his rich
gloryes sake, give unto you mightily to be strengthened by his spirit in the
inner man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that you being
rooted in charity and grounded, may comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, the length, the depth, and to know the love of Christ, which passes
al knowledge, that ye may be filled with all the fullness of God. A most
excellent order how we obtain the understanding of his word, the light of
life, which expresses the great goodness of our good GOD, set forth by this
Metaphor of Geomatrie, of breadth, length, height and depth, that is to say, the
exceeding goodness of God, which in every place, in heaven and earth, East and
Weast, North and South, appears through his light of the Gentyls, Christ the
Lord to the sons of men. Prayer is the first step to this understanding.
Prayer I say to God the Father of Christ and us. Gods merciful gift
answering our prayer is the next, which rich gift reaches to our hearts our
light Christ, the Lord to dwell therein, which Christ does shine by his
spirit so in our souls, that we by this spiritual power, do understand the
mysteries contained in his word, do hear his voice, and only cleave thereto,
eschewing al strange speeches, be they never so pleasant to the natural ear.
1. Cor. 3.14.
For thus made spiritual, we judge al things. Assure your selves by your own
desire of doing good to your own borne sons, of your heavenly fathers gift,
even his holy spirit to this end: Iac. 1.6. Luc. 11.11.
If ye ask in faith not doubting. Which of you fathers, if his son do ask
him bread, will give him a stone? Or if he ask a Fish, will give him a Serpent?
Or if he ask an Egg, will give him a Scorpion? If you therefore (says our
light and Lord Christ) being evil, know how to give your children good gifts:
How much more shall your heavenly father give his holy spirit to them, which
ask of him. Whosoever asks receives and he which seeks finds, who
knocks, the door shall be opened to him. Pray therefore, lifting up pure
hands.

The second is, the diligent study and daily reading in the book of God:
Psalm. 1.
Blessed is he that does meditate in the law of God day and night, and does
confer place with place, and by those that are more plain, open the more
obscure. This was Paul's commandment to Timothy: 1. Tim. 4.13.
Till I come, give thy self to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. Again:
Abide thou in those things that thou have learned, knowing of whom thou have
learned them, 2. Tim. 3.14.
and that of a little child thou have studied the Scriptures, which are able
to make thee wise to salvation, by faith in Christ Jesus.

Yea, old Paul himself, Reading with dyligence, a great furtherance to Gods
knowledge in us.
being a prisoner in Rome for the Gospel, continued this exercise of reading
and penning the fruit of his study. Wherefore that he might have to do so, he
sends to Timothy for his books, and noting Partchment Roles, that he left at
Troas. If this was needful to old learned Paul, it is most necessary in
young Tymothy: if in the teacher, 2. Tim. 4.13.
much more in the scholar. And let no man yrke at the based style of holy Wryt,
but rather think as in homely shelles, many times are found most precious
stones, and in rough enclosing chafe, most fair and fruitful Wheat: So
under the low style of Gods sacred Book, the diligent praying Reader (if he
come not with a prejudiced mind thereto) shall gather to his best good, the
heavenly truth of Gods holy will in his written scriptures. These precious
Jewels shall he there find: A most sure Ancor hold for his conscience against
all temptations: If thou labor of dark ignorance, therein is the brightness
of knowledge: If troubled in conscience and vexed for sin, there is the
remedy, the warrant of quiet mind given thee in Christ: If oppressed and
almost over whelmed in worldly cares, and enemies, there is consolation and
happy event easily had: If destrest and perplexed, there is sound counsel and
faithful friendship: If doubting of Gods life, there is a most sure Tower of
defense, and well builded bulwarks against all such assaults. And truly our
second David Christ, did not else where, 1. Sam. 17.40. Mat. 4.
then forth of this Scrip, take those little stones which slew the old Goliath
Satanas, in his subtle assault and cruel temptation, Scriptum est, etc. What
would thou have? Hence flows the Ryuers of God in Christ, to the drinking
of which, Ioh. 4.14.
our Christ does daily inuyte us, whose nature is absolutely to quench our
intolerable thyrst, The treasures dwelling in the word of God.
and to satisfy us in desire of most happiness. Here is the Storehouse of
GOD, whether we ought to go, to satisfy our hungry souls. This is the Table
of the Lord, most amply furnished with all dyshes of necessary diet, dressed
by the finger of God, wherewith he does most lyberally feed us: Here is also
most pleasant Wine of consolation and life, the Fountain of Christ's blood
daily open, for every soul that thyrsteth after it, to wash away his sins:
In this holy Bible is situate the Heavenly Paradise, far passing the Garden
of Eden, where is all kind of fruit for us to eat, in which the Tree of life
Christ Jesus is most fair and free to us. The tree of knowledge of good and
evil, is set to our instruction, vz the word of God, of which we may eat,
and must eat, will we be saved. But that we eat not as our first Father Adam
did, in earthly Paradise, it is fyt that we come as Bees, and not like unto
venomous Spyders. Let us search and seek therein, the most sweet lycour of
life, the knowledge of God and his Christ, the knowledge of our sins, the
reward of them, the forgiveness of them, by whom and the manner how: The will
of God, and the strength to serve him orderly, the power of Satan and his wily
engines, and how to escape them: The weapons and armor of God, and how to be
armed therewith, and by battle (in our Captain Christ) to beat down Satan
under our feet. If on this sort we come, and humbly with open hearts pray and
read advisedly, and eftsoons meditate in the law of God, we shall most
joyfully return daily to our brethren, into the Hyue of Gods Church, where
we shall become profitable to all men, by the honey of life, even his spirit
and truth, which forth of the Garden of Gods scriptures, we have received. But
if we come with minds to cavil, forestuffed with errors, and bent to gather
to feed our ill, we shall misconster the word, for his truth is open to
babes, Mat. 11.15
that are content to take the lesson at the parents mouth, and not to the
worldly wise, and like learned, resting in their own wouen web of frail
humayne spynning. Hence comes darkness, error, heresies, schisms,
backslydings from God, and running into Hell without remorse. Take heed
therefore, how thou come to this holy book, and look not therein
superficially, but in great diligence, and let the hardness thereof procure
thy whole industry (as before) consydering with what pains men attain to
skyll, and how hard things by often use become both sweet and easy. Mortal
men take great pains to read profane, but little in gods Book.
The mortal books of heathen men, we toil and turn over with incredible
endeavor and contynuall labor, beating body and brain, the solace and safety
of health often berefte, and contemned hereby, that we might attain the
perfection of the writers will. And yet do such labors but teach, or the
keeping or recovery of Natures health, or the increase of state and wealth, or
the ruled lines of common welths guide, or such other artifyciall points of
temporal blessings, which in themselves considered, are in deed precious, but
compared with the treasures of Gods book (the light of life) there is no
comparison. For we have not therein man's earthy, but Gods heavenly wisdom,
speaking unto us, to whose word, Gods word will make us apt to all perfection.
if we give obedient ear, we shall receive most synguler aptness, and ability
to al heavenly things, we shall drive from us all heavy depressing pleasures,
that hinder godly pains in Gospel study, we shall be lightened with
consolation in the book of God, and his word shall become most sweet and
easy unto us, of what estate soever. Kings shall have in this book their rule
to govern, learned Preachers to teach, and the matter and Method:
Counselors Lords and Lawyers, matters of health: the deep wits, and great
Clerks, high and deep mysteries, and loving lowly persons, plain and most
open doctrine, sufficient to their salvation. Therefore read diligently, and
pray continually, and no doubt the Lord according to his promise ( seek and
you shall find, Luc. 11.10. Math. 6. Ezech. 36.
pray and it shall be given you, etc.) will give thee his holy spirit, change
thy heart of stone, into a fleshy heart, and teach thee his statutes, give thee
the understanding of his law, and teach thee himself. This only remains,
that we which be Gentyls, should cast away our former darkness, and put on
this armor of light, and embracing Christ for our lead Star, as he is of
his father given to us, should by his spirit and sacred word of faith, in his
power, cast of the power and works of darkness. Otherwise, it shall be to all
Recusants their condemnation, that light is come into the world, Ioh. 3.19.
and those blind men love darkness rather then the light. The Jew ought to
refuse his Righteousness by the law also, and the Pharisey not to brag and
glory of his holiness, but sincerely to receive this our light Christ, and in
him only to repose his trust, because he is given him of GOD, to be his only
glory. And this God grant to his good pleasure in Christ. To the which Christ,
with God the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, now and for
ever.

Amen. Laus Deo. A. A.

Imprinted at London, in Fleetestreate, beneath the Conduite, at the Sign of
Saint John Evangelist, by H. Iackson. 1581.


