Imprimatur MATTHEW.

CLAY.

Aprilis 6.

1639.

THE Second Part of THE CID.

LONDON, Printed by I. Oaks, for Samuel Brown, and are to be sold at his shop
in St. Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the white Lion.

M. D. C. XL.

TO THE TRULY Noble the Lady, Theophila Cook.
MADAM,
IF I had no obligation to your Ladyship, which might challenge my endeavors of
honoring you, a fitter or a happier name could not protect this piece, (whose
subject is the preferring of Duty, and respects before Love, as the former did
Honor and courage:) which I therefore offer to your Ladyship; because in them
there is none better studied than your self, in whom I have observed from the
strength of Virtue, such a serenity as conducts your mind to the performance of
whatsoever is fit and decent in humane life. And I remember I had the Honor to
hear your Ladyship discourse of this subject, when you concluded that a
perfect Lover should submit his desires to his Mistresses advancement: which
made me wish that our French Author had spoken with those Graces here in this,
with which your Ladyship then did. But since it pleased his Majesty to think
it worth the translating, and commanded it to be put into my hands, I will not
censure it, though I believe, if that may carry the place which is free from
deformities, without excellence before that which is here and there exceeding
fair, and as much blemished, I think this may deserve it, which is rather not
to be excepted to then much extold. Whatsoever it be, I beseech your Ladyship
to let it pass under your name, lest I be thought indiscreet in placing it
elsewhere, or unmindfull of what I owe you, though this be the least part of
that return which is meant to you from

Your most humble and obedient Servant, ERUTTER.

The Persons of the Play.
The young King of Castile. Da. URRACA the INFANTA his Sister. CELIMANT King of
Corduba. SPHERANTI Prince of Toledo. SERIFFA Sister to CELIMANT. D. DIEGO
Father to the CID. RODERIGO the CID. CIMENA. D. SANCHO Favorite to the King.
D. ARIAS. Guard. Attendants. Page to CIMENA.
The Scene.

The Court of SEVILLE.

The Second Part of The CID.
ACT I. SCENE I.
INFANTA. CIMENA. INFANTA. TEll me Cimena and deal truly with me,
What makes you thus disdain to be a Queen,
Are the allurements of a Kingdom such
As they can hardly touch, less charm your heart?
No, I shall nere believe it, but must wonder
At your refusal: do you think your Cid
With all his fortune, and the best effects
Of his great valor, can at any time
Impale this fair head with a Diadem?
That from the King alone you must expect
Cid is as much a subject as thy self,
And though he lift thy fortune to a height
As great as any subjects, yet a thousand
Will side with thee, when this my brother offers
Will set thy beauties in a point to strike
The gazers eyes with envy, or amazement.

CIM. Madam, it is true so great a Princes love
Might take another, though it cannot me,
And the false luster of a Sovereign greatness
May dazell any fond young Virgins eyes,
But for my own direction i will take less
Of their ambition, more of modesty,
And truly Madam, I shall never envy
Her who enjoyes the happiness you offer,
The pomp of Thrones seems troublesome to me,
My desires draw themselves within their compass,
And look no higher then their proper reach:
Equality does make the perfect match,
Unequal persons render the link so weak
That love can hardly make it hold together.

IN. I know Cimena thy great modesty,
But let it not divert thee from a good
Sent from the hand of Heaven, and a King.
That power, which gave thee such rare parts, would never
They should be straightened in a narrow fortune
It knows this fore head's destined for a Crown
Which to confirm, it makes a Monarch know
That naught less then himself can suite thy merit
Though Cid have heretofore made thee his Idol.
Do think his love's not subject unto change
And that he must continue in his absence
As a great soldier, so a faithful lover*
Perhaps thy love may trouble him at present,
Whilst his ambition grows up with his fortune*
If ere he gained his glorious name of Cid,
He thought himself already worthy thee,
Do think his heart will stay in the same bounds,
Now that all Spain, and other Nations
Admire and fear his valor? ah Cimena
Some thing persuades me that his hopes fly higher,
A throne will be the certain rock whereon
Thy so much boasted faith must find its Tomb.

CIM. Oh heavens, how handsomely she would surprise me
And ravish that from me her self would have! Aside
I without doubt she loves him; and I know
She speaks more for herself then for the King:
Madam, if Roder go leave Cimena
To give his heart unto a nobler love,
You shall perceive that she is one can suffer
With as much ease his lightness, as his absence.

IN. But since thou have the very same advantage
Serve thy self of it, and as his great honors
Alter his passions, so let thine Cimena
Take the same flight, and do not think thou shall
For that, be called inconstant or less faithful,
Or that thy change should stick a crime upon thee,
The wills of Kings can render all things lawful.
Besides thy fathers death may well excuse thee,
And I remember with how much constraint
Thou made a promise of thy love to him
Which was no more then hope; the King has power
To cancel that, nor must thy virtue suffer
So great a stain as to prefer the man
Who killed thy father to the King.

CIM. But Madam.
You know how strong a conflict I had in me
Before I gave consent, whilst his great love
Did less then my obedience, I resisted
Yill in the end I saw I must obey
What the King willed, he faid, I must forget
His Crime and my revenge: your father Madam
Gave me into his hands, and since I am
His prisoner* the same bonds shall end my life
And fortune both at once.

IN. But hear my reasons.

CIM. To what purpose.
Should we dispute of what is resolved already?

IN. Well you may think of it at better leisure. Exit.

CIM. Yes: and I know the object of my Choice:
If the Cids glory do put out his flame;
And that is great luster quench the heat of this
I shall not stay the progress of his fortune,
Let him be on a Throne, me in my grave,
Yet if this head must ever wear a Crown
From none but Cid himself shall I accept it.
But what is the reason that he writes not to me?
I had some letters from him at the first,
When the same hand which was bedewd in blood
Dried up my tears, but yet (alas) I fear
Least distance of our eyes estrange our hearts:
For of late (save the conquest of the Rebels)
I can hear nothing from him, he destroys
His enemies and my hopes both at one time,
His glory makes him to forget his duty;
But yet dear heart excuse my sad complaint
True love was never yet without some fear
Thou can not be so generous and inconstant,
And I should fear less, loved I not so much.
Come then my foul and make no longer trial
Both of my passion and my patience:
Come to deliver me from those my doubts
Or know that here I cannot live without thee.

SCENE II.
DON SANCHO. Who Is this Don Sancho? what may his business be?
SAN. The best of news unto the best of women.

CIM* What news? Is Cid returned?

SAN. Not yet sweet Madam,
He Is still expected, but a greater joy
Attends you, which will soon dispell these clouds,
How glorious is your fortune like to be?

CIM. What? has he overcome his enemies?
Is he come home laden with Palms and Laurels?

SAN. I hear his valor has assured our state,
But that is not the cause of this my visit.

CIM. What Is then my happiness, pray let me know it.

SAN. Madam advise but with your own perfections
And you will know the good provided for you,
Ask counsel of your eyes; and they will tell you
Against whom their quick and burning darts are thrown
They Will tell you that a King sprightly and young
Chooses to be a slave before himself:
And that he finds his chains so sweet and pleasant
He seems to have no will to reign without you,
And I am sent to ask what he implores,
Be not then rigorous to your self and him,
But think what baits a Scepter carries in it,
And that 'twill ill become you to be cruel
When a Crown, and title of a Queen is offered.

CIM. I me sure it less becomes thee to afflict me
With a discourse so hateful, perjured man
Have thou so little shame, and courage in thee
To speak this and not blush; have thou forgot
The glory of thy bonds; and that my self
Permitted thee to wear em, whilst my pity
Made my looks gracious to thee, could thou then
Having been once a Lover, proud to be so,
Speak for another now, and that I should
For thy sake take his love into my heart.
Thou shewst by this thy baseness, how unworthy
Was Roderigoes rival, since thou can not
Preserve the honor which thou had, for once
To have been his Competitor.

SAN. Did I think
That you bore any thoughts of love to me,
Or that the impression of my former flame
Were not quite worn out of your heart, I should not
Speak for the King a word, but for my self,
And you should see by my great constancy,
How much I de cherish such a hope.

CIM. What traitor
Should I love thee? can thou imagine it?
Or tempt thy self with such a vanity;
I never yet received a flame so hateful
And if I thought my heart could entertain it,
I Would pull it out my self: but can thou have
The confidence, Don Sancho to pretend
To what thou were not able to defend;
Have thou forgot the Duel where thou were
Forced to bring me the sword thou vainly had
Employed against the Cid, is it for that
Thou lay'st thy claim to my affection?
For that must I prefer thee to the man
Whom the Moors fear, and Spain does reverence?
Come let me hear thy actions; were our enemies
Defeated by thy valor? Did the Moors
Yield themselves at the hearing of thy name?
Does thy arm hold our tottering Kingdom up?
Art thou the glory of it? prove it true
And I will run into thy dear embraces.

SAN. Madam, I have not so much arrogance
To challenge to my self such mighty deeds.
My actions bound themselves more narrowly:
I never did defeat the Moors, my arm
Could nere do any thing worth your acceptance,
And yet it reak, not with your fathers blood.

CIM. Knows thy fierce rage no bounds, take thou delight
To persecute me still, art thou not weary
To see my tears run? thou might easier draw
My blood, and kill me with less cruelty.
Come make it perfect, and revenge thy shame
Upon my lives loss; yet let thy rage forbear
To wrong that goodness, which has spared thy life.

SAN. In telling truth I offer no man wrong,
Nor did my rage suggest my words unto me
Your Designe's fair indeed, but your hope vain;
You care not how y'affront a Monarchs will;
Nor can you think that your Cid will be faithless,
You are the only she in all the Court
To whom his love's unknown, you have not heard
That Cordubas Infanta is his Mistress;
But he himself avows it in his letters,
Which he has done so to the life, that all
Believe he is less their enemy, then her lover.

CIM. Well let the Infanta come, let her instead
Of being captive be a conqueresse,
Let Cid that should be victor, be her slave,
It matters not, so I may have thy absence:
I Will wait the effects of his inconstancy
With more assurance, and far less disquiet,
Pray leave*me, I demand it as a favor
And find some better office when you next
Address your self to any* it is no shame
Not to have well discharged such an employment
As being done must needs betray thy honor.

SAN. 'Long as I serve my King, I fear no blame
But here is an end of this; I leave you Madam,
Till time shall make you to digest my counsel.
In the mean while IN me silent, and obey. Exit.

SCENE III.
KING, DON DIEGO, Guard, and Attendants. KING. DO not believe Don Diego, though
I share
My heart and Crown with the beloved Cimena,
That i will usurp by my authority
A treasure which thy son deserved so well.
No, his great services do live too fresh
In my remembrance to be so requited:
Rather I mean t'augment his happiness,
And his reward shall parallel his valor,
A nobler Mistress I design for him
To whom Cimena without blushing may
Give place unto; nor should thy son complain
Of this my affection, or of that his change.

DIE. But we have never sir deserved this honor,
Nor dare my son pretend to such a fortune,
A higher happiness attends the Princess,
Who is too generous to descend so low.

K. His actions tell me that he merits more
Which to reward according to his value
A Scepter is too little; I will share
With him in his desires, he in my power.
Love may content us both, if as my sister
Is willing to receive him for her servant,
So will the fair Cimena me for hers.
Don Sancho from me is gone to see her,
He knows her spirit, and should, how to tame it:
I hope well of his fair tongues good success.
But why is he so slow in his return?
Since he is conscious of my nearest secrets
He must needs know that I burn all this while
And that his slownesse causes me to languish.

SCENE IV.
DON SANCHO. DIE. YOur Majesty has no cause of further trouble,
See where he is.

K. Oh Don Sancho welcome,
What says Cimena?

SAN. All that rigor can
All that disdain and scorn does usually
Inspire proud spirits with, that cruel fair
Permitted to her tongue, my gentle words
Were spent in vain; the Northern wind would sooner
Have given them hearing, Roderigoes love
Has made her to all else inexorable
Nor can we hope to treat with her again.
As for a Crown, Scepter, or any greatness
They seem but to stir up her anger more.

K. What? will she be so cruel to her King?
I must abate the pride of that fierce humor,
And my resentment of t shall make her see
That Princes must be treated otherwise:
But these scorns her, I Will turn into her shame:
And Cid whom she believes her own already,
Shall as well fail her hopes, as she has mine
When a more worthy object shall invite him
To change his love, and his disdains of her
Shall revenge hers of me.

SCENE V.
DON ARIAS. Don Arias,
What news is it you bring?
ARI. Of Cids good fortune,
And of the Rebels fate, he is hard by
Victorious and in health.

K. I long to see him

ARI. He is not far sir from the City walls,
Meanwhile this Letter will confirm your Majesty,
In The truth of what I said.

K. How am I ravished
And my soul burns with hot impatience
After this object which she so desires,
Go tell him that my thoughts are swift to see him,
Don Diego see that he be well received.

Act II. Scene I.
KING, INFANTA; and CIMENA. KING. IT seems Cimena, you have no room left
In this hard heart of yours for him that loves you,
Must a King live and die in the same fetters?
Were I a private man you would be ungrateful
To hate me, 'cause I love you, howsoever
You were too blame to use Don Sancho so.
Coming from me, and offering my service
He might deserve a kinder entertainment
Civility would require so much; and though
He had displeased you, courting you for me
Duty should have made good your want of love.

CIM. I cannot tell, sir, what has raisd your anger,
Nor how Don Sancho has described me to you:
But certainly, no vanity of mine
Did make me to forget my duty to you:
And my refusal of the sovereign title
Showed my respect, and not my cruelty,
Don Sancho perhaps might be displeased,
But his discourse moved me to what I said,
Since he durst call to mind my fathers murder
(A wound still bleeding in my memory.)

K. If thou have yet a feeling of this grief
Both for thy honor, and content Cimena
It Is fit thou banish from thy kinder thoughts
The Author of it, nor does he now bear
The same affection to thee which he did;
When he left thee he left his first intentions
And having changed his climate, changed his love,
Seriffas beauty is the mark he aims at,
Who once thy enemy, is now thy rival.
I Am sure he is much engaged to this Jnfanta,
But if he were not, yet the services
My father had from all his Family
Design for him the Infanta of Castile.

SCENE II.
DON ARIAS. AR. SIr.

K. What would thou?

AR. Roderigo is without.

K. Admit him then: now you shall see Cimena
This glorious Conqueror, I know hele come
Triumphantly, leading his Mistress with him,
You Will easily perceive in this encounter
Either his love or his ingratitude.
Make your best use then of this time, compare
Your Graces with your Rivals, and by them
Guess what your fortune's like to be.

CI. Oh Heavens!
With what eyes can I see this his approach?

SCENE III. to them.
RODERIGO, SERIFFA; SPHERANTI, and CELIMANT. TO. GReat King, then whom the Sun
sees nothing happier,
(Joy of your subjects terror of your foes)
At length the war respiring, gives me leave
To have the honor to kneel here before you,
But as unto the Deity* of which
You are the Image, none should dare to come
Without an offering, so nor could I
Hope to deserve the happiness to see you
Without a present: Then be pleased, great sir,
T'accept from my hand what Heavens bounty gives you
This Crown, and these two Princes, so far happy
That they are fallen your prisoners, under whom
To be commanded is to live with freedom:
This was the King of Corduba, and this
The heir apparent of Toledos Kingdom.

K. He hear thy full relation, but before it
Let me embrace thee, and behold this forehead
Where Love and Mars do sit enthroned, and make thee
Victorious in either of their wars.

TO. Oh sir, how can I answer this discourse
To spare my modesty, sir, spare your favors
And share the honors, as you have done the labors
Your soldiers as much as I procured
This victory, it is just they should receive
Part of the honor from your Majesty
Both for their valor and fidelity.

K. Their merit can be easily satisfied
But for thy deeds there can be no rewards:
Sure thou were born to make all men ungrateful,
Thy tongue's no less a conqueror then thine arm,
But for my sake spare thy sweet eloquence,
Else I shall be thy captive as are these
But now recite the fortune of thy arms;
No entertainment can be half so pleasant.

TO. Sir (what soere it be) since you command it,
T is fit that I obey: Your rebels slain
Or taken, and those Darers that opposed
The current of your fortune quite defeated
To make your name more glorious, I advanced
My Army toward Corduba, which even then
I had made sure of, if some timely succors
Had not prevented me. This noble Prince
Seeing it beleaguerd straightly; by his forces
Thought to relieve it, but that hope being vain
He like a wise Commander changed his purpose,
And meant to try no valor but his own:
Then by a Herald sent he me a challenge
Which easily my spirit gave consent to
I named the place, where when we both were m^t,
Many fierce blows were dealt, and sure the heavens
Looked pale to see the storms our anger made,
Shine more in our wild looks than in their lightning
Whilst men durst do, that which they durst not see
T was equally between us fought, until
At length your fortune gave me the advantage,

SPHR. Here, sir, your modesty betrays your valor,
I suffered by your strength not my mishap,
You may vaunt freely what I cannot deny.

TO. This was the blow made Corduba to fall,
After this Princes yielding their great thoughts
A bated of their pride, and this fair Princess
To whom I owe for her intelligence,
Made the Town yours almost without resistance,

CEL. T is true great King, this woman, Natures monster,
By her base treachery betrayed my state,
You have my goods, my scepter and my person;
But look, sir, who it is that gives them you,
See from what hand you do receive these presents,
The same put her brother in these fetters,
It is my sister, or some Devil rather,
That took that name upon her to betray me.

SER. Leave to upbraid me thus, that name of sister
Has bin the greatest stain upon my life:
But you that stand so on the point of honor
Was I used as a sister by you, rather
Was I not treated as a slave? the name
Away, I felt the thing* pray sir, believe not
That out of any womanish impudence*
I gave the intelligence I am accused of;
But when I captived him, I freed my self
From those more cruel chains, where in his rage
Shut up my will and free election,
Designing me the object of my hate:
Which when I saw, and that this haughty Prince
Came from his country to my ravishment,
Armed not with fair deserts, but soldiers
I thought I justly might to his violence
Oppose my artifice, which was to render
Unto his enemies his place of refuge,
Which my design I kept long in suspense,
Till this more noble object took my heart,
And made me perfect my intentions.

CIM. I without doubt, his false heart does adore her. Aside.
Can I then see my rival, and yet I live?

K. When the wit's nimble, and the courage ready,
A good success still follows the design,
The business that halts forward is half lost.

SER. Sir, to neglect the execution,
My courage, and my love were too important,
I quickly was resolved, when love came in
To finish up the plot my hate begun,
This valiant Cid whose fame prevented him
In my good thoughts, was of my enemy
Become the object of my best desires;
His virtue conquered me, and had I not
Been overcome I had not been so happy:
For giving up my arms to such a conquest,
'Steed of my own loss I have got a prize,
The honor of all soldiers: Roderigo.

IN. Alas, what can thou hope poor Lady now. Aside.
Can thou doubt yet whether he be engaged.

TO Madam, you put a double tie upon me,
That having done me a courtesy so happy,
You add to it, so much of kind respect,
And believe, Madam, that occasion
Will make me blessed, which points out my obedience,
What may I do to serve you, pray command me.

CIM. What has she to desire, she has thy heart? Aside.

SER. Ah sir, you can do all, and I Would have all.

TO. Madam, the King is here sole sovereign,
He only can give all.

K. Which thou may promise,
Such is thy merit as does challenge all,
Freely dispose of my authority,
And think I have done less then thou deserve.

SER. So great a favor, sir, I not desire
The good I wish (great Cid) is in thy self,
Which is the object my desires aim at,
And that sweet hope, which only makes me live.

TO. I know not, Madam, upon what appearance
You have conceived this hope, I Am sure Roderigo
Nere spoke to you about it.

CIM. Oh, how finely! Aside.
He carries it.

IN. It Is prettily dissembled. Aside.

SER. Have you then, sir, forgot your promises,
Is this the love, and are these the indearments
You promised to the action I performed.

TO. Who gave you that false hope.

SER. Your self.

TO. Who I,
I doubt it much.

SER. Oh Heavens, do you know
This Letter?

TO. Yes.

SER. Pray read it sir, and there
You shall perceive the reasons of my hope.

TO. I know well what I owe, and what I promised,
You shall see Madam, I am not ungrateful.

SER. Oh then excuse my anger, my disdain
Caused it, and not my will, I can be calm,
Having my fear abated by those comforts
You promised to my passion.

TO. Your desires,
Madam, exceed my power, but from me
Expect all duty, and all courtesy
That you could hope for, from a Gentleman,
Or I know how to give.

SER. How faithless man?
Do you fall back unto your first discourse?
Thou paper which betraydst my heart at first
Discover to his infamy thy secrets,
And show his breach of faith.

TO. Let it be read
I Will nere oppose it, and I swear t'observe
What ever that enjoins.

K. The thing you offer
Seems reasonable, thou art just Roderigo
By it we shall perceive your interest.

TO. Sir, if you please, I will be judged by it.

SER. And so will I.

K. Then I shall do you justice.

CIM. Here must I stand with patience to hear Aside.
The sentence of my punishment.

IN. From this, Aside.
I must expect either to live or die.

Seriffa reads the Letter.
MADAM,
IF your brother have so little sense both of his own blond and your beauty,
that he had rather please himself in your afflictions, then his own duty, let
me entreat you to make good that bravery of Spirit which you mentioned to me
in your Letters; which is to leave him to his cruelty, letting him first know
that you were sensible of it, by the revenge you take. And then enter into the
Victors Camp, where you shall make your own conditions* and find an
entertainment to your content by

Your most humble servant, RODERIGO.


You understand the sense, sir, of these words,
These are not terms that should make void a promise
Am not I that Seriffa; you the victor,
Did not I give you entrance into Corduba,
And my own heart at once, and will you now
Bereave me of the hope your self has raised
Is this the great content you promised me:
TO. What is it you can complain of Madam? who
Durst be so insolent to do you hurt?
Are you not here in covert of that storm
Which your fierce brother mean should overtake you?
What could you hope more then this noble usage
Did you suppose your eyes could conquer me,
Alas, I am another; and when ere
I change that object, I must think my self
Led into blindness, and mistake of beauty.

SER. Oh do not change, but end my misery,
Let my blood quite deface this character,
As it looks black already with thy crime,
So let it blush to punish me for mine,
Why stay'st thou? satisfy thy hate in me,
Tear from my breast my love and heart together.

CEL. How am I ravished with this sweet revenge,
What pleasure it is to see thee in this case
Where thy best hope is to sit down with nothing,
Now Lady you may triumph, though you wear not
These fetters, you're no less a slave then I.

SER. What villain?

K. Fie, Madam, calm your anger.
In the word of a King to both of you
I promise a fair treatment, I am one
That know to use a victory. Take you care
That in their several lodgings they want nothing
That their state may requires how ere they be
My prisoners, I Will not bate their due respect
Go Roderigo home unto thy father,
I know he longs to see thee.
Exeunt omnes praeter Cimena, Infanta, Roderigo.

TO. I obey,
Pray, Madam, give me leave to do the duty
I owe unto Cimena.

CIM. To me sir?
Pray spare the labor, for you owe me none.
Besides Seriffa, being vexed already
Has too much reason to complain of you,
Though you committed not this last offense.
She makes a courtsie, and goes out.

TO. What may the reason be she quits me so?
What crime have I committed? what is my fault?

IN. I know not, but you see her cruelty,
And what a little makes her to fly off;
Perhaps you are pleased well with your punishment,
Thou should show more of courage Roderigo
And let her see that he who comes home victor
Should receive better welcome* she is (me thinks)
Some what too full of vanity.

TO. Ah, Madam,
I must not murmur though she be ungrateful,
She is Cimena, and I cannot hate her.

IN. But this thy too much goodness will betray thee,
Thou make thy constancy unhappy to thee.

TO. Madam, you know where it is my duty calls me,
Pray give me leave to wait upon my father. Exit.

IN. Go; this was a pretext I know to leave me,
But I shall be revenged of this neglect
When against all thy hopes of future joy
The rigor of Cimena I employ. Exit.

Act III. Scene I.
RODERIGO from CIMENA'S Lodging. TO. Henceforth Cimena live for ever quiet,
Roderigo shall no more be so unhappy
As to disturb your peace, since you deny him
The sight of you he is content to suffer,
Not only want of that but all things else
You being all to him, that he desired:
Good heaven was there ever so much rigor
Practiced on any as on wretched me?
Did I hope any other recompense
Of all my services, my labors, watchings,
To bring home victory? but that she should
Crown um with her acceptance; and must I
(Courted by all else) be by her despised
Into whose arms I looked to have bin received?
Nor is her anger more apparent then
The cause of it concealed, I am not worthy
To know the reason of my banishment.
Therefore farewell for ever cruel Mistress,
I Will seek some place unhabited by women,
Where I may never see such shining eyes,
As only light us to our miseries. Exit.

SCENE II.
KING, th'INFANTA, SERIFFA, DON SANCHO, DON DIEGO. K. BUt, Madam, spare
Roderigos innocence,
His virtues, and your worth are both too great
To suffer such a stain.

IN. Think of it Madam,
And call not him a traitor, but your heart
Which entertained a love that was not sent
You were too credulous, not he perfidious,
What you desired you were willing to believe,
And knowing the command of your own beauty
With the advantage of your birth and fortune,
I cannot blame you if you thought that love
Which was but civil application:
But now you have found your error, let your courage
Find scorn for him that has not love for you.

SER. How easily the whole Counsel the sick, Aside.
And yet they have not hit my true disease.

K. My sister Madam, tells you right, desires
That are not honorable ought to be short,
Your quality which your beauty only equals,
Invites a higher match then Roderigo.

SER. A conqueror is next unto a King,
Since he is denied me, how can my hopes look higher?

K. Don Sancho wait the Princess to her lodgings,
And see that she command* my Court as freely
As I my self.

SAN. Your Graces humble creature. Exit.

K. Don Diego, is the Cid contented with
The offer which I make him of my sister?

D. DIE. You are the King sir; he your humble vassal,
He could not be my son if disobedient
To you that are his master, and I find
His inclination ready only fear
And modesty keeps in his strong desires.

K. It Is not his fear but Mistress which restrains him*

D. DIE. He will forget her sooner then his duty
Of which the Count can give you the best proof,
For though at that time he adored Cimena,
Yet ventured he to lose her for my sake
(His honor and his duty so commanding)
He can love well it is true, but obey better.

K. I never doubled his obedience
Of which his excellent virtue does assure me:
I Would have (you sister) to accept the Courtship
Which he shall make to you, and if you ask
A reason why, know I will have it so;
Though fortune have not blessed him with a Crown,
And though his greatness be within himself,
Yet there propitious heaven has showed its power,
Heaping its richest treasures on his person,
Hi heart is valors proper sphere, his soul
The throne of virtue where she sits and governs
Directing all his actions to honor;
These rare perfections must be the objects
Sister, of your desires.

IN. Such a command
Makes my obedience ready to love virtue,
When you that are my King requires it of me
I not to give consent to hard conditions,
It Is your part to command, mine to obey.

K. It Is well, it only rest now that Cimena
Comply with my desires I will no onger
Burn to so little purpose, my affection
Haftes to its end, there can be no content
TO approach a fire that will consume, not cherish,
I am resolved to have her, as for love
Which to the Cid she promised, I have power
TO absolve her of it; Princes render lawful
What ever pleases them: respects become
The people, not a King: send for her sister
And tell her I would see her in your lodgings,
To treat of something that concerns her nearly,
It Is wearisome to live thus in desire,
This day enjoying her, I Will quench my fire. Exit.

SCENE III.
SERIFFA, DON SANCHO. D. SAN. BEauty is loves object, Madam and twere hard
T approach such flames and keep a frozen heart,
Dull fouls have eyes lent 'em to see their way,
But men of courage to behold what is fair.
Pardon divinest Lady if my spirit
Made me to love where I should have adored
And though you do estrange me from your heart
Envy me not the glory of my sufferings.

SER. Don Sancho cannot be so young a Courtier
To think that any Lady can despise
A noble love bounded with due respects,
We have no other witness of our beauty
And heaven defend that we should hate our lovers.

D. SAN. Accept my vows then, Madam, with the temper
Of one that seemed to love; and let my service
Be entertained at least with fair acceptance.

SER. How can I do that without injury
Either to you or my own modesty?
To cherish you in what you cannot have
Were to augment your punishment: to give
A heart which is not mine, in me were falsehood,
And no less wrong to you should you receive it
Then to its proper owner.

D. SAN. But he seems
(As one that does not know his happiness)
To be insensible of what your goodness
Has offered him: why should you cast away
That whereof Kings would be ambitious?

SER. Ay me!

D. SAN. That sigh the greatest Monarch scarce deserves
Much less, a subject, thrust him from your thoughts
And let some nobler love take up his room.

SER. Take heed Don Sancho, you begin to forfeit
Your first pretentions, I must not think,
You can love one whom you believe to have
The easy power to dislodge a love
Which she had once receiv d, but henceforth know
My flame runs up into a point so small
As cannot be divided into parts.

D. SAN. Not though there be division of your hearts
The Cid I shame to say it, neglects you Madam:

SER. If he did not I were more miserable
This now seems strange to you, but when I shall
Relate that to you which in part concerns you,
As you are Favorite to the King your Master,
And one that should advise him to be just,
You will perceive, that what I utterd of
Love to the Cid was to secure my self.
But here is my brother, lets withdraw a little.

SCENE IV.
SPHERANTI, CELIMANT. SPHE. IS not this fight enough dear Celimant,
To choke that fire up within my breast
Which I too long have nourished to my ruin
For an ungrateful, and perfidious woman,
Was it too little to disdain a Prince,
And run into the hands of one she knew not
Unless having quitted him, for whom his worth
And valor pleaded she become the prey
Of a y that will-seize her, see Don Sancho
Has made her his already* and shall I
Love where I am so rivall'd, no my heart
If thou must be a captive, let thy fetters
Be such as need not shame the wearer.

CEL. Friend,
Which name I rather choose to call you by
Then brother, (since you cannot be her husband
With safety of your honor) could you think
That she can spare her modesty, whose falsehood
Spared not her brother, and her Country too,
No sir, believe, she that is base her self
Cannot love virtue in an other person:
For how should she love that she never knew;
Here then put out your flame, and think Spheranti
That this conformity of our lives and fortune
Which makes me share in all your passions
May link our hearts so fast we shall not need
Such an alliance to confirm the knot.

SP. J know not friend whether I be more happy
In losing of my love, then in the finding
The Assurance of thy friendship; now let fortune
Look well or ill upon me in thy love
I Will sum up all my bliffe, nor can I think
Brave Celimant, will profess less to me.

CEL. Which to confirm, no ceremonious oath
The band of doubtful, and inconstant souls
Shall I now take; thee friendship, I invoke,
When I do leave this Prince, let me be left
Without a friend, I and without a name.

SP. J know my father at this time endeavors
My liberty, (if at least I can call
This thraldom, where I am so well received)
But I Am resolved to run your course of fortune,
My freedom joined with yours is welcome to me
Else a worse torment then that bondage was
Your sisters rigor did impose.

CEL. No more
Dear friend of her; come, come forget her name.

SP. Since she could be so thanklesse to disdain,
The man that quit his liberty for her,
Which when the Cid did offer, I refused
To follow her, who follow all men else
And that her crime has merited my hate*
I have shook off that chain; but find my self
Caught in another which thou do not know
It Is such as makes me fear my liberty
I cannot go from hence, and think I Am free.

CEL. You are in love it seems.

SP. Yes Celimant.
I am in love, and as much in despair.

CEL. Is there a beauty can oppose your Courtship,
What quality is higher then your own?
Why should you then despair?

S. P. I but the horrcur
Of being vanquished makes me think my self
Unworthy to look up to such a height.

CEL. Consider that your fortune was to yield
His to overcome, yet did you long dispute it
And bravely too; what can you fear Spheranti?

SP. To be too rash*

CEL. To be too rash, let hope
Remove those thoughts, and you will not displease her,
A virtuous love was never odious.
But tell me sir, what name has this your Mistress,
Honor my freedom with this trust.

SP. The Infanta,
Dear Celimant has snatched my heart, and though
My eyes were caught in their first motion to her,
Yet durst I not discover it till now;
But such force has my flame, it will not be
Contained within the limits of my heart
But must break out to thee and suddenly
To her, which if displeasing is my death.

CEL. Hope better sir, I am your caution
She shall receive the offer of your vows.

SCENE V.
Enter DON ARIAS. BUt here is Don Arias.
D. ARI. The King sir asks for you.

CEL. I Will wait him sir. Exeunt.

SP. It Is strange he should be sent for and not I.

SCENE VI.
Enter INFANTA. IN. WHat, all alone?

SP. I Madam, Celimant,
Is sent for to the King.

IN. Oh, I know why
His liberty is now in proposition,
And yours too shortly, if you desire it.

SP. That Madam, is the least part of my care
J am so far from wishing it, I fear it.

IN. This is a Courtship sir, I understand not
Were not Toledo better than Sivill to you.

SP. Madam, the effect will make you see it is not.

IN. Well, we shall hope to see it then; adieu.

SP. My duty, Madam, will not give me leave
To let you go alone, do not deny me
The honor to wait on you*

SCENE VII.
CIMENA. Page. CIM. WHat said Roderigo, boy? when he departed.

PAGE. Nothing, but in his looks one might discover,
Amazement joined with grief to be excluded.

CIM. Excluded, whence? not from my heart I Am sure
There he makes good the place he ever had,
Were it a easy to remove him thence
As from my presence, I should fear no rival,
Take your Lute boy, and sing the song I gave you,
It suits my present state.

The Boy sings. 'TWas not his person nor his parts,
Though nere so famed that won me,
He loved, he said, which I believed;
And that faith has undone me.
His virtues were alike to all,
Nor were they more to me,
I honored them, but loved the man*
Because that he was he.
Who since he has his love forgon,
And is himself no more:
I love him not as he is now,
But as he was before.

CIM. It Is true I must still love him, the remembrance
That I was once Roderigo's only object,
Is that I cherish now.

SCENE VIII.
DON. ARIAS. D. ARI. MAdam, the King
Stays for you to come to him.

CIM. The King! where?
Why would he speak with me?

D. ARI. J cannot tell,
But he expects you on the Infantas side.

CIM. Tell him I come, I know what he would have
But all his power shall not shake my firmness,
In vain he tryes to win me by his greatness.
What is a throne to me that seek a grave?
I Am sure he has no power ore my will,
He that first took my heart shall keep it still. Exeunt.

Act IV. Scene I.
SPHERANTI, INFANTA. SP. MAdam, it is true, I may have bin too rash
To offer you a heart unworthy of you
But yet my fault is such as cannot give
Consent to any low thoughts of repentance;
And if my service find no other grace,
Let me have leave to cherish my attempt,
And let me love my self for loving you,
Then if you shall deny your presence to me,
My soul may do the office of mine eyes
Which may contemplate what these cannot see,
And if my love cannot appear from thence,
From this you shall perceive my obedience.

IN. Though I am better read in my own faults,
Then to believe I could charm any man;
Yet for your sake, because you*le have it so.
J am content to think you love me sir,
And I am sensible of what I owe you,
But you must know that I depend upon
A brother to whose will I am confin'de,
So that I am not Mistress of my heart,
Nor dare I hazard it without his leave,
Therefore to warrant your pretensions
Make your address to him, till then I dare not
Be known to entertain you for a suitor.

SPH. It Is fit I be obedient to this law
Which is most reasonable, but may I be
As sure of your favor, as his leave.

IN. Your virtue, sir, will be your best assurance,
My love proceeds not freely, but deserts
Must challenge it.

SP. Kissing your fair hands, Madam,
J go to make my way to bliss or ruin. Exit.

IN. What shall I do, my heart, this Prince is lovely,
So is the Cid, but he less tractable,
Spheranti is more soft and courteous,
And yet not of less spirit then the other,
Let Roderigo then endeare his Mistress,
And since that love is the only price of love,
Let him that offers his, have his reward.
Alas, what did I say? how can I leave
That object, which rules all within my heart?
Roderigo's free possessor there, and yet
Me thinks, there is a room left for Spheranti.
What shall I do then in this labyrinth?
Shall I to oblige Cimena, quit the Cid.
No I Will not leave him, but with patience wait
The pleasure of my brother and my fate. Exit.

SCENE II.
KING, CELIMANT, DON ARIAS. KING. DOn Sancho, sir, and Arias do wait you
Wi h the conditions of your liberty,
They are but gentle ones, that you forgive
Your sister, in the recompense of which
Your ransom is remitted.

CEL. Greatest Monarch,
Who may dispose my life, you know that here,
I am no less without a will then power
I must obey, what ever you impose,
But yet her crime joined with the insolence
In facing it is such, that giving me
My Kingdom back with her, is worse to me
Then to live here your captive, with what pleasure
Can I behold that power re-deliver'd
Which with my enemies I must receive.

K. I Will quit you of that fear, in taking care
To keep Seriffa in the terms of duty
You shall command her wholly, but at present
Till you be better satisfied, her fight
Shall not offend you, since her love has caused
The treason which you blame her for, I mean
To keep her fast in fetters, until love
And Hymen be the executioners
Of the sweet sentence which I will pronounce.

CEL. Such is her want of worth, the Prince you meant
To Join her to, despises her, and truly
I should believe him to be worth my pity,
Of whom so base an object were considered.

K. Sir, your too quick resentment makes you speak so,
But leave that care to me, there is a Lord
Within my Court, of birth as great as any,
But virtue much beyond his quality,
Which does a done your sister, though it be true
That he has mingled with his love some boldness,
Since he cannot plead any descent from Kings,
Yet if our spirit bids us despair nothing,
This noble Lover must obtain his wishes,
In a word it is Don Sancho that I mean.

CEL. Sir, I beseech you think how great the distance
Is between their conditions* Don Sancho
Has much worth in him, but he is no Prince,
And though Seriffa has disgraced her birth,
She Is nere the less descended from a King.

K. Don Sancho, sir, is all you can desire
Being my Favorite, I will advance
His fortune to that height as shall deserve,
Seriffa's and your love: but did you know
How much he has employed his favor with me
For your advantage, you would recompense
His care with this alliance, but if all
That he has done, cannot make you flexible,
Yet hear me that am King, and do conjure you
To love your sister, and confirm this match,
A Kings entreaties must have no denial.

CEL. Sir, I am yours, and since this marriage
Is welcome to your thoughts: Don Sancho may
In Celimant meet a brother, and Seriffa
Being looked on by me, through you and him,
Shall see I can forget what she has done.

K. Now you oblige me, and this clemency
Shows whence you are descended: how I love
This sweetness in you, trust me your sister
(Now I may tell you so) will well deserve
This favor of you; such a beauty, sir,
Ought not to dwell clouded in your dislikes:
But you are for your business: Arias,
See he find no delay, and call Roderigo*
My sister too; I know they are without,
So good success when I speak for another
Makes me hope all things in my own behalf:
But I must change my countenance: Roderigo.

SCENE III.
The KING, RODERIGO, INFANTA. ALL Spain from thy brave hand has felt that peace
And quiet, which thy Prince cannot obtain,
This work is wanting to fill up thy glory,
Therefore to make thy victory more perfect,
For my sake undertake this enemy,
That would cut from thy valor half thy conquest.
TO. How sir? dares any, who may be so blessed
As to live under your just laws, shake off
Their due obedience? what vain insolence
Dares lift it self against so sweet a power:
Name him sir, to me, that I may destroy him.

K. There Is none can do it Roderigo.

TO. None sir, Why?

K. It Is love that little tyrant which rules all,
The enemy which makes this war upon me,
Regards not majesty, but as a victor
Triumphs already in my captived heart,
Which has consented to its own defeat
So much that I am on the brink of ruin,
If Roderigo's hand sustain me not.

TO. If your ease sir, depend upon my service,
You may be sure of my readiness,
Only sir, let me know what you desire?

K. Oh, Roderigo!

TO. Why do you sigh, sir?
Is It that you doubt of my obedience?
Or that my power is less then your desires.

K. By no means Roderigo, but I fear
Lest some ill fortune, stead of putting me
Into the haven, cast me further from't,
And lest the difficulty should change thy courage,
And leave me to my self in this fierce storm.

TO. My courage is exempted from such fear.

K. I Am well assured of thy faith and valor,
And yet in this I fear, because thou must
Combat thy self, subdue thy own desires,
Conquer thy own dear passions to make
Thy self a sacrifice to my affections.

TO. Your Majesty may dispose then of my life.

K. It Is not my purpose, nor for all Castile
Shall it be said that I wished any good
Which must be purchased at so dear a rate.

TO. What can I do then for you.

K. Thou may put
An end to all my pain in quitting of
Cimena: do not start, they are her charms
By which I Am caught and suffer, nor can I
Believe though now she slight my offered love
Any thing else withholds her, but the thought
Of being thine.

TO. Oh sir, assure your self,
If that be all, and that your Majesty
Vouchsafe to cast your eyes upon this beauty,
I shall not be so rash to hope that good,
Which has the honor to please you my Prince.
In this sir, you may free me from suspect,
My love is (much indeed) more my respect,
And howsoere my heart be linked to hers,
J owe more to my Master then my Mistress.

K. Oh royal soul, and truly generous,
Great Cid, this instant thou have made me happy:
Now I am King indeed, for what thou giv'st me,
I prize above the value of a Crown,
In liew of which I mean to give thee one,
Behold the Infanta, whom I freely offer:
It Is fit, the state, which owes all to thy valor,
Should make thee a great sharer in her fortune.

IN. Every thing smiles upon me, blessed effects Aside
Over take my wishes, what could I hope more?
Love is made for me to my hand, Cimena
Engaged, to which Roderigo gives consent.

K. Thou do not answer me.

TO. Excuse me sir,
I am your subject, and you are my King,
It Is not a Kingdom, which I wish or hope for
To serve you is the honor I aspire to,
Obaying you, I learn how to command,
And since -- But see Cimena.

SCENE IV.
CIMENA. KING. OH, Madam,
The date now of your cruelty is out,
Your coldness, and your hate no more in season*
Roderigo for my sake has quitted you,
And if he had an interest in your person,
He has now put me in full possession of it.

CIM. Sir, Roderigo's free and may renounce me,
I have no scepters to bestow upon him,
But yet I think my birth is not so mean,
As to live under his command; A slave
I am not yet, and my affections
Are not to be inclined and rule by his,
Since greatness is the thing, not love he aims at,
Let him have his desires, I shall not be jealous
Though love do wound him with more pleasing darts
So that the tyrant which shall end his sufferings,
Do not put me on new, nor that his great
Felicity be purchased at the rate
Of my lost honor, or my liberty.

TO. Madam, think better of the man which loves you*
To get you happiness I quit mine own:
And to obtain the sovereigne power for you,
I make my affection stoop unto my duty,
If when I see a Crown is offered you,
I should come in, to cross your better fortune,
I must believe my love did then betray you,
And had relation to my self not you.

CIM. This Roderigo were a fair pretext,
If both our thoughts were levelled at one height,
But let not any right that I can plead
Divert your dear ambition, mount upon
A throne, and taste its sweetness, as for me
I am so far from blaming this your change,
You cannot find more pleasure then I praise,
T'applaud your act; you see sir, I submit
To the same laws your self has made.

IN. Oh, heavens! Aside.
How am I fallen from all my hopes at once,
He is Roderigo still, and she Cimena.

K. You are resolved then Madam, to continue
In the same cruelty? my love I see
Is useless, and my vows superfluous:
Yet think I am a King, and can command.
What you deny my love, you will give my power,
And since I cannot persuade, I must constrain.

CIM. Sir since my presence does but move your anger
Suffer me to retire I beseech you. Exit.

K. See Roderigo, how my love is answered,
She flies my present; leaving not so much
As a kind look behind her; if by this
She thinks to cool the fire which burns my heart,
She is deceived; for this her suddenness
Does not restrain but quicken more my flame,
Tell me was ever King so rudely treated?

TO. This her judicious and wise retreat,
Being no effect of spite or arrogance,
Should not excite your anger: sir you know
A modest fear keeps subjects in restraint,
When they are near their King, and in that sex
The dazzling luster of a Princes person,
Strikes more respect into their hearts then love.

K. Why, was I made a King then? if my quality
Must cross my dearest wishes, let me be
A subject, any thing, so I have her:
Some kind fare rob me of my crown and scepter,
And you shall see that I will bless your rigor,
If in exchange you will give me but one heart:
Cimena limits my ambition,
On her depends either my life or death,
Then if thou ever had a thought to please me,
Roderigo win Cimena to my love,
Accomplish what thou have begun, and try
To melt the ice which circles in her heart,
Or if it be a fire, oh turn it this way,
From thee I must expect all my content: Exit.

TO. And I from you sir, all my punishment:
Did ever any mischief equal this,
I Am made the confident of my own rival,
To my self faithless, true to him that wrongs me,
My duty and my love run contraries,
One binds me to obey a wilful Prince,
The Other my Mistress, whom my heart adores,
If I obey my love, I get his hate,
And if my duty, I must lose her love,
But that I may however, since the King
Has power to take her from me when he will:
Then let me serve my King which I have promised,
But that Cimena claims as well as he;
On both sides thus engaged, and thus distracted.
Roderigo, what can thou resolve to do,
Since with thy love or duty thou must part
Give him thy life, and let her have thy heart. Exit.

Act V. Scene I.
RODERIGO, CIMENA. CIM. THE Infanta's lodgings are that way.

TO. Madam.

CIM. You are mistaken, sir, I am Cimena,
He that courts titles must forget a name
That sounds not Princess, nor would I divert
The full stream of your hopes: here lies my way.

TO. Madam, Cimena, stay and hear.

CIM. My ruin.

TO. One word.

CIM. Pray let me go.

TO. The last I mean
To speak to any of your sex: what rigor
Is this you use, did ever any yet
Refuse to be a witness to a Will?

CIM. Was ever any cruelty like this?
Ah Roderigo, is it not enough,
First to betray me to your love, and then
Leave me, unless to shake my resolution:
You set upon me with new battery,
I cannot hear and live.

TO. I do not come
To urge ought in my own behalf, my duty
And promise made to him, who may command me,
Forces this from me, can you love the King?

CIM. Can you be Roderigo, and demand it.

TO. I have no more to say then, but to take
My last farewell, perhaps when I Am removed
Your duty or ambition will persuade
What from your servant is not credited,
And when by this your obstinacy (as sure
It must fall out so) my poor life grows forfeit,
You will too late repent the loss of both.
A lover and a Crown.

CIM. It Is vainly urged.
How can I lose a Lover, when he first
Renounces me? a Crown I never had,
And if I never seek it, as I shall not,
Where is my loss? but rather where is thy courage
Ah Roderigo must the fear of death
Only come in to make some small pretense
For leaving me, you did not use to be
Frighted at such a name.

TO. Nor must you think
That I am now, yet would I live to see
Cimena in that luster with her virtues
Ever designed her to, for me I think
Nothing can add unto my present state
More happiness then to have been the ground
Where on my Mistress would erect her glory.

CIM. And can you think Cimena will go less,
While you discourse thus, you but teach my duty,
The honor of our love must not be yours
More then mine own, I have as great a share
In it as you, and should it come to suffering
I can as well expect to see you great
As my self miserable; which must be so
If fortune once divide us.

TO. Can our faith
Be so rewarded? heavens, where is your justice?
If we must needs be severed; why to both
Gave you an equal mind, and thoughts alike?

CIM. That being parted, we might be more near,
For they that love alike are always one,
Since but the sight naught can distinguish them.

TO. These mysteries Cimena, are not strange
Unto our loves, in which there has not been
Any thing known, or easy, yet me thinks,
We might find out a way for intercourse.

CIM. Thy love is too material Roderigo,
I could be satisfied with thy Idea.

TO. And I with thine, but is it not some pleasure
To stand thus, and to gaze on one another?

CIM. Go Roderigo, for I feel within me
Since this thy stay, some thing, that prompts me to
Desire thy company, which must be fatal
To both of us; adieu, and think we may
Be severed yet continue still our selves. Exit.

TO. Our selves! am I Roderigo, or has she
Bereft me of my spirit, can she brave
The majesty of Kings secured within
Her own firm constancy, and must I tremble,
If the Kings will have not the wished success?
I ought him duty, and I have performed it,
I Have offered with my life all my desires,
Yet though I give, I may refuse to take,
He cannot force me to a new affection,
Or make me love her less, then she does me,
In other things he rules, in this I Am free. Exit.

SCENE II.
DON SANCHO, SERIFFA. D. SAN. MAdam believe, I could not justify
The love I did pretend, if in this business
I should prefer my passion before
Your honor and content, I hear your brother
The King has reconciled to you, it rests
I let him know how much he owes to justice.

SER. But as you do it, spare my modesty,
I would not be an offer, but his choice.

D. SAN. As you have given credit to my faith,
In this distrust not my discretion,
It is your honor which I seek, to which
I made my love submit, and can you think
I will not now preserve it, I am here
To Attend the King as sent for, and shall use
All opportunities to do you service,
Please but your Highness to retire.

SER. Bequeathing to thy care, the hopes of all
My future happiness. Exit.

D. SAN. Your Highness servant.

SCENE III.
KING, CELIMANT, DON SANCHO. KING. IN this sir, I confess, Spheranti has
Obliged our Family, the Prince is noble,
And I could wish my sister would embrace
The love he offers, what I can confer,
He may be sure of: but you know the Jnfanta
Is promised Roderigo, to whose valor
She has been long a debt, and yet this business
Is not arrived so far as to cut off
This noble Rivals hopes, sometimes a moment
Alters the state of things; a Ladies mind
Is not less changable: tell him from me
He shall have all assistance.

CEL. T is the sum
Of his desires, your Majesty will pardon
The abruptness of my parting, he is my friend
And such a happiness he longs to hear
As much as I to tell him.

K. Your own time
You may command brave Celimant: Don Sancbo
This Prince has royal thoughts and more your friend,
Then you could hope.

D. SAN. Your Majesty still puts
Fresh obligations on your humble vassal,
I am your creature, and the Prince through you,
Looking on me, may happily bestow
His grace upon me as I am your servant,
Though otherwise I be not worth his thought.

K. This modesty becomes thee, and sets off
Thy virtues which I cherish; in reward
Of which, and for thou have been still an aid
To my desires, I have assisted thine,
The love thou made to Corduba's Infanta,
I have taken notice of, and though another
Might suffer in the like attempt, in thee
I Have not disliked it, but commend thy choice,
She is as great, in beauty as in birth.

D. SAN. She is an object for which mighty Kings
Being rivals should take arms, such excellence
Was never meant to be attained with ease.

K. You speak sir, like a lover, but Don Sancho
What would he say, that should be made the owner
Of this rare beauty by consent of all?

D. SAN. That fortune had left nothing to confer,
Being undone in this, hope cannot look
So high.

K. She shall be thine, nay more, she is.

D. SAN. Leave me not now my faith and honesty. Aside.
For I had nere more need of your assistance.

K. Thou do not answer, has thy sudden joy
Surpised thy senses, and shut up thy speech?

D. SAN. I must confess, I Am ravished with this offer;
And on my knees in sign of gratitude
I here restore her to you.

K. Do thou mock,
My courtesy, or is it madness in thee?
Return unto thy self.

D. SAN. Your favors, sir,
Have come so thick upon me, that my thanks
Are still ore taken, only now my fortune,
Has given me leave to show my gratitude,
This Princess whom you offer I adore,
But dare not love, nor any but your self.

K. Thou make me wonder, how can she concern me?

D. SAN. In justice, sir, she is your wife, if contracts
Can stand in force with Princes, by your father,
In your minority, with her a match
Was made and ratifide, of which Don Diego
Cannot be ignorant, nor Don Arias,
Who did transact the business.

L. Some such thing
I heard, but have forgotten, my Cimena
Calls back my thoughts and fixes them on her;
Beside she loved the Cid, and for his sake
Betrayed her Country and her brother.

D. SAN. True,
She did, but not for him: had you great sir,
But heard the story of her love, and how
It grew up in her fancy, since the time
The King her father mentioned first your name
To her yet infant apprehension,
And gave your picture to her, you would say
Love entering by degrees, gathers his strength
From small beginnings, but makes sure his hold.
In fine, your Majesty has been the object,
For whom she has despised the Prince Spheranti.
Endured her brothers fury, and at length
To color her desires, made the occasion
Of Roderigo's being there, the means
To bring her to your Court, and acted that
Unto the Cid, she truly meant to you:
Feigned love is often better showed then true.

K. I must confess my self a debtor to her,
But yet Cimena is my choice, the Princess
Consulted well for her own modesty,
And no less for her good, when she made you
Her speaker, I shall think on it: call Don Diego,
My sister and Seriffa, to them all
I have to say, Entreat the fair but cruel.
Cimena come, and Roderigo too.
I shall dispose of them: how unhappy Exit San.
Are Princes that must love by others reason,
And not their own affections, this Princess
Is fair and loves me, so is my Cimena,
But she abhors me; should I sacrifice
To fame, Seriffa must be mine, but if
To love, Cimena; one of these I Am led to
By reason, to the other forced by love:
Must a Prince suffer violence? he must
Or else imprison them that offer it,
(His wild desires) there being no other course,
But to submit to reason or to force.

SCENE IV.
All the Actors, the INFANTA and CIMENA on one side; RODERIGO, CELIMANT, and
SPHERANTI on the other. BUt here they are* sister, I am resolved
This day to see you married, and to make
Your joy more perfect, I shall give you leave
To choose your husband: the Prince of Toledo
Courts you with such a love as naught can equal
But his perfections, which you must honor,
As well as he your beauty: yet Roderigo
Is for himself so much to be considered,
That we can hardly find a Mistress for him,
Which may deserve his virtues; both of them
Outweigh your merits, yet since equally
They make an offer of their service to you,
Declare which is the object of your choice.
IN. I cannot, sir, believe my self so happy,
As to have either of em for my husband:
But if they do submit to my desires,
Being both equal, I have no election.

K. They both adore you, and on this assurance
You may distingish of their love.

IN. How, both.
I doubt it much.

K. If you do not believe me,
From their own voice I shall confirm it to you.

SP. Yes divine beauty from my heart I speak,
That heart which your fair eyes have set on fire,
The light of which may show you how I love.
And if I lose my hope, I lose my life.

K. Can you doubt yet of his affection?
And Roderigo sure will say as much.

TO. It Is true great King, all men adore the Princess*
She has such universal power ore hearts,
She cannot be seen by any, and not loved,
But here is the difference between my love
And theirs, they live with hope, I with despair.

K. What robs thee of thy hope?

TO. Love.

K. Speak more clearly,
It Is without reason that thou say: can love
Take thy hope from thee, when it gives it thee?

TO. Then when I love, my hope forsakes me quite.

K. But now it does restore what then it took.

TO. In doing so it keeps me further from't.

K. These terms are too obscure, I cannot conceive em.

TO. Time and my constancy will make it plain*

K. But I would know their meaning at this present.

TO. The effect will quickly tell you.

K. What effect.

TO. My death.

K. Thy death, who can cause it?

TO. Cimena, sir.

K. Cimena, thou have yielded her to me.

TO. It was your will prescribed that Law unto me,
I am your subject sir, and you my King.

K. Though you be so, I never had intent
To do you wrong, to do my self a pleasure:
Thou know how dear thy person is to me,
And that my sister is thy valors prize,
Will you refuse her your affection.

TO. I have not, sir, ambition enough
To look so high: pray sir, regard not me,
But leave me to my self, possess Cimena;
In your love let her drown the memory
Of mine, I am your subject, you my King.

K. Well then since you refuse my profferd honors,
And that my sister cannot touch your heart,
My promises are disengaged for me,
I shall accept Cimena, and this Princess
You are content to part with, are you not?
What do you fix upon?

TO. On what I ought,
I am your subject sir, and you my King.

K. Spheranti, if my sister be your choice,
So that your father will give his consent,
I freely shall give mine.

SP. Your Majesty
Shall quickly see that cleerd, I know my father
Will be well satisfied, when he shall hear
That I have joined the Kingdoms of Toledo
And Sevill by a match: but may I Madam
Receive this happiness from your consent?

IN. The King has made you, sir, disposer of me,
And what he chooses answers my desires.

K. Thou Art silent Roderigo, what do think?

TO. That she could hardly have a braver Prince,
Nor he hope more then her.

K. And you Cimena,
Will you not put an end unto my sufferings,
Will you be still obdurate to your King?

CIM. Sir, I have no other faith then what I have given,
You know your father made me wear these bonds,
Which only death can break.

K. My constancy
Shall overcome thy stubbornness, I know
The ground and cause of thy aversion,
Thou have some feeble hope to enjoy the Cid,
But that is without appearance; his own mouth
Has ruined it, speak it again Roderigo,
Assure her that her hopes but flatter her,
Or if thou doft repent thy courtesy,
Deal freely with me, say thy mind is changed,
And that thou love her spite of all her rigors.

TO. Great sir, my duty here restrains my tongue,
It is enough for me that I have told you,
You are my King, and I your humble vassal.

K. Though I am so, I will not force my subject
To suffer for concealing his desires.

TO. Ah sir, cast off all thoughts that may retard
The course of your contentments, when a business
Concerns the good of such a gracious King,
What is the death of one unhappy man?
Twill be a fair employment for my arm,
To punish him that's troublesome to his Prince.

K. Well thou have overcome, thy extreme virtue
Shall serve for an example to thy King. To Seriffa.
See where I am obliged, Madam, Don Sancho,
I hope has taken these blushes off, I know
What right you have to me, and I to you.
This should have been your work Don Diego rather
Then his that did it, you were privy to
All passages between our fathers; but
You I say, as all else do, it is dangerous
To turn the stream of Kings affections.

D. DIE. Your majesty is gracious, and prevents
Excuses from your subjects, I could say
No more in my own defense.

K. Here I restore to thee thine own Cimena,
(Most perfect lover) Madam, I hope your rigor
Is not habitual, he is Roderigo,
Who spite of my desires, has always loved
And honored you, do not defer then longer,
His and your own contentment, let his love
Wracked with so many storms, find here its harbor,
He has conquered still abroad, let him not lose
At home, but add thy Mirtles to his Laurels,
And so confirming to him the same faith,
Thou gav'st him once, receive him for thy husband.

CIM. On what shall I resolve?

TO. To take my life,
If you deny the price of my dear love,
For since the hope of that has yet preserved it,
They both must fall together, and twill be
Some satisfaction to have died your lover.

CIM. Rise, it is enough, I am Cimena ever,
Thou Roderigo, and I wholly thine.

K. Live happy Loversthen, and taste the pleasures,
Which with so many crosses you have purchased:
Quit all your cares, and celebrate this day,
My Court shall be Loves Palace, come fair Princess:
Y are mine by a double tie of love and duty,
Which I shall still preserve, since I am taught
To do not what I would; but what I ought.

FINIS.

