A RELATION O^ (...) Most lamentable Burning of the (...) of Cork, in the west
of Ireland, in the Province of MONSTER, by Thunder and Lightning. With either
most doleful and miserable Accidents, which fell out the last of May 1622
after the prodigious barrel of the birds called Stares, which fought strangely
over and meare that Cit^^^ the 12. and 14. of May 1623. As it has been
Reported to diverse Right Honorable PERSONS.

men work with fire-fighting equipment in a burning town

Printed this 20 of June. 1622. LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nicholas Bourne,
and Thomas Archer, 1622.

To the courteous Reader.
CHristian Reader;
There was this last year 1621. in October last, published a report of a
wonderful battle fought betwixt certain birds, called Stares, or Sterlings,
at and near a City in Ireland called Cork, which was so strange and
admirable an accident, as the like has very seldom or never bin heard of, or
registered in any History in modern or former ages. This report being so
strange, was of some censured as an untrue and idle invention, Of others, which
understood, and by inquiry were resolved of the truth, it was imagined to
prognosticate some strange and dreadful accident to follow, as wars, plagues
or pestilence, with such like conjectures. Sithence which time, namely, this
last of May 1622. the Omnipotent Majesty of heaven has not only reprooved
their vanity, who would not believe so strange a Relation, but has further by
a most dreadful and lamentable demonstration of his power and Justice,
resolved what that battle of Birds might or did prognosticate, wherein his
Justice in one respect may be feared, and his mercy by so exemplar a
manifestation may be sought after in another. In what manner this battle of
Birds was performed, is needles in this place to be repeated, because the
relation is extant in Print, albeit, fitting for the Reader to know, because he
shall thereby understand, how directly this dreadful, and most terrible late
Accident in Cork, was prognosticated in the clamorous and cruel fight of the
Stares, at and near unto Cork, where the Stares began their fiery and furious
fight at the East end of the City; there began the first original of the
ruin of Cork: And as the Birds proceeded in their fight, so did the City of
Cork consume by fire from heaven, as it is more plainly delivered in the
Relation following, to which I leave thee.

A RELATION OF THE MOST LAMENTABLE Burning of the City of Cork in the West
of Ireland, in the Province of MONSTER, by Thunder and Lightning.
THe City of Cork has his beginning upon the side of an Hill, which
discendeth easily into one wide and long street; The only principal and
chief street of the City. At the first entrance there is a Castle, called
Shandon Castle. And almost over against it, a Church built of Stone, as the
Castle is a kind of Marble, of which that Country yields store. The City
has many houses built of the same stone, and covered with Slate. But the
greatest number of houses are built with Timber, or Mudde walls, and covered
with Thatch.

This last of May, being the most pleasant and delightful month of the year;
To take his farewell, gave it in the most ruefull and terrible manner, the like
seldom heard of, or seen in any Country, or heard of in any Age, since the
beginning of the World. The Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were not more
suddenly, or more horribly consumed with fire from heaven, then this City
of Cork was this last of May: Albeit I compare this City with Sodom and
Gomorrah, it is not in respect of the sins, but in respect of the heavy hand
of God showed in like degree. To consume by fire from Heaven either of them,
the sins of Sodom are by the Scriptures made known, which are, and ever
will be known, by the names of the sins of Sodom. No question but this
City of Cork had her sins: Otherwise the hand of God had not fallen so
heavily upon her, but they are not made so apparent as the sins of Sodom.
But if Vox Populi, be Vox Dei, If the people of the Country adjoining round
about them, may be taken for witnesses, for sufficient proof of their sins,
which might provoke the wrath of God upon them: The Citizens, and Inhabitants
of Cork, have been taxed and noted for Usury, (the chiefest Daughter of
Covetousness) to exceed any City in the Kings Dominions, except some Cities
in England, which as they are far greater in quantity, so I fear they do
as much exceed in quality of the same sin. But of this more hereafter, when
I shall have passed over this lamentable Narration of Cork. This last of May,
being Friday, betwixt eleven and twelve of the Clock, the Clouds over the
City began to gather thick, which caused such a darkness in their houses,
that they were amazed to behold so sudden a darkness. These dark Clouds
seemed to Muster together, and to descend by degrees nearer to the City.
Whilst the Inhabitants stood thus wondering at the extraordinary darkness,
suddenly they heard a terrible clappe of thunder; And at the same instant they
saw a dreadful lightning, with flames of fire break out of the Clouds, and
fall upon the City at the same instant, at the East end, and the highest part
of the City. At that very place where the Stares began their Battle, and
where they first fell down, being killed in the fight; There the fire first
began with horrible flames: which the Inhabitants of the West and lower part of
the City beholding, they began hastily to run toward the East part where
the fire began. They were not run half the way, when as they heard a woeful
cry of fire behind them, for the West part was also set on fire. Betwixt two
fires, being amazed and confounded, not knowing what to do, the flames of fire
raged also extremely in the midst of the houses on both sides of the
street. Albeit, they had great abundance of water near at hand, there was no
means to be had, nor any endeavor to be used to quench the flames. For the
fire was so sudden, the flames so hot, and raging, that there was no
possibility to come near them. For the fire which falls from Heaven is
unquenchable, and rages with that violent heat, as may not be endured. So
that the Inhabitants seeing all their labors and indevours to be spent in
vain, and many consumed which adventured too near, to save their goods, their
wives or children; then they resolve to save themselves by running and flying
out of the City into the fields, and to an Island adjoining near unto the
City. Some were saved by this means: But those who were in the City were
so enclosed upon bothsides with fire, that they were brought into miserable
extreamities. These had no other means to save themselves, but to fly for
refuge into the Churches. There were in this City three Churches, all which
were filled with people tormented with woe and terror. For albeit they were in
the Churches covered with Slate, and built otherwise with thick stone walls,
yet this was no security unto them, when as they had nothing to hope for, but
a dreadful expectation every minute of an hour, when the Churches would be
fired also. For they could not go out of the Churches, the fire raged so on
all sides. And in the Churches they heard nothing but clamors and outcries.
Every man's fear was a torment, not only to himself, but to others generally.
For the houses round about the Churches flaming, upon every glimce of fire, the
cry was raised, the Church is now on fire; now we shall all be consumed. This
was the miserable and woeful case of those who fled to the Churches. Now for
those who remained in the streets (as all people whose weakness might not
shift for themselves) or young children, whose want of discretion could not
foresee how to avoid the danger; or such persons who loved their wives,
children, and goods more then themselves, many hundreds of these people were
consumed by the fire. Now concerning those who to save their lives fled into
the Islands and fields adjoining, in what a woeful and miserable affliction
were they? These were beholding their City in a lamentable Combustion. They
were turning their eyes this way and that way, where sometimes their
habitations were: where they had goods, wives, and children, brothers and
sisters; fathers and mothers, cosens and friends; And all either consumed, or
in danger to be consumed with fire. And to aggravate the bitterness of their
heavy afflictions more, they heard out of the City, hydeous and rufull cries
and clamors, which made them imagine all were utterly perished and consumed.
Thus what the battle and fight of the birds did presage and prognosticate,
fell out too true and doleful, in the utter ruin and consumption of a rich
and wealthy City. Upon this so grievous an accident, it is absolutely
necessary, that all the Cities and Towns of England and Ireland, should make
speedy Use of so dreadful an example. For they must consider, the Savior of
Mankind in the xiij. of S. Luke, when he was told of the bloody execution of
the Galileans by Herod: Think you (says Jesus) that these Galileans were
sinners, more then all the Galileans, that they suffered such things? No, But I
say to you, unless you repent, you shall all likewise perish. As those xviij.
upon whom the Tower fell in Siloe, and slew them: Think you they were sinners
above all the men that dwell in Jerusalem? No, I say to you, but except you
repent, you shall all likewise perish. By this our Savior does make it
manifest, that some sinners are punished for examples sake, that other who are
guilty of like sins, may by speedy Repentance pacify the wrath of God,
that he may spare his rod of Justice. These inhabitants of the City of Cork,
were not the only and greatest sinners, above all other Cities of England or
Ireland, but that other Cities are as grievous sinners as they: But that God
has made an especial example in them, that others may be moved to Repentance,
thereby to escape the heavic Judgments of God upon them for the like sins.
God is merciful and long suffering, but if the offer of his mercy be not taken
in due time, his Justice falls heavy where the offer of mercy is refused.
The Battle of Birds over the City being so strange and wonderful an
accident, might have moved them to considerations of Repentance, but they
slighted it over; And now they find (which others may fear) it is good to lay
hold on Mercy whilst it is offered.

FINIS

