DOCTRINALL AND MORAL OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING RELIGION: WHEREIN THE AVTHOR
DECLARES THE Reasons of his late vn-enforced departure from the Church of
ROME; and of his incorporation to the present Church of ENGLAND: teaching,
maintaining and defending the true Christian Catholic and Apostolic Faith,
professed by the ancient Primitive Church, most conspicuous in the outward
virtues and constant sufferings of many holy Bishops and other good Christians,
glorious in the crown of Martyrdom.

By JOHN COPLEY Seminary Priest.

LVKE 22.23. When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. JAMES 5.20. He
which makes a sinner to be converted from the error of his way, shall save his
soul from death, and covers a multitude of sins. LONDON, Imprinted by W.
S. for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his Shop in Fleet Street, in Saint
Dunstans Churchyard. 1612.

TO ALL SEMINARY PRIESTS, MONKS, FRIARS, IESVITES, AND ALL LAY-PROFESSORS of
the present Roman, falsely pretended Catholic faith, grace and true
conversion in Christ JESUS.
Whereas now some months are ouer-passed since my conformity to the Church
of England; whereof I have hitherto been silent, withdrawing myself to further
the contemplation of those inducements which lead me hereunto; my zeal of
truth and knowledge of your great spiritual miseries who live wrapped in a
cloud of ignorance, deprived of the most comfortable beams of true Christian
faith, working by the heat of charity in men's souls, enforces me to
dedicate these my doctrinall and moral observations unto your selves, as
standing in most need of them. My intention in dedicating them to you, is no
other then true compassion of your souls dangerous estate, not seeing nor
knowing your own erroneous doctrines taught in the present Roman Church; of
which I dare say many of you are sincere zealous professors with only regard
to your souls health, and the kingdom of heaven, esteeming that above all
things to be the chiefest to be sought for in this world, is in truth it is;
and therefore your case the more worthy of Christian commiseration, and true
Apostolical endeauours for your delivery out of your so perilous and
lamentable a condition, which, according to the small portion of that talent
that Almighty God has vouchsafed to bestow upon me, I have endeavored to
show unto you by this Treatise, desiring you courteously and charitably to
accept in good part, with no less humility and care of your own souls good,
then I do present it unto you with a sincere desire thereof, in the most tender
bowels of Christ Jesus. Vouchsafe to read it with deliberate judgment;
examine well the spirit wherewith it is written; weigh the substance and
contents rather then the manner or circumstances of my writing; the style is
but plain and familiar; you shall find no affectation of eloquence in it;
because my labors and pains taken herein, have been rather for the profit of
your souls, then for the recreation of your wits. I know well that neither the
planting of Saint Paul, nor the watring of Apollo can redound to your profit,
unless God give increase and prosper the success; and therefore leaving the
increase to God, and desiring you most attentively to read these my
observations, deliberately to ponder them, and effectually to follow them: I
most kindly take my leave of you with Saint Paul's charitable words: Pax Dei
quae exuperat omnem sensum custodiat corda vestra and intelligentias vestras in
Christo Jesus. Philip. 4.7.
The peace of God which passes all understanding keep your hearts and
intelligences in Christ Jesus. Resting this 13. day of June, Anno Domini, 1612.

A most zealous friend and lover of your souls: JOHN COPLEY.

Aduertisements to the Reader.
ALbeit to my singular comfort (Christian Reader) I might in the Sunshine of
mine own happiness have enjoyed to my self the great benefit of Gods favor
showed me in my conversion from Romish novelties, to the ancient Catholic
Faith, taught in this Kingdom; yet for that I had diverse reasons inuiting me
to the participation thereof unto other men's knowledge, that what was private
to my self, might be also a public good unto others; I have thought it
expedient with the promulgation of it, for thy better information concerning my
self, to propound unto thee some particular Aduertisements, whereby thou
may the better know me and my meaning, who am otherwise perhaps unknown
unto thee; and accordingly with moderation of judgment, void of impatient
humor or partiality, censure my proceedings, in the matters handled in this
Treatise.

2 First therefore, I would have thee take notice, that some few, more zealous
and earnest than charitable or wise followers of the Church of Rome, stick not
to object unto me, That they cannot be persuaded, that I am truly in judgment
and understanding a sincere Professor of the faith of England, otherwise than
for some private respect, either of liberty, or other contentment or
preferment; whereby you may well infer, that they have no great opinion of
any ignorance in me of their Doctrine, nor of actual miscarriage in manners that
should make me forsake their communion, since they think I have too much
knowledge to be in heart of any other, and yet can charge me of no
misdemeanour; for mine own part, I must needs tell you, that herein they are
either very ignorant in their understandings, or maliciously affected in their
wills; ignorant of the true knowledge of Gods favor in converting sinners,
and malicious to the Church of England, whereunto I have incorporated my self;
and therefore to disgrace it, they are willing, without either true
understanding or virtue, to cast any sinister imputation they can upon my
person; which I doubt not but by Gods assistance and the endeavors of patience
and and diligence; I shall turn to their own shame, and to the further
manifestation of the wicked doctrines and impieties of their Romish Church;
without any indignity or disgrace to the Church to which I am now incorporated.

3 Secondly, I would further have thee know, that some few Priests of their
Church, having grown debauched in their lives and conuersations, and after
their forsaking communion with the Church of Rome for a cloak of liberty to
their lewd inclinations, have proved most treacherous to those unto whom before
they professed friendship, remaining in their own consciences persuaded they
did not well in discovering Priests, and causing them to be apprehended and
ransacking the houses of Recusants, more for their own profits, than for any
desire of service to the state, or zeal to the Church of England; giving over
all exercise both of virtue or learning, fit for Clergy men. Hereupon diverse
of the Roman Church have made their advantage for the justification of their
own Religion, and reproof of their adversaries faith; insomuch that I heard a
Jesuit of good reputation say, that a great noble man of this realm being in
conference with others of his rank should say, that he much wondered why such
men as were virtuous in their cariages so long as they were of the Church of
Rome, when they came to the Church of England they proved dissolute of life,
and most licentious in their conuersations, whereas such as went from the
Church of England to the church of Rome, though they were never so disorderly
before, they afterward were reformed in their conuersations, and most
religiously exemplar in their behauiours. Now therefore, to show that this
observation proves not always so, and that those of the English Church might
not be deceived with this illusion of the Devil, you may from me take notice,
that it has pleased almighty God heretofore to convert diverse who have lived
with good fame in the Church of England, and of late one master Richard
Sheldon, whose both learning and virtuous conversation, even in the Church of
Rome, has been such as is vnimpeachable by any of his Adversaries, as far
forth as ever I could hear, and so still manifests as much in religious
zeal to the Church of England; and for mine own part, I can boldly say, that
I find as good curbes by the Doctrine of the Church of England, to keep men
from sin, as in the Church of Rome; by virtue whereof, I doubt not, but with
Gods assistance I shall live to serve him in this Church with less sin than
ever I could have done in the Church of Rome.

4 Thirdly, I must give you further notice, that it is a thing well known, that
there are in this realm many dissembling Protestants, which outwardly do all
the acts of Religion belonging to this Church of England, either to stay in
their places in the commonwealth, or to anoyde their penal laws; and yet in
their hearts are resolved believers of the Roman Faith, egregiously dissembling
both with God and men, and practicing most notorious equivocation, as well in
matters of faith as manners; who will not stick to take oaths, receive
Sacraments, go to Church, and commit many a like act directly against their
consciences and persuasion, which according to Saint Paul is sin; Romans 14.
verse. 23
nay, I dare affirm that it is a heinous mortal sin, approaching near to
that sin against which Christ himself pronounces a dangerous threatening full
of terror to any considerat heart, saying; That he that sins against the
holy Ghost, shall never be forgiven, Luc. 12. verse. 10.
neither in this world, neither in the world to come. Whence it may appear,
that such men, as they are most treacherous to God, so may it be probably
thought they cannot be loyal unto men; and therefore are they to be held the
most dangerous men that can be in any Commonwealth, preferring the glory of
men before the glory of God: which being a thing much practiced by some
affected to the Church of Rome, I have been the more willing, both for their
better information, to publish these my observations, as also to give
satisfaction to the Church of England concerning my self, who am (I thank
God) most free from so hateful a crime, odious both to God and man.

5. Fourthly, I am further to let you understand, that my intention in these my
Observations, being more for the instruction of the Professors of the Church of
Rome, than for those of the Church of England (who stand in no need of so
mean a scholar as my self) I have cited often the Authors of that Church
even against themselves, thinking no way better to confute their Doctrines,
than by their own grounds and their own Teachers. And although I handle not
all points controuersed betwixt Rome and the reformed Churches at this day; yet
do I so entreat of the chiefest points of Practice and Doctrine, that all
those being discovered to be but erroneous and novel, and such as cannot stand
with the true grounds of Christianity, I think there is no man of sound
judgment can think I had just cause to stay any longer in that Church, or
that themselves can be partakers of Salvation, remaining in the same.

6. Fifthly, my further desire is, that thou who vouchsafest to be the Reader
of these my unpolished lines, wilt with as favorable a mind entertain them
for thy profit, as I, out of charitable affection to Gods servants, do most
freely publish them to the world; desiring Almighty God to give thee grace to
read them with due attention, and to ruminate upon them with mature
deliberation, laying aside all partiality in thy censures, or inordinate
desire of any curious novelties; my resolution in the writing of them being
more for the profit and spiritual good of others, than for any purchase,
either of praise or estimation to my self; desiring that the naked truth, set
forth without any colors of art or elocution, may show it own power and force
to prevail against falsehood. And so wishing you all happiness, both temporal
and eternal, I leave thee to the protection on of Almighty God:

Yours zealously affected in Christ Jesus. I. C.

A table of all the matters contained in this book of Doctrinall and Moral
Observations.
CHAP. I. Contains the first observation, showing the reasons of this
Treatise. Fol. 1. Chap. 2. Contains an observation of Gods providence, in
ministering occasions of times, places, and persons, concurring to the Authors
conversion. Fol. 15. Chap. 3. Contains the first fundamental observation of
the end of man, and his chief happiness. Fol. 26. Chap. 4. Contains the
second fundamental observation of the supernatural and revealed knowledge,
which is necessary to salvation. Fol. 30. Chap. 5. Contains the third
fundamental observation about the absolute necessity of supernatural faith.
Fol. 34. Chap. 6. Contains the fourth fundamental observation about the rule
and straight mete-wand of the true Christian Faith. Fol. 38. Chap. 7.
Contains the fifth fundamental observation, how the Ministry of the true
Church of Christ is the means of teaching the true sense, and understanding of
Scriptures, where, and when it has a visible external government. Fol. 52.
Chap. 8. Contains the sixth fundamental observation, how that conformity of
doctrine with the ancient doctrine of the primitive Church may be a good means
in these latter ages to know the true Church of Christ. Fol. 55. Chap. 9.
Contains an observation of the wonders, and supposed Miracles, which as
Christ has foretold the Pseudo-Christs, and false Prophets shall do, for the
seducing of Gods Elect, if it were possible. Fol. 72. Chap. 10. Contains an
observation of the great hypocrisy of false teachers fore-spoken of in the
holy Scriptures. Fol. 100. Chap. 11. Contains an observation of the fruits by
which false Prophets are to be known and discerned. Fol. 113. Chap. 12.
Contains an observation about the Sacrifice of the Mass, which is accounted
by the Church of Rome the chiefest act of Religion, that can be done to God.
Fol. 133. Chap. 13. Contains an observation about the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, which is a principal novelty taught in the Church of
Rome. Fol. 160. Chap. 14. Contains an observation about the Sacrament,
ministered but under one kind to Lay People in the Church of Rome. Fol. 171.
Chap. 15. Contains an observation of the Pardons and Indulgences, which the
Pope annexeth to Crosses, Grains, and Meddalls. Fol. 180. Chap. 16. Contains
an observation about the number of seven Sacraments, admitted by the Church of
Rome. Fol. 189. Chap. 17. Contains an observation about the doctrine of the
Virgin Mary's conception in original sin. Fol. 206. Chap. 18. Contains an
observation of the honorable state of Marriage prohibited by the Church of Rome
to Priests, who by Gods law may lawfully live in it: and allowed to those who
by Gods law can not live together without Incest. Fol. 214. Chap. 19.
Contains the Conclusion to the Reader, with a recapitulation of all the
precedent observations for the Readers profit. Fol. 213.
DOCTRINALL and Moral Observations concerning Religion.
CHAP. I. Containing the first observation, showing the reasons and occasions
of this Treatise.
AMONGST all the things which draw men into admiration, Great is the benefit of
true conversion, because it manifests the power of God.
and which do see me to happen contrary unto common course and order,
worthily may the conversion of souls from the ways of sin and iniquity,
challenge the first place, and is to be esteemed as the greatest: for this is
the most excellent work the Heavens does afford us, and the most wonderful
that the infinite power of God, infinitely powerful, can perform. This the
prime Doctor of the Roman Church most clearly intimates, Tho. Aquin. 12. q.
113.
saying, Maximum opus Dei, est iustificatio impij; The justification of a
sinner is the greatest work of God: according to that of the Kingly Prophet,
Miserationes eius super omnia opera eius; Psalm. 144. verse. 9.
his mercies are above all his works: yea, and the Church of Rome to keep
fresh the memory of this document, prays to God yearly in these words, Deus
qui omnipetentiam tuam parcendo and miserando maxim manifestas; In Dom. 20.
post Pent.
O God that by pardon and mercy chiefly manifestest thy Almighty power.
Which verity also S. Augustine confirms, saying upon those words of S. John,
Greater works than these shall he do: Ioh. 14. v. 12. August. tract. 72. in
Ioh. post. Med. tom. 9.
Maius opus est, vt, ex impio iustus fiat, quam creare coelum and terram; it is
a greater work for a sinner to be made righteous, than to create heaven and
earth. This, though it seem a paradox, is most true: for certainly, albeit
the creation of the world was a marvelous work, yet the justification and
conversion of a sinner is much fuller of admiration. God framed and molded the
world almost in a moment of time, and brought forth all creatures in a short
time, as it were into the field: but to abolish the turpitude and foulness of
only one original sin, he used the delay of five thousand years: and to
bring this work to perfection, his only son Christ Jesus endured three and
thirty years exile from his heavenly Kingdom: For the work of creation God
did but speak, Psalm. 148. verse. 5.
Dixit and facta sunt; but for this other work Christ was to suffer and die:
Oportebat Christum pati, Luke 24. verse. 16.
and ita intrare in gloriam suam, it was behoofefull for Christ to die, and so
to enter into his glory: therefore Saint Augustines sentence of true conuerts
is to be noted, Augustine. in Sermon.
saying, Conuersio ad bonum, non homini sed Deo adscribenda; the conversion of
a sinner unto good, is not to be ascribed unto man, but unto God, who of
himself can do all things by his power.

2 Now verily, as justification and remission of sins is the greatest work
of God, Great also, because it manifests the glory and wisdom of God.
manifesting his infinite power and mercy; so neither is there any work of
his more forcible to set out his glory and wisdom unto the world than the
same. It is a glory unto the artificer to delineate most perfect colors of
Emblemes upon base iron and hard steel. The skill also of the Physician is
praise-worthie, when he freeth one from danger that is poisoned, and swollen by
the biting of a Viper, with a present Antidote; so the glory of God and his
goodness chiefly shines in the conversion of sinners. So it shined in Saint
Paul the Apostle, when he being infected with the poison of infidelity, and
swollen therewith, Spirans minarum, and caedis, Actor. 9. verse. 1.
breathing forth threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord,
Christ appearing very oportunely unto him, cured him and strengthened him in
faith. Hereby appears the frailty of humane nature, and the power of Gods
grace, which redoundeth much unto the glory of his Saints, whilst calling
unto their remembrance their passed dangers, they behold their happy security
of present glory: even as the Mariner after the danger of shipwreck
rejoices; as a sick person rejoices, after therecouerie of a perilous
disease; and as conquering soldiers triumph and glory the more in their
victories, by how much their hazards and encounters were strong. This Saint
Augustine teaches most elegantly, saying, Nimis exultant Sancti, dum
praeteriti periculi memores dicunt; 4 Confess. cap 3.
dextra Domini fecit virtutem, dextra Domini exaltauit me; the Saints do very
much rejoice, when mindful of passed danger, they say, the right hand of the
Lord has done his power, the right hand of the Lord has exalted me. So did
Saint Paul rejoice, when of a persecutor he was made a vessel of election. So
also Saint Matthew, when of a Customer he was made an Evangelist. So Saint Marie
Magdalene, when from being a vessel of contumely and disgrace, she was
translated into a vessel of glory. So Saint Peter, when after the denying of
his Master he was made a constant pillar of truth, by his personal
perseverance in faith, obtained him by Christ's prayer, who said, Ego rogani pro
te Petre, Luke 22.32.
vt non deficiat fides tua, I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith fail
not.

3 The observation hereof (gentle Reader) makes me truly to discover, An
acknowledgement of the benefit of conversion.
as the case stands, the obligation I am bound in to God: for Almighty God
of his infinite goodness, and out of the vnexhausted riches of his mercy
having blessed my soul with a true and unfeigned conversion from the
superstitious, idolatrous, and heretical religion of the Roman Church, unto
the perfect knowledge and practice of the Religion established in this Realm,
touching that faith which is conformable to that which was taught by the
Ancient Primitive, Apostolic, and Catholic Church; which is maintained and
defended by his Majesty, with whom I may presume boldly to say, maugre all the
Church of Rome, I will never be ashamed to render an account of my profession,
Praemonit. to all Christian Monarchs.
and of that hope that is in me, as the Apostle prescribes. Having (I say)
been made partaker of this benefit, only through Gods working in my soul, as
I can do no less in the duty of gratitude than to manifest the same unto
you, so must it be a part of my care, not only to acknowledge the same my
self, but to be an occasion that others may partake of the like blessing with
me, who live blinded with the same veil of errors and heretical inventions as
I did, till it pleased God to draw away that dark curtain of implicit faith,
( viz. that the Roman Church is the true Church of God) from mine eyes, and to
give me grace clearly to behold the explicit novelties strongly and cunningly
maintained therein, which enforces me now to make the confession of my faith,
saying no longer the Creed of Rome, made by the Pope, and recorded in the
Council of Trent, but with his Majesty, Praemonit. fol 35.
I am such a Catholic Christian as believes the three Creedes; that of the
Apostles, that of the Council of Nice, and that of Athanasius etc. I also
acknowledge for Orthodox all those other forms of Creedes, that either were
devised by Councels, or particular Fathers, against such particular Heresies as
most reigned in their times. I reverence and admit the four first general
Councels as Catholic and Orthodox etc. I also concerning the Fathers hold as
his Majesty does; the Scriptures also I believe: as for the Apocripha, I hold
them in the same account that the Ancients did, etc. And so of the other points
of doctrine, according to the most judicious profession which his Highness in
the Church of England makes, do I believe.

4 Here at I know (gentle Reader) thou may much marvel, God the cause of
my conversion.
that I (who was borne of such parents as professed the Roman faith, and lost
much of their temporal estate diverse years together for the same; who have
been trained up therein from my youth; who have practiced the function of my
Priesthood these nine years, according to the fashion of that Church; who have
been ready and prompt in ministering their Sacraments, in preaching their
Doctrine, in offering their Sacrifices; who dedicated my life and labors most
willingly for the advancement of that faith; who am allied to diverse of the
better sort of England, professing that religion; who was befriended of many,
and to my knowledge hated of none) should quit alliance with that Church, and
take acquaintance with this of England, where I have scarce any acquaintance at
all; What should cause such a change? I answer thee (gentle Reader) that my
desire is thou should be rightly informed and assured thereof, and then say
with me as I say most sincerely with inexplicable joy to mine own soul, This
is a change of the right hand of the highest. Psalm. 76. verse. 11.
And for this cause do I here present unto you the observations both of
doctrine and manners, which have caused this my unexpected change and heavenly
metamorphosis: not engendered by any wavering disposition or inordinate passion
(too often seen in trouble some times) but begun and effected with mature and
ripe deliberation; reason and knowledge most orderly drawing the chariot of my
will and affections unto the love of truth and dislike of falsehood; and
therefore a work (as I hope) wrought by the only strong hand of God, long
inuiting and leading my soul hereunto, and often displaying the bright beams
of his extraordinary grace, most efficaciously enforcing me thereunto, after
many great conflicts and combats within my self: in which conversion of mine
though some rejoice, yet others out of rash judgment, and indiscreet passion,
and their implacable hatred to the Church of England, joined with extreme
ignorance, and that by the deceitful ground of their implicit faith, and
belief of whatsoever the Church of Rome teaches (not considering the
defection and Apostasy of faith, foretold by our Savior himself in the
Scriptures, under the parable of cockle and tares, Matthew. 13. verse. 25.
of heresies, and novelties, ouersowed by the enemy man after the sowing of
the good seed, when all were asleep) do labor by all means to obscure and
endarken with untrue reports, and most unconscionable calumniations; some
giving out, that I was ever of a presumptuous spirit, but they are such as
have against all conscience and good nature most unnaturally wronged me, as
diverse of the best Papists have heretofore judged, and can yet witness.
Others, that I am bereaved of my right wits, and assuredly distracted in mind:
but they I presume are such as either know me not, or else such as think there
can be no greater madness than to forsake the Church of Rome; out of a
misconceited persuasion they have, that truth is on their side; whereof they
have such a preiudicate opinion, without knowledge, that they will not stick
to say, that should they abandon the Roman faith, they would sooner become
Turks than Protestants. Others, that I am drawn either by the desire of
worldly liberty and preferments, or by some carnal allurements to perform
the will and desires of the flesh; against all which unchristian suggestions,
although I could in respect of my self, with the buckler and safeguard of
patience and silence possess mine own soul in quietness and comfort,
knowing that the greatest temporal happiness of a Christian is the testimony
of a good conscience: yet notwithstanding, for that my conscience gives
evidence, that by them Gods singular mercy and providence most clearly
shining in my conversion, should be eclipsed, and his glory most injuriously
wronged, and many ouer-credulous spirits too too much abused, I can do no
less, in my thankful duty for so singular a received benefit, than to
illustrate the same to the eyes of the world, that all seeing it, Gods holy
name may be glorified herein, and others that walk awry, be invited and
edified by my example: which I cannot better perform, then by giving public
testimony to the world in writing of the true occasions, means, and motives
of my conversion, as by these my doctrinall and moral observations I trust
through Gods grace I shall perform.

5 The truth is, and I cannot deny it, The difficulties of my conversion.
that this my change and conversion from the faith of Rome to the faith of
England, was even beset with manifold difficulties, oppositions, bars, and
obstacles, long hindering and delaying this work, which consisting of the
inward act of resolution in the soul, strengthened by Gods especial grace
with comfort, Tho. Aq. 12. q. Cxiij. art. 7.
at length was performed in an instant: For first it is well known I was armed
against it by my continual education and example of my parents in the doctrine
and practice of the Roman faith, which I was persuaded to have been Catholic,
Education one let.
even from my first years of understanding: for common experience shows that
of the Poet to be most true, Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem testa
diu, Every vessel retains long the savor of that liquor which is first put
into it; yea, the tender twigge in growth enclineth always that way unto which
it was first bowed by the Gardeners hand, whether to straightness or
crookedness; such was my disposition to the faith of Rome, and unapt to any
other by my breeding, had not the father of mercies, and God of all comforts,
by his powerful hand guided me to this, unto which now I am come through his
gracious goodness. Secondly, I was further armed against this my happy
conversion by my function and calling in the Roman Church to the state of
Priesthood, wherein I consecrated all my studies, labors, My function another
let.
and endeavors, to fortify and strengthen my self in the doctrine of that
Church, and also to induce others thereunto, esteeming my endeavors in reducing
any to that religion so pleasing to God, as none could be greater; setting
always before mine eyes that of S. James, Jacob. 5. verse. 20.
He that makes a sinner to be converted from the errors of his ways, shall
save his soul from death. The consideration of which promise in those my
labors and travels, whether by day or by night, by land or by sea, whether in
danger or safety, whether in want or abundance, whether with infamy or good
fame, whether with favors or threatenings, whether ith liberty or imprisonment,
whether with crosses or prosperity, whether amongst my friends, or in
banishment, made them all most sweet, The success of my practice another let.
easy, and pleasant unto me. Thirdly, I was moreover armed against this my
conversion by the successful practice of this my function, which I always
performed with most desired comfort unto my self in the ignorant blindness I
then lived in, and with competent satisfaction and contentment unto others,
whom I thought profitably to have either purchased to Christ by his grace, or
confirmed in that faith. Oh what heart is there that will not be flattered with
prosperous events in the course they labor in, and grow foolishly bewitched
with pride in their own doings; self-love and felicity being like the two
poles Artike and Antartike, upon which the whole course and frame of a foolish
man's life has his dependence! Love to friends another let.
Fourthly, I was armed against this my conversion by the great mutual love
which was between me and many chief and great persons, professing the Roman
faith with me, and suffering much temporal detriment for the same, who I
assure my self were so tenderly affected unto me, that as I could not be
without a joyful or sorrowful feeling of their good or evil, so neither
could they be without the like affection toward me. I cannot utter how much I
was held back by this ginne and temptation of natural friendship, which long
like lime-twigges held the affections of my soul from being able to find wings
for the flight, which I have now made; having through Gods grace received
feathers like the Dove to fl^e vt requiescam, Psalm. 54. verse. 7.
to rest and repose my self in the fruitful boughs of the little
Mustard-seede mentioned by Christ, Matthew. 13. verse. 31.
where I may with experience of Gods comforts now say with his daughter in the
Canticles, Fructus eius dulcis gutturi meo; Cant. 2. verse. 3.
his fruit is sweet unto my taste. Fifthly, Example of parents and kindred
another let.
I was moreover armed against this my conversion by the example of most of mine
own kindred, who were always and still are resolute and constant professors
of the Roman faith, whose conuersions with mine I most heartily wish in the
tender bowels of Christ Jesus. Here it may be well considered, how much my
soul, partly solicited by the love of truth, and strongly yet held fast in the
traitorous affection of flesh and blood, was turmoiled in this conflict against
two adverse powers; the one inuiting me to heaven, the other weighing me down
unto earth; the one showing me the way to God, the other holding me from him by
the heaviness of natural affection. Sixthly, External reputation another let.
the reputation and good opinion I found that both the Romish Clergy and
Laity had of me, might well have ouerswayed any man that was not a master over
self-love, and a contemner of vaineglorie. There is no man of experience but
knows well, that in all outward show the Clergy of Rome here in England
amongst their professors are much more held in reverence and respective regard,
than those of the Clergy of England by their followers, many things of
doctrine and practice tending more to their magnifying and glory; as first the
doctrine of auricular confession, which breeds an extraordinary awfulnesse
toward them; and secondly a continual practice the Papists of England have to
ask their Priests daily blessing, kneeling unto them; a kind of humiliation
not used to every Priest in any country but in England. Seventhly, Natural
perplexity another let.
I was armed further against this my conversion, by an extraordinary
heaviness I apprehended it would breed to those whom I had in former times
reconciled to the Church of Rome, thinking they would rather grieve for me as
one lapsed, than follow me as one risen; unless it should please God by his
especial grace to give them the like occasions to find out the truth, as out
of his fatherly providence he gave unto me.

Oh what inward conflicts, The conflicts going before my conversion
almost insufferable, did these considerations breed in my very soul, so long
habituated in the Roman faith, and practiced in that Religion? How often did
they stop me in my way to Christ, and from the incorporation to his true
Church? How was my poor soul here environed with perplexed assaults of flesh
and blood? of self-love? of natural affection to my friends? and as I
conceived then, of supernatural affection and zeal to my ghostly children? Ah
how many powerful arguments of humane wisdom did wrestle against my poor
understanding, and against the light of grace, Gods inspirations often
illustrating my soul with the beams of his heavenly truth, which I set too
lightly of, as of temptations, the resistance whereof I then thought was
meritorious, howsoever I striued in my conversation outwardly to shadow them,
faining a counterfeit quietness and calmness of mind, when I was most
violently tossed and troubled in mine own conscience? The nights could not
afford me ordinary rest and repose, but often when I thought to overcome
these conflicts betwixt falsehood and truth, by taking my usual rest; even in
my sleep I should find sudden days of grace and spiritual light to awaken
me, and to enforce me to take delight in the Sunshine of truth; which as I
had not grace then to conceive as I should, I held to be but illusorie flashes
of the Angel of darkness, transforming himself into the similitude and
likeness of the Angel of light, to deceive my soul withal, and so I
confessed them, as ordinary temptations against faith, till at length with a
more powerful light it pleased the true Son of justice and God of glory to
enlighten my understanding, in such sort, that all the clouds of error and
endarkened affections were dispersed like mist before the Sun; what before I
held to be heretical, I approved to be most Catholic; what before was
falsehood, was now truth; what before was darkness, was now light. I found my
self suddenly in my meditations upon the grounds of true faith and belief,
like S. Paul, environed, not with a corporal, but with a spiritual and most
comfortable light from heaven, placing my understanding in the paradise of
truth and all her delights, struck down to the ground in the humble
acknowledgement of mine unworthiness, and terrified with a voice from heaven,
not sounding in the ears of my body by their corporal Organs, but sweetly
making a most delightful harmony in my soul, mollifying the obdurate crust
of my heart, and forcing me to say, Act. 9. verse. 6.
Domine quid me vis facere? O Lord what will thou have me to do? with perfect
true conformity of all my thoughts, actions, and endeavors answerable to his
will. Hence was I moved with great power, working even with comfort to my
soul, to call to mind innumerable passages of Scriptures and ancient Fathers,
in former times observed, and other reasonable congruencies, moving me most
effectually to convert my self to the only Apostolic, Primitive, and
Catholic faith, truly professed in the Church of England, as it were destined
hereunto by a presage in my youth, when being borne beyond the seas, I was by
Gods directing providence, inspiring my parents minds by my nurse and her
husband (who were purposely sent for out of England) sent into this Realm,
when I was but few days old, to be nursed here; which was a great furtherance
and means that now in the ninth year of my Priesthood I am in this Realm
nursed and grown to such a spiritual strength, as to embrace the right faith
of a true Christian, which heretofore I wanted. And although lately, since my
conversion, one said unto me, that it had been better if I had been drowned at
sea in the great storm which happened in my passage into this Realm so young
(which I escaped with exceeding great danger, being forthwith entertained into
the Castle by the Captain thereof for my fathers sake) than at riper years
thus to live an Apostata, and to be a scandale unto the Church of God: Yet I
trust that I shall make it apparent, that it was much better I escaped; Gods
providence in the first escape of my body foreshewing a more dangerous second
escape from the shipwreck of my soul, whereby his glory in my happiness may
be manifested to the good of many, that they may truly say, Exodus 1. verse. 19.
Digitus Dei est hic, the finger of God is here.

7. The working of the Trinity in my conversion the first cause of this
treatise.
Hereby you may see (courteous Reader) whether I have not just cause to make
known to the world this my conversion, and the true occasions and motives
thereof, that all that bear of it may say as I have cause to say in mine own
soul, The finger of God is here: For first you may observe, that whilst I
wandered out of the right way of true Catholic doctrine, Gods goodness.
following the Church of Rome, the finger of Gods mercy and goodness directed
and pointed me which way to take into the right path of heaven, most favorably
bestowing upon me beartie contrition for my former errors both in faith and
manners, more than ever before. Secondly, the finger of his wisdom, Gods
wisdom
even when I was most addicted to the studies of the Roman doctrine (occasion
being given me of conference with some Protestants, requiring satisfaction of
me in some capital points of controversy, which I promised either to prove by
the Scriptures, ancient Fathers, and natural reason, or else to embrace the
Protestants faith as Catholic, therewithal intending to impugn the doctrine
of the Religion here professed in England) directed my understanding so to
examine the controversies, weighing all Cardinal Bellarmines reasons for both
sides, that doing it with sincerity, I fell into such doctrinall and moral
observations upon the grounds of the Roman faith, that I most clearly
discovered the dark clouds of error and ignorance, wherewith my judgment and
reason were ouercast; I found the weakness of their grounds, the fallacies of
their reasons, and the insufficiency of judgment showed in most of their
controversies; I found many places of Scripture impertinently alleged, diverse
citations of ancient Fathers fondly wrested against their true understanding,
and many natural reasons alleged most repugnant to reason. Lastly, the finger
of his Almighty power, Gods power:
as efficaciously as the Load. stone, draws iron unto it, drew all the
affections of my heart to a firm resolution, no longer to sleep or slumber in
my errors, but to break off all the bands of erroneous and superstitious
doctrine and novelties, wherewith the present Church of Rome holds souls in
slavery to Satan, and to embrace the truth of the Ancient, Catholic, and
Apostolic doctrine, which I found to be most purely taught in the Church of
England, according to the primitive sincerity. Hence it is most clearly
apparent, how much the glory of God appears in my conversion, and the three
divine attributes of goodness, wisdom, and power of the blessed Trinity,
Qui tribus digitis appendit molem terrae, Esaias 40. verse. 12
who weighteth the earth with three fingers; in the contemplation of which
great benefit I may well cry out with holy Saint Paul, Romans 12. verse. 33
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! for who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has bin his counselor? Or who has first
given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again? for of him, and
through him, and to him, are all things; to whom be glory for ever. For to God
himself must I needs attribute this favor, having just cause for the same
with the kingly Prophet to say, Psalm. 34. verse. 2.
I will always praise the Lord, his praise shall be always in my mouth; who
chiefly has wrought in my soul the understanding, the will, and the
accomplishment hereof; which I can do no less in gratitude than make known,
that his name may be glorified therein. Satisfaction the second cause.
Secondly, if my blinded zeal of your souls good did so much transport me in
my ignorance and errors, as to employ my best endeavors, yea and to venture my
life for your good, and for the reducing of any in this Realm to the pretended
Catholic faith which then I professed, without fear of incurring any
displeasure of the State; then can I now do no less in satisfaction to God
and the world, being now enlightened with truth it self, than to show a more
earnest zeal and burning charity toward your conuersions from the former
errors, laboring to reduce you unto the same light of Catholic truth whereto I
my self am called, that whereas I have formerly wronged the souls of many in
the time of my blindness by diverse labors and exhortations, and the wrong
ministration of the blessed Sacrament, but under one form unto you, quite
contrary to Christ's institution and commandment, rejoicing therein; I may
now in the time of better knowledge endeavor to make part of amends, by using
any possible pains to inform you rightly of the same way which it has
pleased God to call me unto. The true motive of my conversion the third cause.
Thirdly, that you may have true notice, that not any temporal motive has
wrought this change in me; not persuasion of any worldly friend (for till my
conversion I conuersed with none ordinarily but those of the Roman profession)
not natural affection to kindred, because my nearest and dearest friends of
blood are of that faith, and gentlemen of worshipful quality; not want, for
mine own means have been able contentedly to maintain me, with such helps
as the practice of my function drew unto me, besides the love and willingness
of many good friends, most ready to assist me in all my needs; not inordinate
affection to carnal delights, vnapprouable by Gods word, for I thank God I am
free from all such, or any other as far as I know, who am best able to
examine mine own conscience in this behalf.

8 Accept therefore I beseech you (dear Recusants) unto whom I wish as much
good as to mine own soul, To Recusants.
and all happiness in the most tender bowels of Christ Jesus, these my ensuing
observations, grounded upon the sacred letters and the doctrine of the ancient
Church, earnestly praying to God they may bear the same sway with your
understanding and will as they have with mine, for your inducement to a perfect
conversion of your souls, according to my example, unto the true worship of
God in the true Catholic English Church; whose doctrine you may find agreeable
to the true grounds of Christianity, and the doctrine of the primitive Church,
as I doubt not but you may most clearly perceive, if you will vouchsafe
without all passion and perverse affection to peruse my observations; which as
they have been powerful to work my true conversion, so from the truest
affections of my soul I wish they may be as profitable unto you, for your
reduction unto the same most true Catholic faith, with abundance of Gods
blessings to your souls, with perfect allegiance to your lawful Sovereign,
with edification to his Church, with true contentment and peace to your hearts,
with quietness to your present life, and everlasting glory to your life to
come, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus.

CHAP. II. Containing an observation of Gods providence in ministering occasions
of times, places, and persons concurring to my conversion.
SVch is the merciful providence of Almighty God, reaches from one end to
another mightily, and sweetly orders all things, Gods providence orders all
things. Sap. 8. verse. 1.
that as he disposes all humane actions to happen in fit times, so does he
suffer fit accidents and occasions to fall out, that the works which he
intends by men, may have success answerable to his will and designements,
Qui mundum per seipsum regit, Greg. lib. 14. Mor. cap. 26. ante medium.
quem per seipsum condidit, who as Gregory says, rules the world by
himself, which by himself he created. For his understanding and will being
the cause of all things, as the great Doctor of the Roman Church teaches;
Tho. Aq. part. 1. q. 19. in corpore.
Qui operatur omnia secundum consilium voluntatis suae; who works all things
according to the purpose of his will, as Saint Paul affirms; Ephesians. 1. verse.
11.
and his will being known (as the Schoolmen teach) by diverse signs, as by
prohibition, permission of evil, Thom. Aqu. part. 1. q. 19.
operation of good, and by precepts etc. Saint Augustine also saying: August.
enchirid. c. 29. in fine. Tom. 3.
Nihil fit nisi omnipotens fieri velit, vel sinendo vt fiat vel faciendo;
Nothing is done but what the Almighty will have done, either by suffering it
to be done, or by doing it; it follows by necessary consequence that all
occasions, helps and benefits of his creatures, subordinately concurring to
every act of his will proceeds from his providence and wisdom.

2 Hence, My bond of gratitude to Gods providence.
(gentle Reader) I observe in how strong bands of dutiful thankfulness I
stand obliged unto God for ministering unto me at several times, and in
several places, and upon different occurrences, such occasions and means to
search and examine the controversies of religion betwixt the Roman and English
Church, that whilst by my studies and labors my purpose and designement was
to draw others into the net of Rome, I my self was led into the sheepefold
whereof Christ in heaven is the chief Pastor, wherein I see truly verified that
of King David; Psalm. 13. verse. 2.
Dominus de coelo prospexit vt videat si est intelligens aut requirens Deu^,
the Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were
any that did understand and seek God: who never cease to minister occasions
and means concurring to the good of his servants, Matthew. 11. ver. 1.
who numbreth all the hairs of their heads in his knowledge, and suffers not
any thing to happen without his providence unto them. For so we find that
Abraham's exile concurred to his greater good; Genesis 11. verse 1. Genesis 22. verse.
29. Gen 37. verse. 18
the commandment of Isaacks Sacrifice, gave occasion to approve Abraham's
faith, the felling of Joseph by his brethren and his imprisonment, were
occasions concurring to his greater glory, and to the manifestation of his
virtues, Exodus 2. verse. 3.
and Gods more singular providence toward him; the laying of Moses by the
brinke of the river; 1. Reg. 17. verse. 6.
the often delivery of David from Saul's fury; the feeding of Elias with bread
and flesh by Ravens; the preservation of Daniel in the den of Lions; Dan. 6.
verse. 22. Dan. 3.20.24.
the protection of the three Children in the Babilonian furnace, do most
clearly show, how by this providence of God, all occasions and circumstances
of men's lives, do concur to the happiness of his chosen servants: and
therefore most truly sings the Psalmist: Psalm. 90. verse. 1.
Qui habitat in adiutorio altissimi in protectione Dei coeli commorabitur, he
that dwells in the secret place of the most high shall abide under the shadow
of the Almighty: for that all times, places, persons, words and actions fall
out unto the good of such a one through Gods all-seeing and directing
providence.

3 This sweet providence of God toward me in particular, I cannot let pass
in silence, and bury in oblivion, The demonstrations of Gods providence
toward me.
least concealing his glory appearing therein, and blemishing my soul with a
foul spot of ingratitude, in fear of his just punishments I might deservedly
say. Vae mihi quia tacui, woe is me, because I have held my peace. Esaias. 6.
verse. 5.
When I consider how God in my childhood drew me out of the country where I
first breathed air, making me a young trauellei by Sea, protecting me from a
dangerous storm, and affording me after my escape, courteous and friendly
entertainment in a Castle of this land; how in danger of like peril by Sea, I
returned back again, by my mothers direction, when I was about nine years of
age. How near to Namures I escaped danger of drowning, falling into a hole of
water, where I stuck fast in the mudde by the head, had not Gods protection
afforded me a hand to be plucked out with: how I escaped many dangerous
sicknesses, and a most perilous fall out of a Wagon, where my head escaped the
wheel from crushing it in pieces, at my going first to Saint Omers with Master
Nicholas Smith the Jesuit to be a student there, at the first erecting of that
Seminary, of which house I was one of the first six that were received into
it, and that had their first mission into Spain from it: how being to sent
thence by Gods providence with M. Baldwine the Jesuit, after a sore storm by
night near unto the Isle of Wight we were cast into the mouth of the Queens
ships, the next day by contrary winds driving us back unto the downs near
Dover, where we were all taken prisoners by Master King, Captain of one of her
Majesty's ships, and brought into this Realm, being first detained and
courteously entertained at my Lord Admirals house at Derford, then at the then
Lord of Canterburies, who committed us either to Bishops, or other grave
Prelates, where we might have bad better education for the truth of Christian
Religion, then we had amongst the Jesuits if we had had the grace to have made
benefit thereof, had not the poison of false doctrine, first so feised upon all
the powers of our soul, that at that time for want of experience and
knowledge, we could not relish the most delicious Manna of Gods word, nor give
ear to the happy tidings of the true Gospel of Christ so like deaf Adders
our ears were stopped.

4 And further how by Gods providence about six years after intending learning
and further experience, Other particulars of Gods providence toward me.
I went to Rome, in which journey I was imprisoned first at Pheckam in France,
where I was most wrongfully committed with another Gentleman, and our purses
pretty well emptied, and was secondly also taken again at New stade in the
Palsegraues Country, where I was detained for a time with the rest of our
company, by reason of Master Thomas Coniers a Jesuit, with an Irish brother
of the same order, who upon suspicion and jealousy of being busy dealers in
English affairs, engendered by the pretty discovery of some equivocations at
their examinations, had been sent into England, had not the Archduke Albertus
sent his letters in his behalf (as afterward I heard it reported) for his
delivery. How after many sicknesses in Rome where I continued three years, I
was made Priest, intending no other end then to employ my whole life and
labors in connerting souls to the Church or Rome, which I was constantly
persuaded then was the true Church of God; and therefore I thought I could take
no course of life upon me more grateful to God, more profitable to others, or
more meritorious for mine own soul then this was: thus disposed and resolved,
how I with my fellows kissing the Powes feet, and receiving his benediction
upon our selves, and upon our beads, crosses and meddalles, with power to give
the English pardon to others here, for the annulling of temporal pains due to
sin in this life, or the next, and for freeing souls out of purgatory, we
were sent into England. How since I have spent my time for the most part here
in England about nine years in the practice of this function. Where my labors
in that kind were not unprofitable, nor ill esteemed of by those of the Roman
profession, in the which no danger of laws affrighted me, no imprisonments
made me saint, no crosses quailed my courage. Now when I reflect upon all these
occurrences of my life with diverse others, I cannot but magnify the wisdom
of Almighty God, and highly exalt his divine providence: and therefore the
nearer that I approach unto the consideration of the occasions and motives
which God has used to work my conversion in this Realm to the true ancient
Apostolic and Catholic faith, giving me knowledge and experience of many
novelties and erroneous doctrines diameterly opposite to the doctrines of
Christ, his Apostles, and the ancient Catholic faith.

5 Since my coming into this Realm Priest, Reading of Protestant books the
first occasion of doubts.
I observed no one thing to be more necessary for the end I aimed at then the
study of controversies, whereunto next unto the Scriptures for exhortation,
and cases of conscience, for the better directing of souls, I chiefly applied
my self, in the study whereof I found it behooueful, nt to neglect the
reading of such Protestant writers as fell into my hands, thinking I should
thereby be the better able to confute all objections when occasion of
conference with any should be given, which thing being yearly prohibited by
the censure of Bulla coenae, which is once every year with many execrations
and curses published in Rome, I obtained leave of my Superior to read them with
condition not to study them, Master George Blackwell.
but to confute them: which distinction seemed strange unto me as though I
could confute them, and not study them; yet with this condition I promised to
read them; amongst which the first that came into my hand was Master Perkins
reformed Catholic delivered me by a kinsman of mine, who told me of a Cosen
of his that promised to be a Roman Catholic if he could see that book well
answered and confuted. Next to this I met with Master Robert Abbots book in
Latin of Antichrist given to a friend of mine by a worshipful Knight of this
Realm, who highly praised it, and much esteemed thereof. After that I lighted
upon Master Doctor Bucklies confutation of Master Thomas Wrightes articles.
After that I met with the book of proceedings against the Pouder-Traytors,
containing in it that most eloquent and learned Oration of the Earl of
North-hampton. Then came to my hands his Majesty's Apology for the oath of
Allegiance, with his premonition to Christian Princes. After this I fell by a
mere chance upon the book of the now Lord of Canterburies written in
confutation of some of Master Doctor Hills quarterne of reasons. Next met I
with the Bishop of Lincolnes answer to Parsons with some others. All which I
perused diligently, and with great attention, in which writings although some
doctrinall points much distasted my palate by reason of my settled affection to
the Roman faith, yet I found many points both doctrinall and moral, very
remarkable and powerful to move strong doubts, had I not by the implicit
faith of whatsoever the Roman Church teaches, folued them all, and so
consequently held them as matters of scandal and temptation: the first of
which ought not to move a settled constancy, nor the second to find any
entertainment, but even at the very first occurrence to be rejected; yet
notwithstanding at the last, reflecting upon many former observations, I
conceived that ground of implicit faith to be subject to the danger of
error, and held it fit to examine very diligently the grounds of the true
Church, especially for a Cleargie-man, who is to yield a reason of his faith,
and to give satisfaction unto others; and chiefly in such times as the
question is to be discussed which is the true Church, a man ought to hear, to
believe, and to follow, if he will not be esteemed as a Heathen and Publicane.
Then began I to reflect more seriously upon the former points, and to grow very
familiar with the aforesaid books, and with much stay to examine the reasons
and solutions of Cardinal Bellarmine to his adversaries, in the chiefest
points of Doctrine now controuerted, where finding many frivolous arguments
and idle solutions, I grew into much greater care to discuss matters than ever
before, least whilst I thought to go the right way to Heaven, and to lead
others thither, we went both blindfolded to hell.

6 Next unto this occasion happened another, The powder treason another
occasion.
and that was the most unmatched Pouder-treason, as I think the most odious
conspiracy that ever was invented or intended by the brain of man; the
hateful memory whereof will prove everlastingly to all posterity a spot
indelible, not only to the actors, but also to all that shall maintain,
approve, and allow of the same wishing it had had the intended effect,
acknowledging no other faultiness therein, but the want of that success,
which no honest or good Christian mind could ever endure. This was so great a
scandale to many, that had they not been otherwise confirmed in the faith of
Rome, they would forthwith have abiured it: and for my self in particular,
when I heard the names read in the proclamation of those who were the chief
agents therein, I stood amazed, fearing that it had been approved by the Pope
underhand; because I thought, if Garnet, Gerralde, and Greeneway were either
agents or concealers thereof, the providence of the Jesuits was such, that
they would never (whatsoever they thought in their judgments of the
lawfulness thereof) have given consent thereunto, without the approbation of
higher authority; and my conclusion in judgment was, that if ever I could be
assured, that the Pope allowed by any conniuencie whatsoever of the fact, I
should therein rather acknowledge him to be the Vicar of hell, than the
Vicegerent of Christ. And further, I was much more amated, when I heard that
Garnet should acknowledge himself to have heard of it in Sacramental
confession, and yet to conceal it from the State, and to denise no means or
way to discover the fact, without opening himself or his penitent; which the
doctrine of his own Church obliged him unto, Siluest. verbo Confessio. 3. number.
2. prope finem. Emanuel. Sa Aphoris. verbo Confessor. S. Thom. addit. q. 1. de
sigill confess. art. 1. id. primum circa finem colligitur a simili.
for the auoidance of so public a harm, at least in general; this made me
very much to suspect, that in his judgment he approved it, whatsoever he
pretended to the contrary: For though he had made conscience to have revealed
his penitent, yet stood he bound in charity and justice to have revealed so
much in general by some way or other, as sufficient notice might have been
given to avoid the public harm and desolation that should have ensued to the
State thereby; which no doubt he might have done, if he had would by some
means or other. Besides, another thing which bred a great marvel in me was,
The Pope exalted him soon after to the dignity of Poenitentiarius in Rome.
that the Pope himself did neither chastise Greenway for the same, considering
the evidence given by his brother Garnet, no nor so much, as far as ever I
could understand, as give any public intimation of dislike of that hateful
designement, which he might have done by either of his Breues, to the comfort
and satisfaction of his children here in England, and chiefly to the State,
who for his silence therein have just cause to suspect, that he either winked
at it in secret before hand, or at least after the success thereof would have
ratified it for the most heroical stratageme that ever Catholics performed,
and have placed him in the Calender of his famousest Martyrs, as M. Wilson has
already done of Garnet and Owldcorne in his English Martyrologe, who (as the
head Jesuit has reported) fathereth upon himself that most infamous libell,
called Pruritanus, a book so full of blasphemous application of Gods sacred
word, so vnrespectiue to his Majesty, so injurious to the State, and so
enterlaced with lascivious and beastly scurrilitie, that it would shame any
honest man to be esteemed the author thereof; therefore the Jesuits do deal
politikely in ascribing it to a secular Priest, to make the secular Clergy as
odious to the State as themselves; since it is well known, and that not to a
few, that the first inuenter of the greatest part of that book was a fair
young Jesuit, sometimes a student in the University of Louaine, who sent his
first inventions thereof to Parsons and others at Rome, who made themselves
full merry with them, and well approved them; insomuch, that father Talbot,
the Master of the Nouices, ingeniously confessed, that the reading of some of
them caused him much to be distracted in his prayers: and it is to be thought,
that that Jesuit who may best challenge the first invention of that libelling
art, when he shall come to read his Breuiarie, by the memory of them he will
offer up a very unsavory incense in the sight of God at these words, Et dixit
omnis populus fiat fiat, and will prove such a merry mad petitioner, as will
make all the black guard of hell, attending him, to dance for joy. But to
return to the consideration of the treason, when I arrived beyond the seas,
and heard some to term it but an inconsiderate act, as though the substance
of the designement were not faulty, and when I noted, that I could never hear
any one Jesuit to speak reprouingly of it, and further heard some very rashly
and foolishly to cast the imputation of inuenting it upon the best Statesmen
of this land, as a train to make Catholics the more odious to the State, I
began to observe a custom used by some, which is without any regard of truth
or knowledge to speak the worst they can to blemish the reputation of their
adversaries; so I heard a certain young Jesuit report, when Garnet was in the
Tower, A pretty device.
that day and night oil was put into his eyes with feathers, and other means
used to keep him from sleep, that so being weakened both in body and mind,
he might be easily drawn to confess all he knew: which circumstances, with
diverse others belonging to this unmatchable treason, though they made me not
then abandon the faith and belief of those that were actors thereof, yet did
they sow such seeds of doubtfulnesse and care in me to be sound in faith, that
the effects and fruits issuing from them of doctrine, concerning disallegeance
to the King, which is contained in the Popes Breues, has much auerted me
since, as namely the doctrine of Bellarmine, teaching, that the Apostles were
not subject to temporal Princes de iure, but de facto, retracting the former
opinion, Bellarmin. cont. Barclaium. tract. De potest. summi Pontificis in
rebus temporalibus. ca. 3. fol. 48.
extant in his controversies these many years, now holding the quite
contrary, notwith standing it is a doctrine of faith, that as well the Clergy
as the Laity are subject to Kings and Princes, because obedience to Kings,
whether they be good or wayward, in Scripture is commended unto all: 1. Petri
2.18.
behold here the second occasion.

7 A third occasion concurring to my conversion, Conference with others.
was conference with others, into whose companies by chance I have fallen; as
once with a learned Knight, who not knowing me to be a Priest, conferred with
me as with a professor of the Roman faith, who winded me into such a circle
about the Scriptures and the Church, that I could never wind my self out of
it, till I winded my self out of the Roman Church, and stayed my self upon a
ground not admitted there, which is, that the Scriptures are the most
sufficient and certain rule of faith that Christians have; which if you take
away, all religion, all faith, all knowledge of God falls to the ground. And
another time I fell into dispute with a grave ancient Justice of Peace, who
pressed me so far, that I promised to send him some principal doctrines of
the Roman Church so sufficiently proved by Scriptures, by Fathers, and by
natural reason, that if they could be answered, I would subscribe to his
Church; but in the examination of the proofs of those very points, brought in
by Bellarmine, and due consideration of them, I found them to be of very little
force to prove the verities intended, as hereafter shall appear, concerning
the Mass, Transubstantiation, the ministration of the Sacrament under one
kind to lay people, Pardons, auricular confession, and others; whereupon I
have proved since as good as my promise, in joining my self to the Church of
England.

8 A fourth occasion of examining more carefully the controversies, has been
grounded upon his Majesty's Title, His Majesty's Book.
in his Premonition to Christian Princes, stiling himself the Defendor of the
true Christian, Catholic, and Apostolic faith; which seemed so strange unto
me at the first, considering that no Church more chalengeth the name of
Catholic than the Church of Rome, that I began to consider with my self,
whether I could find any capital points of faith taught now by the present
Church of Rome, that were not taught and professed by the ancient and Primitive
Church, and now impugned by the Church of England, and finding that the
doctrine of deposing Princes and Kings by the Pope was not ancient, nor
Transubstantiation, nor the Mass as now it is practiced, nor the Sacrament as
now it is ministered by the Church of Rome, nor Pardons, nor prohibition of
Priests marriages, I have since been enforced to conclude, that certainly the
present Church of Rome professes not in those points the true Christian,
Catholic, and Apostolic faith. Further, as I noted the profession his
Majesty makes in his Premonitorie Epistle to Princes, Praemonit. full. 35
acknowledging himself to be such a Christian Catholic as believes the three
Creedes, that of the Apostles, that of the Council of Nice, and that of
Athanasius; admitting the first four general Councels as Catholic and
Orthodox, the joint consent of Fathers in the Primitive age, the authority of
Scriptures etc. I could not but conceive at last, that his Majesty went upon
the strongest foundations of the Catholic faith that could be laid, to avoid
the danger of new doctrines: which observations did much facilitate my search
and scrutinie into the true grounds and reasons of faith; besides many other
occasions of private conference, with diverse particular persons, who thought
themselves much tempted in matters of faith and religion, because they could
hardly believe what the Church of Rome teaches, or at least not without great
difficulty. Whereby you may see (courteous Reader) the providence of God
working in me by degrees, toward my conversion, affoording me the occasions
and means first of searching and examining, which brought me at length to the
motives of resolving, as hereafter you shall understand more at large, when I
shall first have laid down unto you certain fundamental observations, as
grounds on which the true Christian Catholic faith must of necessity stand,
and the whole frame thereof be surely builded.

CHAP. III. Containing the first fundamental observation of the end of man,
and his chief happiness.
AFter the manifestation of the occasions, The chief business of man is to
seek his end.
the next thing to be spoken of, is to acquaint thee (dear Christian Reader)
with those fundamental observations which made further way to the complete
perfection thereof; the first of which was of that nature, that I assure my
self, no man who has care of his soul and salvation can choose but allow: for
I assured my self, that if I went upon such sure foundations and principles as
religion ought to stand upon, I could neither stay in error, nor fall into any.
Hence I was moved to resolve most constantly, that the most immovable
foundation that all my sp rituall building should stand on, should be a
frequent consideration, that the chief and most principal affair and
business of greatest importance in this world (wherein it was my duty to
employ my endeavors) ought to be the salvation of my soul, and my future
happiness in the life to come; since to this end God created me to his
similitude and likeness, redeemed me with the most precious blood of his most
dear Son, and daily preserved me by his power and goodness. This I
conceived, and concluded always to be the matter of greatest importance in
this world, which I was to prefer before all other affairs whatsoever,
belonging but unto this temporal and transitory life of our bodies; and
therefore for the accomplishing of this business, rather than neglect it, all
other affairs whatsoever were to be omitted; eternal bliss and the salvation
of my soul being my chief end, nd not consisting of any created, but
increated goodness, which is God himself.

2 This fundamental observation I gathered out of Thomas Aquinas, What man's
end is. Tho Aquin. 12. q. 1. art. 8. sed contra. Augustine. 19. de ciuit. Dei,
c. 1. and 3. de Trinit. c. 3. and 4. q. 5. to. 4. Tho. Aqum. 12. q. 1. ar. 8 in
corp 2^. q. 12. art. 8. sad contra.
whose words are these Vltimus finis hominu^ est beatitudo etc; the last end of
men is bliffe, which all desire, as Augustine says: And it cannot befall any
other creatures void of reason to be happy, as Augustine says in his book of
83 Questions: for the obtaining of which end, the same Thomas prescribes the
means and way, saying, Man and other reasonable creatures obtain their last
end by knowing and loving God; which is not compatible to other creatures that
obtain their last end only by participating some likeness of God by their
only being, life, and also by their knowledge. This he further declares in
another place, writing thus: Augustine writes, August. 19 de ^^^^^at. Dei, c
26. in princip. to. 5.
that as the soul is the life of the flesh, so God is the blessed life of man;
of whom it is said in the Psalms, Blessed is the people whose Lord is his God.
And further, to the same purpose he reasons after this manner, saying, Ibidem
in corpore.
That it is impossible for the bliss of man to be in any created good; for
bliss is a perfect good, which totally quieteth the appetite: otherwise it
were not the last end, if any thing remained yet to be desired. For the object
of the will, which is the appetite of man, is an universal good, as the object
of the understanding is universal truth; whereby it is manifest, that nothing
can quiet the will of man but an universal good, which is not found in any
thing created, but only in god, because every creature has a participated
goodness, therefore God alone can sill the will of man: according to that
which is said in the 102 Psalm, who replenisheth the desire with good things
etc. Therefore the bliss of man consists in God alone.

Well therefore might Saint Augustine declare the small comfort that is to be
found in any thing but in God, No true and perfect rest in creatures. August.
lib. 1. Confess. cap. 1.
saying, Fecisti nos ad te, and inquictum est cor nostrum, donec requiescat in
te; thou have made us for thee, and our heart is unquiet, till it rest and
repose in thee: for as the needle of a Dyall, touched with a Loadstone, is not
able to rest or stand steadfastly still, till it be turned toward the North
Pole; so neither can our soul, carrying the similitude or likeness of God,
Genes. 8. verse. 8.
take any true quiet, repose, or comfort in any thing created, but in God
only: for like as the Dove put out of the Arc by the hand of Noah, after the
general deluge, to discover the land, though with a speedy flight she took
a surucy of all the four Climates of the world, yet the Scripture says,
Genes. 8. verse. 9.
Non inuenit vbi requiesceret pes eius; she found no place for her foot to
rest on, until she came to the hand which put her forth: so our souls,
which in creation are put out by the powerful hand of God into the tumultuous
and stormy sea of this life, can find no place of true rest and contentment,
where to settle our selves, till we return again unto God, who created us.
This made good King David to cry out with an earnest desire to enjoy God in
heaven, Psa. 73. verse. 25.
saying, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee: my flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of
my heart, and my portion for ever; for lo they that are far from thee shall
perish.

4 Such as this has always been the desire of Gods Saints concerning their
last end and everlasting happiness; This end is the desire of Gods Saints.
upon the assured observation whereof, I my self in imitation of them building
the frame of all my spiritual proceedings, have been and am verily persuaded,
that God would never suffer me to misguide my steps from the true faith, or
by any heresy to miscarrie with my soul: from this observation have I first
gathered the great fear I ought to have not to offend God, Fear.
but with all care to keep his commandments, that I may not make frustrate
my end, like him of whom the Psalmist says, Qui non accepit in vano animam
suam, who has not received his soul in vain; Psalm. 24. verse. 4.
but with innocence of good works in his hands, and pureness in his heart,
does ascend unto the mountain of the Lord, and stand in his holy place.
Secondly, I have also gathered the great care I ought to have, Care.
not to make any earthly or transitory thing of this life my chief end at
which my actions must aim, as neither riches nor preferment, nor ease, nor
health, nor any earthly thing which cannot afford true contentment to the
soul, but rather to hazard the prejudice of all these, than to ruinate my
soul, or to step out of the right way to heaven. Resolution to embrace the
means of the truth.
Thirdly, I have also further from this observation of my end grounded a most
constant resolution, not to neglect any occasions or labors of due search and
examination into the maine grounds and principles of faith, or any means that
might necessarily conduce thereunto, whereupon I have been always moved to
arm my self with fit reasons, wherewith I might not only establish my faith,
but be able also to defend it against all objections that might any way
contradict it. For the better performance whereof, my purpose and practice has
been often to meditate upon the happiness of the happy end, whereunto we
are all ordained by God: so that this observation settling me in the true fear
of God, and in a due care of my salvation, and in a constant resolution to
apply my self unto all the means and helps that might facilitate me
thereunto, finding here my steps to stand as upon a strong rock, I proceeded
forward with my understanding to behold and contemplate what fundamental
observation I might set my next step upon, as will appear in the Chapter
following.

CHAP. IIII. Containing the second fundamental observation of the
supernatural and revealed knowledge which is necessary to salvation.
AS the first work whereby Almighty God manifested the greatness of his
power, Genes. 1. verse. 3.
which being dispersdd and confused, he afterward placed in the globe of the
Sun, by which the whole world receives comfort and life: Even so in the
creation of man, who is a lively mirror and glass of that greater world, A
supernatural knowledge necessary.
he has placed in light of understanding in the firmament of his soul, to
direct him in the way of Gods true service, and to bring him unto the promised
land of eternal happiness; yet not so, that without dependence on him the
light of our natural understanding has sufficient knowledge thereof, or can
attain thereunto of it own natural power, without Gods especial
illumination; for that, as all Divines hold, to procure the salvation of our
souls, it is most behoofefull and necessary, that besides all natural
knowledge and Philosophical disciplines, got by the only bare discourse of
natural reason, our reasonable souls have a supernatural knowledge revealed
from God, transcending the reach and capacity of reason, which indeed is
called the Science of Saints. Sap. 10. verse. 10.


2 This is excellently well taught and proved by the great Schooleman of the
Roman Church, The proposition proved.
who says thus: It is said in the second to Timothy, the third chapter,
Every Scripture, inspired from God, Tho. Aqu. part. 1. q. 1. art. 1. sed
contra.
is profitable to teach, to dispute, to reprehend, to instruct to
righteousness: but the Scripture inspired from God belongs not unto
Philosophical disciplines, which are invented by the reason of man: therefore
it is profitable, besides Philosophical disciplines, that there be another
knowledge inspired from God. In which words it is here to be noted, that this
Doctor takes the word profitable for necessary: which acception of his is
repugnant to those Romanists that abuse the meaning of Saint Paul, who only
will have it serve to show the profit of the Scriptures, but not the necessity
of them, and so exclude the Scriptures from being the most infallible,
certain, and sufficient rule of salvation; therefore this Schoolemans sense
and meaning here is very remarkable, by the word profitable, signifying the
necessity of a revealed knowledge.

3 This he declares much more plainly in the body of the same question,
answering the maine proposition, An absolute necessity of revealed knowledge.
and saying, That it was necessary for man's salvation that there should be a
certain knowledge according to Gods revelation, besides Philosophical
disciplines, which are found out by reason of man; first because man is
ordained by God, as to a certain end which surpasses the comprehension of
reason; according to that of Esaias the 64. The eye has not seen, O God, Esaias
64.
without thee the things, which thou have prepared for those that love thee:
and it is behoofefull that men have foreknowledge of this end, who must order
their intentions and actions to an end. Hence it was necessary for man's
salvation, that certain things which exceed humane reason, should be made
known unto him by Gods revelation. Behold here most clearly an absolute
necessity of a supernatural revealed knowledge, for the understanding of such
things as surmount the capacity of our natural understanding.

4 His words following do also import a convenient necessity also of such
knowledge even for those things belonging to salvation, which we know by
natural reason. A convenient necessity of revealed knowledge.
His words are these: For those things also belonging to God, which may be
searched into by humane reason, it was necessary man should be instructed by
Gods revelation; because the truth of God searched into by reason, can be
derived unto man but by a few, and of a long time, and with the admixtion of
many errors, upon the knowledge notwithstanding of which truth, the whole
salvation of man depends, which is in God. Therefore, that salvation might
come unto men the more conveniently and the more certainly, it was necessary
that they should be instructed of divine things by divine revelation: it was
necessary therefore, that besides Philosophical disciplines, which are found
out by reason, a sacred knowledge should be had by revelation. Whence it
appears, that a revealed knowledge is required for a twofold necessity, the
one absolute, the other ad been esse, for the greater conueniencie, and for the
better auoidance of error, and all to attain happily the end for which we are
created.

5 Whereby we may gather the great excellency and dignity of this knowledge
above all others, The excellency of this knowledge.
the same Doctor in the next question saying, That Augustine says in the
foureteenth of the Trinity, Tho. Aqu. art. 2. sed contra. Li. 14. ca. 1. in
med. to 3.
Unto this Science is that alone attributed, wherewith the most wholesome faith
is engendered, nourished, defended, and strengthened. But this belongs unto no
Science, but to the sacred knowledge, therefore this holy doctrine is a science.
Ibid. in corpor.
And further he shows the author of it, saying, That as the Musician
believes the principles delivered him by the Arithmetician, so the student of
sacred doctrine believes the principles delinered unto him from God. Hence the
same Doctor saythi in the question following, That the holy Scripture speaks
thereof as of one Science: for it is said in the tenth of Wisdom, he gave him
the knowledge of Saints: whereby it is evidently clear, that all the sacred
and revealed doctrine, and all the knowledge of faith must come from God,
Genes. 28. verse. 12.
and be revealed unto us mortal wights living in this worldly Pilgrimage for
our true comforts, and not to be obtained by our selves; even as to Jacob in
his fleepe the mystical ladder reaching from heaven to earth, with God leaning
upon the top, and the Angels ascending and descending, was from God revealed
unto him, when his waking eyes could not behold it: of whom those words of
Wisdom, He gave him the wisdom of Saints, Bonauent. comment. in Sap. cap.
10.
are literally spoken, as the Franciscans seraphicall Doctor commenteth upon
that place: and therefore may well be called the science and learning of
Saints, and not of men.

6 From the due observation of which doctrine I considered the great vanity
and unhappiness of those, Collections upon the precedent doctrine.
that puffed up with the pride of humane sciences, neglect the study of this
principal science of God and his Saints; unto which all the rest are but as
handmaids to bear up her train. Humane sciences vain.
Hence I resolved, with the assistance of Gods grace, to employ all the labors
of my studies chiefly in attaining to the perfect knowledge of this science.
Secondly, Knowledge necessary in Priests.
I found it a fond thing for my self, who was consecrated a Priest and Pastor
over others, not to endeavor to attain all such knowledge as herein was
necessary for my self and others, which has made me ever since the time of
my Priesthood to divide my times (when other actions hindered me not) into
three parts, bequeathing one part to the study of controversies for knowledge
of faith, the second part to the studies of cases of conscience, as well to
direct aright all the duties of my self as of others; and the third to the
studies of Scriptures, as well for my private consolation, as for the public
information of others, by preaching and exhortation, to this revealed knowledge
from God. Prayer to be used for this revealed knowledge.
Thirdly observing further, that this knowledge required to salvation was to be
had from God with all humility, neglecting the teaching and traditions only
of men, my custom was often to pray to God, that if I were in any error which
I deemed a truth, and against all sly and subtle suggestions and
transfigurations of Satan to say, Illumina oculos meos Domine ne vnquam
obdormiamin in morte, Psalm. 12. verse. 3, 4.
ne quando dicat inimicus meus praeualui aduersus eum; Consider and hear me O
Lord my God, lighten mine eyes, least I sleep the sleep of death, least at
length my enemy say I have prevailed against him: for I could not find any
better collections to be framed out of the observation of this ground than
first to be humble, with dependence upon God more than upon my self; and
secondly, to make the best use of my time for the perfection of Gods revealed
knowledge; and lastly to esteem of all other sciences no otherwise than as of
servants unto this, which in the dignity of the object, without all
comparison, surpasses the rest as much as heaven surmounteth the earth, and
God excels man.

CHAP. V. Containing the third fundamental observation about the absolute
necessity of supernatural faith.
WHen I marched forward with my understanding into a due search of such means
as were necessarily required for the obtaining of the aforesaid supernatural
revealed knowledge from God, Faith necessary to salvation.
I began further to observe, that it is impossible to obtain it but by the
supernatural and infused virtue of faith; by which a man must give a firm
assent to all the revealed verities contained therein, without which we cannot
be saved: the Apostle saying, Heb. 11. verse. 6.
Impossible est sine fide placere Deo; it is impossible withou faith to please
God.

2 For no virtue either supernatural or moral, Faith the foundation of all
virtues.
can be supported without faith; therefore Saint Paul calls it, Sperandarum
substantia rerum; the substance of things to be hoped for: Heb. 11. verse. 1.
because that as it is the nature of substance to be the foundation of
accidents, as of quantity, quality, relation, and the like which it
receives, without which all accidents do perish; so is faith the foundation
whereon all virtues must stand, without which charity, mercy, humility,
patience, and all the rest fall to the ground. So that unless this faith be in
our souls, the end unto which the revealed knowledge from God should lead,
will never be attained.

3 It was a comofortable thing certes unto the Israelites, Faith most
comfortable.
travailing toward the land of promise, through the desert, to see how
graciously God had bestowed upon them a pillar of fire, by the conduct and
guidance whereof, in the thick darkness of the gloomie night, they were
guided through waylesse places, full of many dangerous passages. Such is our
cause of comfort for Gods singular favor toward Christians, who during the
course of this present life, replenished with the thick darkness of
ignorance and error, has affoorded us the most resplendant and shining light
of faith, by the brightness whereof, ouerpassing safely all slipperie and
dangerous straits, they may arrive happily and securely at their most desired
country and long expected home of eternal bliss; which Saint Peter seems
to insinuate very comfortably, saying, 2. Petr. 1. verse. 19.
We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne
and the day star arise in your hearts. O happy shining pillar, and happy
people of Christ, that are guided by the resplendant light thereof!

4 This doctrine is excellently well set down by Thomas Aquinas, who reasons
after this manner, saying, Faith must go before bliss. Tho. Aqu. 12. q. 2.
ar. 3. in corp.
That in all ordered natures two things are found to concur to the perfection
of the inferior nature, one thing by his proper motion, and the other thing
according to the motion of the superior nature: even as water according to his
proper motion is moved to the center, but according to the motion of the Moon
is moved about the center by ebbing and flowing: so likewise the Orbs of the
Planets are moved by their proper motions from the West to the East, but by the
motion of the first Orb, from the East unto the West: for only the reasonable
nature created has an immediate order unto God, because other creatures
attain not to any universal thing, but only unto some particular thing,
participating Gods goodness, either in their being, as things without life, or
else in living and knowing singular things, as plants and living creatures. But
the reasonable nature, in that it knows the universal reason of good and
Entitie has an immediate order to an universal beginning of being. Therefore
the perfection of a reasonable creature does not only consist in that which is
agreeable to it own nature, but also in that which is attributed unto it by a
certain supernatural perfection of Gods goodness, Tho. Aq. 22. q. 3. ar. 3.
and therefore it is said already, that the last bliss of man does consist in
a certain supernatural vision of God, unto which vision man cannot attain
but as a scholar of God hearing the master, according to that of Saint John
the sixth, Every one that hears of the fatehr and learneth, comes to-me.
Now a man is made partaker of this discipline, not presently but successively,
according to the manner of his nature: for every one that is such a learner, to
attain unto perfect knowledge, must believe as also the Philosopher says,
that it is behoofefull for the learner to believe: therefore that a man may
arrive unto the perfect vision of bliss, it is first required that he believe.

5 Now if a supernatural faith be so necessary, Faith the first of all other
virtues.
as it is the foundation and first of all other virtues, then must I needs
pronounce a woe to my self, or to any other that shall want it; and that it is
the first of other virtues, Aquinas does largely explicate and learnedly show
in those words, I answer it is to be said, that one thing may be said to be
before another two ways; Tho. Aq. 22. q. 4. ar. 7.
one way of it self, another way by accident, and of it self faith is the
first of all other virtues: for as in things agible, and to be done, the end is
the beginning, as is abouesaid, it is behoofefull that the Theological virtues
which have the last end for their object, be the first, and take place of other
virtues; and for the last end it self it is behoofefull that first it be in
the understanding, then in the will, because the will is not carried upon any
thing, but as it is apprehended in the understanding; therefore for that the
last end is in the will by hope and charity, and in the understanding by
faith, Tho. Aqu. 12. q. 34. art. 4. ad princip. art. q. 13. art. 3.
it is behoofefull that faith be the first of all virtues, because natural
understanding cannot reach unto God as he is the object of bliss, in which
sort hope and charity aymeth unto him; yet accidentally another virtue may be
before faith, for the cause which is accidentally, is accidentally the first.
Now to remove the impediment, appertains to that cause, which is
accidentally, as it is manifest by the Philosopher accordingly, Aristoteles in
8. Phisuli 8. text. 32. to 2.
whereunto some virtues may be said accidentally to be before faith, in how
much they remove the impediments of believing, as fortitude remoueth inordinate
fear hindering faith; humility, pride; by which the understanding refuses to
submit it self to the truth of faith; and the same may be said of some other
virtues, although they be not truly virtues, unless faith be presupposed,
Augustine. contra Iouinianum, l. 4. cap. 3 tom. 7.
as it appears by Saint Augustine in his book against Iouinian. Hence it
appears by this Doctor, that if faith be wanting, no Christian can have that
revealed knowledge, which necessarily for his salvation he is bound to have;
and therefore I incessantly labored to find out the assuredness of this
faith, and the more that I thought how I might find out this faith, so
necessary to salvation, it pleased God to suffer me to proceed in my search
for some infallible rule, by which I might measure, without danger of mistaking
the true faith of Christ, and thereby be most comfortably led as with the
fiery pillar (like the Israelites by night) through the wilderness of this
world, Exo. 13. verse. 22.
unto the most desired land of everlasting happiness and security, where that
promise of God, made by the mouth of his Prophet, may be verified of us, Esaias
32. verse. 18
My people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in
quiet resting places.

CHAP. VI. Containing the fourth fundamental observation about the rule and
straight mete-wand of the true Christian faith.
BEing thus arrived by Gods grace to discover, The true Canonical Scriptures
the chief rule of faith.
without which all the building of our souls would be but weak, and soon
fall to ruin: I felt my self most forcibly moved by Gods Spirit, with all
humility and diligence to search out the most straight rule where no
crookedness should appear, with the which I might so truly measure out the
right faith, and true Church of God, which Saint Paul calls the Pillar and
firmament of truth. In the desire whereof occurred unto my memory the Angel
that talked with Saint John, Apocal. 21. verse. 15.
having a golden reed in his hand, to measure the spiritual Jerusalem, with
all the gates, the walls, the foundations, and all the parts of that great
city: wishing that it would please God to bestow upon me such a golden reed,
wherewith I might measure out the true faith and Church of God, that all that
are crooked in faith, and misproportioned in their lives, might find out the
truth, and be in the number of those of whom the Psalmist says, Psalm 32.11.
Laetamini in domino and exultate insti, and gloriamini omnes recti cord: Be
glad ye righteous and rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful all ye that are
upright in heart. Whereupon I began to reflect upon the chiefest rules spoken
of, either by the Church of Rome, or other Churches pretending reformation: and
examining with a great desire of truth, whether visibilitie, and continuance of
personal succession of Bishops in any Church: or whether the Popes sole
judgment and definitive sentence, either with a Council, or tanquam ex
Cathedra, without a Council: or whether unwritten traditions; or whether the
written word and facred Scriptures, could be unto me a straight rule of true
faith, and of the true Church of Christ: me thought I found by all probable
evidences, and allowed testimonies, that only and principally the written word
of God, I mean the true canonical Scriptures, could be the golden rod, and
straight metewand wherewith the true proportion and frame of Christian faith
could be measured; in so much that me thought I might well say to my
inexplicable comfort, and to the honor of God, as that high soaring Eagle Saint
John said; Apoc. 11. verse. 1.
There was given me a reed like unto a rod: and it was said unto me, rise and
mete the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship therein.

2 But here thou will say (gentle Reader) that this is but an imagined golden
reed, Objections against Scripture as the chief or certain rule.
and that this is but as crooked a measure as any other, in respect of the many
difficult places of Scripture, which tire out the brains of the most learned,
as also in regard of the diversity of judgments that is found about the sense
of Scriptures; for that the translations having been diverse, it is hard for any
man to judge which is the truest; but all these mists of but apparent reasons
will easily be dispersed, if thou will please but heedily to peruse the proofs
and authorities I bring for this my sure and strongest fundamental
observation. I know only but three kinds of strong arguments that may be
produced for any verity, as namely, the sacred Scriptures, the authority of
the learned, and the force of natural reasons: all which three do proclaim
with a loud voice unto us, that the written word is the most certain,
sufficient and infallible rule of faith that we can have in this world, and
consequently the true golden mete-wand of Gods eternal truth and all Christian
revealed verities.

3 This have I gathered first out of the Scriptures; By proof of Scripture.
Esaias 8.20.
for I find in Esaias the Prophet, that we must repair to the Law, and to the
testimony, if any speak not according to that word, Prou. 2. verse. 1. Prou.
2. verse. 9.
there is no light in them. I find also the wise Solomon to affirm that Gods
words will make a man understand righteousness and judgment, and equity, and
every good path. I find likewise in Saint Luke and other Evangelists: Luke 1.
verse. 4.
These things are written that we might have the certainty of that whereof we
are instructed; and that we might believe in Jesus, and in believing have life
eternal through his name. I find further that Christ says, Search the
Scriptures, Ioh. 20. verse. 31.
for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify
of me: as also in another place, When one asked Christ what he might do to be
saved, Luke 10. verse. 26.
he refers him to the Scriptures for his direction, saying, What is written
in the Law? So did Abraham answer the rich Glutton, They have Moses and the
Prophets. Luke 16.29.
I find also Saint Paul free from all exception herein, saying, The Scriptures
are able to make us wise to salvation, 2. Tim. 3. verse. 15. Verse. 16. Verse. 17.
through the faith that is in Christ Jesus, and are profitable to teach, to
improve, to convert, to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be
absolute, and perfect to every good work. And in another place, we may not
presume above that which is written. I find likewise Saint Peter to accord with
Saint Paul, 2. Pet. 1.19.
when he says, We have a more sure word of the Prophets, whererunto we
cannot take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, till the day
dawne, and till the day star arise in our hearts. Many more proofs would the
canonical Scriptures afford to the same effect: therefore since by the
premised places of Scripture, I see that he that speaks not according to the
word of God has no light in him; since the Scriptures can make us know
righteousness, judgment, equity, and every good path; since they were
written that we might have certainty in that we are instructed in, and
believing, have life eternal; since we are sent to the Scriptures by Christ;
since they are able to make us wise to salvation; since they are profitable to
make us perfect to every good work; since it is presumption to go above that
which is written; since the Prophets be our light in darkness, what better
rule can we have of our faith? what can excuse any man's ignorance that knows
this? or what an obstinate wilfulness were it for me, that knowing these
testimonies of Scripture, shall not believe them? or why should I not think
that the Church of England has not the best reed or mete-wand, to measure the
truth of her doctrine by: when she teaches, Juel. Apol. part. 2. cap. 9.
diuis. 1.
That the Scripture comprehended in the canonical books of the old and new
Testament is the rule of faith, so far that whatsoever is not read therein,
or cannot be proved thereby, is not to be accepted as any point of faith, or
needful to be followed.

4 Which doctrine cannot be shaken or overthrown, By proofs of Fathers.
if we esteem the authority of the learned, who do most plentifully give
witness and unanswerable proofs for the same; S. Basil who lived in the
fourth centurie after Christ, says: Let the holy Scriptures be arbitrators
between us, Basil. opist 80. ad Eustac. medicum page 334.
and whosoever hold opinions consonant to those heavenly oracles, let the truth
be adjudged on their side. And Optatus disputing against a Donatist, presses
him thus, Contra Parmem. lib. 5. page 393.
We are (says he) to equire out some to be judges between us in these
controversies: The Christians cannot, because both sides cannot yield them, and
by parts taking the truth shall be hindered. The Judge must be had from without
our selves; If a Pagan, he knows not the mysteries of Christianity; if a Jew,
he is an enemy to Baptism; therefore upon the earth no judgment concerning
this matter can be found the Judge must be had from heaven: but to what end
should we kocke at heaven, when here we have one in the Gospel? Here we see
Saint Basil appeals for judgment to the Scriptures, and so Optatus likewise
to the Gospel; no acknowledgement here of other arbitrament upon earth. What
shall I speak of Tertullion, who is most plain for me, Tertul. contra Hermog.
calling the Scriptures the rule of faith? The golden-mouthed Chrysostom will
not here forsake me, who terms the Scriptures, Chrysostom. hom. 13. in 2. Cor.
Hom. 3. de Laz.
A most exquisite rule and exact squier and balance to try all things by. And
also in another place says, God has left us the Scriptures more firm then
any miracle. And upon the Acts of the Apostles discourses very fitly to this
purpose: Chrysostom. hom. 33. in Act.
A Gentile (says he) comes and says I would be a Christian, but I know
not which side to cleave unto; many dissensions are among you, and I cannot
tell which opinion to hold; every one says I speak the truth, and the
Scriptures on both sides are pretended, so that I know not whom to believe: to
this Chrysostom replieth: Truly (says he) this makes much for us: for well
might you be troubled, if we should say we rely upon reason, but seeing we
take the Scriptures which are so true, and plain, it will be an easy matter
for you to judge. And tell me now, have thou any wit or judgment? Note this.
for it is not the part of a man barely to receive whatsoever he hears, but
if thou mark the meaning, thou may thoroughly know that which is good: when
thou buyest a garment though thou have no skill in wearing yet thou say not
I cannot buy it, they deceive me, but thou do all things, that thou may
learn to know it: say not then I am no scholar, and will be no judge, I can
condemn no opinion, for this is but a shift and a cavil, and let us not use
it, for all these things are easy. There is nothing can be more clear for
this most sufficient rule of faith, then that which is written by this ancient
Author of the imperfect work falsely fathered, as some think, upon Saint
Chrysostom, whom, because he is often alleged by the learned of the Roman
Church, I will also allege against them: this Author expounding those of Saint
Matthew, Chrysostom. opus imperfect. hom. 49.
Then those that are in Jury let them fly unto the mountains; explicateth
them, thus: that is, they that are Christians, let them repair unto the
Scriptures. The mountains are the writings of the Apostles and Prophets: and
wherefore does he at that time command all Christians to repair to the
Scriptures? because in that time heresy has obtained the Curches, there can
be no proof of true Christianity, neither can there be other refuge for
Christians, which shall desire to know the truth of faith, but the sacred
Scriptures. Before, it was many ways showed, which was the true Church of
Christ, and which was Gentilisme, but now it is no way known unto those which
desire to know which is the true Church, but only by Scriptures: wherefore,
because all these things which belongs so properly to Christ in truth, heresies
have the same also in schism; Churches likewise; holy Scriptures likewise;
Bishops likewise; and other orders of Clerks; Baptism, likewise; the
Eucharist; and all the rest; lastly Christ himself. One therefore that
desires to know which is the true Church, whence shall he know it in the
confusion of such likeness, but only by the Scriptures? Note this.
likewise heretofore they were known by miracles, who were true Christians,
who false. How? false Christians either could not do miracles as true
Christians did, or else, they could not do such as true Christians did. But now
the working of miracles is altogether taken away, and it is more found, that
false miracles are wrought by those who are false Christians, as Peter
(according to Clement) expounds, also, power is to be also given of doing full
miracles unto Antichrist. Likewise heretofore the Church of Christ was
understood by their manners, when the conversation of al or most Christians was
holy, which was not among the wicked. But now either such or worse Christians
are become, then Heretics or Gentiles. And moreover greater continency is
found amongst those who live in scisme, then among Christians. He therefore that
will know which is the true Church of Christ: whence shall he know it, but only
the Scriptures? Note this.
The Lord therefore knowing that such a confusion of things should come in the
last days, he therefore commands that Christians who are in the
Christianity, being desirous to obtain firmness of the true faith, should
fly unto nothing but unto the Scriptures. Note again.
For otherwise, if they have regard to other things, they shall be scandalized
and shall perish, not understanding which is the true Church, and by this they
shall fall into the abomination of desolation, which shall stand in the holy
places of the Church. Whereby it appears that the only means to find out the
true Church, is the canonical Scriptures, especially in these latter times to
which we are now arrived.

5 To our purpose also Gregory Nissen calls the Scriptures: Other fathers.
Orat. de eis qui adeunt Hierosolimam.
A straight and inflexible rule I observe also Saint Augustine to join with
the former, who says, The Scripture pitcheth down the rule of our faith. De
bono vid. cap. 1.
And again he says, This controversy depending between us requires a
Judge, and let the Apostle Paul judge with him, because Christ also speaks in
his Apostle. De nupt. and cencup. ad Vater. lib. 2. cap. 33. Epist. 112. ad
Paulin.
In another place, If a matter be grounded on the clear authority of the holy
Scripture, such I mean as the Church calls canonical, it is to be believed
without all doubt: but as for other witnesses and testimonies, upon whose
credit any thing may be urged unto us to believe it, it is lawful for thee
either to credit, or not to credit them, according as thou shall perceive them
of weight to deserve or not to deserve credit. He says besides, De doctrine.
Christiau. lib 2. cap 9. Ibid. cap. 42.
All points which concern faith and good life, are found in those things which
are plainly set down in Scripture. And again in another place, Whatsoever it
be that a man learnes out of the Scripture, if it be hurtful there it is
condemned, if it be profitable there it is found. Tract. 3. in 1. epist. Ioh.
Contra lit. Petilian. D^^at. lib. 3 cap. 6 and de unit. Eccles. cap. 11.
Again he says, The Church is our mother, her breasts are the two Testaments
of the Scripture, whence she gives her children milk. Again further, If we
or an Angel from heaven declare unto you either concerning Christ or his
Church, any other matter, or any thing belonging to our faith or life, but what
you have received in the Legal and Evangelical Scriptures, let him be
accursed. The same famous Doctor likewise reuoketh from miracles to Scriptures,
De unit. Eccles. cap. 16.
saying, Say not these things are so, because such a one did such and such
marualles, but let them prove their Church by the canonical books of
Scripture, and by nothing else. These are the demonstrations of our cause,
these are our foundations, these are our grounds whereupon we build. And
again, Our faith shall reele and totter, if the authority of the Scriptures
stand not fast. By all which, according to this famous Doctor, who is termed
malleus haereticorum, the hammer of heretics, you see this rule of faith most
clearly approved and justified.

6 Neither do other ancient Writers swerve from the same doctrine, Other
fathers. De error prophan. relig. p. 61.
for Julius Firminus says, Let the venerable mysteries of the Prophets be
opened let the credit of the holy Oracles stand by us. Origin further says,
Hom. 1. in Ierem.
We must of necessity call the Scriptures to witness, for our senses and
interpretations without them are of no credit. Cyrill the Bishop of Jerusalem
says, Concerning the holy and heavenly mysteries of faith, Catech. 4. page 15.
we must not deliver any thing, though never so small, Note this.
without the holy Scripture neither may we be led away with probabilities and
show of words: neither yet believe me barely, saying these things unto you,
unless thou also believe the demonstration thereof from the Scripture; for the
security of our faith arises from the demonstration of the holy Scripture.
The Emperor Constantine in his speech to the Bishops of the Nicene Council
has this memorable saying, Theod Hist. li. 1. c. 7. page 284.
We have the teaching of the holy Ghost written: for the Enangelicall and
Apostolic books, and the Decrees of the old Prophets do evidently teach us
the things that are needful to be known concerning God. Therefore laying
aside all contention, let us out of the dinine inspired Scripture take the
rersolution of those things we secke for. Neither will I let my pen paste
another notable saying of Saint Augustine, which is diligently to be noted,
saying, In Io. tract. 21.
Some may object we do rashly in discussing and searching out the words of
God, but way are they uttered if they may not be known? Why have they sounded,
if they may not be heard? and why are they heard but that we should understand
them? Thus the Ancient resolved me in the security of this rule.

7 And not only these, Proofs of late Writers.
but also the modern Writers of the Church of Rome forgetting themselves as it
seems in their writings, even against their own grounds about the rule of
faith, have given me no less evidence for this most straight and sufficient
rule of the sacred letters and Canonical books than the former. For first
their great learned Doctor, whom they call the Angelical Doctor says, Tho.
Aqu. lec. in 1. Tim. 6.
The doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets is called Canonical, because it is
as it were the rule of our understanding. 1. q. 1. ar. 4.
And again our faith rests and stays it self upon the revelation given to
the Apostles and Prophets, which writ the Canonical books, 1. q. 1. ar. 8.
and not upon revelation, if any such have been made to other Doctors. And
also in another place he shows, how all judgment of truth is to be referred
to the Scriptures, saying, In arguing it properly uses ( viz. the said
revealed knowledge, Tho. 1 q. part. 1. q. 1. ar. 8. ad 2.
whereof he speaks) of necessity the authorities of Canonical Scripture,
but the authorities of other Doctors of the Church, as it were arguing out of
her own, but probably. For our faith does rely upon the revelation made to
the Apostles and Prophets, who wrote the Canonical books, nd not upon any
revelation made to other Doctors. Therefore Augustine says in his Epistle to
Hierome; Epi. 19. Paulo, post princip. to. 2.
I have learned to give this honor to the only books of Scriptures, which are
called Canonical, as to believe most firmly, that not one author of them has
erred in writing; but others I read so, that with what soever holiness and
learning they are endued, as not therefore to think any thing a truth, because
they have held or written so. And in another place, Faith does cleave unto all
the articles of faith for one medium, to wit, for the first truth proposed unto
us in Scriptures, according to the doctrine of the Church understanding
rightly; and therefore he that swarueth from this mean, does totally want
faith. Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence writes expressly, Sum. part. 3.
tit. 18. c. 3. ff 3.
That God has spoken but once, and that in the holy Scripture, and so
plentifully to meet with all temptations and all cases that may fall out, and
all good works, that as Gregory in the two and twentieth book of his Morals
expounds it, he needs no more speak unto us concerning any necessary matter,
seeing all things are found in the Scripture. Gerson a great man in the
Council of Constance says, De com. sub vtraque specie.
The Scripture is the rule of our faith, which being well understood, no
authority of men is to be admitted against it. Durandus says That generally
in the things that touch our faith we must speak to that which the Scripture
delivers, Praef. in sent.
least any man fall into that which the Apostle notes, 1. Cor. 8. If he think
he knows something, yet the knows nothing as he ought to know; for the
manner of our knowledge must be not to exceed the measure of faith, and the
holy Scripture expresses the measure of faith. Alliaco the Cardinal says, 1.
Sent. q. 1. ar. 3.
The verities themselves of the sacted Canon be the principles of Divinity,
because the final resolution of Theological discourse is made into them, and
originally from them is drawn every conclusion of Divinity. Conradus Clingius
says, Locor. l. 3. c. 29. page 290.
The Scripture is the infallible rule of truth, yea the measure and judge of
the truth. Peresius the Divinity Reader at Barcelona in Spain says, The
authority of no Saint is of infallible truth, Iac. Per. de ratio, con. li. 2.
c. 19.
for Saint Augustine gives that honor only to the sacred Scriptures. Whereupon
I frame this reason; That only is the infallible rule which is of infallible
truth: but the Scripture only is of infallible truth: therefore the Scripture
only is the infallible rule.

8 Bellarmine also writes thus, Other late Writers. De verbo Dei, li. 1. cap.
2.
The rule of faith must be certain and known; for if it be not certain, it
is no rule at all; if it be not known, it is no rule to us: but nothing more
certain, nothing better known than the sacred Scripture, contained in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles: wherefore the sacred Scripture is the
rule of faith, most certain and most safe; and God has taught us by corporal
letters, which we might see and read, what he would have us believe
concerning him. Whence I gather, that if the Swenckfeldians are to be drawn
to the written Text, then ought those of the Church of Rome also be recalled to
the same rule from their uncertain traditions, from the Popes sole definitive
sentence, and from their Councels, not teaching by Scriptures. If nothing be
more known, nothing more certain, as the Cardinal confesses, than the
Scriptures; why do they reject them from being the rule, as not sufficient to
preserve from error, not known enough? The same Cardinal says in another
place, De not. eccles. c. 2. ff respond. Simpliciter.
The Scripture is better known than the Church in some case, as namely where
it is received, and speaks plainly, and the question is of the Church.
Willauincentius confesses, The Scriptures and they alone are able to teach us
to salvation, De ratio. stud. Theol. li. 1. c. 31. page 21.
as the Apostle in the third chapter of his second Epistle to Timothy
affirms, saying, All Scripture is inspired of God, in which words the Apostle
comprehends all things that are needful to the salvation of man. Comment. in
2. Tim c 3 in verse. 15, 16.
Espenceus writes, That if any thing be needful either to be known or done,
the Scriptures teach the truth, reprove the false, reclaim from evil,
persuade to good, neither yet do they make a man good in some sort, but
perfect; yea, they can teach a man to salvation, and make him learned
sufficiently. Panormitane writes thus, One faithful man, Part 1. de elect.
polest. ca. significa.
though private, is more to be believed than the Pope or a whole Council, if
he have better reason on his side, and authority of the Old and New Testament.
And Gerson more sully, De exemp. doct part. 1. considera. 5.
The examination and trial of doctrine concerning faith belongs not only to
the Pope and Council, but to every one also that is sufficiently seen in the
holy Scripture, because every one is a fit judge of that he knows: And
again, some layman; not authorized, may be so excellently learned in the
Scripture, that his assertion shall be more to be credited than the Popes
definitive sentence; for the Gospel is more to be credited than the Pope.
Therefore if such a lay man, though he be private, teach a truth contained in
the Gospel, and the Pope either know it not, or will not know it, yet it is
evident that his judgment is to be preferred. Costerus.
Cesterus says, That such verities concerning our faith as are absolutely
necessary to be known and believed of all men, are plainly taught in the
Scriptures themselves. Doctor Saunders says, Rock, page 193.
We have most plain Scriptures in all points for the Catholic faith: he
means the faith of the present Church of Rome. Doctor Hill in his quart. of
reasons: the eight reason.
And Doctor Hill seems willing to have it thought, that they build upon the
Scriptures in all points of doctrine, when he says, Neither may here the
Protestants reply and say, that the Papists build upon miracles, visions,
prophecies, and upon such like, but not upon the Word; for all that they
allege, are most agreeable to the word of God: neither do they teach any
doctrine but such as is derived out of the holy Bible. This affertion shows
much weakness of judgment, and little skill even in the grounds of Divinity:
for who is so ignorant that knows not the Papists do build upon miracles,
visions, prophecies? And who so simple amongst them, that know not that they
build least upon the word when they generaly teach, that the written word is
not sufficient for faith without traditions? And what a foul misbeseeming
untruth is it for a Doctor to say, That all that they allege are most
agreeable to the word of God; when they ordinarily object, that the perpetual
virginity of the virgin Marie; the assumption of her body into heaven; the
baptizing of reasonlesse children; the keeping of the Sunday: and others the
like; are not to be proved by the word of God, but are built only upon
traditions? Is not this then a very gross forgetfulness to affirm, That they
teach not any Doctrine, but such as is derived out of the holy Bible? And yet
he forgets himself so much, that again in the same reasons he says even
for the time past: That the Catholics (meaning Papists) ever squared their
Doctrine by the Line and the Level of the word of her Spouse, and therefore
never had cause to reject the least jot of the holy Bible; and at one word
the Catholics follow the Bible. By all which it seems most apparent, that
the learned do approve the word of God, that is, the Canonical Scriptures, to
be the most certain, sufficient, and most infallible rule that can be assigned.
What reason then have I to forsake the judgment of so many learned men, both
ancient and modern Writers, who herein are most conformable to Scripture it
self.

9 For if we consider rightly of the nature of faith, Natural reason shows
this rule.
observing that the knowledge, whereto it consents, and the end to which it
leads, are supernatural; nothing can seem more agreeable to natural
discourse than to gather also that only that book which contains Gods revealed
verities can be the sufficientesi means to know them; which is the holy
writings of the old and new Testament. If a man should ask me why I believe
the creation of the world, all the miracles wrought by Moses, Elias, and
Elisaeus; that there is a God; that Christ is is the son of God; that he was
borne of a virgin; I cannot answer with assuredness, because this Priest or
that Priest teaches me so; for reason will object that he may err, or that
all Priests agree not therein; or that first I must be assured he teaches me
doctrine of such a Church as cannot misinstruct me, which I must know by some
other means. Therefore my only answer must be, that I believe, because those
Scriptures revealed from God do teach me, which are the most sufficient rule,
whereby I can have assured knowledge of truth revealed from God, by all which
it seemed most clear unto m that only the Scriptures can be the most assured,
sufficient, and infallible rule by which I am to measure my faith, and all
virtues belonging thereunto, and therefore all other rules are very subject to
the crookedness of many errors. Siluest. verse. 60. fides Nu. 2.
Hence I began to see my former error in holding with Siluester, that the Pope
as the vice gerent of Christ upon earth was to be my rule; according to his
assertion taken out of Saint Thomas: The Pope has the primacie of the
universal Church, to whom it appertains to determine those things which
belong to faith, 22. 1. 11. ar. 3.
that they may be held of all with a constant faith, and in him resideth the
authority of the universal Church. Therefore it belongs to faith to adhere
unto the sentence of the chief Bishop, in those things which belong to faith;
yea also in those things which belong unto good manners, because in such the
Church cannot err, nor consequently her head, as head or as Bishop, which I
understand always to be true, when in doubts he is required, not as a learned
man, or such a person, but as the head of Christianity, or according to
Archidiaconus, Note this.
when he determines with the Council of Cardinals: but the first is better,
because the Pope may be without Cardinals. But when I remembered that two Popes,
namely Sixtus and Clemens, set out two Bibles within two years space (for
Sixtus Bible came forth in the year 1590. and Clements in the year 1592.)
with commandment to be read and followed upon penalties mentioned in their
several breues, wherein many disagreements, contradictions, and contrarieties,
appeared in so important a matter of faith, as the appointment of what is
Scripture, and what is not, that herein Pope Sixtus grievously erred: I
concluded that the Popes sentence definitive could not be a sufficient rule
for me to measure my faith by, unless I would be like unto a principal Roman
Clarke of this land, affirming, that here in England, he thought the opinion
of Cardinal Bellarmine the best to be held concerning deposition of kings;
namely that the Pope has his dominion in temporalties only indirectly, yet if
he were in Rome he would follow the opinion of Bosius, that he has it
directly, as the most plausible there. And much wondering that such an
assertion should pass from the mouth of so grave a man, I began to infer,
that if but place or persons were the rule of such men's faith in matters of
such weight; it was time for me who regarded but the salvation of my soul, to
seek after some better rule, more sure and infallible.

10 Now then (courteous Reader) having found out this most sufficient rule of
faith, namely the holy Scriptures, I refer my self unto your impartial
censure, to judge whether I could do less then to measure all the doctrinall
points of my faith by this golden meet-wand, and therewith measure out the
spiritual and true Church of Christ: which if thou shall judge fit for me, I
hope such shall be the care of thine own salvation, as to use it always in
like manner for thy self, that thy faith may be free from all crookedness of
heresies, and thereby be made partakers of Gods promises; for the manifold
divisions about the Church, the diverse errors taught by those that pretend to
be other men's Teachers, and even the love of thy self may well make thee say
with holy David, following the light of Scriptures, Psalm. 119. verse. 10.4.
Psalm. 119. verse. 18.
unto thy Lord God, Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum and lumen semitis meis.
Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. And again, Open
thou mine eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of the Law.

11 Yet thou art to have great care that thou make not this rule longer than it
is, nor shorter: for this is forbidden by Christ himself, speaking against
such a one saying; I protest unto every man that hears the words of the
prophecy of this Book; Apoc. 22.18, 19.
if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this Book: and if any man shall take away from the words
of the book of this prephecie, God shall take away his part out of the Book
of life, and out of the holy City, and from the things which are written in
this Book. This fault of adding to the Books of holy scripture is very
notorious in the Church of Rome, as I have duly observed. Ses. 41.
For the Council of Trent adds to the Canon of the old Testament diverse
Apocriphall Books, which must be believed as Canonical Scriptures; as namely,
Tobias, Judith, Hester, and the two books of the Macchabees, Esdras, Wisdom,
and Ecclesiasticus: all which are learnedly proved to be Apocriphall, by the
right reverend Father in God, my Lords grace of Canterbury, in his answer to
master Doctor Hill his eight reason: Number. 3. and sequent.
the consideration whereof made me plainly conclude, that herein the Church
of Rome gives great and apparent occasion for any to judge that she erreth, and
consequently not to hear her voice thus uttering falsehood for truth, giving
equal authority to the Apocriphall Books with the holy canonical Scriptures.

CHAP. VII. Containing an observation, how the Ministry of the true Church of
Christ is the means of teaching the true sense and understanding of
Scriptures, where and when it has a visible and external government.
ALthough I have clearly discovered, The external ministe rye of the Church
an ordinary means to know the true sense of Scripture.
that the sacred Scriptures are the chief infallible rule of faith, and most
sufficient in the precedent observation; yet could I not rest satisfied till I
found also a means for the simple and unlearned to ground their faith upon:
because Deus vult omnes saluos fieri and ad agnitionem veritatis venire, God
will have all to be saved, 1. Tim. 2.4.
and come to the knowledge of his truth. And as well as he in the government
of his creatures has his end to which he designs them; so also by his
wisdom he does most prudently substitute subordinate means for the full
accomplishment of such his designements; now therefore, how those that are
neither able to read the scriptures, or though they be able, have not
sufficient skill and knowledge to consider the circumstances of Texts, and, by
the analogy of faith, not learned enough to find out the true meaning of the
Scriptures, nor have the gift of interpretation, as many and most have not,
whereupon arise many deprauations of Scriptures; how such should be directed in
the right use of the rule of Scriptures, and in finding out the right meaning
of them, I thought it a matter of great weight well to discover, and by the
declaration thereof to afford a stay to weak consciences in this behalf. In
the scrious discussion of which point it pleased almighty God so to second my
careful Labors and endeavors herein, as that I received full satisfaction, in
mine own judgment, by this conclusion, namely; That the most ordinary
external direction left by God especially to direct unlearned men in the
finding out of the true sense and meaning of the Scriptures, is the ministry
of the true visible Church of Christ, assisted by the holy Ghost; and the
Church in this respect is called, 1. Tim. 3.15. Matt. 5.14.
The pillar of truth, and the ministers thereof, The light of the world.

2 And therefore as master Harding himself confesses, True understanding of
Scripturs. only in the Church: Doctor Hard. con^ut. of the Apology of the
Church of England. fol. 36.
Mester Celuine admonishes very well; That it is especially to be noted, that
out of the Church there is no light of the sound understanding of the
Scriptures. But the inconsiderate Doctor makes a very fond inference upon
this ground, saying; This ground being laid, on which each part must sland and
be tried in, crow no more against us, boast your selves no more, we fear not
the judgment of the holy Scriptures; nay, it is your selves that fear this
judgment, for your own conscience tells you, that on this ground you are
the weaker side; Jnstit lib. 4 cap. 8. number 7.
he forgot that master Calvin said: Let this be a firm axiom, That no other
word of God is to be had, to which place must be given in the Church, than
what is maintained; first in the Law and Prophets, then in the writings of the
Apostles: neither is there any way of teaching in the Church of God, but by
the prescript and rule of his word. If master Harding had well observed this,
he would not have made such an inference, or affirmed, that the Protestants
fear this judgment, but rather would have concluded as I do, That since both
stand upon the outward ministry of the true Church, let us seek the true
Church of Christ, and having found it, The deuties of the true church
then hear and follow her doctrine, teaching according to Scripture, and out
of Scripture.

3 The due observation whereof shows, That the true visible. Church is to
repress the deprauations of Heretics, and partly to inform those that are
unlearned, and to exercise even the obedience of those that are learned, and by
the external ministry of teaching the true sense of Scriptures, is to give
directions, and is duetifully by her members to be heard and followed. Which
assertion I find not to make either for the present Church of Rome, or of Engl.
or any other particular Church, till it be proved which of them is the true
Catholic, Ancient, and Primitive Apostolic Church, teaching the sound
Doctrine of the first, pure and untainted ages, whereof I am to speak in the
Chapter following.

CHAP. VIII. Contains a fundamental observation, how that consormity of
doctrine with the ancient doctrine of the Primitive Church may be a good
means in these latter ages to know the true Church of Christ.
AFter that I had thus discovered both the most sufficient rule of faith to be
the canonical and true Scriptures, Antiquity a good inducement to the true
Church.
I could not yet give sufficient contentment to my understanding, until such
time as I had found out also some kind of guidance unto the true Church. In the
serious contemplation of which point I thought, that the most assured course I
could take herein, was to lay down such a direction, as is approved both by
the Church of England, and by the Church of Rome, and truly to examine some
principal points of doctrine in question between the English and Roman
Church, by this means of trial: whereunto if I should find either the first
agreeable, or the second disagreeable, I resolved that I might have a strong
inducement to conclude which was the true Church of Christ, and which the
false, whose doctrine might be esteemed Christian, and whose doctrine
Antichristian.

2 By which inducement I was the more earnestly moved to make trial, then by
any other; It is approved by Fathers.
for that I found the ancient Fathers very frequent in giving of this mark of
antiquity; for Tertullian says, By the order it self, Lib. de praescrip.
aduers. Her.
that is made manifest to be of our Lord, and true, which is first delivered;
and that externe and false which is sent in afterward. And in another place
writing against Marcion, he says, Lib contra Marcion.
I affirm that my Gospel is true: Marcion says as much for his: who shall
determine this controversy betwixt us, but the difference of time prescribing
authority to that doctrine which shall be found more ancient; and adiudging
corruption to that which shall be convinced to be the later? Saint Gregory
Nazianzen urges the Apolinaristes thus: Greg. Naz. epist. 2. ad Cledonium.
Hieron. epist. ad Pamach and Ocean. de errori bus Origenist. Hieron. contra
Luciferianos.
If the faith began but thirty years since, whereas there be almost four
hundred years from the manifestation of Christ, certainly both our Gospel and
faith were vain, and void for this long time. And Saint Hierome questioneth
with the Origenists of his time after this manner: Why go thou about after
four hundred years to teach us that which we knew not before? The Christian
world was without this doctrine until this day. And against the Luciferians,
he says: I will declare unto thee my opinion briefly and plainly; we must
remain in the Church which being founded by the Apostles, has endured to this
day; and all others even in this, that they were instituted after, show
themselves to be Heretics. Vincent. Lyrinens. in cap. 26. and 27.
With which Fathers Vincentius Lyrinensis accords, when explicating that of
Saint Paul; O Timothy keep that which has bin left unto thee, He says, This
depositum is that which has been committed to thee, not which has been
invented by thee; that which thou have received, not that which thou have
devised: a thing brought unto thee, not uttered by thee; in which thou must not
be an author, but a keeper; not an instructor, but a follower; not a leader,
but one that is directed. Now therefore thus finding so many ancient Fathers
making antiquity a near adiunct unto Catholic and Orthodox truth, and
novelty to be the usual badge of Herretikes: I began with great diligence and
care to examine two maine points of religion now controuerted, and much
disputed on, as well by the most learned of the English as of the Roman
Church, viz. of the doctrine of justification by faith alone, and of the
imperfection of our good works; that being according to knowledge grounded in
religion, my zeal therein might be the greater, and my assuredness of a sound
ground, cause me to stand the more strongly, and to labor in others spiritual
profit with the greater constancy and courage, as since it has succeeded
through Gods especial grace to the unspeakable comfort of my soul, affording
me grace and ability of body to perform this so profitable a work, begun
and ended by him whom I do most humbly desire to be the (...) and (...) of all
my endeavors.

3 Now as I proceeded on further by degrees, Antiquity a good way of trial.
to compare the doctrine of the Church of England, and that of Rome, concerning
the two points above specified, with the doctrine of the ancient Church by this
means of antiquity, I found the doctrines of justification by faith only; and
of the imperfection and demerit of good works, as they are taught in the
present Church of England, most deservedly to claim the privilege of
antiquity; as taught by many both Latin and Creek Fathers, Justification by
faith alone proved by Greek Fathers. Ses. 6. Can. 9. Origin. lib. 3. Romans 3.
notwithstanding that the Church of Rome accurseth all that hold the contrary
in express terms saying; If any shall say that a wicked man may be justified
by faith alone, etc. let him be accursed. Against which definitive sentence of
the Council of Trent, I find first of the Greek Fathers Origin to be most
clear, who upon those words of Saint Paul to the Romans; We therefore think
that man is justified by faith, without the works of the law; writes thus:
The Apostle in these words says that justification by faith alone suffices,
so that a man only beseeuing is justified, although he perform no work. And
if an example be required, who was ever, that without good works was justified
by faith alone; I think that thief may suffice, who crucified with Christ,
cried unto him on the cross, Lord Jesus remember me when thou shall come into
thy kingdom. Neit her is there any good work of his described in the Cospell;
But for this faith alone Jesus says unto him; Amen, I say unto thee, This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise. This thief therefore is just fied by faith
without the works of the law: because the Lord did not ask what work he did
first; neither did he expect what work he had done, when he believed, but
being justified by faith alone, when he was to enter into Paradise he took him
for his companion, and it is related in the Gospel according to Saint Luke,
unto the woman without any work of the law, and for faith alone, he said: thy
sins are forgiven thee. And again, Thy faith has made thee safe, go in
peace. And in many places of the Gospel we read that our Savior used this
speech, to show that the faith of the believer is the cause of his salvation:
Hitherto Origin. Neither is Saint Basil of other opinion, who writes thus: The
Apostle says, Basil. co^cione dehumilit.
he that rejoices let him rejoice in the Lord, saying, that Christ is made
unto us from God Wisdom, Justice, Sanctification, and Redemption: that, as it
is written, he that is to rejoice, let him rejoice in the Lord: for this is
perfect and entire rejoicing in God, when a man is not exalted for his own
righteousness, but acknowledges true righteousness to be wanting in him,
and to be justified by faith alone in Christ. And Paul rejoices in that he
despises his own righteousness, and in that by Christ he seeks that
righteousness which is of God. Thus much S. Basil, whose doctrine agrees most
plainly with the doctrine of England in this point.

4. I find also S. Chrysostom to be most clear for the same doctrine of
justification by faith only; saying upon those words: Other Fathers. Chrysostom.
Coment. in Epist ad Romans cap. 3.
Gloriation is excluded: by what law? etc. In this place he shows the power
of God, not only for keeping him, but for justifying him, and for leading him
unto glory: standing in no need of works, but requiring only faith. Hom. de
Fide and Lege.
And in an other place: No man without faith has had life: for the Thief
believed, and was justified by the most merciful God: and here say not unto
me, that time was wanting, that he might live justly, and do honest works;
neither will I strive about this, but only this one thing will I affirm, that
faith alone of it self saved him. Again also in an other place, Hom. 3. in
Epist. ad Tit.
he says: If thou beleeuest, why do thou infer other things, as if
faith alone suffices not to justify a man? Hom. 7. Romans 3.
He says further: But what is the law of faith? even to be saved by grace.
Here the Apostle shows the goodness of God, who not only saves us, but also
justifies and glorifieth us, using no works hereunto, but requiring faith
only. Again Hesichius says, that God having commiseration of mankind when he
saw it weakened to perform the works of the law, Hesich. comme^t. sup. Leuit.
l. 1. c. 2
he would not have man to be saved by works, but by grace; but grace through
mercy is apprehended by faith alone, not by works. Theophilact upon these
words of Saint Paul: Because by the law no man shall be justified before God:
Theophil. Commen^^n cap. 3. ad Galath.
says; That he shows that by the law all men are made execrable, and
subject to malediction, and that blessings are heaped up by faith; now he
clearly shows that faith it self, or alone, has power to justify. And
again says elsewhere, Theophilact. 2. ad These 2.
For faith alone he is to give eternal good things. Thus it appears how the
doctrine of justification by faith only was taught by the ancient Greek
Fathers.

5. Proofs of Latin Fathers.
Now if we examine the Latin Fathers we shall find them as plain and copious
in this point, as the other: for Hilarie speaking of the Scribes, says: Hilar.
in Ma. h. Can. 8.
It moves the Scribes that sin should be remitted by man, for they only
beheld man in Christ Jesus, and that to be remitted by him, which the law could
not loosE: For faith alone justifies. The same teaches Saint Ambrose upon the
words of Saint Paul, Being justified freely by his grace, says: Ambros. sup.
Paul. ad Romans 3
They are justified freely, because working nothing, nor yielding requital:
they are justified by faith alone through the gift of God. And again upon
these words: sup. Romans 4.
Believing in him that justifies the wicked; HIs words are these: He says
this because if by the works of the law unto the wicked believer, his faith is
reputed to righteousness, as to Abraham; how therefore do the Jews think
themselves to be iushfied, by the justification of Abraham, since they see
Abraham, not by the works of the law, but by faith alone to be justified?
therefore the law is not needful, when the wicked is justified by faith alone
with God. And in an other place: This is appointed by God, that he who
believes in Christ shall be saved without works, De vocat Gent. Cap. 9. ad
Romans
by faith alone; and again faith alone is appointed to salvation. Primafins
likewise sometimes an Auditor to S Augustine, speaks often of justification
by faith alone: Sup illud ad Romans 4.
saying. He justifies the wicked by faith alone, not by the works which he had
not. And again he says: Ad Romans 5.
Abraham before circumcision is justified by credulity aone. And in an other
place: Thou live like a Gentill, Ad Galath. 2.
not like a Jew. Thou know that hou have had life through grace, not by
works, but by faith alone, Ad Galath. 5.
And again, Abraham believed God, and it was reputed to him for
righteousness: so unto you faith alone sufficieth to righteousness. Which
Author has many other places to the same purpose. Haymo sup. Paul ad Gal. 3.
Haymo who lived in the time of Ludouicus Pius, the son of Charles the great,
says. The law was not fulfilled by faith, but by work; but the Gospel is
fulfilled more by faith then by works, because faith alone sauethl. Sup. Paul.
ad Heb. 11.
Again in an other place, saying: If the Harlot that is an Infidel and an
Idolatresse, is saved by faith alone; much more shall they be saved, who have
not fallen into more grievous crimes. In Eu^ng. de Circumcil. Christi Abacuc.
2. Aug. l. 1. contra duas Epist Pelag. cap. 21.
So likewise elsewhere: They shall be faued only by faith alone, as it is
written, but the just lives by faith. Saint Augustine also himself seems
most plain for this opinion, saying: Of what virtue soever thou shall preach
the Ancient just men to have been of, nothing has made them safe but faith.
And again: If any man after believing shall forthwith depart out of this
life, L. 83. quaest. q. 76
justification of faith abides with him, without any precedent good works,
because he has not attained thereunto by merit, but by grace.

6. Which doctrine of these so Ancient Fathers, Later writers
even the learned of the modern Writers of the Church of Rome do approve,
and jointly allow of in their writings. Thomas Aquinas their Angelical Doctor
writes thus. Romans 3. Lect. 4. Gal. 3. Lect 4.
Works be not the cause why a man is just before God, but rather they are the
execution and manifestation of his justice: for no man is justified by works,
but by the habit of Faith infused: yea justification is done by faith only.
Bonauent. 4. d. 15. q. 1. nu. 10.
And Bonauenture the Franciscanes Seraphicall Doctor writes thus: For so much
as man was not able to satisfy for so great offense, therefore God gave him a
Mediator who should satisfy for it; whence it comes to pass, that by only
faith in his Passion all the fault is remitted, and without the faith of him no
man is justified. Saint Bernard also is most perspicuous in the delivery of
the same doctrine, saying, Cant. ser. 22.
Whosoever is compunct for his sins, hungreth and thirsts after
righteousness; let him believe in thee that iustifiest a sinner, and being
justified by faith only, he shall have peace from thee. So that now it is
apparent, that the doctrine of justification by faith only taught in the
Church of England, is made good by the mark of antiquity, and approved even
by some of the Romanists themselves against themselves. Yea, Vergerius a
learned Bishop (as my Lords Grace of Canterbury notes but of Sledian)
intending to write against Luther in that argument, Doctor Hills reasons
unmasked, reas. 8. nu. 2. fol. 307. Sleid. lib. 21.
was by traversing of it caught himself. And so by the discovery first of one
verity, at length grew to abandon altogether the Church of Rome; as any
whosoever shall read this Treatise, may well do I hope, with satisfaction and
comfort to his own conscience.

7 I further began also to make trial of the doctrine of the Church of Rome
concerning good works by this mark of antiquity, which teaches them to be so
perfect, About the imperfection of good works.
that in some sort they are simply, absolutely, and perfectly just and
righteous: further, that they are merits, that they justify a man, and that
they are not only mereitorious for increase of grace, but also of eternal
glory: which doctrine tends exceedingly to the engendring and nourishing of
a Pharisaicall pride and presumption in good works; whereas the doctrine of
the Church of England, teaching imperfection to be even in our best works of
the righteous, that they are not merits, that they do not justify, that they
are not meritorious, is a most wholesome doctrine for planting of the true
Publicanes humility, relying wholly upon Christ's righteousness, and the
imputation thereof, when he said, Deus propitius esto mihi peecatori, Lord be
merciful unto me a sinner: and so was pronounced more justified than the
Pharisie, justifying himself by his works, Luke 18. verse. 11.
when he said, I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or
even as this Publicane; I fast twice a week, I give tithes of all that I
possess. This observation I gathered by reading and diligently noting
Bellarmines confused controversies in the doctrine of justification, drawing
the readers only to a proud Pharisaicall presumption in their own works,
against whom I observe many Fathers; Our righteousness imputed.
first, to account all our true righteousness to be Christ's righteousness
more than ours, and ours only by imputation, and therefore our own
righteousness consequently very imperfect. Saint Augustine has in plain
terms thus; Epist. 106. ad Bonifac.
The righteousness by which through faith we believe we are justified, that
is, we are made righteous, is the grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
In Enche. ca. 41.
And again; He is sin, and we righteousness, not ours, but Gods, neither in
us, but in him, as he is sin, not his own, but ours, nor in himself, but in
us: so therefore we are Gods righteousness in him, as he is sin in us, to
wit, Lib. 2. de Jacob. and vit. beata.
by imputation. S. Ambrose says, As Jacob of himself deserved not the
primogeniture, who being hidden in his brothers apparel, and clad in his
garment, which yielded forth the best odor, did insinuate himself to his
father, that to his profit he might, under another person, receive benediction;
so do we lie hidden under the precious purity of Christ our first begotten
brother, that from the sight of God we may give testimony of our justice.
With the doctrine of which ancient Fathers, holy Bernard agrees as well as
the Church of England, Bernard Ser. 61. in Cantic. Cant.
saying; I will remember thy justice alone, for it is mine; to wit, thou art
made unto me thy righteousness from God: for how can I fear that one justice
may not suffice us both? It is not the short cloak, which according to the
Prophet cannot cover two, thy justice is justice for ever, and this large and
eternal justice shall cover both me and thee together. Whereby it is clear,
that all our righteousness is none of our own, but Christ's; and therefore all
our works in respect of our selves, are sinful and imperfect.

8 Besides, the imperfection of our works appears, Works imperfect, because
they cause not salvation.
in that although they are necessary for many respects, yet are they not the
efficient causes of salvation: for Saint Ambrose says, This is appointed by
God, Ambros. in 1. ad Cor. 1.
that he that believes in Christ be saved without work, freely receiving by
faith alone remission of sins. And Saint Augustine has these words, August.
in Psalm. 70.
Thou art nothing of thy self, call upon God; sins are thine, mercies are
Gods; chastisement is due unto thee, and when the reward shall come, he shall
crown his gifts, not thy merits. Saint Chrysostom also says, Chrysostom. in
cap. 3. ad Romans
Herein the power and might of God is showed, in that he saves, justifies,
and leads unto glory by faith alone, without good works. Basil says thus,
Basil. in Ps. 114.
Everlasting rest abides upon those that strive lawfully in this life, not for
the merits of their deeds, but out of the most bountiful favor of God, in
which they have believed. All which places do argue against the perfection of
works for our greater humiliation, and Gods greater glory.

9. Moreover, the learned Fathers do further show, Works imperfect, because
impure. Hieron. lib. 2. aduers. Pelag.
that the works of the righteous are not simply and absolutely just and
perfect; for Saint Hierome writes thus: If according to Job the Moon does not
shine, and the stars are not clear in his sight, how much more man, who is
rottenness, and the son of man, a worm? For every mouth is stopped, and
every clean one is obnoxious unto God; because before him, by the works of
the law, all flesh shall not be justified, and there is no difference of
persons; for all have sinned, and are in need of the glory of God, being
justified freely through his grace. Saint Augustine speaking to Pelagius, says
thus: Aug. li. de nature. and great.
The Lord if he would might lift up mortal men to Angelical purity, and so
cause that they might perfectly keep the Law, but he never did, nor ever will
do it. Epist. 29.
Saint Hierome also speaks as plain to this purpose, when he says, The
fullest charity which cannot be increased, so long as man lives here, is not
in any; but so long as it can be augmented truly, that which is less than it
ought to be is of vice, out of which vice it is, Lib. de perfec. iustit. resp
18. Lib. 9. confess. cap. 13.
that no man does good and sins not: who further says, It is sin when
either there is not charity which ought to be, or when it is less than it
ought to be. And Saint Augustine, Woe also to the laudable life of men, if
without mercy thou do discuss it. Lib 9. Mor. c. 1.
And Gregory the Great in his Morals says, The holy man because he sees,
that all the merit of our virtue is vice, if it be severely judged by the
inward arbitrer, does right well adioyne; if he will strive with him, he
cannot answer him one for a thousand. And again, Cap. 28.
How much soever we sweat in good works, we do not apprehend true
cleanenesse, but we imitate it. And in another place he says. Lib. vlt. Mor.
c. vlt.
Our evils are pure evils, and the good things which we believe we have,
cannot be pure good things. With which ancient Writers very well agrees
Saint Bernard, Ser. 5. de verbis Isaiae.
saying, If our righteousness be humble, perhaps it is right, but not pure,
unless perhaps we believe our selves to be better than our fathers, who said
no less truly than humbly, All our righteousness is like a filthy polluted
cloth. How is it pure justice where sin cannot yet be wanting? By all which
places I was enforced to conclude the acknowledgement of the imperfection of
good works with the Church of England, to be much more agreeable unto truth,
and more profitable for true Christian humiliation, than an ouerprizing of our
works with the Church of Rome, to puff up souls with vain glory and
ostentation, by the which many are most lamentably let fall into the pit of
Hell, Tolluntur in altum vt lapsu grauiore ruant; they are lifted up on high,
that their fall may be the greater.

10 Again, Imperfect, because they cannot justify.
to demonstrate further the imperfection of our works, the ancient Fathers
are most clear, teaching, that they cannot justify a man in the sight of God.
Saint Ambrose says, But that is auailefull unto me, Ambros. de vit. bon. li.
1. cap. 6.
that we are not justified by works of the Law, I have not therefore whereof
to glory in my works; I have not whereof to boast my self, and therefore I
will glory in Christ; I will not glory because I am just, but I will glory
because I am redeemed; I will not glory because I am void of sin, but
because sins are remitted unto me; I will not glory because I have been
profitable, but because Christ is the advocate for me with the Father, but
because the blood of Christ is powered out for me. The same learned Doctor in
another place says, Vaunt not thy self for being styled the Son of God: In
Luc. cap. 14.
grace is to be acknowledged, nature not to be unknown: neither may thou
boast thy self for serving well, for doing what thou ought to do, the
Sun serves, the Moon obeys, and the vessel of Gentiles, chosen of God,
says, I am not worthy to be called an Apostle. And elsewhere, showing
himself not to be guilty of sin, he adds, but in this I am not justified.
Saint Augustine further says, Tract. 82. in Ioannem.
This is glory toward God, wherewith not man but God is glorified, if he be
justified not by works but by faith. And again, In Psalm. 30.
You are saved by grace, says the Apostle, and this not of your selves, but it
is the gift of God, not through works, as if you did well, that you might be
worthy to approach thereunto, not through works, least perhaps he be extolled.

11 Further, Imperfect, because not meritorious.
for proof of the imperfection of our works, I find the ancient Fathers to
afford me matter herein, teaching them not to be meritorious: for Origin was
ancient, and yet he said, Orig. ad Romans li. 4. c. 4.
I can hardly believe there is any work that may require the reward of debt.
Saint Chrysostom is ancient, and yet he says, Hom. 33. in Genes.
If any of our works do follow the free vocation of God, they are a
retribution of debt; but grace, beneficencie, and greatness of bounty are
Gods gifts, therefore not meritorious. Saint Hilarie also says, In Psalm. 51.
That not the works of justice themselves were sufficient unto the merit of
perfect bliss, unless the mercy of God also in this will of righteousness
do not repute the vices of humane changes and motions. Lib. 1. aduers. Pelag.
Saint Hierome says, Now therefore we are just, when we confess our selves
sinners, and our righteousness is not in proper merit, but by Gods council.
Lib. 4 de Ciuit. Dei, cap. 20.
Saint Augustine says, Without the merits of good works the sinner is
justified by faith, and that alone. De great. and lib. arbitr. cap. 9.
And again, The Saints do attribute nothing unto their merits, they attribute
all to mercy, O Lord. And again elsewhere, We must understand, that God
brings us to eternal life, not for our merits, but for his own mercy. Lib.
1. de vocat. Gent.
Prosper further says, Therefore in the Parable of those that labored in the
Vineyard, the same reward is given to the Laborers, whether they labor much
or little, that those who have labored with much sweat, and have not received
more than the last, may understand, that they have received the reward of
grace, and not of works. Yea, and Gregory the great, Super Psalm. 7. Paeniten.
Bishop of Rome, says, It is one thing for God to reward men according to
their works, and another thing to give the reward for the works themselves,
when the Scripture says, According to our works, the quality of our works
is understood; and that the reward shall be his, whose the works are: for unto
that blessed life wherein we live with God can no labor be compared, no work
likened; seeing the Apostle says, The sufferings of this life are not worthy
of the glory of the life to come. Which proofs of ancient Writers show most
clearly, good works not to be so perfect as the Church of Rome makes them;
and therefore I may well say with Waldensis, He is to be reputed the sounder
Divine, Sacrament. ti. 1. c. 7. p. 30.
and the better Catholic, and more agreeable to the Scripture, that simply
denies such merit, confessing, that simply no man merits the kingdom of
Heaven, but obtaines it by the grace and free will of God, that gives it.

12 From all which authorities of the ancient Fathers, Later writers prove the
same. Bernard. orat. 1. omn. sanct.
diverse ways showing the imperfection of our works, Saint Bernard seemed no
whit to swerve, saying, But what can all our righteousness be before God?
Shall it not, according to the Prophet, be reputed as a filthy polluted cloth?
and if he be straightly judged, all our righteousness shall be found unjust,
and having too little. What therefore shall be of sins, when justice it self
may not answer for it self? Therefore devoutly crying with the Prophet, Enter
not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord; with all humility let us have
recourse unto mercy, whihch alone can save our souls. And in another place,
If any be devout, if he be solicitous, Bernard. ser. 3. de annuno. Mariae.
if he be fervent in spirit, let him take heed he trust not to his merits,
that he rely not upon his works. All which, though they make strongly against
the doctrine of the Church of Rome, tending to presumption in good works, and
to show the imperfection of the best of them in respect of our selves, yet does
it not follow, that good works are not necessary to salvation, Why are good
works necessary.
for they are necessary for diverse other respects: First, that our works may
give testimony of our faith, that by them, as by the fruits, our faith may be
known, because that without them faith is dead. Jac. 2.18. 2. Pet. 1.8.
Secondly, that we may be certain, and confirmed of our election and
salvation; for works, Ibid.
though they be not the causes, yet they are the way to salvation. Thirdly,
that our faith may be exercised, nourished, confirmed, 2. Tim. 1.6. 2. Pet. 1.8.
and promoted. Fourthly, that we avoid temporal and eternal pains, which
God threateneth to inflict upon transgressors of the Law. Fifthly, Romans 8.13.
2. These. 4.6.
that our lives may answer our professions: for if we be children of light, it
is behoofefull for us to walk like children of light. Sixthly, that not doing
evil, we may not contristate the holy Ghost, 2. Cor. 5.15. Philip. 2.15. 1.
These. 5.19.
but that we may obtain both temporal and spiritual rewards, which God has
promised to those that do well. Seventhly, that they may be done for the good
of others; 1. Tim. 4.8. Psalm. 5. v. vlt.
that the good may be edified by our example, and that we may not give a
scandale to those that are without; that by our holy lives, as much as lies in
us, we may gain others, 2. Cor. 6.3. 1. Pet. 2.22.
and by doing good, we may put the wicked to shame; and that we may stop the
mouths of calumniators; 2. Pet. 2.12. and 3
for our works, 16. ad Tit. 2.58.
though they are imperfect, yet are they grateful unto God, not for any
perfection or dignity in them, but because they are of the holy Ghost in us,
and of faith which purifieth our hearts, because all their imperfection is
pardoned, covered, Psalm. 32.2.
and not imputed.

13 Hence I observe, How faith and good works may go together.
that a justifying faith and good works may go together, the first as the
cause, the other as the effects; and therefore considering the true nature of a
good Christian, having that faith which works by charity, my thinks I
behold him in the mysterious vision which the Prophet Ezechiel beheld of the
four beasts, Ezech. 1 and 10.
near the river Chobar, flying up to heaven with wings, and hands under the
wings, who amounting to heaven according to the number of wings, had also
sixteen hands, which they made-shew of, as it were to insinuate, that they did
not only amount up by the helps of their wings, but also by the strength and
force of their hands, which being under their wings, moved and supported them.
For herein I behold a proper resemblance of a true, just, and righteous
Christian, who, to ascend unto heaven, and to amount himself from all earthly
and terrene comforts, and to make his conversation with God in heaven, does not
perform this flight only by the wings of faith, but is also therein by the
hands of charity and good works to help and support them, without which he
falls down to the ground: so that now we see, against the Church of Rome,
that faith alone justifies without good works, and that good works without
faith cannot justify, through their imperfection, which in respect of man are
so absolutely imperfect and impure, as the precedent places of antiquity do
testify, and therefore I find the most probable inducement of antiquity in
those two points to lead me unto the Church of England.

14 Now (courteous Reader) when I had observed the Church of Rome to fail thus
in the triallof antiquity, My feeling upon the consideration of this
observation.
about the two aforesaid points of doctrine, concerning faith and good works,
attributing too little to the one, and too much to the other; and the Church of
England to have Antiquity on her side for the establishment of the aforesaid
points: I began more seriously to behold mine own estate, and to see the
former danger of my soul, with the great peril of diverse others, whose
careful instructor I have been in the contrary novelties. I began with
amazement to reflect more studiously and feelingly upon the severe words of S.
Paul, denouncing an accurse upon the teachers of novelties, when he said: Gal.
1.8.
Though an Angel from heaven should preach unto you otherwise, then that which
we have preached unto you, let him be accursed: In the fear of which curse,
as I discovered my error, so I determined it to be high time for me to shake
hands, and bid adieu to the Church of Rome, which by her novel doctrines
entangleth the souls of many in the nets of eternal perdition. Now could I
not but with tears of compunction for my former professed novelties, begin
to mollify the hardened crust of deformity, which they had wrought in my
soul; and also with tears of compassion bewail the miserable estate of those
souls as I knew to be defiled with the spots of like errors; now could I no
but most earnestly prostrate my self upon the ground before the Throne of Gods
mercy, both for them and my self, beseeching him to be propitious and
favorable to us all, in the most tender bowels of Christ Jesus his Son,
cauing pardon and mercy only by him, of the Father, whose pardon and mercies
are above all other his works, that we might all, who were miserably seduced
by the novelties of Rome, discover, and detest them as abominations in the
sight of God, and constantly resolve never to participate more with her
erroneous doctrines, and novelties, which were sowed by no other then Satan
and his Ministers, but to enter into the happy felloship and society of that
Church that teaches the contrary verities, standing upon sure Antiquity. And
now did I further with all humility of my heart, and humble acknowledgment of
this great favor from God in affording me the means of discover such
falsehoods, yield him humble thanks, offering up withal into his holy hands,
my soul, my body, with all the powers and faculties of either, with the whole
residue of my life to come, to be employed hereafter in the conversion of
souls to the present Church of England, which I found, notwithstanding all
pretenses to the contrary, to be Apostolical and most Ancient, grieuing much
for my former Oath taken in Rome betwixt the hands of Robert Parsons, some
twelve or thirteen years since, to the contrary, in the form following word
for word.

The Oath of the English Seminaries.
EGO N. N. Collegij Anglorum alumnus, etc. I John Copley Collegiall of the
English Seminary, duly considering the great benefits which Almighty God
has bestowed upon me, and that especially whereby he has drawn me out of
my Country infected with Heresy, and made me a member of his true Catholic
Church, and desiring not to show my self altogether ingrate unto Gods so great
mercy, I have freely decreed to consecrate and offer up my self wholly unto
his divine service, for attaining as much as in me lies, to the end of the
said College: and I do promise, and confirm by this mine Oath unto Almighty
God, that I am, and shall be ever most ready in mind by the assistance of his
holy Grace, to receive in due time holy Orders, and to return into England,
there to gain souls, whenever the Superior of this College shall think
good by virtue of his office to command me thereunto.

For the taking of so unlawful an Oath, in such my blindness, against the
lawful power and authority of the Governors of this Realm, with contempt of
their Laws to the contrary; as also for the practice of the contents therein
specified upon false supposition of gaining souls to God, whilst I drew them
from God, from my heart I repent me, craving pardon of God, and his Majesty,
with diverse others whom I have offended, and grievously provoked their just
indignation against me; acknowledging that I may truly say unto God with the
prodigal Son, that wasted his substance in a far Country: I will go to
my Father and say unto him, Father I have sinned against heaven and against
thee, Luke 15. v. 21.
I am no more worthy to be called thy Son. If thou (courteous Reader) art as I
was, glorify the name of God in the view of thy errors, (which I hope by this
Treatise sufficiently to lay open unto thee) turning to God, who is mild, and
merciful to all true penitent sinners, purposing amendment, and acknowledging
their sins; and if thou art otherwise, let me entreat thee for the love of
God to give him thanks for me, and thou thy self to be constant and firm
in the Faith of the present Church of England, which teaches the true,
Christian, Apostolic, and Ancient faith, in which through Gods grace we may be
saved.

CHAP. IX. Contains an observation of the Wonders and supposed Miracles,
which, as Christ has foretold, the Pseudo-Christs and Prophets shall do, for
the seducing of Gods Elect, if it were possible.
AMongst the diverse marks which Cardinal Ballarmine brings to show us,
Miracles make more for the Church of England than for the Church of Rome.
and to which society of Christian believers were ought to join our selves,
to be true children of Christ, he urges for his eleventh Mark the glory of
Miracles, in these words: Miracles are necessary to persuade men to a new
faith, Bellarm. de notis Eccles. l. 4. c. 14. in Epitome.
or to an extraordinary mission, and are sufficient and efficacious to prove
the same, so that where true Miracles are found, without doubt there is the
true Faith. Which Assertion when I considered deeply with due observation of
all points of doctrine concerning the working of Miracles, I found this Mark
to make as much for the Faith of the present English Church; for that it is the
same which being new in the Apostles time, was confirmed in the hearts of all
believers by the Miracles of the Apostles, and holy Men of the Primitive
Church, at the first planting of the Christian Faith; and hereby I am put in
mind that as Aristotle says, Aristoteles.
Prudentis est distinguere, it is the part of a prudent man to distinguish,
betwixt times and times, betwixt doctrines; and faithfully compare the
believers of the first Ages, even of Rome it self, with those of after-ages;
which as I endeavored to perform, in examining this mark of miracles, I
observe that unless it were done with great prudence, infinite numbers may be
carried simply and ignorantly into gross errors, to the great impeachment of
Gods glory, and miserable seduction of their own souls; and therefore to lay
down this observation, I thought it good to use extraordinary diligence, that
therewith all I might be the more assured of truth, that the world may clearly
see, that this pretense of Miracles makes nothing at all for the present faith
of Rome, but only against it, showing the Professors thereof not to be true
Christians.

2 For albeit it be a truh not to be denied, all that do miracles do not true
miracles.
that all true miracles can only be done by God, yet does it not follow, that
all that do miracles do true miracles, and such as are done by him; for to
every true miracle four things are required, as a learned Roman Teacher
affirms; First, Four things required to true miracles. Io. de Combis in
compend. Theolog. verit. lib. 1. ca. 20.
it must be of God; Secondly, it must be beyond nature; Thirdly, it must be
evident; Fourthly, it must be fore the corroboration of Faith: Therefore if any
of these four be wanting, it may be called a Marvel, but not a Miracle.
Therefore it is also to be known, that the Devil can do miracles, though
not true miracles, yet such miracles as to men may seem true miracles; for
Thomas Aquinas says, and that very truly, out of S. Augustine, That miracles
by art Magic are made, Aug. lib. 83. q. 79 Tom. 4. Part. 1. q. 14. q. 4. Sed
contra.
which are altogether like unto those miracles which are done by the servants
of God; which he explicateth dogmatically after this manner. If a miracle be
taken properly, the Devils cannot do miracles, nor any other creature, but
only God; because a miracle properly is termed that which is beyond the order
of any nature created. Yet sometimes in a large sense that is called a miracle
which exceeds the faculty and understanding of man, and so the devils can
do miracles; which men admire, in that they exceed their power and knowledge
For one man, when he does any thing, tha is above the power and knowledge of an
other man, he leads the other into an admiration of his work, that in some
sort he seems to do a miracle. Yet it is to be understood, that albeit such
works of Devils, which seem miracles unto us, re^ch not vnot the true nature
of miracles; they are notwithstanding sometimes true things. As when sire fell
from heaven, and with one blow consumed the family of Job, with all the
herds of his cattle, and a whirlewinde overthrew the house, Aug. 20. de
Ciuitae Dei c. 19.
slew his children, which were the works of Satan, were not fantasmes, as
Augustine says: And therefore well does Saint augustine say in an other place
speaking of the lying miracles of Antichrist, as he same Doctor notes: That
the works of Antichrist may be called signs of lying, Li. 83. q. 79. to. 4.
either because he will deceive mortal senses by phantasmes, seeming to do
that which he does not; or because that if they be true Prodigies, yet they
draw those that shall believe them to a lie. Hence the same Doctor Saint
Augustine says; Aug. li. 83. q. 79. a medio tom. 4.
That when Sorcerers do those things which Saints do, they are don for a
different end, and by a different power: for Sorcerers do them seeking their
own glory, Saints do them seeking the glory of God; Sorcerers do them by
certain private contracts; Saints do them by public administration and
command of God, unto whom all things created are subject.

3 Now therefore since seeming miracles done by the Devil, The true Catholic
church the approuer of true miracles.
exceeding the ordinary power of Nature, may deceive many, if they judge their
Doctrine by them;and for that it is hard for a man to be able to say, whether
a miracle be done by the power of almighty God, or by the power of the Devil,
because both exceed our understanding, and the ordinary course of Nature: it
stood me upon to search out some infallible means, by which I might be
assured, that they were true miracles, and such as I might confidently rely
upon. In which scrutinie I could find no better rule than to observe, whether
they be done in the Catholic Church, or no; which I do learn out of Saint
Augustine, Aug. de unit. Eccles. ca. 16.
saying; Whatsoever things of this quality are done in the Catholic Church,
Therefore they are to be approved, because they are done in the Catholic
Church, Therefore she is not manifested Catholic, because those things are
done in her. Whereby it is clear, that miracles absolutely are not a proof of
the Catholic Church, but the Catholic Church an approouer of true miracles;
whence it follows, That the miracles of the Primitive Church, were not so
much a confirmation of her truth, as her truth a confirmation of them. Whence I
observe further, That the present Church of Rome, not being the true
Catholic Church, because she teaches not the true Catholic ancient Faith,
without mixture of many novelties, does in vain all eadge miracles in her
behalf, which for that they are done out of the true Church, are to be
reckoned amongst Antichrists lying signs and prodigies: Therefore I may
pronounce confidently with S. Aug. unto the Papists; I say not that these
things are so, Aug. de unit. Eccles. ca. 16.
because such a one did such and such maruailes; but let them prove their
Church by the Canonical books of the Scripture, and by nothing else: these
are the demonstrations of our cause, Note this.
these are our foundations; these are our grounds whereupon we build. Whereby
we see Miracles excluded from being a mark of the Church, as the Cardinal
Bellarmine would feign persuade the world, that so his Roman Church might be
approved for the true Church of God. Vnapproueable therefore is the assertion
of master D. Hill, who chalengeth much unto the Roman Church by her glory of
miracles wrought by her Saints; his words are these: The tenth reason of this
quarterne.
Now it is so manifest that there have been an infinite number of miracles,
wrought by those who were of the Catholic Roman Religion, and never any by
them, who were not of that Church since Christ's time, as he who shall deny it,
may be proved no less impudent and shamlesse, than be who shall deny that
ever there was any Mass said in times past in England, or that ever there were
any wars between Turks and Christians, or that there be any such countries
as the East and West Indies, which thing if a man should deny, would he not
of all men be deemed not only impudent, but mad, drunken or afoole? In which
words because Master Doctor Hill seems much to forget himself, I must needs
refresh his memory with some few interrogatories. What master Doctor? I pray
since Christ's time, did not Simmon Magus work miracles? who as Baronius says,
Baron. an. 68. nu. 22.
made images to walk, and would lie in the fire without hurt, and fly in the
air, and make bread of stones, he could open doors fast shut, and unloose
bands of iron, and had many shadows following him, as it had been men: Will
you say he was a Roman Catholic? Tacit. lib. 4.
did not Vespasian the Emperor at Alexandria restore a blind man to sight?
will you say he was a Roman Catholic? Who be they Christ spoke of, when he
said, Matthew. 7 22.
Many will say to me in that day, Lord have we not by thy name prophesied, and
by thy name cast out devils, and by thy name done many great works, and then
will I profess to them, I never knew you, depart from me ye that work
iniquity? What, will you say that these workers of miracles, and also of
iniquity, were of your Catholic Roman religion? What think you of those Saint
Augustine speaks of, August. de unit. Eccles. cap. 16.
saying, If there be done some miracles of heretics, we ought the more to take
heed, because when the Lord had said that there should be some deceivers, who
by doing many signs, should deceive the very Elect, if it were possible, he
did add, commending it vehemently and said, behold, I have foretold it unto
you. What, will you grant all these were of the Catholic Roman religion?
August. tract. 13. in loan.
What, will you say unto the same ancient Doctor in another place where he
says, Against these miracle-mongers, as I may so call them, my God has made
me wary, saying; In the last times there shall arise false Prophets doing
signs and wonders? What, will you grant none of these to be yet come? or will
you grant them all to be of your religion? What, will you say to your
Countryman, Prompt. mor. part. aestiu. page 627. dom. 24. nu. 4.
Master Doctor Stapleton, public professor of Divinity in Louaine, and if I
mistake not, your acquaintance in Doway, who says; For the more trial of the
godly, not only Antichrist himself, and his nearest forerunners, but all
heretics also, may do true miracles, by the permission of God, as the
sorcerers may do. Will you grant such forerunners and Heretics to be of your
Catholic Roman religion? or will you say, Doctor Stapleton erreth in calling
them true miracles? or will you recant your former assertion, acknowledging
your former mistaking? and then shall I be as glad, as now I have commiseration
of your error, beseeching God, in the mean time, of his infinite mercy, that
you may see both your own error, and the errors of others of the present
Roman religion, and how different it is from the ancient Roman religion, which
in Saint Paul's days was famous through the world. For my part, I could not but
upon these and other considerations observe the Church of England to be free
from such false Prophets and Pseudochrists, that they miracles, as Christ fore
told, should deceive the very Elect, if it were possible: for neither do they
pretend themselves to work miracles, and so to hunt after their own
estimation and applause for their holiness, as the teachers of the Roman Church
do; neither do they hold it absolutely necessary that God should continue that
faith by miracles, which was formerly planted by them, but rest themselves
contented with the former of the Primitive Church, lest otherwise they should
be subject to seduction: whence I concluded to my self, that unless the
Church of Rome could prove her self to be true, Catholic, and ancient
Primitive, I ought not to be led by her pretended miracles; in regard that
Doctor Stapleton says, Heretics and the forerunners of Antichrist may do true
miracles by Gods permission, for the trial of the good: which neither my self
nor any manelse ought to believe, because Christ has armed us with a warning
caveat against them, saying; Nolite eis credere.

4 Which, Pretense of miracles a sign of false teachers. Matthew. ^4.24.
how true it is I appeal to the holy Scriptures themselves, our Saviors words
are most plain: There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets shall show
great signs and wondes, so that if it were possible, they should deceive the
very Elect; behold I have told you before, but believe them not; by which
warning, advice is given to beware of them, to discern them, and not to give
credit unto their teaching, notwithstanding all their miracles. Neither is
Saint Paul's prediction less significant of them, who remembers us, 2 Thessalonians.
2.9.
That the coming of that son of perdition, is by the working of Satan with
all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and in all deceive ableness of
unrighteousness among them that perish, because they received not the love of
the truth, Apocal cap. 13.13.14.
that they might be saved. Saint John also in his Revelations speaking of the
second beast, says; He did great wonders, so that he made fire to come down
from heaven on the earth in the fight of men, and deceived them that dwellon
the earth, by the signs which ae permitted to him to do in the sight of the
beast. Apocal. cap. 16.13.
Afterward we hear also again; that three unclean spirits like frogs, came
out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of
the mouth of the false Prophet, for they are the spirits of devils working
miracles. And moreover, lastly we find in the same book, That the beast was
taken, and with him that false Prophet, Apocal. cap. 19.20.
that wrought miracles before him, whereby he deceived them that received the
beasts mark. Now what is to be understood by powers, signs and wonders, I
will cite the words of Ioannes Vignerius, Institut. Christ. cap. 9.. 2. verse.
3. Hebr. 2. Matthew. 24.24.
who says: That miracles in the sacred Scriptures are termed, powers, signs,
wonders, and portentes: for Hebrews the second, it is said, God witnessing in
signs, and portents, and diverse powers; and Matthew the four and twentieth,
they are called prodigies, which differ thus; in that because they exceed the
faculty of nature, they are termed powers: but in that they are ordained to
the manifestation of grace, they are called signs; and for their excellency
they are termed wonders and prodigies, as it were showing things far off. So
that putting all these places together, I could not conclude otherwise then
unless I would believe these false Prophets, unless I were willing to be an
Entertenido to the son of Perdition; and be deluded most notoriously by lying
wonders; unless I would be a perpetual consort unto the frogs vamped forth of
the Dragons mouth; unless I would be wilfully deceived, as one that had
received the beasts mark; then to shake hands with the present Church of Rome,
boasting so much in her miraculous powers, signs, wonders, and prodigies; for
in the reformed Churches, I find no such illusions pretended, nor the least
danger thereof, nor any where else but in the present Roman Church.

5 By which observation, Miracles not to be expected in the latter times.
I was the rather induced to this conclusion, for that I find diverse inclining
to think it too much curiosity now that the faith is planted, and after so
long continuance, to seek it out by more miracles. Therefore first I will set
down the Doctrine of an old Dominican Friar, distinguishing the times of doing
miracles, whose words are these: The Church has a threefold state viz. Jacob.
de Vorag. de sanctis in die ascensio, ser. 6.
The Primitive, the modern, and the last. In the Primitive state, miracles
were wrought often, but now seldom; and in the last state, that is, of
Antichrist, they shall be done most seldom. In the Primitive state they were
done often, because according to Saint Chrysostom, the ancient miraracles have
admiration, profit and necessity: Therefore then according to Saint
Chrysostom, miracles were done, as well for admiration, because men being then
accustomed to their senses, were therefore to be lifted up; as for profit,
because then many were infirm and oppressed of devils; and for necessity,
because they were infidels and wrapped up in errors. But in the modern state
they are seldom done, because necessity requires them not, men being now
believers; yet sometimes they are wrought, because profit and utility exalts
them, for that sometimes men are found weak, and to stand in need of them. And
why miracles are not done now so frequently, as they were in the Primitive
Church, there is a threefold reason; one is for the strength of faith; because
now the Church is strengthened and established in faith. This reason Bernard
assigns, putting an example of the plant, into which we power water, till we
see it fastened in the earth; secondly, for the profitable example of the
world, De ciuit. Dei lib. 22.
This reason Augustine assigns, saying, whosoever requires yet wonders that
he may believe, he is a great wonder himself, who believes not when the world
believes; Thirdly, for the greater merit of faith; because, according to Saint
Gregory, faith has no merit, where humane reason provoke it: but in the end
they shall be wrought but seldom, for three reasons, that Isidorus teaches;
either that the hand of the persecutors may become more bold, or that the
patience of the Saints may be the more proved; or that the lightness may be the
more showed of those which shall fall. Who speaking here of the miracles of
Saints in these three states of time, she weth they shall be scanty in the
middle ages after Christ, and very raw in the last ages; which if it be true,
what can I do but suspect the pretended miracles of the Church of Rome, which
swarmeth with so many books replenished with their narrations, in such strange
and unheard manner as there were never the like? and therefore they easily
seem to surmount all belief, and I may more largely press those words
against those of the Church of Rome which this Author points at, saying to
all her followers out of Saint Augustine; De ciuit. Dei lib. 22.
Why, say they, are not the miracles now done, which you do preach to have
been done? I might say that before the world did believe, they were necessrie
to this end that the world might believe, but whosoever does enquire after
wonders, that he may believe, he himself is a great wonderment, who
believes not now the world does believe. By which words I observe a necessity
why men should look for miracles in the Primitive Church, but none why we
should expect them now; but rather why we should fear to be deceived by
beleeiuing false ones for true ones; and therefore Saint Augustine gives
another stronger reason to hold him in the Church, than the continuance of
miracles, saying: Contra Epi. fundamenti.
The consent of people and nations does hold me: there does hold me an
authority which was begun with miracles, nourished by hope, increased by
charity, confirmed by antiquity; by which I observe though he show the
authority of that sacred doctrine confirmed in the beginning by miracles, as a
menes to hold him, yet he speaks of no continuance of them, but leaves
confirmation to the authority of sacred doctrine it self, which must be the
strongest hold of the Churches claim. De vera relig. cap. 25.
Saint AuguStine also in another place says: Since the Catholic Church is
diffused through the whole world, and grounded, neither are these miraculous
things permitted to endure until our times, lest the mind should always seek
visible things, and by the custom of them mankind should wax cold, at the
new appearance whereof it was all on fire. Mor. lib. 27.11.
And Saint Gregory says most plainly: What marvel is it if the faith being
propagated, miracles be not often done, since even the very Apostles in many
which were already faithful, did not do them? Neither is Isidorus any whit
discordant from Saint Augustine above recited, who seems to insinuate as much
in these words; Miracles are a sign, Isidor. lib. 1. de summo bono.
not necessary for the faithful, who now have believed, but to the
unfaithful, that they may be converted; for Paul for the infidelity of not
believers, cures the father of Publius by miracles from the infirmity of an
ague: but sick Timothy, who was a faithful, not by prayer, but medicinally;
that thou may know miracles to be done, not for the unfaithful, but for the
faithful. So I find Didacus de la Vega not to swerve much from this doctrine;
Conc. quadrag. feria 4. post primam dominicam quadrag. Matthew. 12. verse. 39.
who upon these words, Generatio male and adultera signum quaerit, and signum
non dabitur ei, nisi signum Ionae Prophetae; An evil and adulterous generation
seeks a sign, but no sign shall be given unto it, save the sign of the
Prophet Jonas; says, The Scribes and Pharisees approach unto Christ, to
require signs and wonders from heaven, by the which he should show himself
the true Messiah promised in the Law: whom he reprehendeth with sharp
words, and confounds them, calling them an evil and adulterous generation:
and their demand required no milder words, but was worthy of such an
answer. For the coming of the Son of God into the world was not so hidden,
but that it was prevented many ages before, and announced by the heavenly
Oracles of the Prophets. Whereupon I observed, that if the Scribes and Pharsies
were reprehended so severely for requiring signs from heaven, because they had
Christ foretold by the Prophets; then could I not but assure my self that the
followers of the Church of Rome are worthy of as great a reprehension even of
the same nature of adulterous generation, that after the faith so long planted
and begun with miracles, and confirmed by antiquity, boast so much on their
own miracles, and strange wonders. Doctor Stapleton upon these words of
Christ: Job. 4. Prompt mor. Dom. 20. post Pent. soco 5.
Nisi signa and prodigia viderit is not creditis: Unless you see signs and
wonders, you believe not: has these words worthy of note and observation. The
ruler is checked, because that being brought up amongst the Jews, and
instructed in the Law, he would not believe by the authority of the
Scriptures, but by signs, but expect the extreme danger of his Son, that
he might see a sign. This was an incredultie almost common to all the Jews,
which in another place Christ taxes most sharply, for certain of the Scribes
and Pharisees coming unto him, and saying; Master, we will see a sign of
thee, Matthew. 12.
answering, he said unto them; Matthew. 16.
a wicked and adulterous generation asks a sign. Which words again he
answered at another time, when the Sadduces empted him in like manner; and
calls them a wicked and an adulterous generation, which seeks signs:
because they did evil in tempting God; and such an evil was this, that they
showed their souls not to be the true spouses of God by faith, but adulterous
friends of transitory things. For even as a wife which truly loves her
husband, desires not to see any extraordinary signs of her husbands love
toward her, as that her husband should as it were cast himself into the fire
or water for his wives sake; but rests contented with that true internal
love, which he carries her, and the common external signs of a husbands
love toward her: So the faithful soul, which by faith and charity is
espoused unto her God, if she be such a one, does see so many signs in her
self, the love of God so vehement and sincere, so many embracings of Gods love
toward her, so many and frequent sweetnesses from above, so many daily graces,
favors and benefits, lastly, that peace of her God which passes all
understanding, that to seek other signs for confirmation of her faith in God,
or the charity of God toward her, she esteems it not only idle, but also
most impious. For as it is an argument of chaste love to cleave only to God; so
is it the sign of an adulterous soul in slipperie things to seek external
signs. Further, as the ancient Jews were contented with the signs of their
Elders done in the desert, in the red sea, on mount Sina, Deuteronomy. 32.
in the passage of Jordan, according to that; Interroga patres tuos, and dicent
tibi; Ask thy Fathers and they will tell thee: So the Jews when Christ
teaches, and all Christians at this day, must be contented with the old
signs, either typically done before Christ's coming, of which it was not fit
the Jews should be ignorant, and chiefly the Scribes and Pharisees, and the
Princes of the people, amongst which this Ruler seems to be one, or performed
by Christ himself, which are sufficient for our faith. Therefore all this
curiosity, and show of incredulity, and fornication from God, is worthily
taxed by Christ, either in this Ruler, or in the standers by, or in both, whose
hearts he saw. By which Lobserued how worthy of reprehension of the Church of
Rome is, which, for confirmation of her doctrine, even until his day stands
still upon miracles as great, and more in number then ever before; well she may
be termed wicked and adulterous herein, if when I consider what strange, yea
and often ridiculous miracles she pretends, not only to justify falsehood,
sin, and impiety; but also by them, to commend the actors of them before all
ancient Saints.

6 Whereof I will now gentle Reader give thee a taste by some few presidents
happened in these latter ages of the world, Examples of false miracles in the
Church of Rome.
as the books and public writings of the Church of Rome have left recorded to
the world; which as they moved me to see mine own former ouer-credulous
spirit; so have they not strengthened me in the true faith, whereunto through
Gods exceeding great mercy I am now arrived. And first for the justification of
Garnets innocence in the business of the Powder Treason: what a ridiculous
invention is published, and has bin preached to the world by Costerus the
Jesuit in Bruxells, upon the report but of a bare Letter from England some few
years since, when I lived in Louaine, of a certain prodigious straw, in which
a little blood has made such a lively resemblance of his face, that as it is
by his favorers reported (and with mine own ears I have heard it) it is one
of the most stupendous miracles showing Gods love to their society that ever
happened; and therefore since, that time one M. John Wilson the Author, as is
said, of the English Martirologe, assuming unto himself Papal Jurisdiction,
has canonized him for a Saint in heaven; who was put to death for concealment
of treason against his King and Country, whilst he lived upon earth; Indeed
I must needs confess it a stupendous work, which since the first appearance
thereof in print, has assumed not only one, but diverse shapes; for first at
Louaine I saw it drawn with three horns of hair upon his head over his
forehead, so that it appeared more like a monster than a man; I saw him at
Antwerpe after that drawn without those horns; yet a star shining in the
midst of his forehead, in great glory: of which kind I saw many pictures in
paper tendered by a Iesuitesse woman, as she seemed by her habit and carriage,
to be sold as the chief pictures then in request; since that time here in
England I have seen a Latin book, in which another miracle (as it should
seem) has been added unto it, representing two Seraphines under his beard,
as it were, holding up his chinne, that men might the better behold his
glory. But besides all these transformations, one thing is most remarkable,
which I have heard reported by diverse, that is, some can see this goodly Image
at the first looking on it; others canno see it, till one of a better sight
oint where it is, and others can not behold the glory thereof at all; I have
spoken with some of those three kinds of beholders, who according to the
measure of their eye sight, have told me as much; besides, at the first, the
picture of this miracle was very small, but now it is greater, and perhaps it
will carry yet a greater shape, and be the mother of miracles, increasing to
the end of the world, and so surpass all the miracles done in Christ's time,
which were not permanent, but transitory; about which if a man should ask the
Author of Pruritanus that monstrous and athisticall libell, how so strange a
miracle could be done, he would soon no doubt answer you according to his
sacrilegious manner of applying the sacred Scriptures with the Devil: quia
scriptum est: and maiora hijs facietis. Which words Saint Augustine expounds
of the conuersions of sinners by the ministry of Preachers, because the
conversion of sinners is the greatest work of God. Now (beloved Reader) how
could I with any reason give credit to this miracle,) howsoever at the first
report I was ouer-credulous, when I observed the manner how it was carried: and
if such reverend Fathers of the christian world, will stand in defense of it,
and beknaue better men than themselves, without regard to the magistracy, as I
heard one principal Father do in Bruxels in great choler and indignation
against those that should gainsay it: I may (beloved) well call in doubt, and
enter into a jealous suspicion of many other strange miracles, devised for the
maintenance of untruth and falshoode by others of the Roman Church. Secondly, I
remember an other strange miracle, had it not proved false, for the great
credit of the Jesuits, and their holysocietie in Persia. Not long before the
discovery of the Powder treason, there was dispersed by the^ among some of their
Catholic friends here in England a little Pamphlet in the French tongue,
reporting the miraculous conversion of the King of Persia, The miracle of
Persia.
by one Campion a Jesuit and Englishman, that dispossessed one which had a
devil, who commanded the devil at his departure out of the body, to give a
sign thereof, by striking down the top of a steeple;whereupon followed the
Kings conversion, with many of the nobility to the Roman faith, with liberty
to preach it publicly, and to build up Churches and monasteries throughout all
his Dominions. Which of many here in England was believed to be true,
especially by a friend of mine, unto whom that Pamphlet was sent, who requested
me to say mass in thankesiguing to GOD for so great a benefit; but in the end,
that Jesuit who sent the Pamphlet, gave out, that it was but a thing, devised
by French Hugonets, to disgrace their society. What strange devises are these?
What hateful illusions wherewith honest sincere souls are made gulls, through
deceitfulnes and devilish policies, using all things for nothing but their own
ends; I can not but now smile at my self, to remember the plain sincerity of
my heart, in believing this pretty invention, and with how thankful a mind
I offered up the sacrifice of the Mass, with a tacit and silent wish, that
God by the like means would procure the conversion of England.

7 Thirdly, Other pretended miracles in the Church of Rome.
I will not omit here to call to mnind two strange miracles, invented to the
honor of S. Francis, that people might be the more excited to pray to him
before all others; The first I heard preached at S. James Church in Antwerpe in
the Lent time, some five years since, by a Capuchine Friar, and affirmed to be
such an evident truth, that no just exceptions might be entertaind against it,
before a great assembly and confluence of people, Of one that roasted her
child.
with many particular circumstances of place and persons, which made it carry
the more likeliehood of truth with it; and since that time, I know where it
has been related by the Provincial of the Franciscans here in England. The
story in brief is this in effect. A certain Gentlewoman there was in a town
in Sicilie, some few years since, that longing much to taste of the flesh of
her own child, and yielding foolishly by the devils suggestions to satisfy
her desire, when her husband was from home, killed her child, and cut him into
quarters; putting one part on the spit, to eat of it, and hanging the other
parts upon hooks b in the kitchen; at length the husband came home and wondered
to see what a strange piece of flesh was on the spit, asked his maid what it
was, who replying, that it was a part of his child, which his wife had killd;
he forthwith in a great rage went unto her, and threatened to kill her; whereat
she being both sorry for her son, and afraid of her husband, falling upon her
knees, entreated him for Gods sake, and the honor of S. Francis, that at least,
if she must needs die, he would give her leave to repent her sin, and to say
her prayers, commending her soul into Gods hands, and then to do his
pleasure; which he granted: and she praying very earnestly to S. Francis, to
whom she was much devoted, at length, ending her prayers, desired him to go
with her into the kitchen, and if he saw not his child alive, then to execute
his pleasure. O horrible and unheard miracle, or rather mendacium! She took
the parts of the child, as well that on the spit, which was more than half
roasted, as the rest, and put them together upon the table, and by the merits
of S. Francis, they all joined togehter, the child revived, and came to the
same state as before; so she obtained again her husbands love, and be beheld
again his dead child: S. Francis merits hereby exalted, and therefore the
conclusion must needs be unhappy, that man that will not pray to S. Francis.
Gentle reader, if you have more faith than I, you may believe this miracle, if
you be piously affected, you cannot (as the Franciscan says) but believe it,
and wholly offer up all your prayers to holiest S. Francis, the chiefest Saint
in heaven.

8 But if you cannot give credit to the former, In mag. spec. exemp. ex
chronic. minor. Gallico. lib 2 ca. 39 and Latin. lib. 10. cap. 29. and Bartholo
de Pisis li^ ^. part. 2. conformit. fructu 10.
I pray you consider the next, which, at least for morriment sake, can not but
win belief. In the time that S. Francis dwelled in the city of Engubi, there
was within the territory of the same city, a certain terrible wolf, of mighty
bigness in body, and most fierce in the rage of his hunger, that did not only
devour beasts, but also men and women, insomuch that he kept the citisens in
such fear, that when they went forth of the City, they went out armed as if
they had gone to the wars, How Saint Francis tamed a wolf.
and hardly could they so escape from being sorely bitten with his sharp teeth,
if they chanced to meet him, so that scarce durst any go alone out of the
City gates for fear of meeting him. But God determining to make manifest
unto the same Citizens the holiness of Saint Francis, when upon a time he was
in the same City, moved the Saint with a charitable compassion of their
misery and vexation to afford them help. Whereupon he purposed to go and
meet the Wolf, unto whom the Citizens said; Take heed father Francis, go
not out of the City, for if you do, the woolfe which bath devoured many,
will also devour you. But Saint Francis not dismayed with their words, but
hoping confidently in Christ's assistance, who commands the spirits of all
flesh; went forth of the City with his companion, not with buckler or
helmet, but armed and defended with the sign of the holy Cross. Thus the
holy father being confidently out of the Town, and many looking on from
such places as they had climbed up to expect the event; the terrible woolfe
eftsoons with open mouth ran to Saint Frauncis and his companion, against
whose fury the good Father opposed the sign of the Cross, and so through
Gods power, kept back the woolfe both from himself and his companion, stopped
his course, and shut his mouth, and further said unto him; Come hither
brother woolfe, and in the behalf of Christ Jesus I command thee, neither to
hurt me, nor any other. Whereupon forthwith inclining his head upon the
ground, he prostrated himself at the feet of the holy Saint, as gently as a
Lamb. To whom thus prostrate, Saint Frauncis said: Brother woolfe, thou do
much hurt in these parts, and have committed many horrible and grievous
crimes, destroying the good creatures of God without all pity or mercy, and
thou do not only destroy unreasonable Creatures, but which is a mere
madness in thee, thou do devour men who are created to the similitude and
likeness of God; therefore thou art worthy to die a most violent death like a
most notorious Thief and Murderer, for the which, all do justly exclaim and
murmr against thee, and the whole City is thy Enemy. But Brother Wolf I
will make a peace between you and them, upon condition thou hurt them no more,
and they also shall, forgiving thee all offenses, not hurt or prosecute thee,
neither shall dogs bark at thee. Which the Wolf seemed kindly to accept by
the gestures of his tail, ears, body, and inclination of his head: Unto whom
S. Francis again replied. Brother Wolf, since it pleases thee to make this
peace, I promise thee I will procure that thy expenses and necessary victuals
shall daily be given thee by the Citizens, so that hereafter thou shall never
be hungry in excess. For I know that the evil thou do proceeds from
the fury of thy hunger. But brother Wolf, since I obtain thee so great a
benefit, I will have thee promise me never to hurt either Man or Beast: do
thou promise me this? The Wolf then made an evident sign by the inclination
of his head, of promising to perform that which the Saint required, and
imposed upon him. But brother Wolf then said S. Francis, I will have thee upon
thy credit to assure me, by giving me thy faith and promise, A good jest.
that I may evidently believe what thou promisest. So S. Francis holding out
his hand for assurance of his promise, the Wolf lifted up his right fore-foot,
and very softly and gently alied it in his hand, so engaging his credit to him
by the best sign he could; then again S. Francis said, Brother Wolf I
command thee in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, now presently to go along
with me into the City without fear of hurt, to conclude this peace with thee
and the City: whose command the wolf obeyed, and accompanied him very quietly
into the City like a most mild Lamb, which put the Citizens, that saw it, in a
great wonder, and the report thereof was instantly spread over all the Town,
and all Men and Women, young and old, flocked thither where S. Francis was with
the Wolf. When the people were thus gathered together S. Francis made them an
excellent Sermon, telling them amongst other things that such vexations are
granted by God for the sins of the people, and how much more dangerous was
the consuming flame of hell, which shall everlastingly devour the damned, than
the madness of a wolf, which can but devour the body, and how dreadful it
is to be drowned in the gulf of hell, since so great a multitude of people
were so much kept in fear by the peril of one little beast. Return, return,
therefore D. B. to our Lord, do worthy penance, God will deliver you from the
present danger of the Wolf, and from the future danger of hells devouring
fire. And then said further, mark me well beloved, my brother Wolf who
stands quietly here before you, has promised me, and has also given me
assurance of his promise upon his credit, to make peace with you, and never to
hurt you in any thing, upon condition that you shall also give your promise to
maintain him; and I for my Brother Wolf will be surety, that he shall
firmly observe, and faithfully keep this covenant of peace with you; with
that all that were there cried out aloud, promising always to cherish and
feed the Wolf. And S. Francis in the presence of them all, said, and thou
brother Wolf do thou promise to hold peace with them, and that thou will
hurt neither Beast nor Person of theirs? then the Wolf made show of promising
to keep peace, by falling upon his knees, inclining his head, and other
gestures, of tail, and ears, full of blandishment; Saint Francis then said:
But brother Wolf, I will have thee now before all here present to give me
assurance of thy promise, as thou did without the gate, and that thou will
keep this peace, and that thou will not offend in the surety made. Then the
Wolf lifting up his right fore-foot, made promise in the hand of S. Francis
his surety, in the sight of all, whereupon there was such admiration and joy
of all, as well for the devotion of the Saint, as for the newness of the
miracle, as also for the peace between the Wolf and the People, that all gave
thanks unto God, praising Almighty God, who by the merits of his Saint had
delivered them from the mouth of the fierce Beast, and restored them quietness
and safety from so fearful a vexation. An honest Wolf.
Now afterward the Wolf always kept his promise, and conditions ordained by
Saint Francis, and living in the City two years, going up and down from
door to door, begging his food without hurting any, or being hurt of any,
was lovingly cherished and fed of all, and which is more strange, there never
did Dog bark at him. At length the Wolf died, and the Citizens were very
sorry for his death, because the continual sight and presence of the Wolf,
did maruailously renew in them the memory of Saint Francis virtue and
sanctity. I noted this Miracle related by such Authors, as a thing not only
ridiculous to any judicious Hearer thereof, but as also most erroneous in the
circumstances; as namely where Saint Francis tells the Wolf of his horrible
crimes committed, against Men and Beasts; and tells him further that because
he devoured men created to Gods similitude, and that therefore be was worthy
to die like a Thief, and Murderer: whereby it seems he insinuates that a
bruit beast, doing that which is natural unto him, commits sin, which can
not be sin unless it be voluntary; and that this humble Wolf was so
intelligent, as that he knew man to be created to Gods similitude and
likeness; therefore a fit miracle for Fools and Children.

9. Yet to sport you more, Other Miracles like the former. Mat. Paris. in Hen.
3.
I will tell you yet one as pretty as this, to show the power of this Roman
Canonized Saint, as well over Birds as the Wolf: I have read that Saint
Francis when his Preaching was despised by the Romans, went into the fields,
and there charged the Crows and Kites, and Pies, to listen to his doctrine,
which they did for half a day without any noise or chatting, and thus he did
for three days together. A man could not well say of these humble Auditors,
Beati qui audiunt verbum Dei, and custodiunt illud; Blessed are they that hear
the word of God and keep it. Neither will I here omit an other miracle wrought
upon one Friar Francis, a follower of the noblest Saint Francis, who
celebrating Mass found a Spider in the Challice, Conformit. Sancti Francis.
got into the blood of his Savior, and did not take him out, but drank it up
together with the blood. Who afterward rubbing his shinne-bone, and scratching
where it itched, that Spider came whole out of his leg, and did him no hurt.
O most ridiculous miracle! what could be the end of it? was it because he did
against the Rubicke of the Mass, See the Missall.
which commands the Spider to be burnt? or might not that Spider be suffered
to abide as well in the body of so holy a Friar, as in the blood of Christ? But
the Church of Rome is full of like miracles. Pretty is that which is recorded
by Gregory the Great, as the Papists say, who writes that when Pope John had
rode on the horse of a noble woman, the horse would not any more endure a woman
upon his back, no not his old Mistress; A wise horse no doubt. Now when I
considered these and many other ridiculous miracles recorded by the learned of
that Church, which neither confirm any truth, The strange example of the
Papisticall Doctor of Paris. Catechishist cap 10. tit 4 part. 2. Fr. Put. in
vita S. Pr. Joan. Nau. vo 2 Chapter 2. Gerio. 37. Laurent. Sur. 6. October. S. Ant.
1. part. tit. 5. c. 2. ff. 11.
but only tend to the glory of their Saints in simple men's judgments, I could
not but much lament at my former folly in being too credulous unto them. Yet
one I can not but relate more, because in my judgment it rather overthrows
the faith of Rome, than establishes the same; the story is this and not be
gaine-said, as the Papists hold, by any, so authentical are the proofs
thereof, done in the presence of many witnesses. There was a Doctor in Paris
much renowned and famous, as well for his doctrine as for his good exterior
life, so far forth as men could judge, who departed this world, without the
administration of Sacraments. Anno 1086
And whilst the Dirges and prayers of the dead were singing, when they were
come unto the fourth Lesson, which began Responde mihi, Answer me: the
deceased man, who lay upon the Hearse, lifted up his head a little, in such
sort, that every one there present might see him, and with a horrible and
fearful voice he cried out aloud, Iusto Dei iudicio accusatus sum, I am
accused before the just judgment of God: Which words having spoken, he laid
himself down again in his coffin. Whereat all the assistants admiring,
determined to defer his burial till the next day; when, thinking to perform
the exequies, they came again to that passage afotesaid of the office of the
dead, he suddenly rose up again, and cried out with a loud voice, saying,
Iusto Dei iudicio iudicaetus sum, that is to say, I am judged by the just
judgment of God. Whereat the assistance were stricken again into a great
admiration, and much more astonished than before, to behold so dismal and
hideous a spectacle. And although he had then declared himself to be accused
and judged by the just judgment of God, yet it was not manifest by these
words, that he had yet received sentence of damnation, insomuch, that yet it
ressed for them to interpret and hope the best; and therefore they thought it
good to defer his burial till the third day. Whereto very early the next
morning all the town flocked together, being desirous to know the event of so
strange, rare, and fearful a judgment of God: when having begun again the
office of the dead, and coming to the same passage above specified, he raised
himself up the third time, and to the great horror of all the standers by, he
said, Iusto Dei iudicio condemnatus sum; that is, I am condemned by the just
judgment of God:

Therefore Parcite funeribus, mihi nil prodesse potestis,
Heu infoelicem cur me genuere parents,
Ah miser aeternos vade damnatus ad ignes:
Which verses may well be Englished in this sense, O spare vain prayers, with
outward shows of peace,
Your Dirges yields no comfort to my soul:
Aye me accursed, from hope of joys I cease,
Gods judgments just do all your prayers control.
Why did my parents ever foster me,
A damned wretch, and hell-hound for to be?
Ah cursed me, thus to provoke Gods are,
And to be doom'de to ever lasting fire.


Who is there that cannot be astonished to hear, that a personage, who living
amongst men, was esteemed for a holy and perfect man, should be condemned by
the just judgment of God? This Doctor, by the common suffrage of the Church,
being found unworthy of Christian burial, was interred in a profane place.
But this rare miracle occasioned many to correct and amend their lives.
Whereat Bruno, with others, were so much terrified, that they framed a more
strict order than ever was before, termed Carthusians, that by the strictness
of that life they might be the better prepared for the strict judgments of
God. In the consideration of his miracle, if it were true, and no hypocritical
cunning used therein, I cannot conceive, but that it makes more against the
faith of Rome than for it; of which profession this Doctor, whilst he lived,
was reputed both to be a learned and holy Saint: For first, if he were so holy
and learned, no doubt he knew what belonged to preparation for his death: and
therefore howsoever he might be deprived of outward means, or help of the
Sacraments, yet it is to be presumed, that at least, in voto Sacramenti, he
would excite himself, as much as lay in him, to be penitent for his sins.
And it is to be thought his Holiness would not permit him to be negligent of
that which lay in his power to perform. And lastly, since there is no cause
registered of his damnation, but known only to God, he being both a professor
and teacher of the Roman faith, it may as well be presumed (so far as man,
for his souls benefit, may enter into Gods secrets) that God showed this
extraordinary judgment, to manifest to the world, that though his life was
never so good in the sight of the world, or his learning so great, yet where
true faith is wanting, no salvation can be attained, and that therefore the
Roman faith cannot be the true faith. This is the fittest collection I can
make of this miracle, because he was a Doctor professing that faith of Rome,
and lived and died therein.

11 But now I will relate another miracle which much astonished me, making me
stagger, The strange delivery of Traianes soul out of hell fabulous and most
uncertain.
and was never able to find a good answer for it, which was the strange
delivery of Traianes soul out of hell by Saint Gregory's prayers for him:
which how repugnant it is to the very true doctrine of the Roman Church it
self, is clear by that which is read in the Office of the dead, viz. Ex
inferno nulla est redemptio. Now it is to be noted, Lipeloo in vita Gregor.
magn.
that Lipeloo records it for a truth, and so it has been recorded always
by the Church of Rome; and yet of late, by Baronius and Bellarmine, it is
reputed a fabulous narration: Whereupon I infer, that if after so many ages
recording and belief, it prove but a fabulous thing, a man may as well suspect
all the rest that seem of the like nature, notwithstanding he be learned
that records them. What erroneous doctrine is to be found almost in the
Church of Rome that has not many miracles for the confirmation of it among
them, so pleasant to read, that they will sooner make a man laugh in reading
them, than give any credit at all to them. So in confirmation of the real and
substantial presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, there is a pretty tale
recorded in the life of Saint Anthony of Padua, of whom it is recorded; S.
Anton. in sum. hist. 3. p tit 24. c. 5. ff. 2.
That a certain heretic promising to be of his religion, if his Mule after
three days restraint would go and worship his God in the Eucharist, Tho. Boz
li. 14. de sig. eccles. dei, cap. 3. Laurent. Sur. to. 3. The tale of a Mule.
and refuse his prouender which he would provide for him. When the day was
come, the Mule being brought forth by his Master, and the Eucharist by Saint
Anthony, he staying himself a little, said; O thou brute beast, in the name
and power of thy Creator (whom I unworthy wretch do hold truly in my hands) I
charge and command thee, that forthwith thou come humbled before him, and do
him honor and reverence as thou can, to the end that the perverse obstinacy
of heretics may know hereby, that every creature is subject unto him, whom
the Priestly dignity daily handles upon the Altar. Which speech being ended,
the hungry beast forsook the prouender provided, which the heretic had set
before his eyes, and went forthwith unto the Sacrament, kneeled down before
it, and humbled down his head: which the people admiring, praised God, saying;
We have seen this day marvelous things: which the heretic seeing, repenting
him of his fault, abiured his heresy, and embraced the true Catholic says.
No less remarkable is that which is reported of a certain Priest that doubted
of the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, Ant. d'Ance Cat. Hist. l. 1. c. 5.
tit. 8. loan. Meff. in hor. Reg. ser. de coen. Domini.
as the Church of Rome teaches; who being devoted much to the virgin Marie,
prayed often unto her, to be delivered from this doubt: Who being one day at
Mass, the Host, before the saying of the Pater noster, was gone out of his
sight; whereof as he was in a great amazement, the virgin Marie appeared unto
him, holding her son Jesus betwixt her arms, and said unto him; This is he
whom I brought into this world, this is he whom you have consecrated, this is
he whom you have held, and touched with your hands, and showed to the people to
be adored, which you eat and drink in the Sacrament: behold here I give you
my Son, with reverence and devotion to be received of you: and so as she
presented him unto him, he changed at that instant again into the form of
bread, whom he received, and so his doubt ceased. Here you see (courteous
Reader) strange miracles alleged by the Papists, in confirmation of their
doctrine: one while the bread is unseen, then Christ and our Lady, and then
again the form of bread, another while a Mule forsaking his prouender, to
adore God in the Sacrament; whether these be not such signs, wonders, and
great prodigies as may seduce the elect, if it were possible, I leave to the
holy Ghost, to inform you the truth, saying, Nolite eis credere, believe them
not. And one more yet I will relate unto your memory, which has been wrought
of late years, and may be esteemed for a notable lie. Till. Bred. 7. Col. sac.
c. 7.
There was a certain Caluinist that married a Catholic woman (that is,
Papist) that long endeavored to induce her to hear a Caluinist Minister
preach. The wife, after she had a long time contradicted him, was at last
constrained to go, by the rigorous speeches and threatenings of her husband;
yet did she first acquaint her ghostly father there with, who advised her to
obey the commandment of her husband, and to go only once to the said
Sermon, yet with condition to go first to Confession and to the Communion. The
woman having performed the advice of her ghostly father, strengthened with the
Sacraments, went to the Sermon; and she was no sooner entered, but the Preacher
became as silent and mute as a fish, yet said at last, after a little pause,
Here is some body present that has eaten of the bread of Papists, which is
the cause that I will now give over preaching, hoping to make recompense
another time. The husband who was present, seeing the Preacher, A pretty
fiction to disgrace Caluinists.
by Gods permission, to become silent, and disabled to prosecute his matter,
for the presence of one that had received the holy Communion; who being
returned home, enquired of his wife, whether she had not received the
Communion that morning, or not, she without dissimulation answering yes, her
husband suddenly knew, that this doctrine of the Caluinists was false and
accursed, in that being placed with the light of the Sacraments of the
Catholic Church, it withered so, and came to naught: whereupon presently he
made a good fire, burned all his books to powder and ashes, and became
himself a child of the Catholic Church. In which miracle first I observe,
that the ghostly father of this woman gave her leave, for obedience to her
husband, to go to the Church of Caluinists; which, how it can hang with the
doctrine of Paul the fifths Breue, who shows it unlawful for English
Catholics to go to the Churches of Heretics, viz. of all Caluinists and
Protestants, that are so in his judgment, unless it be said, that the Church
of Rome holds one doctrine of faith lawful at one time, that is not lawful at
another time, I should be glad to be resolved. But this I observe to proceed
from Gods providence, that the inuentors of these and the like miracles for the
confirmation of their doctrine in one point, does often in some circumstance or
other show such ignorance or falsehood that discovers them, either not to
approve the matter they intend, or else runs into some other error less
tolerable, showing them most plainly to be such signs and wonders as Christ
gives a Caveat of them, Not to be believed. Many other miracles I might here
insert, but that I will not be too tedious in such idle tales, fitter to be
told amongst children as fables, than to any men of more ripe judgment; yet
are they amongst the Clergy of Rome of such account, that their Sermonists are
stuffed with them; as may be observed in Iacobus de Voragine, Johannes Meff,
Bernard de Bust. Philippus Dies, and many the like, and are held more
profitable for the people than any other manner of doctrine. Yet I observe one
thing by reading of their lives of Saints, that many miracles which were
authentical for many hundred years past, are now grown to be Apocryphal, as
may be seen by comparing the ancient lives of S. George, S. Katherine the
Queen, and others, with them, as they are of late years corrected and written
by Lipeloo, following Baronius and other writers of the same kind.

12 Now therefore to draw near my conclusion: My conclusion about miracles.
what fruit could I better gather, upon the due observation of Christ's warning
unto the world, Not to believe such miracles, than that the Church of Rome
cannot be the true Church of God, that either winketh or authoriseth infinite
numbers in the same nature as these are of, which I have already recorded out
of her own Writers: for which cause, I could not but abandon her Communion,
and fly to that Church, which like a faithful Spouse rests contented with
the former miracles where with Christ's Church was begun, and chiefly relying
upon the holy Scriptures, and the ancient doctrine of the Primitive Church.
Yet is not my opinion in this point of miracles so to be understood, as that I
do think no true miracles at all shall ever be done in the declining age of
Gods Church; but I would have it known, that my judgment is, that none are to
be believed which are pretended to be done in confirmation of new doctrines,
not taught in the Scriptures, not known to the ancient Church, because it is
most evident, that Christ has forbidden all belief of them, and therefore not
to be esteemed of otherwise, than as of illusions of Satan, wherewith to
enchant souls, and to make them believe lies in stead of truth and verities.
Oh what a misery is it to see how many simple, sincere, and ouer-credulous
Christians are cousened with these deceits and illusions of the Devil, and the
true marks of Antichrist! Let me therefore entreat thee courteous reader to
remember the predictions of these signs and wonders above mentioned,
forespoken of by Christ, S. Paul, and S. John, and not so fondly to be lead
blind-folded to the eternal destruction of thy soul by too much credulity.
Be not like the Scribes and Pharisees, seeking after signs from heaven for the
faith, least you prove one of those that are termed by Christ a wicked and
adulterous generation.

CHAP. X. Contains an observation of the great hypocrisy of false Teachers
fore-spoken of in the holy Scriptures.
AMongst the many testimonies recorded in holy Scriptures concerning false
Teachers, The hypocrisy of false teachers showed in the Scripture.
by which I might further discover the erroneous doctrine of the Church of Rome,
and make comparison of her doctrine with other reformed Churches: the next
which represented themselves, were such places as describe the dissimulation
and hypocrisy of false Teachers, and inuit men to take heed of them, and to
prevent all their dissimulations, and impostures, by which they seduce simple
souls from the knowledge of truth, and lead them by cunning art of words to
follow leasings and false Gods. This I noted first out of Christ's words,
describing the manner of Heretics coming, and giving a preventing Caveat to
take heed of them, Math. 7. verse. 15
where he said: Attendite a falsis Prophet is qui veniunt ad vos in vestimentis
ouium, intrinsecus autem sunt lupi rapaces; Beware of false Prophets, which
come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves: as if
he should say, take heed of the hypocrisy of those Prophets who seem to be
one thing, and are an other, of whom S. Paul says: Romans 16. verse. 18.
Per dulces sermones and benedictiones, seducunt corda innocentium; With fair
speech and flattering they deceive the hearts of the simple: who in another
place speaking of the heretics of latter times, says. In hipo crisi loquuntur
mendacium, 1. Tim. 4. verse. 2.
and cauteriatam habent co^scientiam; Who speake-lies through hypocrisy,
having their consciences burned with a hot iron. Further, Christ dehorreth all
from hypocrisy, when he said: Math. 5. verse. 20
Nisi abundauerit institia vestra plus quam Scribarum aut Pharisaeorum, non
intrabitis in regnum coelorum; Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of heaven.

Now how the injustice of the Pharisees was a fourfold Hypocrisy, The
Pharisees fourfold Hypocrisy.
The first consisted in external righteousness without internal, whereof
Christ speaks, saying: Vos Pharisei quod deforis est calicis, and catini
mundatis; quod autem intus est vestrum plenum est rapina and iniquitate. Stulti
nonne qui fecit quod deforis est, Luc. 11. v. 36.
etiam quod deintus est fecit? Ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the
cup, and of the platter: but the inward part is full of ravening and
wickedness. Ye Fools, did not he that made that which is without, make that
which is within also? And again, Vae vobis Scribae and Pharisaei Hipocritae;
similes estis sepulchris dealbatis, quae a foris apparent hominibus speciosa,
intus vero plena sunt ossibus mortuorum and omni spurcitia: Math. 23. v. 27.
Sic vos aforis apparet is hominibus iusti, intus autem pleni estis hipocrisi
and omni iniquitate; Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees Hipocrites: for ye
are like unto whited tombs, which appear beautiful outward, but are within
full of dead men's bones and of all filthiness. For so are ye also; for
outward ye appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy
and iniquity. Vae vobis Pharisaeis, Luc. 11. v. 42.
qui decimatis metham, and rutam, and omne olus, and preteritis iudicium and
charitatem Dei; Woe be unto you Pharisees, for ye tithe the mint and rue, and
all manner herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God: or as S. Matt.
says: Math. 23. v. 23.
Et reliquistis quae grauiora sunt legis, iudicium and misericordiam and fidem;
And leave the waightier matters of the law, as judgment and mercy and
fidelity, Math. 23. v. 3.
Quaecunque dixerint vobis, etc. Whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe
and do; but do not according to their works; for they say and do not. And
again: If you be the children of Abraham, do the works of Abraham. of the
Pharisees was vain glorious, who in all their actions of religion sought the
glory and praise of men, Christ saying: Math. 6. v. 5.
They fast and pray, Vt videantur ab hominibus; That they may be seen of men:
from all which fourfold hypocrisy, wherein consisted the unrighteousness of
the Pharisees, Christ dehorteth all Christians by a motive of heavenly bliss,
saying as before: Unless your justice abound more then the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

Hence it follows, The hypocrisy of the Church of Rome.
there may we well presume the false Prophets to be, which Christ bids us
beware of; and therefore since I observe it abundantly to appear in the
present Church of Rome, the Teachers of that Church, as false Prophets coming
unto us, are the reuenous wolves in sheepe-skinnes, whose justice does no less
abound then that of the Scribes and Pharisees, which will keep them from
entering into the Kingdom of heaven. For so long as I have been in that
Church, I have seen much external righteousness, as long prayers, much
whipping with disciplines, much fasting, many miraculous cemonies of religion,
strange mortifications, and all this without the true faith, by reason of the
many novelties crept into that Church, and without charity, the inward life of
the soul; whence it proceeds that there is much dissension amongst all
sorts, many divisions amongst the learned, many back-bitings amongst religious
persons, many wrongs and injuries offered without conscience, much violation of
moral honesty and civility, envy amongst most, detraction amongst all,
wicked life without measure, rash judgments without any consideration, lying
reports against one an other, traducing of one the others reputation, by
writings, by words, by secret complotments, and macheuillian devises without
all fear of God, or love of honesty.

Religious men are poor in the outward show of their profession, Once acertain
Capuchine said (as a Jesuit has related) when one said that the Jesuits and
his Order proceed well together that the cause was because the Jesuits desired
to have al and they desired to have nothing.
but who abound more in common than the landed Monks, and well monied
Jesuits? They are chaste in the outward vows, but many of them most lascivious
in heart, as by the one Author of the Pruritanus, may be judged of many
besides; Who more blindly obedient in outward profession, than religious men to
their Superiors, and who more rebellious or treacherous to their Princes?
Garnet, Oldcorne, and others of their ungodly society can witness this. It
carried a goodly show and face of virtue, for a certain Jesuit to confine Sir
Euerard Digbie within the compass of two chambers, carrying the resemblance of
Hell and Heaven by the outward furniture, and pictures, wherewith they were
adorned, for his spiritual exercise, and the better settling of his life in
virtue by holy contemplations. Herein appeared the garment of a sheep; but the
corruption of unrighteousness, and Pharisaicall injustice, appeared, in that
the aforesaid holy Father who lived openly in his house like a Gallant,
following his play, and other recreations, and free conversation with others in
the house, whilst the Knight was shut up in his prison to pray, and meditate
of his life past, and the world to come; and also in that not only this good
Father, not long after with this Knight his Ghostly child, were found to have
harbored in their hearts that festering corruption of the powder treason, the
memory whereof will be odious and hateful to all posterity. Herein appeared
the ravenous Wolf, so clad in a sheep garment.

When Parsons the Jesuit sent money from Rome to Master William Alablaster in
show of love and charity, Parsons notorious hypocrisy to diverse.
inuiting him to come thither, as though he would there have done him some
great favor, no man would have thought but this good father had had a heart of
true burning charity, in tendering the good of the honest Gentleman, who was
banished out of England for professing the Roman Faith: Herein appeared the
garment of a sheep: but afterward when the said Gentleman not suspecting any
guile under the cloak of a religious profession, arrived at Rome, and by the
means of this holy Father was committed to the Inquisition where he was kept
some month prisoner, upon pretense of a book which he had published with
approbation of those that were to allow of it in the Low Countries, and humble
submission thereof in his Preface to the Churches censure in all points taught
therein, like a sincere child of that Church, as then he was, and like a true
Israelite without fraud or guile: herein appeared the ravenous Wolf in a
Sheep skin. What a woluish disposition may it be thought this man bore to
his Majesty and the State, who were of a contrary religion to him, since he
appeared so cruel to one that professed the Roman says; that suffered
banishment for the same; that for zeal to that Church left the way he was in
to preferment at home, and found little charity or kindness abroad? When
the same good father further would profess great desire of the Secular Priests
good proceedings here in England; when he would compassionate other men's want
of charity in disgracing the good Fathers of his order, with some personal
imputations, saying, it was an uncharitable part for any so to discover any
man's imperfections; herein appeared the garment of a sheep. But when publicly
he read a letter from England amongst the Scholars at Rome, disclosing the
horrible sin of one William a Priest, that had many years lived too
familiarly with a Tailors wife, whereof the Tailor having notice, carried a
dagge under his cloak up and down London streets to shoot him to death, for so
sacrilegious and adulterous an act: and this, as he said, was an earnest
Appealant; at which time four of the Appealants were in Rome to prosecute the
Priests cause against the Jesuits, and M. Blackwel, of which charitable report,
I being then a Student of that College, was my self an ear-witnesse, yet
could I never since upon diligent enquiry understand any such story to be
true of any Priest in England: and therefore herein appeared the ravenous
Wolf. When Doctor Richard Smith went to Rome some few years since, to compose
some good order for the government of the secular Clergy, and freedom from
the Jesuits domineiring soueraignetie over them, that by absolute disclaiming
intercourse of consultations with them, the State might not have a just cause
to inuolue them in the true imputation of any participation with the Jesuits
practices; this religious and Christianly resolved Robert Parsons said he
desired nothing more then peace, and would not be quiet till it was made with
him; herein appeared the garment of a sheep: but when at the same time
otherwise to disgrace him, and to enclose him within the gates of the holy
Inquisition, there he and another Priest devoted unto him, presented the book
which the said Doctor writ against master Thomas Bell, into the Inquisition,
there to be examined, taxing it to contain dangerous propositions against the
Popes authority in Temporalibus, notwithstanding the whole book is written in
defense of the Roman Catholic says; herein appeared the disposition of this
ravenous wolf: but the book cleared it self, and the Author got
commendations for it.

4 Many the like testimonies of the Roman hypocrisy could I produce, which
must not be maruailed at in the members, The hypocrisy of Popes described.
since it appears more manifessly in the chief head, the Pope himself, who
is described by Saint John; Apocal. 15.11.
To have two horns like unto the Lamb, but to speak like the Dragon. Where
Lyranus says; They are like to the Lamb, that is, Christ, whose two horns
are the two Testaments. Lyra. in Apoc. 13 Primas. ibid.
And Primasius; He will endonour to make the two Testaments agreeing with the
Lamb, after the manner of the Lamb to agree with himself, yet is he said to
speak as the Dragon, because he will deceive those whom he shall seduce, by
the hypocrisy of fained truth. For he should not be like unto the Lamb, if
openly he should speak as the Dragon. Now he faineth the Lamb, that he may
invade the Lamb, that is, the body of Christ. So likewise he, whosoever he
be, that is Author of the ordinary Closse, applies the same note of
hypocrisy to the whole multitude of Antichrists consorts, when he says; They
shall feign themselves to have innocence, Gloss. ordin. ibidem.
and a pure life, and true doctrine, and the miracles which Christ had, and
gave unto his. Whereby it is apparent that not only the Bishop of Rome, but
also his precursors and consorts shall be notorious in this note and mark of
hypocrisy and dissimulation. This may seem probably apparent, if we remember
the letter that was sent by Garnet some few months before his trouble to
master Blackwell, signifying from father Aquauiua the General of the Jesuits,
that his Holiness gave order that all Catholics here in England should
behave themselves quietly and dutifully toward his Majesty, without giving
offense, or raising any tumults about matters of religion: which some thought
to have been by reason of the commotion that happened in Wales about that
time, whereof perhaps the Pope might have some inckling; yet I find that men of
farther reach, observing the success of the intended powder treason following
soon after, have observed that that letter which master Blackwell should have
spread amongst Catholics, was but a cloak of the secret designement of the
powder-day, to take away all apprehension of danger in the state, whereof it is
probably thought that both the Pope and father Aquauiua were either expressly,
or circumstantially made acquainted with that business; nay moreover my self
strongly urging against one the unlawfulness of the powder-designement, he
wished me to be silent, for it was more then probable that the Pope knew well
thereof: and in speaking against it I should but cause the Jesuits to
disaffect me and do my self no good. Hereupon I grew silent, and thought the
more then of such horrible hypocrisy, for that some reported that both the
Pope and Cardinals had spoken publicly against it, which me thought could not
hang well together without some intolerable hypocrisy; especially considering
that Greenway by the Pope was not only suffered to live in Rome, but also
exalted even before the Popes face to the dignity of being one of his
Penitentiaries appointed publikly to hear co^fessions in S. Peter's Church in
Rome, and Gerard likewise suffered to live quietly in Flanders without check
or control by any man, who made such deep protestations to one master
Buckland Priest, upon his salvation, that he had no ways notice of the
powder-designement, that as I heard the said master Buckland say, either he
must needs believe him to affirm a truth, or else that he was as great an
hypocrite and dissembler as ever lived in the world. So like are the followers
of the Roman Church to the first kind of the Pharisees hypocrisy, in
pretending outward holiness, whilst in their hearts they harbor most
detestable unrighteousness. Therefore well did Saint Bernard describe
Hypocrites, saying, that they were; Mordaces vt canes, dolosi vt vulpes,
superbi vt leones; they are biting like dogs, they are guilefull like foxes,
they are proud like lions: for such will suffer no man's reputation to be
untouched, but will tear it with their spiteful teeth; they are crafty as
foxes, which tear in pieces the sheep of the best wool, and as proud as
lions, for that they contemn all, disgrace all without regard to any man's
person or dignity.

5 Secondly, The second kind of Romish hypocrisy.
I have also observed the second kind of the Pharisees hypocrisy, to be very
abundant in the Church of Rome, which consists in a preposterous, and
defective outward holiness, breeding scrupulosity in trifles, and largenes of
conscience in matters of more moment. As for example, I find that for violating
their custom and observation upon fasting-dayes, many will be exceedingly
scandalized, but give no show of scandale-taking at the most wicked example of
the powder treason, or the traitors thereof, but rather by their silence seem
willing to approve it, and to lament only the misfortune of their desired
success. Others there are that will control and check any rash judgment
even in trifles in others, who themselves without scruple or knowledge, or
judgment, will not stick to lay the imputation of the powder treason upon
Protestants themselves, who should by Machiuillian complotments be the first
contriuers of it, to draw Papists unto it, thereby to make them the more odious
to the world. Again, the Church of Rome forbids Priests to be married,
which is lawful by the law of God: and whereas marriages betwixt kindred in the
degrees of affinity are prohibited by the law of God, they suffer and permit,
dispencing with men's consciences therein, as for example; that one brother may
marry his brothers wife, which was allowed in this kingdom by the Pope; that
the niece may marry her uncle, which has bin granted but to mean persons even
of late years in Hamp-shire, by authority granted from the Pope. What ca^ be
more preposterous the^ to make a law which God never made, and in liew thereof
to disanull an institution which God has made? Besides, the Popes themselves
suffer some of the Clergy to profess external poverty, as the poor
Capuchins, whilst themselves and others live in all pomp, iollity and
pleasure, using all coulors of holiness to enrich themselves, and to draw
treasures out of al countries to fill the Exchequer of S. Peter withal. Who
sees not most plainly that many deluded souls, whilst for the grant of
indulgences yearly to this Church and that Church, they pay round sums of
money into the Roman offices; they grow negligent in seeking pardon from God,
and so never obtain truly pardon for their sins? what shall I say of their
preposterous zeal in keeping holidaies? I often noted that the days appointed
in memory of Saints, are much more solemnly kept, then Sunday which is the
feast of their Lord and Master; and in stead of one prayer to the Father, or to
the holy Ghost, or the blessed Trinity, the children of that Church do say many
either to the virgin Mary, or to S. Francis, S. Benet, Beatus Ignatius, or some
other Saint to whom they are most peculiarly addicted. By all which examples, I
observe the Church of Rome much also to exceed in this preposterous hypocrisy,
and external holiness, without any order or rule.

6 Thirdly, The third kind of Roman hypocrisy.
I have further entered into a deep consideration of the third kind of
Pharisaicall hypocrisy, which consists more in words than in deeds, more in
shadow than in truth; Which I find without measure to abound, likewise in the
church of Rome. For the Pope himself in words caries the style of Seruus
seruorum Dei, the servant of the servants of God, which is but merely verbal;
for in effect his actions are all noted with pride, carrying the show of Lord
or Emperor rather than of a Servant; Auent. Annal. lib. 7.
who as one writes Dominus dominantium perde ac si Deus foret esse contendit;
he strives to be the lord of rulers, in as if he were God: and who sees not
this to be true that considers his challenge of soueraignetie even in
temporalls over all Emperors and Kings of the world? that beholds him carried
upon men's shoulpers? that know how he makes all Princes but his vassals to be
deprived of their kingdoms, and all dignities, whenever he thinks it
expedient, propter finem spiritualem, for a spiritual end, that is, for the
good of the Church? that has seen him attended upon by the whole College of
Cardinals? whose intolerable pry was such, that a King of France finding
him inexorable in the cause of Frederick, Math. Paris. in Henr. 3. His
Majesty's speech in the Parliament.
Recessit iratus and indignans, quod humilitatem, quam sperauerat in seruo
seruorum minime reperisset: he went away angry, and scorning not to find the
humility he hoped for in the servant of servants: well therefore may his
Majesty term him for such his pride, as he does, That three-crowned monarch,
or rather monster, who is so humble in the phrase of his Title, and so glorious
in stateliness of his Crown. In words likewise his Holiness is Vicarius
Christi; but in his actions he seems opposite to Christ; as when he takes
away Christ's blood from the lay people in the sacrament. And that holy Pope
showed himself but a bad Vicar, Balaeus in vit. Pontific. in Leo. 10.
that with a blasphemous and sacrilegious tongue called all the belief we have
of Christ, Fabulam, a fable or tale. It is a verbal matter in the Pope to be
called Petri successor, the successor of Peter: Platin. in Io. 10.
but it is a real true thing, that a Petrivestigijs discessit potestate
seculari: he swarued from Peter's steps by secular power, becoming more like
to Constantine than to Saint Peter; Bern. de consid. lib. 4.
nay rather like to Simon Magus in thr sale of holy things, than unto Simon
Peter in the free gift of them, who had neither silver nor gold, yet gave them
freely in the name of Jesus Christ. Acts 3. v. 6.
It is also a verbal matter for his Holiness to be called clauiger regni
coelorum, the porter or keykeeper of heaven gates; but it is a real thing that
he leads many into hell; in the mean while a cave at is given, that etsi
innumerabiles sectum animas due at ad infernum, nemo tamen illum iudicet: Dift.
40. si Papa.
although he lead innumerable souls with him to hell, yet none judges him.
No man may presume to say unto him, Curita facis? Why do thou so? It is but a
verbal thing which Casuists teach when they say, Em. Sa. verbo litterae 1.
Literas alienas aperire and legere mortale est, nisi sit scribentis superior,
It is a mortal sin to read and open other men's letters, unless he be
superior to him that writes them. But it was more than verbal, when a devoted
follower of the Jesuits went to the master of the Posts in Bruxells, and
there paid for a Packet of Letters, sent to a Benedictin Monk out of Spain,
pretending that he was his friend, and affirming, that he would see them safly
deliuerd to the party to whom they were directed: yet first he was so friendly
unto him, that he opened the packet of Letters; went and showed them to the
Jesuit Legier in Bruxells; and when all was done, caused them by the help and
light hand of a trusty Iesuited Lady, cunning both in opening and sealing,
enclosed them up again so artificially, excepting one which was of greatest
importance that miscarried; and yet by gulling a fourth person, sent them at
length to the honest Moncke, to whom they were directed. Is not this very
courteous charity in the religious Jesuit toward his religious brother of an
other Order, professing with him the like evangelical Councels of perfection?
this is no hypocrisy, but courtesy. This is but kind charity, to pay for an
other man's letters, and to send them to the owner, without suffering him to pay
postage: to take away one letter of most weight, whereupon the whole business of
the Benedictins affairs written from their Provincial in Spain, belike with
them is but a part of friendship, nam amicorum omnia sunt communia; all things
are common amongst friends. Fie upon this holiness of such a religions
professor of Evangelical perfection, thus peremptorily to intrude himself
into his brothers secrets, thus uncharitably to abuse the love of his friends
good natures, as to make them instruments of so unchristian inciuilitie; and so
wickedly against all justice and right reason to put the poor Monk to write
again into Spain to his General, before he could proceed in the affairs of
his Order: a good Machiauillian trick to take advantage of time; but certes no
man can hold it an honest part in a religious man. Many presidents of this
kind of Pharisaicall hypocrisy might be alleged, but that I delight not to
make long stay in the relation or thinking of such impieties.

7 Lastly, The fourth kind of Romish hypocrisy.
the fourth kind of Pharisaicall hypocrisy which I observe to abound in the
church of Rome, consists in seeking the praise and glory of man; for from
what source can it proceed that the Pope should so ambitiously hunt after the
supreme loueraignetie over all Clergymen and Kings, but the vain desire of
his own glory and greatness in this world which all men should admire and
praise? what should cause the Jesuits more than other religious to seek the
government of the secular Priests in the Colleges, but the glory of
themselves, or the insatiable desire of praise, as men that would be thought
the chief and strongest pillars of the Catholic Roman faith in England?
what sense or reason can move them, if they had any care of their own body and
corporation to meddle in such a corporation, as is distinct from theirs, and in
no points of Evangelical perfection agreeing with them? But such is the
providence of God, permitting their busy heads to be troubled so much with
other men's affairs, that they loose all spirit of their pretended religious
perfections, and setting still other men together at variance for their own
vaineglorious designements, they neglect the care of their own profession,
hinder others, and breed a confusion in their whole Church of divided
affections, which at last may be hoped will cause the utter ruin and
desolation of the Papacy, that so the truth may prevail, and the tyranny of
Antichrist come to an end, notwithstanding all their goodly pretenses of doing
all things, Ad maiorem Dei gloriam: which every good Christian aymeth at as well
as they. Now therefore of such hypocrites we may say with good reason: It were
behouefull that these dregs of men were cut off and burnt, that with their
filth they should no longer defile Gods service: Polidor. Virgil. invent. l. 7.
c. 5.
as Polidore Virgil said of others, pretending the same Evangelical
perfection, and much greater than these do.

8 Now the due observation of this Pharisaicall hypocrisy, The Roman
hypocrisy a good inducement to make any man abandon that Church.
not to abound any where so much as in the Church of Rome, seemed unto me as a
most probable argument to induce me to relinquish all society with her and her
teachers, whereof my self was one; for if Christ bad beware of them, I should
have been too disobedient to his command, if I should any longer have stayed
my-selfe in the communion of their Church; when I considered many Vas and woes
pronounced by the Son of God to fall upon all kind of hypocritical
Pharisees, I could not but conceive a great danger in staying longer with them
in the participation of their Sacraments, and in the doctrine of their Belief,
which I found to be so much replenished, both with doctrine and works of
hypocrisy, that I may truly say of the most esteemed of the Church of Rome,
as a Doctor of Paris, who lived two hundred years since, Hemang de stat.
eccles. p. 53.
spoke of Friars, saying; They are worse than the Pharisees, ravenous wolves in
sheep clothing, who in words pretend the forsaking of the world, and in
deeds with all possible fraud, deceit and lying hunt after it. The like unto
these did Saint John Baptist call Genimina viperarum, the brood of Vipers,
Matthew. 3.
because inwardly they carried poison howsoever outwardly they glistered in the
vanity of virtues, and perfect zeal. And Job seems prettily to describe them
saying, Job. 39.
Penna struthionis similis est Herodii and accipitris, the hawke and storke
surpass other birds in the speed of their wings, unto which the Struthio is
like in feathers, Herodius.
but not in flight, because they can but move their wings to fly, yet never
fly; even such do I find to be the false prophets of the Church of Rome, who
by diverse external actions seem to have their wings raised to fly, yet with
their heart and soul they cleave to the earth, they forsakenot the world, taste
only terrene things; there are like fishes swimming in their uncleanness, Wolves
in their malice, Foxes in their craftines, birds in their vaineglorie, yet
do they transfigure themselves into the Angels of Light; dissembling
mortification, 2. Tim. 3.
to deceive the simple, and under the pretense of piety to take their prey;
whom the holy Apostle Saint Paul calls, Voluptatum amatores, magis quam Dei,
habentes speciem quidem pietatis, virtutem autem eius abnegantes: lovers of
pleasures more than of GOD, having the show of piety, but denying the power
thereof: and therefore to be avoided, and wariness to be taken of them, as
Christ himself forewarned.

CHAP. XI. Contains an observation of the fruits by which false prophets are
to be known and discerned.
BY the former observation of the false prophets hypocrisy, A way for Papists
to discover the truth.
which Christ teaches to be avoided, I have in some sort been induced to
behold the false pretended catholic religion of the Church of Rome, and to
conceive what a zealous detestation a man of understanding ought to have of
that faith and religion which is taught by such hypocritical teachers; yet
when I considered further more particularly the means, which in the judgment
of Papists themselves our Savior teaches every man to use for the discovery
of them, much more have I beheld the corruption of the Roman religion, and
been moved to beartier repentance and greater commiseration of poor seduced
Popists here in England, who in a good sincerity and erroneous assurance of
their religion, are ignorantly led by many of their teachers, into a wonderful
blind obedience, not only to the temporal detriment of their states and
fortunes, and hazard of worldly means for their posterities, but also which is
worse, to the great perrill of their souls everlasting ruin and destruction;
for whose good also I have thought good to give them some means of redress,
by explicating unto them the means discovered by Christ, wherewith they might
help themselves, as also the manner of my proceeding in the consideration of
this point.

2 In my scrutinie therefore and search into the truth of religion and
discovery of falshoode, False prophets to be discovered by their fruits.
I conceived nothing more important for the better success in my business,
than to observe out of the Scriptures some probable way and means allowed of
by the Papists themselves, by the which I might clearly distinguish betwixt
false and true teachers, for that I perceived, that al pretend truth, pretend
the church pretend Christ, pretend the salvation of souls, pretend the
knowledge of Scriptures, yea and the falsest teachers carry the outward
appearance likewise of good shepherds. And I found that Christ, who forewarned
us to beware of the bad, has also given us advise to hearken unto the good;
and withalll, a good instruction, even in the judgment of the Romanists, how
to discern and distinguish the one from the other, Matthew. 7.
when he said; By their fruits you shall know them: do men gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree yields good fruit,
and the evil tree yields evil fruits. A good tree cannot yield evil
fruits, neither can an evil tree yield good fruits, Doctor Stapletons
explication of Christ's meaning.
every tree that yields not good fruits shall be cut down and shall be cast
into the fire: Therefore by their fruits you shall know them.

3 For D. Stapleton a principal Romanist has thus interpreted our Saviors
speech, saying; In this place the fruits by which heretics must be known,
are neither some true things which they teach, neither are they always the
works which they do, whether good or evil, but they are partly the
heretical doctrines themselves, which are false and impious which are proper
to every heretic, and of every arch-heretike properly invented; partly also
certain ill works proper to heretics, and growing forth from the root it
self of heresy: for such are their own proper fruits as have their own
Authors and Parents.

4 Concerning the first, Two ways heretics may be known by their doctrine.
Ibid.
The faithful people may two ways know heretics from their own doctrines,
as by their proper fruits; first by their doctrine generally received, namely,
as if it be new and unheard, and otherwise than by the known rule of faith,
which anciently they received, for so the Scripture exhorts faithful people,
when she gives warning to beware of heretics; saying: If any shall
euangelize unto you otherwise than you have received, let him be accursed. An
other way by their false dostrine, an heretic is known as by his own
fruit, when by the doctrine it self evil works are engendered, or when the
doctrine it self leads men unto wickedness of life and manners, as at this
day very many doctrines of other herotickes do.

5 Concerning the latter, the evil works proper to heretics, and by which
they may be known, as by their own proper fruits, How here tikes may be known
by their works
are a certain pride not vulgar, but especial, against the present, and all
ancient Doctors of the Church. Likewise an hatred not of this man or of that
man, but of the whole Church, or truly of her superiors, pertinacie, anuy,
inobedience, ambition, covetousness, and a singular kind of hypocrisy. And
further, which uses to issue out of these-spoile and destructions of Churches,
subversion of kingdoms and commonwealths, the dissolution of the whole
people. These fruits of Heretics the Scripture teaches, and all antiquity
has observed. So the Anostle; there shall be men loving themselves, hautie,
proud, and having the show of piety, 2. Tim. 3.
but denying all the power thereof; that is, the Gospel in their mouth charity
in their tongue, hatred of the Church in their heart, sacriledges in their
deeds, pride in their breast. Again; Romans 16.
not serving the Lord, but their belly, by sweet speeches they seduce the
hearts of innocents. 2. Cor. 11.
And again, such false Apostles are crafty worke-men, transfiguring
themselves into the Apostles of Christ. 1. Tim 4.
So unto Timothy, certain shall depart from the faith, attending to the
spirits of error, and doctrines of devils speaking a lie in hypocrisy. 2. Pet.
2.
Further, Peter; They shall make merchandise of you in covetousness with
fained words. And lastly, Titus 1.
Paul unto Titus; Teaching the things which behooue not for filthy lucres
sake. By these fruits, wolves are known under the garments of sheep, and
heretics under the title of the Ministers of the Word. De vtil. credendi, cap.
1.
Therefore Augustine defines an Heretic thus; An Heretic is he, that either
begets or follows false and new opinions, for temporal commodity, and
chiefly for glory and dominion sake. For every Heretic forsakes the unity
and faith of the Catholic Church, either for temporal commodity, or to get
the praise of his name. By all which we see these words of our Savior
explicated not by any, but such a one as in all things favors the Roman
church, to point out the right way to judge false teachers by: all which the
more I duly observed, the more did I find just cause to forsake the Church of
Rome, and to abandon all longer communion therewith.

6 For first concerning their doctrines, The Bishops of Rome have been authors
of many false doctrines. Sess. 24. Can. 3.
I have found the Bishops of the Church of Rome to have been the authors of
many erroneous novelties. For Pius Quartus decreed at Trent that it should be
lawful for him to allow those degrees to marry together, which God in
Leuiticus had forbidden, and to forbid those which God had allowed; this was ex
Cathedra an heretical decree; who can excuse it? but this was not his heresy
alone, for against true faith and belief many Popes have taught the like
marriages. Summa Angelica verbo Papa. nu. 1.
Martine the fifth allowed one to keep in marriage his own sister. Of late
years another Pope allowed King Henry the eighth to marry his brothers wife,
in which case of affinity Ioannes Viguerius teaches that the Pope has no
lawful power to dispe^ce. And another Pope taught Emmanuel King of Portugale to
marry two sisters. By which dispensations and doctrine, Osor de gest. Eman.
lib. 2.
I perceived both heresy to be taught by Popes and to be practiced.

Celestine Pope ordained marriage to be void, Hadrian. quod. lib. 6. page 34.
when either of the parties fall into herefie. Pope Steven the sixth decreed in
a Council that such as were ordained Bishops by Pope Formosus his
predecessor, were not lawfully ordained, Sigebert. chron. an. 902. Sigon. de
Reg. Jtal. lib. 6. an. 896. Baron. an. 897. nu. 6. b de consecrat. d. 4. a
quodam. 32.77. quod proposuisti. Ibid.. sed illud Ambr. Council. Senens. apud
Baron. an. 303 nu. 89. Caranza in Marcel. Tom. 2. an. 302. nu. 102. Athanas.
epist. ad solitar. fas. tem. an. 353. Baron. an. 357. number. 43.44.
because Formosus was an evil man: which tastes flat Donatisme. Pope Nicholas
decreed that to Baptize only in the name of Christ, is good Baptism,
contrary to the decrees of Gregory and Pelagius. Pope Gregory decreed that a
man might take another wife, in case his wife were so diseased, that she would
not yield him the debt of marriage, the which says Gratian is contrary to the
sacred Canons, and to the doctrine of the Apostles and Evangelists. Marcellinus
committed idolatry, and offered sacrifice to Jupiter, Saturn, Hercules, and
the Pagan gods, and was thereupon examined, and condemned by a Council of
three hundred Bishops. Which story Baronius confesses was from the
beginning believed with a general consent, and kept in the ancient
Martirologies and Breuiaries of the Roman Church. Liberius who was Pope about
the year three hundred and fifty, fell into Arianisme, subscribing to the
unjust condemnation of Athanasius, whereupon Athanasius fell from his
community, and himself as an obstinate Heretic, was deposed and cast out of
the Church. Honorius the first, that was Pope in the year 626. was a
Monotholite Heretic, whose heresy was, that Christ had but one will, and so
withal but one nature: for the which the Church condemned him in three
general Councels; In which matter Caius against Pighius says: Synod 6. act
4.12.13. Synod. 7. act. vlt. Synod. 8. act. 7.
How can Pighius clear him, whom Psellus, Tharasius, Theodorus with his
Council at Jerusalem, L^^. live. (...) p. ^lt.
Epiphanius and Pope Adrian affirm to have been an Heretic. And Dominicus
Bannes deriding Pighius, calls it a jest, that now after nine hundred years
Pighius can find all those wickednesses to be forgers. 22. Page 91.
I have read that in the year 1408. in the Council of P^sa, consisting of a
chousand Divines and Lawyers, they were feign to depose two Popes at once,
Gregory the twelfth and Benet the thirteenth, ^hcodor ^^c. meas. de (...) sum.
hist (...) 3 (...) cap ^. 3. (...) Atten. vbi supra cap. 6. 2. Sess. 11.12.
the tenours of whose deprivation calls them; Notorious Scismatikes, obstinate
maintainers of Seism? Heretics departed from the faith, scandalizing the whole
Church, unworthy the Papacy cut off from the Church. (...) Benet continued
Pope still for all this, a second Council holden at Constance deposed him
again, and declared that he had no right to the Papacy, commanding all men to
esteem him as an Heretic, and Scismatike. The same Council deposed also
another Pope for heresy, namely, John the three and twentieth, against whom it
was proved, that he held and defended as his judgment, that there is no
eternal life, Bian page 1384. Sess. 34.
nor no immortality of the soul, nor resurrection of the dead. Not long after
the Council of Basil deposed Eugenius the fourth, See AEn. Silu. q^aest Council
Basil. lib. 2. apud Fascir. expetend. page 20. and inde.
Declaring him to be a rebel against the sacred Canons a notable disturber and
scandalizer of the peace, and unity of the Church, a Simonist, a perjured
wretch, incorrigible, a Scismatike, an obstinate Heretic. By which exampics of
Popes teaching false doctrines against faith, and notable heresies, I observed
the Church of Rome to have been clearly deciphered, having such false prophets
and teachers, as Christ speaks of, easy to be discerned by the fruits of
their doctrines, either taught, or professed, or both. And so this way of
judging Heretics by their doctrine, makes exceedingly against the Roman
Clergy, especially when I reflect upon all the novelties taught and confirmed
even by Popes approving them, as concerning the prohibition of Priests
marriages, the tolleration of the Stews and Brothelhouses in Rome and other
places; adoration of the Eucharist, with the worship of Latria; with many
others which I have before in the ninth Chapter showed not to be ancient, and
consequently heretical, because they are new, and aftercome into the Church.

7 Again, The corrupt and rotten fruits of Romish doctrine.
when I considered further the second way to judge of false prophets by the
Church of Rome, as Stapleton teaches, by the proper fruits of their doctrine,
I found also by this way the fruits of Roman teachers to be most corrupt and
rotten, issuing forth of their doctrine; for what proceeds from their
dogmaticall teaching the lawfulness of the Stews tolleration, but too
vnrefrained a license and liberty of sinning to all that are loosely affected?
What greater incentiue to sin can there be for lascivious persons, then
assurance of place and persons, where conueniencie and consent may assuredly
be expected? Or what greater occasion to young persons prodigally to spend
their temporal substance, and ruin their souls, then grant of such open
passage to si^? What can more encourage poor minds to be dishonest, then
permission to get themselves livings by dishonestie? As also what can more
demonstrate the Popes covetousness and insatiable avarice, then the permission
of such offenders paying yearly tribute unto him for the free exercise of all
filthy abominations?

Again, what proceeds from the prohibition of Priests marriage, but infinite
and almost innumerable sins against nature, as bestialitie, Sodomie,
unnatural euacuations, Incest, adultery, fornication, sacriledges, and a
thousand other abominations, which abound in the present Church of Rome,
whilst that lawful wedlock, and honorable bed which Saint Paul calls
undefiled, may not be permitted, nor commended, without imputation of
incontinencie, sacrilege, and filthy pollution, which is truly the doctrine of
Devils, as Saint Paul terms it. I omit to speak how many virgins have been
defloured, how many matrons dishonored, how many monastcries perverted, how
many good husbands wronged, how many widows abused, how many wilful
abortments, how many slaughters of children, and other foul abominations
committed by unmarried Priests; therefore though chastity and single life are
both highly commendable and profitable to him that has the gift to live so,
yet the restraint thereof has more disgraced the Church of God, then almost
any one point whatsoever, making even sacred things to appear to the world
deformed and full of such blemishes as will never be taken away. I have observed
further also that the doctrine of pardons, for the release of temporal pains
due to finnes, either in this life or in Purgatory, annexed unto grains,
meddals, crosses, rings, and the like paltry things, which is a doctrine most
current in the Church of Rome, does serve for the root and offpring of much
covetousness and avarice, of much loss of time unprofitably; of simony in
selling Masses, which are counted sacred things, for money; of neglecting to
pray for the living, while so many dirges, masses, funerals, trentals, and
Aniuersaries are said for the dead without fruit or profit; nay how far did
Pope Gregory, Lipeloo. in vita Greg. Mag.
styled the Great, proceed in the vanity of this doctrine, whilst he prayed
not for deceased Christians only, but for a damned Pagan? who, as it is
fabulously written in his life, and has passed current these many hundred
years, delivered the soul of Traian the Emperor out of hell fire by his
prayers, which has hitherto been obtruded unto the Christian world for an
especial favor showed by God unto that Pope, which shall never be showed unto
any other. Be not these goodly illusions of the world, and most abominable
abuses of religion, grown up in the Church of Rome, enameled with zealous and
charitable pretenses? whilst such tales must set forth this Popes worth, and
be believed, and the holy Scriptures teaching no remission after this life must
not be of any credit at all? I have noted many evil branches to rise out also
from another root of their doctrine, which co^fisteth in teaching men to pray
to Saints; how much Gods glory thereby is taken from him, is apparent to any
man of experience and travel, who has seen and observed how much the outward
solemnities of Saints days do excel the solemnities of Sundaies which are the
feasts of the Son of God; that has observed many more Churches dedicated to
the^ then to God himself; that has noted the ordinary common prayer of laymen
to be called our Ladies office; whilst they have none at all made in honor of
the holy Trinity, or of the Father or the Son, only a short one they have in
honor of the holy ghost, and another of the cross, yet not free from
superstition and idolatry, whilst they pray: Officium sanctae crucis ad Mat.
By the sign of the cresse to be delivered from their enemies; whilst they
attribute the victory Christ got upon the cross to the cross it self, saying.
O victory of the cross, and admirable sign, cause us to hold our triumph in
the heavenly court. Again, Antipho.
By a tree we were made bond-me^ and by the holy cross we are set free; The
fruit of the tree seduced us, the Son of God redeemed us. And again, O
blessed cross, etc. sweet wood, sweet nails, etc. Antipho ad noc.
Again, O venerable cross which have brought salvation to wretches, by what
praise shall I extol thee: for that thou have prepared unto us thy heavenly
life. Again speaking to Christ, By thy holy cross thou have redeemed the
world, etc. Al which in my judgment seemed very derogatory to Gods glory; as
te^ding to a divine worship of the creature for the Son of God. And thus in
their excessive devotions to Saints and creatures, they have little feeling or
understanding of the true love and devotion they should feel and show to their
Creator.

8 When moreover I consider how the Church of Rome freeth the Clergy from true
obedience to temporal Princes, Other insta^ces of the corrupt fruits of Romish
doctrine.
by their immunity it prete^deth they enjoy even by Gods law, and great
privileges freeing from civil courts and government; I find here an open gap
made to al busy heads, and tumultuous spirits to say and think, and do what
they list against the sacred authority of Kings and Princes confirmed by God
himself; But withal when I add the doctrine now so much taught in the Church
of Rome by her false prophets, viz. that the Pope has power and
ecclesiastical authority from God, for the good of the Church, to depose
Emperors, Kings, and Princes from their regal dignities, and kingdoms, in the
execution whereof the Pope himself as the head of Christianity will be the
chief judge and commander in his own cause, I find all the walls and defenses
of security for Kings shaken to the ground; and doors let open to the wicked
intentions and designme^ts of factious spirits to plot against Kings, and to
subvert kingdoms with liberty of conscience, free from all scruple or remorse.
Hence and from no other spring arises so much contempt in the Roman clergy of
Kings, that they care not how irreverently they speak against them, their
Magistrates and officers, and others, as they list; some will not stick to say
that Priests are not subjects to Kings, nor are bound to give answer truly to
the temporal Magistrates, or Bishops, here in England further then they
please. Others will make no scruple to say, that they may lawfully without sin,
if they can free themselves from being apprehended, resist, yea and kill his
Pursuiuants in defense of themselves, though others approving also the same
doctrine, more mild and moderate, will say it is better and a greater act of
perfection, to let themselves be apprehended, then so to resist, as also
because it may prove scandalous: but in conclusion all hold it lawful, and all
teach it; and their ground is natural est vim vi repellere, it is a natural
thing to repel force by force, as also because no temporal or civil
authority is sufficiently valued against the Priests of the Roman Church. I
will not relate what liberty the Roman doctrine against Princes gives to
saucy subjects to speak what they list, and to report such things against our
late deceased Queen, and his Majesty now raining, as are odious even unto
men's minds to think of; my heart trembles to remember what horrible crimes I
have heard them charged with, and no modest Christian would ever open his
mouth, or give ear unto them: the disgust that such speeches have given me, is
far greater then I can express, because all the world knows them to be most
hateful lies and calumniations, which only could be suggested by the devil
who is father of all lies and untruths, and master of such Heretics as the
Apostle Judas describes, Epist. Judae verse. 8.
dominatione^ spernunt, despise power: but no marvel if men yield to such
suggestio^s of the devil, since experience teaches, that this doctrine of the
Popes supereminent power has stirred many, not only to speak, but also to
attempt diverse treacherous and rebellious enterprises against the late Queen
deceased, and much more horrible against his Majesty and al his roial Progeny,
without all mercy either to friend or foe, as the discovery of the powder
treason, plotted and designed by diverse giddy and inconsiderat heads,
associated with some of the society of Jesus has of late made manifest to the
world; nay which is more odious, such as are (as they think themselves)
religiously affected to the society of Jesus, Joan. Wilson. in mart. Anglica.
have not sticked to make some of the abetters of that hateful co^spiracy
martyrs of the Roman Church, as namely, Garnet and Ouldcorne; whereas it is well
known, as the right Honorable the Earl of Northhampton shows, My Lord of
Northhampton in his speech to Garnet.
Garnet was not called to the bar for any matter of conscience, as some
perhaps may publish out of rancor or peruersity of heart, to set a fair gloss
upon the ground of his profession; and proves it many ways by diverse
presidents of favor, and therefore well might he say to Garnet as he did,
foreseeing how his fellows would be ready to canonize him; In the same speech.
S. Augustine speaks of some hotheaded fellows in his time, that not
withstanding their life led in this world more latronu^, like thieves, yet in
their ends affected cultum and honorem martyrum, the service and honor of
martyrs: among whom I shall ever rank with just cause these powder-men. But
this proceeds as many other actions of disalleagia^ce do from no other ground
then from that noted doctrine of the Popes illimited power and tra^scendent
authority in civil matters over Kings which he challenges; when Card. Bellar
in his book against D. Barkley, Note this in Bell.
goes so far that contrary to his former doctrine he teaches now that the
Apostles were not subject to civil power, de iure, but de facto. Whereby we may
see in time into what a gulf and ocean of errors the doctrine of Rome, if it
be not prude^tly prevented, will drown the world in; which principally carries
the clergy upon a higher wave of pride then any, in so much that the L. of
Northamp. out of the multiplicity of his reading, In his speech to Garnet.
most prude^tly notes, that by the course and recourse of times and accidents
wise men observe that very seldom has any mischievous attempt been undertaken
for disturbance of a state without the counsel and assistance of a Priest, in
the first, in the middle, or last act of the tragedy; and that all along with
such a a chorus of confedraes, to entertain the Stage, whiles the lives hnd
fortunes of great Princes, being set upon the tenter-hookes, aue put all in
hazard. Which observation I would wish that all Priests would diligently mark,
and then doubtless they would be careful of their own reputations, and be
more reverently affected to higher powers than they are, as it gladdeth me to
see some have been of late, as Master Blackwell, Master Warmington in his
moderate defense, and others, whose good examples I heartily wish many more may
embrace and follow, not doubting but God by such beginnings may draw them so
from step to step, as perfectly to see and discover the erroneous doctrines of
the Church of Rome, as well in other points of doctrine, as in that of the
Popes pretended authority over Princes in temporalls, as he has drawn
lately, master Sheldon a prisoner for the Roman faith, and my self, though no
prisoner, as I hope for our souls everlasting good, so also for the future
benefit of many others, and the fuller accomplishments of his more merciful
designements to others thereby, who doubtless will so do, if we by our
ingratitude and forgetfulness of so rich a benefit provoke not his
indignation against us, by evil conversation, and bad carriage of our lives,
as others have done before us, to the advantage of those whose communion they
forsook, and disgrace of them to whose congregations they were conjoined.
Which doubtless we may do, if beholding the abominations of the Church of
Romes corruptions, we consider them rather with a mind to reform our own
faults, and to draw others from them, than to lay any disgraceful imputation
upon others, further than to demonstrate the naughtiness of the tree by the
naughty leaves, flowers and fruits that grow forth from it; which in very
truth is the only cause why I have so far entered into this discourse,
because Christ says; According to Doctor Stapletons rule.
Ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis cos: by their fruits ye shall know them. Now
therefore since out of the fruits of the Roman doctrine, I find the teachers
thereof to be such as Christ bids us beware of, I must say, Father, I have
sinued against heaven and against earth; and therefore with humble
acknowledgement of my faults desire, that I may again be received into his
favor.

9 Now it rests that I make trial of the Roman teachers by the fruits of
their lives, to see whether by them also they can be found such as Christ
speaks of to be avoided; Other fruits of the Roman Church.
and albeit I have already in the former chapter alleged much in declaration
of their hypocrisy, it is here not amiss to consider also somewhat of other
their fruits. And first to begin with Ambition and Bribery, I find that
Platina on Damasus 2. notes, that the custom grew that any ambitious fellow
might invade S. Peter's seat: and that of Boniface 8. the saying was, T^latin.
in vita Damas.
That he entered like a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and died like a Dog. Vita
Bonis. 8.
I find also that Johannes Saresburiensis observed long ago, that It passed
striving for the Popedom, they fought for it, ambitious men entered into the
holy place, Pol. lib. 8. cap. 23
not without their Brothers blood. I sinde further, that Platina speaking of
the coming of Siluester 3. to the Popedom says, Vita Siluest. 3.
At that time it came to pass, that he which most preuaild not in learning
ning and holy life, but in Aribery and Ambition, even he alone obtained the
Papacy: good men being oppressed and rejected. I find also, that Caesar
Baronius entreating of the Popes that succeeded in the ninth age, tells how
about the 908. Theodora a noble woman, but a notable strumpet, of great beauty
and excellent wit, by keeping company with Adelbert the Marquess of Tuscia, by
whom also she had certain daughters, Anno 908. nu. 6.
got the monarchy of the City into her hands, and prostituting her daughters
unto the Popes inuaders of the Apostolic Sea, and to the Marquesses of Tuscia,
thereby the command of those strumpets so increased, that at their pleasure
they removed the Popes that were lawfully created, and thrust violent and
mischievous men into their room. Anno 912. nu. 8
I also find moreover, that the famous Ecclesiastical Writer makes great
complaint, for the miserable face of the church at that time, saying; How
filthy was the face of the Roman Church then, when most powerful, and withal,
most sordid whores bare all the sway at Rome? at whose lust Seas were changed,
Bishops were given; and that which is horrible and not to be uttered, whose
lovers, the false Popes, were thrust into the seat of Peter, which were not to
be written in the Cathologue of the Roman Bishops, but for the noting of such
times. For who may say they were lawful Popes, which were thus without right
thrust in by such strumpets? No where we find any mention of Clergy choosing or
giving consent afterward: all Canons were put to silence, the Pontifical
decrees were choked, ancient traditions proscribed, and the old customs,
sacred rites, and former use in choosing the high Bishop utterly extinguished:
thus had lust gotten every thing to it own hand. By whose complaint I
observed not only the lasciviousness of those Popes, but also that there were
no right Popes, no continued succession of chief bishops, which is one of the
strongest grounds the teachers of Rome do build upon, nor consequently no
visible head of the Church upon earth; for that this abuse continued almost
200. years together. discontinuance of time, Sigon. de reg. Ital. an. 1046.
lib. 8.
and unlawfulness of entrance, interrupting the succession which the Church of
Rome most insolently braggeth of. I find diverse examples recorded by good
Writers of such Apostaticall Popes as show they were false teachers, even by
the confession of such Writers as are highly esteemed in the Church of Rome.
Who knows not that Benet the ninth was a child about ten years old? Baron
an. 103. Baron. an. 955. number. 2.3. Plat. and Baron. ann. 908. nu. 1. Baron. an.
912. number. 7. Baron. an. 928.
That John the thirteenth was a mad lad eighteen years old at the most? That
Sergius the third entered violently, casting out his predecessor Christopher,
imprisoning him with bands till he drove him to turn Friar, and so to end his
days? John the eleventh was created Pope by Theodora, and violently intruded
for his filthy love. Afterward her daughter Marozia by force of arms expelled
him, and caused him to be imprisoned, where he was smothered to death. Baron.
an 928. number. 2. Baron. an. 931. number. 1.
Leo the sixth succeeded him, and he also was imprisoned and died. The next but
one was John the twelfth, he was bastard to Sergius by madame Marozia, and
being yet but a stripling, was violently put into the Popedom by his mother
and her husband Wido the Marquess. The next Pope but one was Stephen, Baron.
an. 940. number. 1.
chosen by the Romans without the Cardinals consent. John the thirteenth
another boy was made Pope by the faction of Albericus his father, Baron. 9.55.
number. 4.
when for his age he was not yet capable of the order of a Deacon; in the end
his Bishops forsook him, Luitpr. li. 6. c. 11
and one night as he was in bed with a man's wife, the devil struck him, and
he died. About ten years after Benet the sixth was imprisoned and murdered by
Boniface that succeeded him, who got the Popedom by violence, Baron. an. 974.
and was again himself as violently deposed, Anno 275. nu. 1
and John the fifteenth put in his room, but he returned again and
apprehending John, imprisoned and murdered him. Anno 985. nu. 1.
Baronius says of him; He was a villain and a thief, the murderer of two
Popes, the inuader of Peter's Chair, who had not so much as one hair of a
Roman Bishop, whether we consider his entrance or going forward: but deserves
to be reckoned amongst famous thieves and ransakers of their Country, such as
were Sylla and Catiline, all who might cast their cappes at this thief. By all
which fruits I was much diuerted from the church of Rome. Yet other fruits as
bad as the former.
Besides the great schisms that have bin amongst the Popes are fruits by
which they may well be known for false prophets, wherein there have been two
or three Popes at once. I find about the year 1044. Benet the ninth, Baron.
an. 1044. number. 1.2.5. Naucl vol. 2. gener. 35. Onup. in Greg. 6. Theod. in
Niem. lib. 1. ca. 7.
Siluester the 3. and John were all Popes at once, and made their abode in 3.
several places of the city, dividing amongst them the reuenews of the
Patriarchies, until Gregory the 6. hiring them with money to give over,
himself was created the fourth Pope, and was presently expelled again, and
Clement ordained. Again, about the year 1379. began the schism between
Urban and Clement, which ended not till seventy years after. At the first
there were two Popes together, the one in Italy the other in France; Naucleer.
col. 2. gener. 46. Ioh. Moium. de reb. Hisp. l. 18. c. 1 Naucl. gene. 47.
what time the most learned men alive could not tell which was the true Pope,
but it was doubted throughout the christian world. Hereupon some 30. years after
the schism begaN, the Cardinals meeting at the Council of Pisa elected a
third Pope, and so there were three Popes: whereof Bellarmine says, It could
not easily be judged which of them was the true and lawful Pope, De Romans
Pontif. li. 4. ca. 14
every one of them having most learned Patrons. Shortly after, the Council of
Constance deposed them all three and created Martine, which yet did not so
extinguish the schism, but that in the Coun cell of Basil it brake out again,
Naucl. genesis 48.
where the Duke of Sauoy was made Pope against Eugenius, and was called Felix,
between whose resignation, and the election of Clement against Urban was
seventy years, for Clement was elected Anno 1379. Clem elected.
Felix resigned Anno 1449. which schisms as they overthrow that article of
faith, I believe the holy Catholic Church (for Zabarell says To suffer many
in the Papacy, Zabar. de susp. Pauli post init.
is to offend that article of faith, one holy Catholic) so are they such
fruits as do clearly demonstrate the teachers of that Church, which Christ
bids us take heed of. Which fruits of schism, as they have abounded in the
Papacy, so do they even till this day no less abound amongst the whole
Clergy; for mine own experience teaches me so much, that there is such a
rooted schism and division betwixt those of the society of Jesus, and of the
order of Saint Benet, as also betwixt the secular Priests and the said
society, that it is impossible even for the Pope himself to make a quiet
atonement between them; and so different are the incorporations of the Roman
Clergy, every one ambitiously aiming to outgoe each other in the favor of the
layty, that whilst they strive to advance themselves, they hinder one another:
only the poor seculars, whom the Jesuits seek to calumniate with most
impudent untruths, are likeliest (though they be the honestest amongst them, to
go down the wind for want of Bishops among them, to be their heads, which is
unlikely to be obtaind in haste, if the religious can hinder them, by any
cunning sleights and sly devises: yet in fine, if the Papacy continue, the
Capuchines are most likely to prevail, because as one of them answered to one
that wondered their Order lived in peace with the Jesuits, which other Orders
could not do, saying the cause was, because the Jesuits desired to have all,
and they desired to forsake all, and to have nothing: wittily taxing the
covetous desire of the Society; so may I conclude, because the Capuchines
desire to have least, most Papists in time will be inclined to favor them, as
least burdensome to their Commonwealths.

11 But now I must a little further (the better to examine the Church of Rome
by the works and fruits of her teachers) enter into the consideration of some
of her Popes, Martin. Polon. an. 1607. Plat. in Siluest. 2. fas cic. temp. an.
1004.
whom we shall find to have been as wicked men (if any credit is to be given
to Stories) as ever lived. It is written of Siluester the second, Other fruits
of diverse particular Popes.
that being a Monk he forsook his Monastery, and giving himself to the
Devil, followed him, and did homage to him, that all things might propser
according to his mind; which thing the Devil promised him: And so by briberie
he obtained the Archbishoprickes of Rhemes and Rauenna, and at last the
Popedom also, by the help of the Devil, upon this condition, that after his
death he should be his, body and soul. In the end, as he was saying Mass, by
the noise of Devils about him he understood he should die; whereupon confessing
his sin before the people, he desired all the members of his body, wherewith
he had served the Devil, to be cut off, and the trunk of his body to be
laid in a Wagon, and buried where the horse would draw it: Of whom Caesar
Baronius, Anno 991 nu. 7.
though he does his best to excuse him, confesses notwithstanding, That he
forsook his Monastery, and became a Courtier, and in talking, babbling,
slaundering, detracting, flattery, and doubleness of mind being made to
deceive, he outwent all men. Now as for Boniface the seventh, Baro. an. 985.
nu. 1.
Baronius writes, That he was a very villain, and a Church-robber, a savage
thief, the cruel murderer of two Popes, the inuader of Peter's Chair, that
had not so much as the hair of a Pope, but was to be reckoned amongst the
ransackers and spoylers of their country, such as were Scilla and Catilione,
which were not comparable to this thief that murdered two Popes. Here are
goodly fruits for the Vicar of Christ; yet I find Pope John the thirteenth
far more fruitful than the former, whom the Stories call, a Platin. in Io.
13. Naucler anno 956.
Monster of a man, Platin. in Io. an. 13.
one from his youth up defiled with all vice and turpitude, more given to
hunting than prayer, when he could tend it for lechery; Sigon. reg. Ital. l.
7. anno 963. Onuch annot. Plat. in Io. 8. Luitprand. l. 6. c. 6 and 7. quem
refert. Bar. an. 963.
accused and detected before the Emperor, in a Synod of Bishops, of Murders,
Adulteries, Incests, Periuries, and other vices of all sorts. His whores that
he kept are named Reynera a widow, Stephana his fathers Concubine, and her
sister, Ioane Anne, and diverse others: He turned the Palace of Laterane into a
Stews: he would forcibly ravish wives, widows, and maids that came from
other places to Rome on Pilgrimage, the fame whereof made them afraid to come:
He would give them Saint Peter's golden Challices and Crosses for a reward: He
used Hunting openly, and Dicing and Drinking: at dice he would call upon the
Devil to help him, drink healths to the Devil, set men's houses on fire,
revel it up and down the City in armor. He ordained a Deacon in his Stable
amongst his Horses; a Bishop of ten years old, and made Bishops for money.
He put out his Godfathers eyes, cut off his Cardinals members; one man's tongue
he cut out, and maimed two Cardinals more, cutting of ones nose, and another
hand: Anton. Chron. port 2. tit. 16. c. 1 ff. 16. fassic. Tep. anno 944 Baron
anno 964. nu. 17.
in the end as he was committing adultery with a man's wife, he was suddenly
slain by the Devil, and died without repentance. Many others could I record,
whose fruits are most irksome to behold, and unwholesome to taste, but one
Alexander the sixth shall serve for all, who lived about a hundred years since;
Do Princip. c. 18
of whom Machiauell writes, That he did nothing but play the deceiuer of
mankind; he gave his mind to nothing but villainy and fraud, whereby to deceive
men: He got the Papacy by Symonie, Onuph vit. Alex. Guic. Hist. l. 1.
buying the consent of the Cardinals, that after smarted for it. The King of
Naples signified unto the Queen his wife with tears, when he heard of his
election, that there was a Pope created, who would be the bane of Italy, and
of the whole Commonwealth; the which was also the general ceonceit of all men.
Guicciardine says, He was a Serpent, Lib. 6.
that with his poisoned infidelity, horrible examples of cruelty, luxury,
and monstrous covetousness, selling without distinction things holy and
profane, had infected all the world. His manners and customs were dishonest,
Lib. 1.
little sincerity in his administrations, no shame in his face, small truth in
his words, little faith in his heart, and less religion in his opinions, all
his actions were desiled with insatiable covetousness, immoderate ambition,
and barbarous cruelty. He was not ashamed, contrary to the custom of former
Popes (who to caest some color over their infamy, were wont to call them
their nephews) to call his sons his childen, Lib. 3.
and for such to express them to the world. The bruit went, that in the love
of his own daughter Lucretia were concurrent, not only his two sons, the
Duke of Candie and the Cardinal of Valence, but himself also, that was her
father; who as soon as he was chosen Pope, took her from her husband, and
married her to the Lord of Pesere: but not able to suffer her husband to be his
corriuall, he dissolved that marriage also, and took her to himself by
virtue of Saint Peter's keys. Lib. 6. Onuph.
It was among other graces his natural custom, to use poysonings, not only
to be revenged of his enemies, but also to despoyle the wealthy Cardinals of
their riches. And this he spared not to do against his own friends; till at
the last, having a purpose at a bauquet to poison diverse Cardinals, and for
that end appointed his Cup Bearer to give attendance with the wine, amde ready
for the nonce; who mistaking his bottle, gave the poisoned cup to him, was thus
himself dispatched by the just judgment of God, that had purposed to murder
his friends, that he might be their heir.

12 I omit many other particular fruits of diverse Popes, which would make much
more against the Church of Rome; but these being enough for the application to
Dr. Stapletons doctrine concerning the discovery of false Prophets unto the
Teachers of the Church of Rome, I could not but judge the teachers of that
Church too passionate and partial, that knowing the most distasteful fruits
thereof, not only in their Head the Pope, but also in their Cardinals,
Bishops, and even in their religious Monasteries, to have been so bad, as the
like are not to be found in any of the resormed Churches, will notwithstanding
most unjustly charge the Ministers of Gods Word, and Teachers of reformation,
to abound in such fruits: insomuch that I could not but admire the impudency
of Master Doctor Stapleton, speaking against the Teachers of the reformed
Churches, saying, The Devil seems to have received power from God by his
Ministers, Bonif. Mor. Dom. 7. post Pent. loc. 2.
the Heretics of our time, to produce most barbarous and horrible fruits, and
to make huge slaughters in the Church, and according to his pleasure and malice
to vex, trouble, and destroy the mystical body of Christ, as well in the
whole worship and Sacraments of Religion, as also in all the authority and
power it has upon earth. Whereas in truth, mature judgment of the premised
fruits of the Church of Rome, both concerning doctrine and manners, will
discover his rash assertion to be vertified of himself and his own Roman
Church, teaching many novelties, and abounding in all kind of wickedness, as
men of learning and experience well know. And therefore his enumeration of 74
wicked fruits in the Teachers of reformation may fitlier be applied in part to
the Church of Rome, and in the mean time the reformed Churches having learned
to forgive, not only 74 calumniations and injurious reproaches, but even 77;
and that 77 times of their offending neighbors, will not be so uncharitable as
not to pardon them, but also most earnestly, out of true charity, pray for
their conversion, as Christ did for the Jews, saying, Ignosce eis Domine quia
nesciunt quid faciunt, Pardon them, O Lord, because they know not what they
do. Hence (courteous Reader) since I follow but the Council in the search of
truth, which Christ (by the interpretation of the Romanists themselves) gives
to all in judging Teachers by their fruits, and hereby being moved to an
alienation from the Church of Rome, I hope that in conscience, even in the
sight of God and Man, I am excusable, for my incorporation to the Church of
England, since it is grounded upon such a place of Scripture as Christ himself
delivers, and the Church of Rome allows as a direction, by which men may
discern the truth of their Teachers. Esteem not therefore slight ly of this
inducement, but weigh it seriously, as indeed it is a point of great
importance, to produce in the souls of Christians that true detestation and
hatred of the Roman Apostasy, as the enormities and foul deformities thereof
varnisht over with lies and hipocrisies do require.

CHAP. XIII. Containing an observation about the Sacrifice of the Mass, which
is accounted by the Church of Rome the chiefest act of Religion, which can be
done to God.
AS that object which is most frequently presented to a man's eyes, The
Sacrificie of the Mass grounded upon man's invention.
is also most frequent in his memory, and takes the deepest impression; even
so the Sacrifice of the Mass being an action which in the Papacy as a Priest
I did daily perform, with more serious preparation, and intensiue affection,
than any thing else whatsoever; because I held it the most pleasing action I
could do to the honor of God, to the good of his Church, and for the benefit
of my self, and others; therefore amongst all the erroneous doctrines which I
discovered in the Church of Rome, the abuse thereof does most often offer it
self to my mind, and with greatest impression lays open unto me the
foulness of my former heresies in that Church, and touches my soul with the
deepest stroke of repentance above all others: especially when I consider the
most detestable Idolatry committed therein, not only by my self, but by the
Assistants in adoring visible Elements, for the Savior of the world, and that
with such a kind of worship as is only due to God himself, and in being too
credulous to that erroneous doctrine of the Council of Trent, Sess. 6. c. 2.
can. 3
that if any man shall say, that the Sacrifice of the Mass is only a Sacrifice
of praise and thanksgiving, or a bare commemoration of the Sacrifice
performed upon the Cross, and not a propitiatory Sacrifice, or that it does
not profit him alone that receives it, and that it ought not to be offered
for the living and the dead, for their sins, punishments, satisfactions, and
other necessities, let him be accursed. Which curse albeit it carries a
terror with it to such as are not enlightened so, that they can discern the
erroneous doctrine for which it accurseth, and that carries not rather in
mind the fear of Gods maledication, than any of man; saying: Cursed is he
that puts his trust in man, and takes man for his defense, and his heart
goes from the Lord: as the followers of the Church of Rome do, who rely only
upon the Popes authority, who may be as sinful a man as any other, thinking
themselves secure, if his authority be their defense, and the warrant of their
belief; yet could I not stand in dread of his curse, when once I found this
Sacrifice of the Mass, as it is now taught by the Church of Rome, not to have
sufficient warrant by Gods word, nor by the ancient Church, teaching any such
doctrine concerning it, as the present Church of Rome teaches.

2. The Mass was not instituted by Christ.
For first I observed, that this Sacrifice, which the Church of Rome teaches,
to be a propitiatory Sacrifice, and such a one as may be offered for sins,
as well of the living as of the dead, is not any thing agreeable to the
institution of our LORD JESUS, there is not so much as a word spoken by CHRIST
of any offering, or oblation to be made, but only commandment given to eat
and drink, and to do that in remembrance of him, his words only importing
the institution of a Sacrament, and no Sacrifice. Neither did he so much as
utter a word that he offered himself at the last Supper, for Cornelius Musso
a Bishop so famous for his learning, Bib lioth. Sanct. lib. 4. Suar. tom. 3. d.
74. 2.
as Sixtus Senensis writes, that he was a Preacher at twelve years old, and
all Italy ran after him, did defend that Christ at his last Supper offered
no Sacrifice at all; whereupon I framed this argument; Note this argument.
The Priest in the Commemoration of the last Supper is not to do other thing
in substance, then what Christ did; but Christ as Musso held, offered to
Sacrifice at all, ergo, the Priest in commemoration of Christ's last Supper, is
not to offer up any Sacrifice at all. Behold then here it follows by
necessary consequence upon Mussoes Assertion, that the Sacrifice of the Mass
is not to be offered at all. It is clear, as Musso says, that he offered
not himself to his Father at his last Supper, for then should he not have
perfected his Sacrifice with one oblation made, as the Apostle Saint Paul
teaches, Hebr. 7.27. and 9.26.28.
but with a double Oblation twice made; namely, once in his Supper, and once
upon the Cross, which were most repugnant to the holy Scripture. Again, the
Apostle Saint Paul says: 1. Cor. 11. v. 23. and sequent.
I have received of the Lord that which I delivered unto you, etc. and so
shows the whole manner of CHRIST'S institution of the blessed Eucharist, who
made no mention at all of any Sacrifice; which the Apostle (considering he
boasted that he had showed all the Council of God) would not have omitted,
Act. 20.27.
if the Supper had contained any meaning of a propitatorie Sacrifice: Moreover
Saint Paul writing to the Corinthians, bids us to show the Lords death, not by
sacrificing Christ: for to Sacrifice, and to show the Lords death, are two
distinct things; and the showing CHRIST'S death by the Sacrament is sufficient
for the application thereof to our souls, for the remission of our sins.
Therefore I could not conceive any such Sacrifice as the Mass, propitiatory
for sins to be instituted by Christ: which Sacrifice if it be of such
importance as the Church of Rome teaches, and so principal an act of
religion, doubtless there would have been some apparent touch thereof
expressly given in the holy Scriptures, and especially in that place where the
Papists pretend it should be instituted.

Again, The Sacrifice of the Mass disableth Christ's sacrifice upon the Cross.
1 Ioh. 22.
I have further observed, that to teach the doctrine of the propitiatory
Sacrifice of the Mass, the perfect satisfaction made by Christ's Sacrifice upon
the Cross is made insufficient and inualid: For he being the propitation or
reconciliation, not only for our sins, but also for the sins of the whole
world; for the demonstration of which effect upon the Cross he cried, Ioh.
19.30.
finished; I can see no need why a propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass should
be offered for sins so often, since the reconciliation made by Christ is
applied by the Sacrament. Hebr. 7.27.
Besides, since Christ did it once when he offered up himself: and as S. Paul
says; Not that he should offer imselfe often; Hebr. 9.25.
none being Priests according to the order of Melchisedech, but Christ, of whom
the Scripture says: Hebr. 5.4.5.
Tues Sacerdos in aeternu^ secundu^ ordine^ Melchi.; it follows that no other
was to offer up Christ as a propitiatory Sacrifice for sins, but himself:
Moreover, the Sacrifice of Christ has no need to be often reiterated,
whereby the Priesthood of Christ is opposite to the Priesthood of the old
Testament, whose sacrifices ought to be reiterated, for Christ needed not
daily, Hebr. 7.27.
as those high Priests, to offer up sacrifice for his own sins, and then for
the peoples: for that did he once when he offered up himself. And again:
After he had said: This is the testament that I will make with them, etc. and
their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Hebr. 10.16.17.18.
Where remission of these things is, there is no more offering for sin. And
again; Christ by his own blood entered once into the holy place, and obtained
eternal redemption for us (not such a redemption as is to be reiterated every
day. Hebr. 9.12.
) And again: Not that he should offer him self often, as the high Priest
entered into the holy place every year with other blood (for then must he have
often suffered since the foundation of the world:) but now in the end of the
world has he appeared once to put away sin by the Sacrifice of him self.
And as it is appointed unto men once to die, and then comes the judgment: So
Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many. Again, Hebr. 9.25.26.
By the which Will we are sanctified even by the offering of the body of JESUS
CHRIST once made. And again, Hebr. 10.10.
Every Priest appears daily ministering, and often times offered one manner of
Sacrifice, which can never take away sins: but this Man after he had offered
one Sacrifice for sins, sits for ever at the right hand of God, Hebr.
10.11.12.
etc. for with one offering he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified.
By which places it is clear, there needs no more reiteration of CHRIST
already sacrificed, who once has wrought Redemption, and Propitiation for
sin, which is to be applied by the Sacrament.

4. The sacrifice of the Mass a novel doctrine. Praeceptor. Romae desacr.
Mis. c. 1 dict. 2.
In can not but marvel that the Sacrifice of the Mass can be esteemed so
highly as it is in the Church of Rome, which is, as they say and teach, a
Sacrifice, that is perfected, and consists of Christ as the thing offered,
and chiefly of three actions, the Consecration, the Oblation, and Consumption.
Which (says the same Author) concerning the substance was instituted by
Christ, Ibid. dicto. 1.
concerning the action as it is now done, by the Church: For if we look well
into it we shall find it but a novel doctrine in all the essential parts
thereof. It began not all at once, but by degrees; for the Latin language
came not in, where the people understood it, till the time of Gregory, six
hundred years after Christ, Declarat. ad Censar. Theol. prouis.
as Erasmus says: the Church in former time using the Service in the Vulgar
tongue. The doctrine likewise of Transubstantiation, now believed by the
present Church of Rome, Tom. 3. did. 5. sect. 1. p. 628.
to be therein, is acknowledged by Scotus and Biel to be no elder than the
Council of Laternae, for so Suares the Jesuit writes of them. The Sacrifice
or oblation, thought by some to be made therein, in the judgment of other
learned Papists, was not done by Christ. For Azorius the Jesuit writes;
Jnstit. Moral. lib. 10. cap. 8.
That some Catholics deny that Christ offered up himself under the form of
Bread and Wine in his last Supper; which being true indeed, it follows, that
the opinion of such a sacrifice is not founded upon Christ's deed, or
instituted by him, but upon some later invention since him. Whence it follows
that Ioannes Stephanus Durantus does teach most unsound doctrine, De ritibus
Eccl. ^^ath. cap. 3. n. 1. and 2.
when he says: That it is perspicuous by the testimonies of Christ himself,
of Paul the Apostle, and of ancient Fathers, that Christ instuuted the
sacrifice of the Mass, and was the Author thereof: who also after he had
cited the institution of the Sacrament, Luke the 21. and 1. Cor. 11. upon those
words: Do ye this in remembrance of me; he concludes, That, by those
words, Christ gave a commandment of sacrificing unto Priests, A notorious
shift of a learned Papist to prove the Mass.
for, to do, signifies to sacrifice. But in very truth whosoever is not most
stupid may out of the words of both places euince the contrary, and discern
what a gross absurdity it is to enforce, that, because to do sometimes does
signify to Sacrifice, therefore Christ commanded the Priests to Sacrifice; for
if it be true that there Christ's commandment to do this, imported a command
to Sacrifice, where then is the Sacrament instituted, which is a distinct thing
from a Sacrifice? Many such shifts as these are the Teachers of the Roman
Church enforced to undertake, for the maintenance of their Doctrine, which if
men would observe with attention, and judgment, they might with very great
facility discover the weak grounds of all their Arguments. I find that
Thomas Aquinas seemed to be of a contrary opinion: For disputing how Christ
is sacrificed in the Eucharist, he answers, that he is said to be in two
respects. First, because the ministration of the Sacrament is an Image, Thomas
Aquinas against the Mass.
representing the Passion of Christ, which is his true immolation: and Images
use to be called by the names of those things whereof they are Images:
Secondly, in respect of the effect of his Passion; because by the Sacrament we
are made partakers of the fruit of his Passion. And says he, As concerning
this second manner, it is proper to this Sacrament, that Christ is immolated,
or sacrificed therein. These reasons argue that he held no such kind of
Sacrifice as the present Church of Rome defends; because the celebration of
the Eucharist, (in his judgment) being but an Image of the true Sacrifice of
Christ, he could not think it to be a true sacrifice vni-vocally so called,
but only by external relation. And saying again: That Christ is sacrificed
therein; by reason we are made partakers of the fruit of his Paession: he
shows clearly he knew no real sacrifice, because we are made partakers of
that even in Baptism also, where no man imagins Christ to be sacrificed.

5. Idolatry is committed in the sacrifice of the Mass.
But what shall I say of that most odious and horrible Idolatry, that is
committed in the sacrifice of the Mass, where Bread and Wine, which are the
creatures of God, are worshipped with Latria, as is the Son of God, the which
worship is only due to God. O ye heavens, come and admire at this unspeakable
folly and blindness of men! they stick not only to do this abominable fact,
but they persist also in teaching it. I my self being a Student in the
College in Rome, had this delivered me from my Master in the Pulpit, a learned
Jesuit, in manner following, as a matter of faith; who upon this question, Who
is to be worshipped with the adoration of Latria; De adorat. ff. 1. q. 1. in
dictat. Romans
says: Thirdly, with the same worship of Latria, the consecrated Host and
Chalice, is to be worshipped, because under those most sacred forms Christ the
Lord is adored, who is really present, according to his humanity and
divinity, which is defined in the Council of Trent, Sess 13. c. 5. can. 6.
lib. 2. deritib. Eccles. cap. 40.
and Stephanus Durantus shows it most fully; this doctrine as it is most
untrue, so is it here affirmed by the Italian Reader, with a manifest untruth,
for I can not so much as find the word Latria in all that Chapter of Stephanus
Durantus, An Italia^ trick.
which I have very carefully perused herein, Durant. c. 40. l. 2. number. 3.
who only affirms; That it is probable, that the Eucharist is lifted up, and
showed to the people for adorations sake: and he may as well be understood of
Dulia, or Hyperdulia, or of a less reverence, which is done in the
ministration of any Sacrament, not in worship of the thing present, but in
worship of God who is in heaven. Yea and to show that this kind of
Latria-worship is held to be a doctrine of Faith, in answer to his third
question, Ibidem.
which is this: Since the precept of adoring the Sacrament is a matter of
Faith, at what time does it oblige the faithful to perform it? He answers
in sour cases: First, when the Sacrament in the Sacrifice of the Mass is
elevated, those that are present are bound to adore it: Secondly, when it is
carried to the sick: Thirdly, when the Ho^st is ministered to the Communicants,
the Communicants are not only bound to adore it, but all the rest standing by,
and that are present, although they receive not. Fourthly, when it is set forth
upon the Altar for public prayer, as experience shows in their forty hours
prater. By which it is apparent how frequently the Church of Rome enforces men
to give that worship which is only due to God, unto the Creature, which is by
them to be worshipped as God. For the Council words are these: Sess ^3. can.
6. de sacr. Euchar.
If any shall say that Christ the only begotten Son of God is not to be
adored in the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, with the worship of Latria, yea
external: and therefore not to be worshipped with any peculiar festival
collebritie; nor the be carried solemnly in Processions, according to the
laudable and universal rite and custom of the holy Church, or not to be
proposed to the people to be adored, and the adorers thereof to be Idolaters:
be he accursed. Here is a strange piece of doctrine, yet is it not
unaccompanied with the malediction of the Bishop of Rome. I cannot observe any
place or passage of Scripture that makes for this doctrine; no, neither does
Stephanus Durantus cite either Scripture or other ancient Father that makes
for this Latria worship; whence it follows, that it is a new doctrine,
unheard of in the primer ages of Christ's Church, only this I note, that he
cites some ancient Fathers, seeming to approve the worship of Christ in
Heaven, when they behold the Sacrament: yea, and also some kind of reverence to
the Sacrament; but no such as is due to God, but rather, as may be thought,
such a kind of reverence as is used in Baptism, and fit to be used in the use
of signs of holy things: and therefore to conclude, since in the sacrifice of
the Mass, where the consecrated Host must be adored with Latria-worship, most
detestable Idolatry is committed, I could not, but with a great dislike of so
foul an abuse in doctrine, disauow that Sacrifice of the Mass, and hold it
most abominable in the sight of Almighty God. Hence I conceived the more
worthily of his Majesty's judgment and learning: for if the very essential
parts of the public sacrifice of the Mass have no warrant in Scripture, and
the essential part thereof so idolatrous, he might well and confidently
affirm of private Mass, Praemonit.
If the Romish Church has joined new articles of faith, never heard of in the
first 500 years after Christ, I hope I shall never be condemned for an
Heretic, for not being a Nouleist. Such are the private Masses, where the
Priest plays the part both of the Priest and of the people. For what an
absurd thing is it for the Priest to say, Dominus vobiscu^, or orate fratres,
The Lord be with you, or pray ye brethren; or to turn about, as if there were
people to answer, when nothing but bare walls appears, saying, Ite Miss^ est,
Go ye, Mass is done. Nay what a ridiculous prayer is it, when the Priest says
unto God, none being present but either a man or a woman, playing the office of
a clerk, Memento Domina famuloru^ famularum: In Can. Missae.
que tuaru^, and omniu^ circu^stantiu^ queru^ ubi fides cognita est and nota
deuotio, pro qubius tibi offerimus, etc. Remember, O Lord, thy men-seruants and
women-seruants, and all that stand round about, whose faith and devotion is
manifest and known unto thee. This is as ridiculous a false prayer as that
which the Priests always say upon the feast of an ordinary Confessor: Ad
sacrum cuius tumulum frequenter
Membra languentum modo sanitati,
Quolibet morbo fuerint grauata
Restituuntur. Breuiar. in com. mu. Confessorum

Under nunc noster chorus in honorem
Ipsius hymnum canit hunc libenter,
Vt pijs eius meritis iuuemur
Omne per aeuum.
Englished thus,
At whose sacred Tomb sick people
Even now often with whatsoever
Diseases they are oppressed, are restored
To health.
Our Quier therefore now in honor
Of him sings this Hymn willingly,
That by his pious merits we may be
Helped for ever.


Is not this strange, that so notorious a lie must by millions of Romish
Priests be sung and said upon the Feasts of such Confessors, at whose Tombs
not so much as a lame dog was ever cured, and yet they stick not to say,
that often and from every disease they are cured? But by this it may be
gathered, that the Romish Church has little care what she allows or
practices, how gross or absurd soever it be, so long as her erroneous
doctrines may either be believed or practiced; and hence she suffers the
Latria-worship of the Host, to be instilled into the vulgar sort of people,
without any remorse or scruple for so unwarrantable an error.

5 Now as for the ceremonies of the Mass, The ceremony of the Mass has no
certain signification.
as I have been careful to learn their meaning and significations, thereby
have I also found as great cause to disgust the sacrifice of the Mass as for
the former; for so uncertain is the disagreement of Romish Authors about them,
as none can be greater. Michael the Suffragane of Mets tells us, The Amies.
that the Humerale, which is made of thin linen, Michael. Suffragan.
Mongunt. explic. mist. sacrosanct. nus.
yet pure and clean, covering the Priests head, signifies Christ's Divinity,
covered with frail humane flesh, free and clean from sin. In another place
he says, That it designeth the indefatigable labor of doing good, and
chastity of body and mind: but Iacobus de Voragine says, Iac. de Vor. ser.
de Sanct. de celibrat. Mis. ser. 1. De ritibus eccle. Catho. c. 9. ff. 6. Lib.
2. de sacra. part. 4. Part. 4 q 26.
That it signifies the Helmet of Salvation, because he must appoach to the
Altar with hope and confidence. Stephanus Durantus; that thereby is understood
the custody of a man's mouth. Hugo de Sancto victory, and Alexander de Ales.
think it signifies the veil wherewith the perfidious Jews did cover the
face of Christ. The Albe, according to Michael the Suffragane, because it is
clean, and closed round about the Priest, designeth the most entire
conversation of Christ amongst all. The Albe. Ibid.
And in another place he says, it admonishes us of the innocence and purity
we receive in Baptism. But Iacobus de Voragine, Ibid. Vbi supra.
more like a souldior, will have it signify, Loricam iustitiae; because that
as the Albe covers the Priest all over, so does Justice, with other virtues,
cover the soul. Ibid. nu 9.
Stephanus Durantus will have it signify the perseverance of good works.
Germanus will have it signify the brightness of the Godhead, In Theor. rerum
Ecclesiast.
and the shining conversation of a Priest. Again, it represents the white
garment wherewith Herod did mock Christ. Stephanus Eduensis Bishop says,
that it designeth the glory of Christ's resurrection, which, the Angels
reporting, appeared in white garments. The girdle. Explicat. mist. sacr. Miss.
The Girdle wherewith the largeness of the Albe is tied about, signifies
(according to Michael, Suffragan of Mets) that Christ often tied his most high
and perfect conversation, and so tempered it, according to our infirmities, and
accommodated himself unto our manners, that by his actions we might be the
better instructed unto the knowledge of salvation. And in another place says,
That it designs how we ought to restrain the limbs of our mind, least
chastity be dissolved with the prouocations of concupiscence. Lib. 5. in Leuit.
Isychius by the Girdle understands fortitude; therefore God said unto Job.
comforting him in his afflictions, Accinge vt vir lumbos tuos, Girt thy loins
like a man. The Manuplo. Ibid.
The Manuple (says Michael the Suffragan) signifies the fruit of good works,
wherewith we must be comforted when we are exercised with the calamities of
this world. And in another place he says, That it signifies Christ's
immunitie from all perverse and sinister actions. But Iacobus de Voragine
otherwise says, De celebrat. Missae.
it signifies the buckler of faith. And Bonauenture says, The Manuple on the
left hand signifies the humility of Christ in this life; In exposit. mist.
sacr. Miss.
or else the Manuple on the left hand notes the combat of Christ for justice
sake. The Stole. Ibidem.
The Stole signifies the voluntary obedience of Christ, as Michael the
Suffragan of Mets says: but Iacobus de Voragine will have it mean a
double-edged sword, Jacob. de Vor. de celebrat. Missae, lib. de sacra. Altar.
cap. 10. In exposit. mist. sacr. Missae. The Vestment In exposit. mist.
to out both with word and example. And Stephanus Eduensis says, That the
Stole signifies the obedience of the son of God: but otherwise Bonaventure
says it signifies the passion of Christ. The Vestement (says Michael,
Suffragan of Mets) has two parts; the first part, which is the lesser,
signifies the Church before Christ's Passion; the hinder part, which is the
greater, signifies the people of the Church, united together after his
Passion; or otherwise he says, that it designeth the charity, wherewith all
the members of Christ must be conjoined to one the other. But Innocentius
says, That the Vestement every whit entire signifies the unity of Faith,
Lib. 1. mist. Missae. c. 58.
Germanus says, it signifies the Purple Garment, which the wicked, mocking
Jesus, put upon him.

By these varieties of conjectures about the only apparel of the Priests that
must offer the sacrifice of the mass therein, I observed that there was no one
true meaning appointed by the Church for those ceremonies, and that every man
may frame what symbolicall conceits they list upon them, and therefore are they
vnporofitable, and rather to please the simple withshews, than with any other
assured sense; so does it appear to be in other the ceremonies of the mass,
which as they are different in sense, so are they ridiculous to practice or to
behold. The Introite signifies the Fathers expectation of Christ; as Michael
Suffragane tells us, Introite in explic. mister. mis.
or if we will believe Ioannes de Combis, it signifies the beginning of a good
work, and it is doubled, because in our beginning we must do good and decline
from evil; or if we will give credit to Germanus, it signifies the coming
and entrance of the Son of God into this world. The nine times repeating
Kyrie Eleyson and Christ Eleyson is to the three Persons in Trinity, as the
chiefest of all prayers for the imploration of Gods mercy, as Michael the
suffragane of Metz notes. In explic. mist. sacr. mis. In comp. Theol. verit.
li. 9. ca. 18.
But Johannes de Combis says more, that is, That it signifies the invocation
of Gods mercy whereof we stand in need many ways: the first three for
remission of sins committed in heart, tongue, or work, concerning
contrition, confession and satisfaction; the second three ways for the grace
of faith, hope and charity; the third three ways for glorification; whereby
we shall rejoice in God above us; in our selves of our selves, and for our
neighbors about us. Yet if we may believe Iacobus de Voragine, he teaches
that the 9. repetitions are in honor of the nine Orders of Angels, In celeb.
Miss. sermon. 2.
which we honor in such manner, that we may attain unto their society; which
are distinguished into three Ternaries or Tertians, and are sung 9. times;
because the Angels are distinguished into 3. Hierarchies, or 9. orders: Lib.
2. mist. mis. cap. 19. 4 part. q. 37. offic. mis. 2.
but otherwise teaches Innocentius tertius, and Alexander de Ales, saying,
That they are said 9. times against 9. kinds of sins, as appears there at
large: Part 3. q. 83. art. 4.
yet if we please to credit Th. Aquinas saying thrice (...) is for the person
of the Father, thrice (...) is for the person of the Son, and then is added
again thrice (...) for the person of the holy ghost, against the threefold
misery of ignorance, Fraction.
of sin, and of penalty. Now as for the fraction of the host into 3. parts
Iacobus de Voragine teaches that this ceremony was ordained by Pope Sergius,
as Albert. Magnus also thought; De celeb. mis. ser. 2. De ritibus eccle. cap.
lib. 1. de frac. sacr. Host. De sacra. alt. cap. 18.
but Steph. Durant. affirms, that it was instituted long before: now wherefore
it is thus thrice broken, Steph. Eduensis says, That the heast dedicated to
the holy Trinity is divided into 3. parts, whereof the one is put into the
chalice, and drowned in the blood, for that part of the Church being tossed in
the storm of this world, which is crossed with many afflictions: the other two
without the challice are for those, whereof the one is of the faithful which
is in purgatory tried with fire, the other of Saints which reign
everlastingly with Christ. But Th. Aquin. otherwise teaches, Part. 3 q. 83.
artic 5.
that the fraction of the host signifies 3. things; 1. the division of Christ's
body in his passion; 2. the distinction of his mystical body, according unto
their diverse estates; 3 the distribution of graces proceeding from the passion
of Christ; Cap 3 eccles. Hier.
teaches. Yet otherwise may it be understood if we will believe Iac. de
Voragine, who teaches that it is broken into 3. parts, to show it is offered to
honor the B. Trinity; or to show that in Christ there were 3. substances, he
flesh, the soul, and his godhead; or to show that it is offered for the
mystical body of Christ, which is divided into 3. parts of those that are to
be saved, virgins, continent persons, and those that are married. Now it is here
to be noted, how this Author contradicts himself: for whereas before it is
cited, that he made Pope Sergius the ordainer of it is triple fraction: Desancto
Greg. Pap. ser. 4.
yet says he in another place speaking of Greg. the great; He ordained also,
that in the mass three parts should be made of the body of Christ, to
signify, that the mystical body, that is, the faithful of Christ are divided
into 3. parts: for that part which is put in the chalice, hidden and put in the
wine, signifies that part which is in heaven, which is hidden from all evils,
and is made drunk with the plenty of Gods house: the other 2. parts signify
the 2. parts of the faithful which areyet exposed to tribulations; the one,
which in the world is exposed to much trouble; the other, which is in purgatory
subject to great torment. Out of which Author by the way I observe the great
alteration made in the mass, who says; that whereas the mass was first said
confusedly, he ( viz. Greg.) adorned it beautifully, appointed in to be sung in
a threefold language, to wit, in the greek, as Kyrie-eleison, in the hebrew as
Amen, and Alleluia, in the latin, as the rest, By all which premises, if I
should add hereunto the various meanings of the Priests turning one while his
back to the people, and another while his face, Jbidem.
one while reading aloude as if he were chiding in an unknown tongue, otherwhile
in silence as if he were asleep, one while turning a half circle, other while
turning round the whole, as if he were dancing Salingers round, one while
reading at the middle of the Altar, then on the right end, and after hopping
to the left like a nimble stage-plaier, as I and others sometimes observed in a
quick footed Jesuit, not without smiling at such his antike gestures, he did
them with so ill a grace: If I should add all these, the reading of the^ would
be too tedious, yet by the former related the reader may judge of the rest, the
true meaning whereof may be forged out of any private man's brain, as he
pleases, as it appears by the distracted senses of these already cited out of
diverse Authors; truly there is no man of a pious affection, but may frame far
more reverend ceremonies than any of these, even almost out of every ordinary
action; How the Papists, do use much to establish the doctrine of the Mass by
the allegations of bastard fathers
and as for the antiquity of the masses ceremonies most of them are but nouel,
in respect of the ancient and primitive times of Gods church, neither
instituted by Christ, or by any of the Apostles, and many of them ordained in
imitation of the Roman heathenish ceremonies, practiced about the idolatrous
worship of their false gods.

7 It is strange notwithstanding and very obseruable, to note the frequent
practice of Romish teachers, in the citations of bastard Authors, when by the
ancient Fathers, they go about to establish this doctrine of the mass in the
minds of those that are either too simple, or ouer-credulous, who are easy to
be deceived either by the good opinion they conceive of them, or by the long
acquaintance, and familiar conversation they have long maintained: but all is
not gold that glisters; the wolf will deceive by he sheeps skin; weeping
Crocadils will bite to death; and sweet notes of singing Sirens drown their
hearers. Even so fares it spiritually with poor Romish Catholics, as they
call themselves, when they lend their ears to the pretended antiquity the
Priests will allege for their doctrine, which especially is apparent in their
proofs for the sacrifice of the mass. Page 10.
For M. Tho. Harding in his answer to M. Jewels challenge, Page 320.
as also M. Tho. Heskins in his Parliament do allege Abdias bishop of Babylon,
who lived Ann. Dom. 44. under whose name there is a Book entitled, The Stories
of the Apostles, which is judged by Sixtus Senensis for a treatise fained under
his name; by cardinal Baro. is utterly rejected; yet M. Heskins says; For thy
better confirmation (gentle Reader) I shall add the testimony of Abdias Bish.
of Babylon, Page 43.
and and a Disciple of the Apostles, who writes thus of the mass and death of
S. Matthew; And when all had said Amen: and when all the Church had received the
Mass, To. 1. page 326. and page 394. Abdias hist. Apostol. lib. 7.
and the mysteries that were celebrated, he stayed himself, that by the Altar
where the body of Christ was by him consecrated, there should his martyrdom be
solemnized. These plain words devised and fathered upon Abdias, may justly
give cause for men deceived, to look about them what they believe, not easily
to believe all that either master Harding, or master Heskins, or others do
allege out of Antiquity; for many such counterfeit Writers are often all
eadged, because no better can be found for the proof of their false doctrine.
I find likewise, that Iodocus Coccius, to establish the Mass, cites Clement
a Bishop of Rome, who lived in the year 80. as Author of the eight Books of
Apostolical Institutions; To. 2. page 656. and 868. To 1. page 117.
and yet the Cardinal Baronius judges them to be written in his name, and
Posseuinus the Jesuit seems to think it will be a hard matter to prove them
to be either Apostolical or lawful, or at the least written by Clement
himself; his words are these: Turrianus has not altogether amongst all proved
or euicted those constitutions to the Apostolical or lawful, Posseuin. in
Appar. page 328.
written by Clement himself. And yet notwithstanding, the Papists make no
scruple to cite these books as most authentical, as here Coccius does. So
deal the Rhemists also to prove the sacrifice of the Mass, alleging
Dionisius the Areopagit, Page 204.
who lived in the year 96. as Author of the celestial and ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, which book notwithstanding is rejected by Caietan that famous
schoole-man among the Cardinals, Cap. 3.
as you shall find it written in Sixtus Senensis. Page 61.
So to prove the same doctrine, Doctor Harding in his Reioynder against Jewels
Reply of the Mass, and also Cardinal Bellarmine allege Arnobius, who lived
in the year three hundred, Page 47. and page 206. Tom. 3.955.
as the Author of the Commentaries on all the Psalms; yet is it judged by
Sixtus Senensis, by the incongruitie of the style, Page 262 et 201.
innumberable soloecismes and barbarismes, which are in it, to be as far
different from his other writings as heaven is from earth; and Posseuine says
of them, Posseuin. in Appar. page 129.
Neither are they approved by Sixtus Senensis, nor by others. So again to
establish the Mass, Iodocus Coccius alleges Damasus Pope of Rome, Tom. 1.667.
who lived in the year three hundred sixty seven, as Author of the book
carrying this title of the lives of the Bishops of Rome, commonly called Liber
Pontificalis; which book Posseuine judges to be another, not this Damasus; In
Appar. page 378. Tom. 1. page 573. Bar to 4. page 428.
which Baronius says, contains many things repugnant unto themselves almost
in every Pope, and therefore he thinks it to be collected out of diverse
authors. Master Doctor Heskins in his Parliament of Christ, to prove the
sacrifice of the Mass, alleges Amphilochius, who lived in the year 390. as
the author of the life of Saint Basil; Page 157. Bar Mart. Ian. 1. page 6.
Spurius. Posseuin. in Appar. page 77.
yet Baronius says, That in the judgment of all the wiser sort it is thought
to be some bodies else. And Posseuine says; The bastard Amphilochius, cannot
be his under whose name it is carried about, Glicas in the fourth part of his
Annals has taught us. By all which examples of the Papists all aging such
counterseit Fathers for the confirmation of this doctrine of the Mass, as also
many other points: I can by no means think but that many of them do teach
this doctrine most wittingly and maliciously against their own conscience, and
therefore sin deadly against the holy Ghost; heaping Gods judgments upon
them against the day of his wrath; and also I assure my self that their
doctrine cannot be good which is vpheld by such counterfeit and weak props, as
are the writings of bastard teachers, and counterfeit books.

But besides the former observations, The pretended privileges of the Mass
most fond. Ioannes de Comb. compend. Theol. verit li. 6. cap. 18.
which do sufficiently discover the erroneous doctrine taught by the Church of
Rome concerning the Mass, the great and maine excellent privileges which she
pretends to wait upon this sacrifice is not to be omitted, whereof Ioannes
de Combis alleges diverse; saying; The Mass has many prerogatives; First
because it is celebrated by one that is fasting. Secondly, because only in a
Church and upon an altar, unless sometimes of necessity, under a Tent or in
some other honest place. Thirdly, because it is behouefull that he that
celebrateth be a Priest. Fourthly, because it is behouefull that he be clad
in sacred vestments. Fifthly, because only it is done in the day, and not in
the night, unless in the Nativity of the Lord. Sixthly, because it is
celebrated with a lighted candle, yea though a thousand Suns should shine
upon the earth. Seventhly, because there words do sound which are Divine,
Angelical and humane. Divine words when the Pater noster is said or sung; and
when the words of the Lord are read in the Gospel; Angelical words when
Glory be to God in the highest; but humane words in the Collects and the like.
Eighthly, because there are heard three of the noblest tongues, viz. Hebrew, as
Saboath and Osanna; Greek, as Kyrie eleison; Latin, as in others which are
there. Ninthly, because the Mass in his kind is as full of mysteries as the
sea of drops, as the Sun of beams, as the firmament of Stars, as the
imperial heaven of Angels. Tenthly, because Priests in solemn Churches, have
in their Mass many Ministers; the Deacon, Subdeacon, and Acolytes. Eleuenthly,
because the Angels being there in the presence of such majesty, it suffices
us to be scholars. Twelfthly, because there is the Lord of heaven and earth. I
might unto these twelve add the effects of the sacrifice of the Mass also,
taught by Bernardinus de Busto, who amongst many others very ridiculous,
puts for one this prerogative; Bern. de Bust. in ser. de Sacrif. Mis.
viz. quamdin quis audit sacrum not senescit, man waxes not old so long as he
hears Mass. When I read these privileges, after it had pleased God to give
me a true understanding of the Masses idolatries, I could not but grieve that
men should be thus deceived by the devils suggestions, as to give credit unto
such idle devises for the maintenance of Gods dishonor and the devils service.
Is it not a great prerogative, think you, of the Mass, that the Priest must
be fasting, before he go to take a piece of wafer, and a prertie quantity of
good Maligo, rich Canarie, or other strange wine? I trow it is a pretty
breakfast to take three draughts of such wine, although there be a few drops of
water in the last. This privilege I have observed pleases the Jesuits best
of all, who scorn to have weak wine, as Clarret, but commonly make provision
of the best comfortable Sackes for that purpose; and will lightly take more
into the Challice then any other Priests, out of a greater care they have that
no particles of Christ's sacred flesh should stay about the sides of the
Chalice, which religious care is a good fair cloak for them to warm their
fasting stomachs with the more beartie and full draught; so that in truth this
fasting privilege of the Mass, serves but for a color to have a good
breakfast, and so to comfort the Priests stomach, that many a Lay man would be
full glad of the like. The other prerogatives as weakly grounded upon man's
inventions, not on Scriptures or Apostolical traditions, in truth are as
mean; but especially that great prerogative of the Mass, viz. that a man
grows not old so long as he hears Mass, is one of the foolishest conceits
of a Franciscan Friar that ever I heard or read. For if it were true, there is
no Doctor Steuens water could so preserve a man's life, or prolong it, as the
hearing of a Mass, and I think many would hear more Masses then they do, if
this were sound Divinity: but by this it is easy to discover the Mass not to
be as the Church of Rome teaches, a principal act of religion, and a work
that surpasses all the works that ever God wrought, as the work of creation
and redemption; (more miracles appearing in the Sacrament then in either of
them, as may be observed in Ioannes de Combis: Lib 6. de cap. 14.
and noted by Master Perkins in his Reformed Catholic, and not any whit
touched as far as I could perceive in master. Doctor Bishop against him;) but
rather a most diabolical illusion of the world, drawing men to serve the
creature in stead of the Creator, and the devil in stead of God.

And this in very truth appears most plainly, The Mass confirmed by false
miracles, a palpable mark of false doctrine.
if we consider diligently how the Pseudochrists and false prophets of the
Church of Rome endeavor, as it were, seeing the weakness of their cause, to
establish and make good their doctrine of the Mass with the signs, wonders,
and prodigies, which Christ himself the Savior of our souls wills us not
to believe; which are so ridiculous, that no man of sound judgment reading
them, can choose but laugh and smile at them, howsoever out of true charity,
and a right religious zeal he have greater cause to commiserate the poor
blinded souls that are most miserably seduced by them. I will therefore for
the fuller manifestation hereof, set down some few amongst many, which I have
read and noted out of diverse authors of good credit, and well approved in the
Church of Rome. The first is taken out of Pope Gregory the Great, S. Greg.
Mag. hom. 37. in Euang. and lib. 4. dialog. cap. 57.
who writes; That a certain man being taken prisoner by his enemies, was
carried into a far Country, where he was kept prisoner a long time, whose
wife not hearing any thing of him, thought him to be dead, and therefore
caused a Mass to be said for him every week. Whereupon it happened that so
often as the Mass was offered for the deliverance of his soul, so often were
his irons and shackles loosened in the prison where he was; which afterward
when being released, he returned again to his wife, he told her as much with
great admiration; whereupon the wife enquiring the time and the hour when he
found him so freed from his fetters, she found it happened at he same hour,
that Mass was said for him. Whereupon Pope Gregory says; Hence, my best
beloved brethren and good friends, learn ye how much the sacred host being
offered by our selves, is of force to untie the bands of our hearts, since being
offered by one, it had such power, as to break the bands of another body.
Certainly if this sacrifice be of such force, I marvel why the Priests in
prison, offering it with the devotion of worthy Confessors here in England,
should not be able often to loosen their chains, yea and to open the very
prison gates for their deliverance; but this cannot be, because such fictions
never prove true, and these are but fables invented to delude poor simple
souls, that Priests by saying of Masses for them may empty their purses, and
be partakers of their coin. Again, as it is written that here in England A
certain Prince which had been sick of the Palsy a long time, and carried
into Saint Stephens Church, Edinerus Angelus in vit. S. Anselm.
to hear Mass sung by Anselme Bishop of Canterbury, and to receive his
blessing, whereupon he recovered present health. Either this story is invented
to honor Anselme with, or else to approve the Mass by it; or if the Mass be
of such power, how happens it in all this time of persecution, as the Papists
term their small sufferings here in England, that they have no sick persons
cured by so many Masses as are offered by Priests and Jesuits? But all is but
man's invention; and as babes are deceived with shows, so are simple Papists
with false lies and such like fabulous wonders, invented either by ambitious
and foolish Priests, or hypocritical and pharisaicall Monks and Friars. It is
an usual thing in the Church of Rome, by such inventions to confirm one false
doctrine by another so confirmed; so I have noted the doctrine of Purgatory by
the doctrine of the Mass; for diverse Romish Authors have left it recorded,
that Benedictus Octauus Pope was delivered out of Purgatory by the sacrifice
of the Mass, Petr. Dam. Card. Al. l^y. in fest. S. Od^li. (...). Ian. Laur.
Sur. to. 1. lib. 2. cap. 2. An. Ebor. cap. de orat. Cath hist cap 5. tit. 19.
part. 2. Tho. Cant. lib. 2. A^un. cap. 53. part. 14. Cath. hist. cap. 5. tit.
19. part. 5.
and the prayers of Saint Odilus Abbot and his Monks. Here is a miracle
framed not only for the Mass, but also for Purgatory, and praying for the
dead. So likewise I have read of a Priest in France, who being very poor, yet
very devoutly affected to the souls in Purgatory, in so much that every day
without failing he ^ffered the sacrifice of the Mass for them for the which he
was cited and accused before his Prelate, and being brought before his
Bishop, he simply confessed the truth; wherefore he was taxed to payment
of a certain sum, and forced to give surety for the same: which having
sworn to perform, the poor man was in great trouble, finding out none to
answer for him; but instantly the eyes of the Bishop were opened, and he
beheld more than a thousand hands stretched forth ready to give surety for
the Priest. Whereupon the Bishopped said unto the Priest, thou have sureties
enough: go, and according to thine own pleasure and mine, say Mass as thou
have done heretofore. Many other strange wonders could I allege in this kind,
not to be believed, but rather to be wondered at, that any man dares have so
much presumption as by such wicked devises to wrong Gods truth, and to
maintain false-hood; for if it be a true mark of false teachers, which
Christ prescribed when he spoke of those that should do such wonders, that the
elect might be seduced by them; then it follows that the Romish teachers are
those even in this very doctrine of the Mass, who only pretend to have
miracles and wonders to approve it.

10 For in truth they have no one place of Scripture for this sacrifice which
they so highly esteem of; The story of M^lch^sedech wrested to prove the
Mass.
they pretend many figures and types of the old Law, many predictions out of
the Prophets, and also other testimonies out of the Gospel, but they are all
insufficient, weak and impertinent, nothing serving their purpose. So most
impertinently does Cardinal Bellarmine allege the example of Melchisedech,
Desacrif mis. lib 5. cap. 5. and 6. Genes. 14. Psalm. 109. verse. 5.
who brought forth bread and wine, for he was the Priest of the Highest; but
Christ is a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, and not according to Aaron,
as Paul teaches, Hebrews the seventh; therefore he was to institute an
unbloody sacrifice, under the form of bread and wine. This reason of
Bellarmines is of no force, for were it true that Melchisedech offered bread
and wine (which is not) yet nothing else would follow but that Christ offered
bread and wine; which our Adversaries will never grant, for they teach that
bread and wine does not continue after consecration, but that they are
annihilated, and so transubstantiated, that nothing remains of the substance
besides the body and blood of Christ. Besides, Melchisedech did not offer, but
only brought forth (as the Hebrew word signifies) bread and wine, for the
refreshing of Abraham's soldiers, as the Text it self clearly teaches.
Neither is Melchised^ch a Type of Christ, either in offering or bringing forth
bread and wine; but first in respect of the name Melchisedech, the King of
righteousness; secondly, because he was King of Salem, Jsai. 9.6.
and Christ is King or Prince of peace. Thirdly, because Melchisedech was
together both a King and a Priest, and so is Ch^^st. Fourthly, because the
Progeny of Melchisedech is not related, so is Christ a Priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedech. Psalm. 110.4.
Therefore this figure of Melchisedech has no ref^re^^ce to the sa^rifice of
the M^sse at all. Controuers. 5. Confess. Petricomensi cap. 41.
And howsoever Pighius and Hosius say that this is the opinion of all the holy
Doctors o^ the Church, that this bread and wine was offered for a sacrifice to
God, and not for a refection to Abraham: both this exposition and assertion is
false. For both Tertullian contra Iudaeos, and also Epiphanius expound it of
his bringing forth of bread and wine to Abraham; Hebr. 55. Haeres. 55.
Epiphanius says, Abraham was about eighty eight or ninety years old when
Melchisedech met him, and brought forth bread and wine unto him. Lib. 1. cap.
11.
So also does Josephus expound it; Melchisedech milites Abraham hospitaliter
habuit, nihil illis ad victum deesse passus; simul ipsum adhibuit mensae,
Melchisedech used hospitality to Abraham's soldiers, and suffered them to want
no victuals, and did take Abraham to his table. That this is the true sense,
appears by the Hebrew word which does not properly signify to offer and
sacrifice, but to bring forth; and the force of truth makes some of the Roman
Church to confess this to be true. Caietan. in Genesis 1.14.
Cardinal Caietan upon this place writes thus; There is nothing here said of
sacrifice or oblation, but of bringing forth, which Josephus says was done to
the refection of them, which had gotten the victory. And that which in the
vnlgar edition is put after as a cause, for he was the Priest of the most high
God; in the Hebrew is not set as a cause, but as a clause separated from it.
Andrad defens. fidei ^rident. lib. 4.
Andradius also does herein forsake his friends, and acknowledges this to be
the true exposition: his words be these; We need not Kemnitius to strive about
the word offering seeing that both in the best corrected Latin copies, and
also in the holy Fathers which apply this place unto the holy Eucharist, it is
proferens, brought forth; and I in judgment agree with them which say that
Melchisedech refreshed Abraham's soldiers, wearied and fainted with long fight.
By which it appears how unprofitably this place is cited for a figure proving
the sacrifice of the Mass, wherein Christ's true substantial body and blood is
offered in sacrifice, as the Church of Rome teaches under the form of bread
and wine.

11 Very impertinent further is that argument Bellarmine makes for the Mass,
The Paschall Lamb falsely pretended to be a figure of the Mass. De sacrific.
mis. lib. 5. cap. 2.
taken from the Paschall Lamb which he says is an express figure of the
celebration of the Eucharist; saying, That the celebration of the Paschall
Lamb was an immolation of the victime which was offered, therefore the
celebration of the Eucharist must be also an immolation of the victime offered
unto God, that the figure may answer the thing figured. It is a strange thing
that so great a scholar will so impertinently allege such an argument; for
who knows not that the Paschall Lamb was offered also by such as were no
Priests, or if they were, as himself suggesteth, concerning this sacrifice,
there remained an ancient privilege, Li. 1. vitae Mosis
that all householders should exercise the priesthood, as may be seen in
Philo. Besides, any man may see, that the figure does not answer the thing
figured, because the immolation of the Lamb was bloody:which is not found in
the sacrifice of the mass, as the Adversaries confess; as also for that the
Lamb was sacrificed by a multitude, which agreeeth not with the mass, which
is offered but by one Priest at a time. And further, in regard that the
paschall Lamb was not propitiatory for sins, as he holds the mass to be;
but was only done in commemoration of the Israelites freedom from Egypt. There
is no man lastly, that is so ignorant, but knows that the Paschall Lamb was a
figure of Christ's bloody sacrifice upon the Cross, and therefore it can only
be gathered hence, that our Lamb Christ Jesus was to be sacrificed, of whom
Saint John the Baptist said, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world. Now, that we should offer Christ so, as the Adversaries
teach under accidents, without substance of bread and wine, does no where
appear. And albeit some of the Church call the Eucharist by the name of a
Sacrament, yet does it not follow, that the mass is therefore to be approved
as is the same; for it is a fallacious argument from a thing spoken but in some
respect, to conclude the same thing absolutely. The Fathers called the
Eucharist a Sacrifice but in some respect only: as first, in that all sacred
rites may be called by the common word of the old Testament, Sacrifices; Quasi
a faciendo sacra, from doing holy and sacred actions: Secondly, in regard that
in the Supper there is a commemoration of that only and true sacrifice of
Christ, they gave that name to the action from the chiefest and most principal
respect: Thirdly, in regard of diverse prayers powered forth in the celebration
of the Supper, Heb. 5.7. Revel. 5.8. and 8.4.
which are called Sacrifices in the Scriptures: Fourthly, because the
spiritual sacrifices of our souls, as Faith, Hope, and Charity, are
exercised and stirred up by the use of the Supper, that they eu^r understood
it to be such a Sacrifice as our Adversaries teach the mass, where but the
forms of the Creatures, without substance, are adored and worshipped as GOD
himself, and GOD himself sacrificed and offered in substance to GOD, they
will never be able to prove or make manifest, either by Scriptures or
approved Writers of Antiquity, howsoever they may with Cardinal Bellarmine
make show to do it, as he labors to do by the former things so
impertinently misapplied, as the meanest Scholar is able to discover their
insufficiency.

12 Now therefore (courteous Reader) having thus observed the sacrifice of the
mass to be unwarrantable in the holy Scriptures, My resolution upon the
obs^ruation of all the p^emises concerning the Mass.
and not approved by the ancient Fathers, as i^ is now taught in the Church
of Rome; I could no longer continue in league and friendship with that
Church, which pretends so many proofs for it, and has none at all. For
finding, as it appears by all my precedent observations in this Chapter, that
it was never instituted by Christ; that the pretended propitiation thereof
derogateth from the Sacrifice Christ made upon the Cross; that it is but a
novel doctrine in many things unknown to the Fathers of former Ages; that
most hateful Idolatry is committed therein; that it contains ceremonies
very ridiculous, and uncertain in their meaning, not known to the Church of
Rome it self, and such as are neither ancient, nor Apostolical; that it is
maintained and defended by false devised and ba^^ard writings; that it has
many foolish and false prerogatives, given it by the Adversaries; that it is
established and confirmed by many lying signs and wonders, the arguments of an
adulterous generation; that the Types and Figures of the old Testament make no
whit for it: I might well think my self bere^u^d of my right wits, if I
should any longer offend GOD by the still offering of it, as I have done too
often, and by continuing the practice thereof, to the eternal damnation of
other men's souls. Therefore (courteous Reader) if thou art a child of the
Church of Rome, follow no longer such a stepmother, leading thee by public
appearances to thine own ruin, and to the daily provocation of Gods wrath
against thee; hate her fooleries, detest her idolatries, and abandon her
communion, if thou will not eternally perish albeit thou have long lain
asleep in the deadly lethargy of Romish superstitions, awaken at last, and
break off all the bands of thy sinfully-habituated affections to that
Antichristian monarchy, esteem no longer that to be white which is black,
that to be holy which is most ungodly; fear not the curses of the Pope in
denying the Sacrifice of the mass to be propitiatory for sins, his
excommunication will have no such force as Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence
had, Lipelo in vita Ant. 2. Maij.
who denouncing the sentence of excommunication upon a white loaf of bread,
made it as black as a coal, and freeing it afterward from the same curse, it
returned to be as fair as it was before: All the Popes Anathemaes can not make
the bread of the mass otherwise than it is, idolatrous; all the white flower
in it, cannot make it pleasing unto GOD; or a Sacrifice allowable for
Christians. Therefore say thou with me from thy heart, with me in true
detestation of all the abominations committed by such Idolatry; Deus
propitius esto mihi peccatori: Lord, be thou merciful unto me a sinner.

CHAP. XIII. Containing an observation about the doctrine of
transubstantiation, which is a principal novelty taught in the Church of Rome.
AFter the former observations had sufficiently alienated by judgment and
affections from further approbation of the faith of Rome; My proceeding about
the doctrine of transubstantiation.
yet because I thought that I could not be sufficiently enough armed against
those errors and falsehoods, wherein from my youth both my understanding and
affections had been habituated, which would be powerful still to incline and
lead my soul, again, unto those Romish abominations, which long custom had
made familiar, and in conceit religious; I still proceeded further to the
discussion and discovery of other errors, false doctrines, and secceeding
novelties taught in that Church, that more and more beholding her spiritual
fornications and disloyalties, I might in my soul be the stronger to oppse
against them, and the better able to relinquish and abandon with assurance of
truth of my side, and security to mine own conscience, all communion and
participation with her sinful heresies and novelties, and happily avoid Gods
just punishments which are threatened by the holy Scripture against her
disloyalties, to the faith of Christ her heavenly Spouse.

2 Amongst all which there was scarce any one thing that wrought more
powerfully and fearfully in mine understanding, It ought to be a great terror
to adore the creature for the Creator.
even to the terror of mine own soul for my erroneous doctrine delivered to
others, than the discovery of this late and new-sprung-vp doctrine of
transubstantiation, which sets up such an Idol of bread in the Church of Rome,
to be adored as God, that that seems to be truly verified of her which was
uttered long before, Colet Deum quem ignorauerunt patres eius auro and Argento
and lapide pretioso rebusque pretiosis, Dan. 11.38.
He shall honor the God whom his fathers knew not, with gold and silver, with
precious stones, and with pleasant things. The gainsaying of which doctrine
unto the Church of Rome seems so unlawful, that she pronounces most bitter
execrations against those that shall so do, Sess. 13. an. 2.
If any shall say (says the Council of Trent) that in the holy Sacrament of
the Eucharist there remains the substance of bread and wine, together with
the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall deny that admirable
and singular conversion of the whole substance of bread into the body, and of
the whole substance of wine into the blood, the forms of bread and wine still
remaining; which conversion the Catholic Church most fitly calls
Transubstantiation; be he accursed.

3. Yea, The Church of Rome hates the reformed Churches for nothing more than
for impugning the doctrine of Transubstantiation. Pet. Besseus concept.
Theolog. Quadraeg. dom. 3. Dan. 13.
the Teachers and Preachers of that Church do not hate the worthy Professors
and Arch-Doctors of the Gospel for any point of doctrine more, than for
impugning this of Transubstantiation. Peter Besse the great and famous French
Preacher, against Master Calvin and Luther speaks thus, Two wicked old men,
of unbridled lust, did wickedly accuse the most chaste Susanna of Adultery,
notwithstanding that she was the most chaste and honestest that was to be found
in the whole Kingdom of Babylon: here again we see two crafty knaves
marching out upon the Stage, Luther and Calvin, that accuse the chaste Susanna,
viz. the holy sacred Sacrament of the Eucharist, and Transubstantiation, the
chief member thereof, of Idolatry; then the which notwithstanding there is
nothing to be found in the world more holy or divine. And the samd Author soon
after for the same point compares them to the two witnesses, of most deperate
audacitie, that gave false witness against Christ; adding further, That as
Christ was crucified in the middle between two theenes; Ibid.
so likewise we see it fares with the Sacrament of the Altar, where being
placed between two thieves, two most desperate Heretics, it is assaulted with
diverse blasphemies: who a little after speaks unto the Idol in this manner,
and also to God, saying; Worthily therefore, O sacred Eucharist, thou may
cry out, Dirupisti vincula mea, Psalm. 115.
tibi sanctificabo hostiam laudis; And thou, O Lord, Saepe expugnauerunt me a
iuuentate mea; For often, O Lord, have they persecuted thee, often have they
blasphemed against thee, shot their arrows at thee, and chiefly at
Transubstantiation. This Preacher, it should seem, has forgot, that the
doctrine of Transubstantiation is a novelty of no greater antiquity than the
fourth Council of Laterance, Iacques Gualter. Chron. de Pestat. du
Christianis. tries. siecle. Can. 1.
which was held but in the year 1215, under Innocent the third, which is not
yet 400 years since, where that doctrine was delivered in these words; But the
body of Christ, and the blood in the Sacrament of the Altar, is contained
under the forms of bread and wine, the bread being transubstantiated into the
body, and the wine into the blood by Gods power. This it seems his Majesty
very iudiciously observed, when after he had said; If the Romish Church has
coined new articles of Faith, never heard of in the first five hundred years
after Christ, I hope I shall never be condemned for an Heretic, for not being
a Nouelist: where numbering up many novelties which are used in the Romish
Church, he reckons this Transubstantiation for one.

4. Arguments against Transubstantiation. Comp. Theol. verit. l. 5. c. 58.
Which doctrine of Transubstantiation I discovered to contain a notable
Heresy, by the proofs following: First (says Ioannes de Combis) Latria is a
service and reverence exhibited to God: therefore, if the honor due to God be
exhibited unto the creature, it is Idolatry: Latria comprehends five
things, viz. Faith, Knowledge, Reverence, Sacrifice, and Prayer. Whereupon I
framed this Argument: The doctrine of Transubstantiation admits this worship
in the Church of Rome to a Creature, viz. to Bread and Wine; which
notwithstanding the words of Transubstantiation remains still a creature,
otherwise how is Bread and Wine the external signs of inusible grace, as
every true Sacrament is; or how is the essential part, appointed by CHRIST in
the Sacrament, remaining, when it cease to be there; as Transubstantiation
teaches the Bread and Wine does? Nay, the very Scriptures say so much, showing
the Bread still to remain Bread, and the Wine still to remain Wine. Saint
Paul, the heavenly interpreter of CHRIST'S words, does not admit
Transubstantiation, but does so interpret the Sacramental union, that still
the visible elements remain: for the Bread of the Sacrament he calls Bread
still, even after the consecration, to teach, that the substance of the Bread
remains still; and so he calls the Wne still Wine, as appears plainly by
his words, The Cup of Blessing, which we bless, 1. Cor. 10.16.
is it not the communication of the blood of CHRIST? and the Bread which we
break, is it not the participation of the body of the Lord? Now then, if the
Chalice be but a communication of his blood, and the Bread but a participation
of his body, still remaining Bread and Wine (for the thing participating is
not the thing participated) where then is their doctrine of Transubstantiation,
or how can it stand sound with the truth of the Scriptures? He says plainly
further, 1. Cor. 10.16. 1. Cor. 11.26. Verse. 27. Verse. 28.
All we are partakers of one Bread. And again, As often as ye shall eat
this bread. And again, Whosoever shall eat this Bread: besides, Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread. Now therefore, the
Scripture teaching us so plainly Bread and Wine to remain in the Sacrament,
it follows that there is no Transubstantiation in the Sacrament, and so
consequently it is apparent, that all those commit gross Idolatry, that
worship it with Latria; because they give that worship which is due to God, to
the creature, which they believe to be God, teach to be God, and pray to as
unto God.

5. Fathers against Transubstantiation.
Secondly, I summoned diverse ancient Writers, to see whether they would afford
me any warrant for Transubstantiation, and I find them against it, and none
for it. I find Tertullian in express words to say, Jesus Christ having taken
bread, Tertul. l. 4. adu. Marc. cap. 40.
distributed it to his Disciples, he made it to be his body, saying, This is
my body, that is, the figure of my body. I find him likewise to show as much
in express words in another place, Tertul. l. 3. adu. Mars. cap. 19.
saying; God has so revealed it in the Gospel, calling the bread his body,
to the end that thou may thereby understand, that he has given to the bread
the figure of his body. Now then, if the bread be a figure of CHRIST'S body,
according to Tertullian, then it is not transubstantiated. Saint Cyprian says,
Epist. 3. l. 2.
We find, that the Cup which the Lord offered, was mingled, and that which
he called his blood was wine. See here Saint Cyprian gives but a denomination
to the blood, attributing substantial being to the wine by the Verb
Substantive. Lib. 8. demonstr. Euang. cap. 1.
Eusebius is also clear agianst Transubstantiation in these words, JESUS
CHRIST gave unto his Disciples the signs of the divine dispensation,
commanding them to celebrate the figure of his own body. For seeing that he
did now no longer receive the sacrifices of blood, nor the slaughter of diverse
beasts ordained by Moses, he has taught us to use the bread for a sign of
his body. See here it is still called bread, and a sign of the body, how
then is it transubstantiated? Saint Augustine also stands against
Transubstantiation, De doctrine. Christian. l. 3. c. 16.
saying; These words, Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, are a figure, commanding us to partake the Passion of
CHRIST, and profitably to remember, that his flesh was crucified for us. Now
therefore, if the eating the flesh of the Son of man, and drinking his blood,
is but to partake of the Passion of CHRIST, and a profitable remembrance, that
his flesh was crucified for us, how did Saint Augustine teach the doctrine of
Transubstantiation? Nay rather, does he not most plainly insinuate the
contrary; I find also the same Doctor to say against Adamantus. Chap. 12.
The Lord made no difficulty to say, this is my body, when he gave the sign
of his body. Here I observe the word Body to be expounded by the sign of his
body. Who says in an other place, Epist. 23. ad Bonifac.
The holy sign of Christ's body is after a sort the body of Christ: and the
holy sign of the blood of Christ, and so the holy sign of faith (to wit
Baptism) is faith. Surely Baptism can not be said to be Transubstantiated
into faith, how then can the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ be
substantially transubstantiated into the body and blood of Christ: Saint
Augustine in an other place is yet plainer against Transubstantiation, saying:
Understand that which I say spiritually, Super Psalm 98.
you shall not eat my body which you see, neither shall you drink the blood
which my Tormentors shall shed, I have recommended unto you an holy sign,
which being spiritually understood shall make you live. Behold how clear S.
Augustine is against Transubstantiation. So also is S. Chrysostom, that golden
mouthed Doctor of Greece, most clearly gainesaying the doctrine of
Transubstantiation in the Sacrament, saying: The bread before it be sanctified,
we call bread, Ad Caesar. Monachum.
but when the divine grace sanctifies it, it is delivered from the name of
bread, and is thought worthy the name of the Lords body, though the nature of
bread remain still. Now (courteous Reader) if I should not judge impartially, I
can not but here conclude that if the nature of bread remain, the substance of
bread can not be changed into the body of Christ substantially, and therefore
no transubstantiation can follow.

6. I can not omit here to record Gelasius, who says: Other strong places of
ancient Fathers agianst Transubstantiation De duabus naturis Christi.
The bread and wine pass into the substance of the body and blood of Christ,
yet so as the nature of bread and wine cease not; and they are turned into
the divine substance; yet the bread and wine still remain in the property of
their nature. If this be true that the nature of bread and wine cease not,
and that the bread and wine still remain in the property of their nature,
then can not transubstantiation stand. For hereby Gelasius confuted Eutiches
the Heretic, holding that Christ had but one nature, and that in regard of the
union the humanity was turned into the Deity; against which error he opposed
the doctrine of the Eucharist, showing that as therein bread and wine after
consecration were honored with the name of his body and blood, and received
grace to their nature to be a holy Sacrament, though still they remained in
their former nature and property: So the humanity of Christ received grace by
the hypostaticall uniting it to the Godhead, and yet still retained the former
property to be humane flesh. Therefore had Gelasius belief been answerable
to the present Church of Rome concerning Transubstantiation, he not only could
not thereby have confuted Eutiches, but Eutiches might by that very doctrine
most probably have confuted him. Who might right well have argued thus: Thou
Gelasius think the Sacrament a resemblance of the incarnation of Christ, and
the union of his two natures; but in the Sacrament the bread and wine after
consecration remain no more, but are turned into the flesh and blood of
Christ, and so there is but one substance. After this manner may I likewise say
in the Incarnation, after the union the humanity remains no more, but is
changed into the Divinity, and the Nature is but one. What could Gelasius have
answered to this Argument, if he had held the doctrine of Transubstantiation?
Hence it is evident both by his words, and the scope of his disputation, that
he held it not. Not unlike to Gelasius is the doctrine of Theodoret, Dial.
immuta. fol. 8.
writing thus. Our Savior in delivering the Sacrament called his body bread,
and that which is in the cup he called his blood, he changed the names, and
gave his body that name which belonged to the sign, and to the sign that name
which belonged to his body. The reason why he thus changed the names, was,
because he would have such as partake the divine Sacraments, not to heed the
nature of those things which are seen, but for the change sake of the names
to believe the change that is made by grace. For he called it wheat and bread,
which by nature is his body; and again on the other side he called himself a
Vine: Thus honoring the simbols and signs which are seen with the name of his
body and b^oud, not by changing their nature, but by adding grace to nature.
And further the same Author in an other place reprehending the Eutichian
heretic says. Dialog. 2. Inconfusus.
You are caught in your own net, for the mystical signs after consecration
do not depart from their nature, but they abide in their former substance,
form, and figure, and may be seen and touched as before. If they depart not
from their nature, if they abide in their former substance, figure, and form,
if Christ changed not the natures, but the names, adding grace to nature; how
can the doctrine of transubstantiation, in the judgment of this writer, stand
free from the impeachment of an erroneous innovation?

7. How modern Authors of the Church of Rome show the doctrine of
transubstantiation to be novel. De verit. corp. and sang. p. 46.
And so I find even by the confession of the learned modern Writers, this
doctrine is but novel, and of small antiquity, and has not been believed as
a matter of faith in the purest ages of the Primitive Church: for it is well
known, that before the Council of Laterane no man was bound to believe
Transubstantiation, as themselves confess. Tonstal says, It was free for all
men, till that time, to follow their own conjecture, as concerning the manner
of the Presence. Scotus and Biel are reported by the later Schoolmen to have
been of mind, That the opinion is very new, and lately brought into the
Church, Soto. 4. d 9. q. 2. art. 2. and 4. Suar. tom. 3. d. 5.4. d. 10. q. 2.
ad arg. pro prima. sect. 1.
and believed only upon the authority of the Laterance Council. And Scotus
himself says, We must say the Church, in the Creed of the Laterane Council,
under Innocent the third, which begins with the words, Firmiter credimus,
declared this sense concerning transubstantiation, to belong to the verity of
our faith. Besides Scotus and Bellarmine confess; Scot. d. 11. q. 3. Bellar.
Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 23. Turrec. tract. 13. q. 49.
There is no Scripture to convince it, unless ye bring the Church of Romes
exposition, that is to say the Popes authority, in whom they think the power
of the universal Church in determining matters of faith principally resides.
Now therefore if this doctrine be no more ancient than the Council of
Laterane as it is clear, I oppose against the accurse of the Council of
Trent, the malediction of blessed Saint Paul, a better man than any in the
Council of Trent, who pronounces a direful Anathema against any that shall
teach other doctrine than what he taught; how fearful a state then do all
Popish Priests stand in, that teach this novelty of Transubstantiation
diametrally, contrary to the places of S. Paul before cited: 1. Cor. 10.16. 1.
Cor. 11.26. Verse. 27. Verse. 28. Euagrius. 4. lib. Hist. c. 35. Niceph. lib. 17.
cap. 25. Hiesich l 2. super Leuit. cap. 8. Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 8. August. cont.
lit. Petil. lib. 9. c. 30.
It is well known that it was an usual thing in former ages, in diverse places
to give the residues of the Sacrament to little children, as Euagrius and
Nicephorus have left recorded to posterity: Yea and in other places of the
Christian world, as Hesichius teaches; neither has it been thought much in
former times to give the bread of the Sacrament into the peoples hands, and
sometimes permitted them to carry it home, which is a sign that they
conceipted not then the doctrine of Transubstantiation, which has caused it
since to be adored, and have made it a sinful act for Lay people to touch
the Sacrament, yea and have brought it to such a fond esteem, that if a Fly
or a Spider fall into the wine, or any like thing, which can not without vomit,
or danger of death be taken down, the Fly or Spider, or what else, must be
taken out and washed as warily as may be in a Chalice, and the Priest must take
the ablution, but the Fly or Spider must be burnt. Ibidem eodem cap.
Or if a sick man vomit up the body of the Lord, it must be taken up again as
diligently as may be, and taken by a Priest, or by some clean and discreet
youth, if the sick man can not resume it himself.

8. The inconveniences of approving Transubstantiation.
Besides, the inconveniences that follow of this doctrine of
Transubstantiation, are so many that no man almost out of common sense can
admit it, unless be will fondly suffer himself to be carried away with such
a general implicit faith of the Church of Romes inerrabilitie, whereby he may
fall into as many heresies and dangers of seduction, as a blind man is in
danger of falls, if he will only walk by the guidance of an other as blind as
himself. Hence it follows that it must be believed, that accidents are
without a subject, whereas the nature of a Sacrament requires no such matter;
like as when the wood is burned, the color of the wood should remain alone
without a subject; that Mice that know the consecrated Host, do know bare
accidents alone, and thta the glorified body of Christ are subject to the
grinding of teeth. That no work of God neither of Creation nor of Redemption,
is so great as the work of consecration by the Priest, by which
transubstantiation is performed. Whence it is come that the Romish Divines hold
that many miracles together are done in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, whereof
Ioannes de Combis reckons up nine, so fond and ridiculous, that it is a
wonder any man can believe them: as first, In Comp. Theol. verit. lib. 6. c. 14.
That the body of Christ is in as much quantity there, as it was upon the
Cross, and as it is now in heaven, yet does it not exceed the bounds of that
form; with all the rest of like nature: Hence to breed a belief of this
doctrine, the Romish writers tell us that the Sacrament being lost in a Village
of Komele in Germany, in a Pixe, Caesar. lib. 9. c. 7.
it was discovered in a field by the Oxen that did worship it, kneeling down
upon the ground, which neither by whips nor cries would not stir out of the
place from worshipping their Creator, till it was taken away by the Parish
Priest, who fetched it away with cross, candle, and incense, in great
reverence. They tell also how a certain woman going to the Communion, reserved
the Sacrament, and put it into her hiue amongst her Bees, as one had counseled
her; whereupon the pretty Bees were so religiously affected to their creator,
that for the fit entertainment of so great a guest, S. Anto. 3 p. sum. tit. 12.
c. 8. ff. 3.
they built him a goodly Chapel in wax, with walls, windows, doors, caves,
and Altar to rest him upon, with a bell also; and when the time was come that
the honey was to be taken out, the woman raised up her hiue, and beheld this
fine miracle, which caused her with great fear to go and confess her fault to
the Priest, who with his Parishioners carried the Host with great reverence to
the Church.

They tell also for a great miracle concerning this doctrine, S. Bonauent. in
vit. 8. Francis. Cath. Hist. cap. 5 tit. 13. part. 4.
how that S. Francis had a sheep which ordinarily went to Church, which at the
time of Elevation of the Lords body, that the people might worship it, bended
down his head, fell upon his knees, showing all other tokens of worship and
adoration, which much moved the assistance to greater devotion: They tell
further, Joan. Mefreth. in hort. Reign. ser. de coena Domini.
that when a woman cast the Sacrament amongst Swine, they kneeled down to it,
and worshipped it; how she roasted it, and it fell a bleeding; how she buried
it in the earth, and yet still the blood flowed forth: whereupon moved to
compunction, she believed the true body of Christ to be in the Sacrament, and
did penance for her incredulity all the rest of her life. Many other the like
incredible fables they have left recorded to move men to worship the bread and
wine in the Sacrament with divine honor due only to God, and so to confirm
this novelty of Transubstantiation, the which since there are no Scriptures to
support it, I can not believe it; as also for that the observations of the
reasons noted in this Chapter, induce me to the contrary belief. Therefore
(dear Reader) beware how you believe the Romish doctrine, established with
such lying signs and wonders; rejecting both Scriptures and Fathers to the
contrary; make not a corruptible creature your God and Maker; give honor and
glory unto God only, who by his infinite mercies requires it at thy hands,
and, as I have done, renounce all society in rites, ceremonies, and acts of
religion with the Church of Rome, that that of David may be verified both of me
and thee, Psalm. 1. v. 1.
saving: Blessed is the man that has not walked in the council of the
ungodly, nor stood in the way of sinners, and has not sit in the chair of
Pestilence: which happiness thou may enjoy if thou followest not the
ungodly Counsels of Laterane and Trent, in this point of doctrine, if thou
continuest not in that Church, and restest not thy self upon that Pestilent
chair of Romes infectious Idolatries.

CHAP. XIIII. Contains an observation about the Sacrament ministered but under
one kind to Lay people in the Church of Rome.
I Have read in a certain Preacher that the Writers of natural things have
left recorded, The Sacrament under one kind gives not life unto the soul.
Petrus Besseus Concep. Theol. fer. 2. mayor. Heb
that there is a certain herb to be found upon the Alps, having only two
branches, which is of such a strange natural power and officacie, that the
beasts living upon those mountains, if they chance to taste but of one of those
branches, forthwith they die, but if they eat of both branches, they take no
hurt or damage, but are nourished thereby; Even so do I observe upon the
mountains of holy Scripture, the plant of the holy Eucharist having two
branches of bread and wine, by Christ's institution, of such nature and
quality, that if by faith his faithful flock eat but of one branch, and
leave the other, they perish through heresy, but if by faith they taste and
feed of both branches, that is, both of bread and wine, they feel much good,
they are strengthened in the life of their soul, and are much nourished
thereby; according to that of Christ: Joan. 6.
Nisi manducaueritis carnem filij hominis and biberitis eius sanguinem, non
habebitis vit am in vobis; Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. Whereby I observe the great
danger the Church of Rome stands in, which will afford here sheep in the
Sacrament only one branch, viz. the bread, and bereave them of the other
branch, viz. the wine; and on the contrary side the great happiness of the
Church of England, which affords Christ's faithful flock both branches of
the blessed Sacrament, as well Bread as Wine, according to Christ's own
institution. This inducement amongst many has not been the least, which has
as comfortably drawn me to the Church of England, as the star which
appeared to the three Sages in the East, guided them in a short space to the
presence of Christ, swadled in clothes, and lying in a Crib at Bethlem; having
in imitation of them now offered up my three gifts unto Christ, to be employed
wholly in his service, my Understanding, my Memory, and my Will, with all my
faculties of body and soul, depending or subject unto them, for the
propagation of his Gospel, for the demolition of Romish novelties, and for the
manifestation of his unspeakable mercies showed unto me, and the reformed
Churches, in freeing us from those damnable errors and wicked ways, wherein
the Church of Rome leads her blinded followers, which fondly shut their eyes
from the Sunshine of truth, appearing in the holy Scriptures, and from the
Prophets and Apostles, who like shining stars by their doctrine, recorded in
the book of Gods secrets, would both comfort and direct their souls in the
right way to heaven, if flying with humility to Christ, and acknowledging
their own blindness, they would cry out with devotion unto him like the
poor blind man in the Gospel; Domine fac vt videam; O Lord make me to see.

2. Howsoever the adversaries in the Supper of the Lord make no reckoning of
the wine, Both forms must be in the Eucharist.
which is essential to the Sacrament, yet the true faithful knowing the
dignity and excellent value thereof, will not be so unmannerly, being invited
thereunto, as to neglect that which Christ provides for them. For being
rightly informed, that as in the great and pompous supper which Cleopatra
Queen of Egypt set before Antonius, there were two precious jewels and
gemmes brought to Antonius, which were esteemed to be worth two hundred and
fifty thousand Crowns: Even so in the supper of the Lord, in the blessed
Eucharist, which is the great supper prouded in the Church of God for his
faithful friends, there are two jewels of inestimable price, that is, the
bread and wine, by means whereof the flesh and blood of Christ, the rich price
of our redemption, is conveyed unto our souls; therefore there is no just
cause why the Church of Rome, pretending to be the chaste Spouse of Christ,
should be so scornful of the rich gift of her heavenly Spouse, who liberally
offers her both these jewels, as most discourteously to suffer and permit,
that the lay people should be deprived of the one of them, since Christ has
appointed both for them. The practice to be so, is sufficiently known to all:
and that the doctrine of the Church of Rome is so, also appears by the
Council of Trent, saying; Council. Trident. ses 21. anno 1.
If any shall say, that by Gods Precept, or upon necessity of salvation, all
and every faithful of Christ ought to take both forms of the most blessed
Sacrament of the Eucharist, let him be accursed. And agine, If any shall say,
Cap. 2.
that the holy Catholic Church was not led upon just causes and reasons to
communicate lay men, and Clerks also not consecrating, only under the form
of bread, or therein to have erred, let him be Anathema. By which it is most
apparent, how the Church of Rome does not only cross Christ's institution, and
disobey his commandment, but also overthrows the very essential part of
the Sacrament.

3 For first, The ministration of the Sacrament under one form is repugnant to
the essence of the Sacrament
there is nothing more essential in a Sacrament than the matter and form
thereof; as in Baptism, the water, and words: so in the blessed Sacrament of
the Eucharist the essential parts thereof are the Bread and Wine coniunctim,
jointly, and the words of consecration of either of them jointly, and not
divided; for the Catechism of the Council of Trent defines a Sacrament thus:
Cathe. ad Parachos.
A Sacrament is a thing subject to our senses, which by Gods institution has
power, as well to signify as to effect holiness and righteousness. Whereby
it appears, that the sensible sign, instituted by God, is a thing essential
to every Sacrament. Which appears also b Johan Viguerius, saying, De sacra.
in Gene. c. 16. v. 3
It is necessary that the things which are assumed for the Sacraments, be
determined by Gods institution, because that things by their natural virtue
have no power of sanctifying. Now therefore, if we consider the matter and
sensible signs instituted by Christ for the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
Jnstit. c. 16. ff. 3. verse. 1. Thom. 3. p. q. 74. art. 1.
Johannes Viguerius tells us, That the matter of this Sacrament, before
consecration, is bread and wine, because Christ took bread and wine; and
Melchisedech, who in his sacrifice figured Christ, offered bread and wine, so
Christ did institute it under the forms of bread and wine; and very
conveniently: First for the use of the Sacrament, which is eating; for as water
is taken in the Sacrament of Baptism for the use of spiritual ablution,
because corporal ablution is commonly done by water: so bread and wine for
spiritual refection, because most commonly men are corporally refreshed
therewith. Secondly for signification, because this Sacrament is a memorial of
the Lords Passion, in the which the blood was spearated from the body; so
distinctly the bread as a Sacrament of the body, and wine as a Sacrament of
the blood. Thirdly for the effect, in respect of the whole Church, which
consists of diverse believers: so the bread is made of diverse corns, and the
wine of diverse grapes. Out of this ground it seems, that the Jesuit in Rome
delivered in the School the definition of this Sacrament in this manner, which
I took from his mouth with mine own pen; which is, De sacramentis tract. 4.
c. 1. dico 3.
That the Eucharist is a Sacrament, which under the forms of bread and wine
contains the body and blood of Christ, for the nourishment of spiritual
life given by Baptism. From all which doctrine I most clearly gather, that
bread and wine jointly ministered belongs to this Sacrament; and that without
overthrowing the essence of this Sacrament, according to our adversaries own
Teachers, it cannot be given under one kind to the lay people: for it is to be
given to lay people according to the essential parts thereof, instituted by
Christ: but according to these Writers, the essential parts thereof are bread
and wine jointly, as the matter; the form being the words of consecration,
jointly pronounced over either form, ergo the bread and wine coniunctim are to
be ministered to there people for the integrity of the Sacrament. Whence it
follows, that the Church of Rome, by the amputation of one form utterly
crosses and overthrows the nature of the Sacrament, and so makes it no
Sacrament at all, because so it wants an essential part thereof. Therefore
very justifiable is his Majesty's assertion, when reckoning up the novelties of
the Church of Rome, amongst the rest he ranketh the amputation of the one half
of the Sacrament from the People. Praemonit.


4 Secondly, that the doctrine of the Church of Rome does cross Christ's
institution, It also crosses Christ's institution.
is also most clear to any judicial man: for as my Italian master teaches
me, That the Eucharist was instituted in the last Supper, Tract 4. de sacra. c.
1. dico 2.
after the washing of feet, before the usual Supper, the first is a matter of
faith out of the Gospel, and it is defined in Clementine Vnico, in the
Tridentine Council, where it says, Ses. 13. c. 1. and 2.
This is the tradition of the ancient Fathers. Now then, if this be so, we
must examine, whether Christ did institute it under both kinds, or not: for if
he did, then certainly it is also so to be ministered likewise to the people,
because he bid that to be done in remembrance of him which he himself did
then: his meaning not being to institute two Sacraments of the Supper, whereof
the one for the Priests should consist of two parts or of two kinds, the
other for the people but of one. I find Saint Matthew to record Christ's
institution in this manner; As they did eat, Jesus took the bread, Mat. 26.
v. 26.27.28.29.
and when he had blessed it, he brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and
said, Take eat, this is my body. Also he took the Cup, and when he had
given thanks, he gave it them, saying, Drink ye all of it, for this is my
blood of the New Testament, that is shed for many for the remission of sins.
I find aso Saint Mark to set it down thus; Mark. 14. v. 22.
And as they did eat, Jesus took the bread, and when he ahd given thanks,
he brake it, and gave it to them, and said, Take, eat, this is my body: And
also he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks, gave it to them, and
they all drank of it; and he said unto them, This is my blood of that New
Testament, which is shed for many. S. Luke records it thus, Luke 22.19. and 20
And he took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it and gave to
them, saying, This is my body which is given for you, do this in remembrance
of me. Likewise also after supper he took the Cup, saying, This Cup is that
new Testament in my blood which is shed for you. 1. Cor. 11. v. 23 24.25.26
27.28.29
And S. Paul most largely explicates the same Institution, saying; I have
received a Precept of the Lord, which I also have delivered unto you, that the
Lord Jesus, in the night when he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had
given thanks, he brake it and said, Take eat, this is my body which is broken
for you, this do ye in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he took
the Cup when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the new Testament in my blood,
this do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me; for as often as ye shall
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the Lords death till he come:
Wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink the Cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Let every man
therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of
this Cup; for he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his
own damnation, because he discerns not the Lords body. Now out of all these
places of S. Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. Paul, I find both kinds
instituted by Christ, and so inseparably intimated with a copulative
conjunction, that whosoever separateth them, can but most insolently oppose
himself against Christ's institution, and the essence of the Sacrament. What
greater pride can there be, than when Christ says in express words, Drink ye
all of this, as well as eat the bread, than with the Church of Rome to
contradict him, teaching the people only to eat the bread, and not drink the
wine? Or what greater presumption, than so rudely to thwart S. Paul? who
calls the institution of the Sacrament a Precept, which he delivers to the
people, specifying both forms of bread and wine, commanding as well the
receiving of the wine to be drunk in remembrance of Christ, as the bread to be
eaten; and therefore if the one bind lay people, the other also does as
strongly oblige them, especially since S. Paul in another place says thus; 1
Cor. 10.16.17.
The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? for we that are may, are one bread, and one body, because we do
partake of one bread and one Chalice. The Church of Rome taking away the
participation of the Chalice, in ministering the Sacrament to lay people only
under the form of bread, makes S. Paul to speak false, who joins both
forms together with a conjunction copulative, showing that we are many one
body, because we participate of both, making us all one. And it is here to be
noted, how the Bibles printed amongst our adversaries, do vary about this
Text, and may be suspected, that they have played Legier du maine with the
Bible, as well in their last corrected Latin as in the Greek concerning this
Text, for in them both (of one Chalice) is left out, and yet in an old
Manuscript which I have now in my hands, and in another Bible printed at Paris
in the year of our Lord 1583, the text is, That omnes quidem de vno pane and
de vno calice participamus, We all partake of one bread and of one Chalice.
Whereby it is more than probably to be feared, some notorious imposture has
been committed in leaving out the Chalice in the latest vulgar editions. So
that now all these places of Scripture being iudicially weighed, the amputation
of one part of the Sacrament seems not only to control Christ's own
institution, but also his absolute commandment.

5 Besides, that it is a mere novelty, It is also a novelty. Lib. de Eccles.
obseruat. c. 19. p. 388. Thom. in 1. Cor. 11. lect. 5. and 6. Aeneas Sil. Hist.
Bohem. c. 52. Bellar. de Euehalib. 4. cap. 26.
not grounded upon antiquity, is most apparent to all that rightly examine the
matter, for at the first the people received the cup as well as the bread;
afterward (says Micrologus) the Roman Order commands the wine also to be
consecrated, that the people may fully communicate; and this was approved by
many learned Writers. Yet in time the Council of Constance, See. 13. ff. item
ipsae, forbad it, and then all of the Church of Rome began to change their
minds. Afterward the Council of Basil released the decree of Constance to
some, as to the Bohemians; and the Council of Trent confirmed it again. Ses.
21. c. 2.
Whereby it is apparent, that the modern Church of Rome has swarued in this
point of faith from which it believed formerly, and since it began to be the
seat of Antichrist. The most ancient Liturgies in their own form show, Cyril
Cath. mystag. 5. Liturg. Marci page 62. Thom. p. 3. q. 80. art. 12 q. 3. Hom.
16. in nu. 1
that the people received the wine as well as the bread. And Caietane says,
This custom endured long in the Church; and that they had ministering cups
for the nonce to serve the people with wine, which none will deny. Origin
says plainegly, Christian people were accustomed to drink the blood. And S.
Cyprian, How do we make them fit for the cup of Martyrdom, Epist. 2.
if first we do not admit them by the right of communication in the Church, to
drink the cup of the Lord? The same Author, or another as ancient, Sermon. de
coena Dom.
in another place says, The Law does prohibit the eating of blood, the Gospel
commands that it be drunk. That the Chalice also was used in S. Ambrose his
time, himself shows, Apud Theod. 5. Hist. 15. In 2. Malach.
speaking to Theodosius; With what boldness will thou partake with thy mouth
the cup of precious blood? S. Hierome says in express terms, The Priests
which make the Eucharist, and distribute the blood of the Lord to the people.
And Paschasius says, Super cap. 15.
Drink ye all of this, as well the ministers as the other believers. Apud
Gratian. can. Comperimus de consecrat. did. 2.
Gelasius says, We find that some receiving only the portion of the sacred
body, abstain from the cup of sacred blood; Who doubtless (because I know
not by what superstition they are taught to be obliged) either let them receive
the entire Sacraments, or let them be expelled from the entire Sacraments,
because the duision of one and the same mystery cannot be without great
sacrilege. All which places do most lively express the faith and practice of
the ancient Church to have been otherwise than it is now in the present Church.

6 Is it not a lamentable thing to see, Observe well this Council Ses. 13.
that the Council of Constance confesses, That Jesus Christ instituted and
administered the Sacrament under both kinds, and that in the Primitive Church
this Sacrament was received by the faithful under both kinds: And yet against
Christ's institution and the practice of the Primitive Church, the same Council
most blasphemously complains, That in some parts of the world some rashly
presume, that Christian people ought to receive the Sacraments under both
kinds; and thus censures it to be presumption and rashness to follow Christ.
Of the Fathers of that Council, with the Pope himself, I may well say,
Concilium inierunt vt caperent Iesum in sermon. Exodus 7.
But as the Serpent of Moses devoured the Serpents of the Sorcerers, so Christ
will overcome the malice and craft of such wicked counselors. It is a folly
for our adversaries to say, That when Christ said, Do this in remembrance of
me, he spoke only to Priests; for then it would follow, that the lay people
may be debarred of both kinds: and it is as impertinently objected, that the
Apostles were Priests, therefore Christ's Precept, Drink ye all of this,
belongs to Priests only, for then the Primitive Church did amiss, and S.
Paul the Apostle also, who delivered the Supper to the lay people, without
amputation of either kind, in such manner as he had received it of the Lord. My
conclusion upon the precedent observation.
Now therefore, upon due consideration of all the premises, finding the Church
of Rome to adulterate the word of God, to overthrow the nature of the
Sacrament, to go against the doctrine of the Primitive Church, and to check
most impudently Christ's own institution, cursing them that believe as Christ
teaches, and do as he commands, in drinking as well of the Cup, as in
eating the Bread of the Sacrament, without division or amputation, I see no
ground of faith to warrant the doctrine of the Church of Rome in this case; and
therefore it is to be feared (unless God show her the greater mercy) for all
her maledictions and curses, to the terror of poor simple Christians, she her
self will one day inconsolably taste of the bitter cup of Gods wrath and
indignation, which upon the sudden will be poured upon her, to her utter
ruin and destruction; and she that has so much afflicted and tormented
others, will find it true, that Horrendum est incidere in manus Dei viuentis,
It is a horrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

CHAP. XV. Containing an observation of the Pardons and Indulgences which the
Peope annexeth to Crosses, Grains, and Meddals.
I Have observed in reading the lives of Saints a story worth the noting, John
the Bishop of Jerusalem, Metaph. in vita S. Epiph. Laurent. Surius, 12. Maeij.
who having with his honors changed also his mind, being surprised with
extreme covetousness, he grew to heap up great store of treasures beyond all
reason or measure: which Saint Epiphanius understanding, endeavored to draw him
to some liberality toward the poor: but he who preferred his gold before all
other works of charity, cared not for the poor. Epiphanius seeing this,
obtained of him a certain sum, more by force than by love, which he
distributed amongst the poor with great joy. Few days after the Bishop
redemanded again his money with great importunity, unto whom Epiphanius gave
good words, promising to repay him soon after: but the Bishop was not
contented, but used him with some violence, uttering injurious speeches against
him, calling him impostor and cosener. Epiphanius nothing troubled, spit in his
face, wherewith instantly stricken blind, he fell to the ground; whereupon at
length he acknowledged his fault, craving pardon. Then Epiphanius showed him
into what a gulf of covetousness he was plunged, and putting his hand upon
his head, restored him his right eye again; who praying him to restore him
also his left eye, the holy man refused it, to the end he should be always
warned by that mark, ever after to use more modesty, and more carefully to
avoid that plague of covetousness. In this example (courteous Reader) you have
a lively representation of the Bishop of Rome his insatiable avarice, now that
he is come to such temporal greatness in this world; and consequently of the
spiritual blindness, wherewith God has strooken him for the same, not
suffering him to see the light of truth, but to run headlong into diverse
inextricable heresies, as a just punishment for such his greedy desires; for
the novelties, which are now broched in the Church of Rome, were not known
till this hateful sin of avarice took hold of the Popes, Indulgences
grounded upon the covetousness of Popes.
and drew them to employ their studies more in gathering together temporal
wealth, than the riches of Gods graces, and true knowledge of the Scriptures.
For hence and from this source only has flowed diverse points of doctrine, now
current in Rome, more tending to the amplification and enlarging of his
temporal Kingdom, than the Kingdom of Christ's Church amongst which the
doctrine of Pardons and Indulgences is not the least profitable for the filling
up of the Popes cofers, and giving contentment to his auaricious desires,
arguing the great spiritual blindness God has permitted him to fall into in
punishment of the detestable sin.

2. Indulgences disproued by their definitions.
Now this observation having auerted my mind from the Church of Rome with
diverse others, and laid open unto my soul, the most foul abominations of
that Church, for the better explication of her erroneous doctrine concerning
Indulgences and Pardons, I must show thee (courteous Reader) how this auersion
grew in me by the examination and study of truth. First, I began to examine
the true nature of these Romish Indulgences and Pardons by the definition of
them, which I found in Cardinal Bellarmine to be thus expressed. Lib. 5. de
poenit. cap. 2.
Indulgences (says he) are the remissions of pains, which are to be endured
after the remission of faults, granted unto the faithful for a reasonable
cause by the high Bishops out of a Fatherly lenity and condescension. Ioannes
Viguerius the great Scholar of Spain calls Indulgence: Joan. Viguer.
Instit. Christi. cap. 16. verse 29.
A distribution of the treasure, or an application of the penalties of the
supererogation of Christ or of his Saints, for the remission of pains due for
passed sins, made by him, that rules the Universal Church, with judgment
of discretion. Siluester their best Summist for cases of conscience, defines
it thus. The Ecclesiastical Indulgence, Siluest. verb. Jndulgentia. number. 3.
is a donation of some thing taken out of the spiritual treasure of the
Church, made unto a sinner that he may satisfy God, the creditour of his
pains. Thus these learned men of Rome write of the nature of Indulgences.
Whereupon first I note out of Bellarmine, that these pardons are not to be
granted without a reasonable cause, and according to Viguerius with judgment
of discretion; yet notwithstanding this is contradicted by Emanuel Sa the
Jesuit, who says: That some say an Indulgence given without cause is of
value; Verbo Indulgen. number. 1. Bonauent. 4. d. 20.2. part. q. vlt. Solu. 4. d.
21. q. 2. art. 2.
others do not only require a just cause, but such a cause as is
proportionable to the Indulgence. I, but Sa himself peremptorily affirms; I
think no doubt to be made of an Indulgence given from the Pope. Where I note
this man to be more the Popes Friend than the rest, who whether the Pope with
just cause or without just cause grant an Indulgence, he approues it; and
further I observe a great difference amongst the Romish Writers in this point,
and therefore no credit to be given to those that so much disagree in the
cause why Indulgences should be granted. Secondly, I note out of Siluester,
that the subject of Indulgences is a sinner, I mean, as he says, it is
granted to a sinner; and yet this seems to be contradicted by him and
others; who says: He that is not in Gods grace obtains not Indulgence. Sil.
Lerb. Indulg. 5. Tho. 3. p. q. 27. art. 1. Solu. 4. d. 21. q. 2. a. 3. Adrian.
4. de Indulgent. col. 13. Concl. 3.
Thirdly, I observe moreover, that whereas the Pope grants Indulgences
oftentimes, both from sin and pain, which now is grown ordinary, he
crosses the Doctrine of these Authors, who in the definition of an
Indulgence, make mention only of remission of pain, and not of the sin, for
according to their own Doctrine else where, both mortal, and venial sins
are taken away by the Sacrament of Penance, as the proper subject and matter of
their Sacramental absolution.

3. Now for the establishment of this doctrine of Indulgences, The Scripture
abused about Indulgences.
they have no Scripture, as far as I can perceive, of any force, which has
made the Reformed Churches to term these Papal Indulgences, pious frauds of
the faithful, inventions, and impostures; and his Majesty discovering as
much, justly to reckon them amongst the trash depending upon Purgatory, To
Christ. Mon. f. 43.
not worth the talking of: yet do they not stick to be so presumptuous as to
allege Scriptures most indiscreetly for their doctrine, as namely Ioannes
Viguerius does, as if he had got a great victory against the Reformed
Churches in this point, proving the name of Indulgence to be found in the
Prophet Esaias, his words (which he cites) are these. Notwithstanding to
convince their ignorance, Instit. Christ. c 6. 6. verse. 19.
and unbridled boldness, we must show the name Indulgence, expressly to be
found in the sacred Letters, in the same sense the Church uses: And this
chiefly in Esaias the Prophet, where in the Person of Christ he says. The
Spirit of the Lord upon me, in that he has anointed me. He sent me to
announce unto the meek, to heal the contrite of heart, to Preach Indulgence
unto Captives, releasement to those that are shut up: and so it can not be
denied, that the name of Indulgence in the sacred Letters is not to be found.
And that Esaias wrote according to the intention which the Church uses, Christ
the Lord, has declared in S. Luke, where it is said, Luc. 4.
that when upon the Sabbath he entered the Synagogue of Nazareth, he rose up
to read, and the Book of the Prophet Esaias was deliucred unto him; and turning
the Book he found the place where it was written; the Spirit of the Lord upon
me, for that he has anointed me, he has sent me to Euangelize to the
poor, to heal the contrite of heart, to Preach remission to Captives: behold
how the name Indulgence, Christ interprets remission. But of what Indulgence
spoke Esaias? truly of sins, for the pardoning and remitting of which, Christ
was sent by God the Father; and because in sin there are two things, to wit,
the fault and the pain, the remission of the fault, and also the remission of
the pain, is rightly called Indulgence. But the Church as is said takes
Indulgence for the application of penalties of supererogations, of Christ, and
his Saints, by which pains are remitted; therefore nothing is more manifest
than that the name of Indulgence is found in the sacred Letters, according to
the intention which the Church uses. Here I see a brave proof of a vaunting
Spaniard, who with his Spanish Brauadoes thinks to have conquered, but I
believe when he shall have found the strength and truth of his encounterers,
whom he terms Heretics; if he were now alive, he would say as I have heard
reported once by an English Gentleman, that served sometimes amongst them of a
Countriman of his; who fighting against the Soldiers of the Reformed Religion
in the Low Countries, and finding his powder so moist that with often putting
match to it, it would not take fire, in most blasphemous manner, see swore in
the Spanish tongue. I vow to God, that this day, I think, God is become a
Lutheran. For in very truth if the Texts which Viguerius cites, so
confidently, thinking by them to overthrow all the Lutheranes in the world, be
well and rightly understood, you shall find them to be of no efficacy at all,
and to be but match and powder without fire; that is, Scripture and his own
sense, and private understanding without the fire of the holy Ghost, without
the Spirit of truth, and the comfortable Master teaching all truth; for the
prophecy of Esaias only foresheweth how Christ the Messiah, coming into the
world, should Preach the remission of sinners to all in general, and delivery
to those that lived in the darkness of ignorance, before the coming to Christ
as the Gentills, who should find mercy and truth by Christ as well as the
Jews. Neither will I deny, (which makes nothing for Viguerius) but that the
remission of sins, and also the remission of pains due to sin, is meant by
the word Indulgence, the infinite guilt of sin, and the eternal pain due to
sin in hell fire, (both which belong to sin) being taken away by the blood
of Christ, and therefore if the eternal pain, why not also the temporal? what
reservation did Christ make, or his Apostles, to show that the ternall pain
should be remitted, and the temporal be reserved only for the Pope, to be
pardoned by means of crosses, medalls, grains, rings, knotted cords, and the
like childish trinkets? O miserable blindness that cannot discern such gross
errors, and so great a profanation of Christ's merits and satisfaction, Sweet
Jesus, open the eyes of all that are thus blinded, let them see how the sacred
Scriptures are foolishly misapplied, wickedly wrested, racked, and most
impiously profaned for the supporting of Romish novelties. I will not show how
impertinently other places are applied by Bellarmine for the confirmation of
the same Romish error, my designement not being to write a whole Book of
Confutations, but only to point at the chief observations I made in diverse
points of religion inducing me from Romish errors and idolatries unto the light
of truth.

4 Upon further consideration of indulgences I find also, The doctriue of
Romish In dulgences not ancient.
that as they are not established by Scriptures rightly understood, so neither
are they supported by antiquity in the primitive age of the Church. Bellar.
cites Greg. the first to have granted Indulgences in the days of stations,
Bellar. de sacra. poenit. lib. 5. ca. 3 in 4. did. 20. q. 1 artic. 3 quast. 2.
Alt. sum Theol. tract. 6. ca. 9.
for proof whereof he cites Thomas Aquinas; and Altisiodorensis who was before
Thomas; he cites also Leo the third, who as S. Lugderus writes, at
Aquisgraue in the Palace dedicated a Church to the blessed virgin Mary,
enduing the same Church with many indulgences. He cites besides Sergius the
second about the year 844. who granted indulgences of three years and of
three Quadrigenaries unto those that should visit the Church of S. Martin upon
the mountain, Spist. de sanct. Suuiberto apud Sur. tom. 2 post S. Suuibert.
upon the feast of the same Church. He cites likewise Urban the second to have
granted a plenary indulgence to those that went to the holy wars. He cites
also Martine the fifth to huae granted a plenarie indulgence: And the Council
of Trent to have approved also the use of Indulgences. Amongst all which cited
by Bellarmine, Pope Gregory the first lived in the sixth centurie, Pope Leo the
third, who was successor to Pope Adrian the first lived in the eight centurie;
Sergius the second, successor to Gregory the fourth, lived in the ninth
century; Urban the second, successor to Victor the third, lived in the eleventh
centurie; Pope Martin the fifth by some called Martin the third, successor to
John the one and twentieth, lived in the fifteenth centurie, as appears in
the French Jesuit James Gaultier. Table Chron. de l'estate du Christianisme.
Now therefore, when I do seriously consider these assertions of Ioannes
Viguerius and Cardinal Bellarmine for the practice of Indulgences, the
ancientest they cite is Gregory the great, who lived in the sixth centurie,
which was after the sowing of much cockle and more heresies, man being asleep;
no such practice having been known by any Pope before then, whereby it
appears that their doctrine, even by their own assertions, about these
pardons and indulgences is but a new doctrine lately sprung up in the christian
world and has not the mark of Antiquity to stand in defense of it.

5 This I find also even by Bishop Fisher to be most true, Other late writers
show the novelty of Indulgences.
who says, That so long as there was no care of Purgatory, no man sought
after Pardons, for on it depends the credit of Pardons; When therefore
Purgatory was so lately known, and received in the Church: Assert. Luther.
confut. art. 18. page 86.
who now can marvel at Pardons, that in the beginning of the Church there was
no use of them? Pardons therefore began after that they had trembled a while at
the pain of Purgatory. I find also that Durandus says; There are few things
to be affirmed for certainetie concerning Pardons, 4. d. 20. q. 3.
because the Scripture speaks not expressly of them: and the Saints, Ambrose,
Hillarie, Augustine, Jerome speak not of them at all. Caietane also the great
Schooleman says; There can no certainty be found of the beginning of paerdons
There is no authority of the Scripture or ancient Fathers Greek or Latin
that brings it to our knowledge. Tra Hat. de Indulg. ca. 1.
And Alphonsus shows in very plain terms, that they are but novelties,
saying; Their use seem to have come but lately into the Church. Haeres. verbo
Indulg.
And Henriquez a Jesuit often cited by the Readers in Rome has these words;
There be ceertaine late Dinines which affirm it is no rashness, Sum mor. li.
7. cap. 3.
if a man say the use and practice of Indulgences is not from the Apostles
times.

Now, this being considered which these Writers esteemed most learned by their
own associates, do find (even contrary to cardinal Bellarmine, who cites
Scriptures for proof of Indulgences) that there is no mention of in the holy
Scriptures, nor Fathers, nor the ancient Church, I could not but conclude, but
that certainly they are novelties not to be embraced, the doctrine of them is
but cockle that ouergroweth the good corn; it is after-comming, and therefore
not to be esteemed. So that now finding no good ground of these Pardons, I can
find no truer ground of them in all rpobabilitie, than that the Popes being
desirous to enrich themselves with money, have devised them for the emptying of
men's purses throughout all Kingdoms subjected to his usurping authority, like
Boniface the ninth, of whom it is written; That he sent into diverse Kingdoms,
his Treasurors with Pardons, Theod. a mem. de scismat. lib. 1. ca. 68. page 20.
who extoried thereby very great sums of money from the simple people: that
in some one Pronince they would get together above an hundred thousand florens,
and released all sins to them that confessed unto them without any penance.
Therefore as I said in the beginning anarice caused spiritual blindness in
Popes, and blindness, as a punishment, confirms them more and more in their
errors.

6 Is it not strange, considering all reason to be against this doctrine of
Indulgences, that the Church of Rome will by her comminations still curse those
that embrace it not, as the Council or Trent does all those, That affirm them
to be unprofitable, Ses. 25. decret. de Indulgentijs.
or deny any power to be in the Church to grant them. What, shall not (as I
said before) the blood of Christ as well take away the temporal pain due unto
sin, as the eternal? or is not his satisfaction infinite? what need then
the superfluous satisfaction of Saints (...) Did the ancient Church ever
speak of other Pardons than of the Pardons of outward penances, which ere
enjoined for public satisfaction of the Church? Has not Christ fatisfied for
the whole world? what need then of the satisfactions of Saints? what more than
Indulgences instilleth a vain security into the souls of men, and
overthrows the foundations of all true contrition? is not Gods forgiuesse and
remission expressed with an Omne debitum dimisi tibi: Matthew. 18.32.
I have forgiven thee all thy debt: if every debt, why not aso the debt of
temporal pain, if an exception can be showed, why is it not made manifest?
Now judge (beloved Reader) whether here be not sufficient reason to make me
or any other say farewell unto the Romish Church that thus enthralleth souls,
prophaneth the blood of Christ, disableth the Sacraments, and picketh men's
purses by the devised doctrine of her Ecclesiastical Indulgences; Dear Jesus,
pardon my former fault, make me see better hereafter, let me with true
compunction for this error say with the holy Prophet David; Erraui sicut ouis
quae perijt, quaere seruum tuum: I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek
thy servant, O Lord, Psalm 119. verse 176.

CHAP. XVI. Containing an observation about the number of seven Sacraments
admitted by the Church of Rome.
IN my travels in the Low Countries, Vain is the terrors of Romish curses
against the truth.
in a fair corne-field to drive away crows and other birds from the corn,
will most artificially frame the reprefentation of a terribleman standing over
the corn with a grimme countenance, and with bow and arrows drawn up to the
head, to the great terror of all birds that none may approach, as if forthwith
he would hit all that came near. So likewise when I confider how the Church of
Rome uses the show of terrors and comminations to keep Christians from
feeding upon the wholesome truths and verities growing in the spacious fields
of Gods word, I find much cause of laughter to see she should think men
endued with reasonable souls should have so little sense as not to discover
her vain scarecrowes of curses and excommunications, which are only terrible
in words and just nothing in effect, but counterfeit terrors without hurt or
harm; as for example, she makes a great show in words concerning the number of
seven Sacraments, as if she would shoot every one to the quick that will be so
venterous as to approach unto the field of Scriptures to know the truth
thereof; her threatening show is this, Council. trid. sess. 7. desacra. in genere
Can. 1.
If any shall say that all the sacraments of the new Law were not instituted by
Jesus Christ our Lord: or that there are more or fewer then seven, viz.
Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreame-unction, Order and
Matrimony; or also any one of these seven not to be truly and properly a
Sacrament: be he accursed. Here is the definitive sentence of the Church of
Rome, casting you out of her Synagogue if you gainesay her decree; it is
curiosity with her, and great presumption to examine her doctrine, you must
not be so hold as to taste of the sweet and most pleasant fruits of Gods word,
the arrow is drawn up to the head against you, the terror of Anathema must put
you to flight, Christ's doctrine must be no longer the little grain of
mustard seed grown up above all herbs, for his faithful birds to sit upon
the boughs thereof; this scar-crow Anathema, must put all to flight.

2 But those that are wise and iu siciall do discover the vanity of this
frightful spectacle; Those that are wise discover the vanity of them.
with the Berraeans they will examine the Popes doctrine, by the Scriptures, as
they did Saint Paul's, they will follow the directions of Doctor Stapleton, who
appoints also a mean to try the doctrine of false teachers by antiquity,
even for all the common sort of people. They will, as a great Doctor and
Champion of the Popes said to me once, find that it had been better that the
Pope had left many of the doctrines of the Council of Trent undefined, because
so many new Anathemaes makes the world begin to suspect, that the Popes labor
more to subject people unto them by terrors then by truth, as men do children,
who to keep them in awe, will tell them of Hobgoblins and Robin-good-fellowes
and such like, that will fetch them away if they be unruly, and leave not their
crying; Which policy my self partly observing to be used by the Church of
Rome even in a modern example of Paul the fifth his Breue against the oath of
allegiance, thinking only by the bare words declaratiue, without any one
reason alleged for the unlawfulness in taking it, other then his own plain
assertion; to strike such a terror both into his own children, and into the
King and State, as if none would dare to gainsay it; but blessed be almighty
God, who has so communicated the beams of his unspeakable wisdom unto him
and his loyal subjects, yea and unto many of the Popes own children, who were
long seduced by his pretended inerrable power, that they dare not only believe
the contrary, but also openly avouch it to the world, and join foot to foot
in defense thereof both with pen and sword, if need be, howsoever the Jesuits
would think themselves aduantaged if both sides should come to this latter
encounter; but I trust God out of his mercy will dispose of milder courses,
more manife sting therein his sweet providence and mercy for those that live
in a most blinded and yet zealous ignorance of the errors they are in wrapped
in by the slights of their false teachers seducing them, who are much more
industrious and laborious for the kingdom of Antichrist, than the true
professors of the Gospel are for the kingdom of Christ, according to our
Saviors own words, Prudentiores sunt filij tenebraru^ quam filij lucis in
generatione sua, The children of darkness are more prudent in their generation
than the children of light. Against whom I will daily pray that those who stand
as sentinels over the reformed Churches may both have and carefully practice
our Saviors words, in another place, as an wholesome Autidote: Estote prudentes
sicut serpents and simplices sicut columbae, Be ye prudent like serpents, and
simple like doves; using serpentine prudence to defend their faith, and
sovereign rulers as their heads; though with hazard of their own bodies and
lives; and not omitting such a sweet doue-like simplicity and mildness without
gall of malice, that their adversaries may be overcome by the observation of
their wisdom and their Christian-like charity toward them.

3 But to return whence I am digressed, The Church of Rome by terrors more
the^ by proofs endeavors to plant the belief of seven Sacraments.
I discover the idleness of the Romish Anathema by the error and novelty of
the doctrine of seven Sacraments, for the desence whereof the Council has
thundered it out, for I can find no Scriptures making properly for seven, no
nor any one ancient Father reckoning seven only, and no fewer nor more; as for
Baptism and the blessed Eucharist, there is no doubt to be made; for all the
things which the Church of Rome requires to a Sacrament properly taken do
concur therein; Belarm. lib. 1. de sacra. Bapt. cap. 1. Hebr. 6. verse. 4.
Ephe. 5. verse. 26. John 3. verse. 5.
the external right is expressed in Saint Paul, calling it; The lauer of water
in the word of life. The institution and commandment; unless a man be borne
of water and the spirit, he cannot come unto the kingdom of God, etc. and in
going teach ye al people baptising them in the name of the Father, Mark. vlt.
v. 16.
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; the promise of grace: who beleeneth
and is baptized shall be saved, but who believes not shall be damned. So
likewise in the Eucharist, the external rite is found to be bread and wine;
Mat. 26. verse. 26 Ioh 6. verse. 57.
The institution and commandment at the last supper; do this in remembrance of
me: The promise of grace: he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides
in me and I in him. Whereby it is apparent that of these two Sacraments the
Scriptures show all the things most plainly belonging unto a Sacrament properly
taken as the Church of Rome understands of Sacrament, with all the things
necessarily belonging thereunto; and therefore that these two are Sacramnts is
clear in their understanding, which the Church of England according to all
antiquity does admit: but the other five received by the Church of Rome either
in one effe^tiall thing or other belonging to a Sacrament properly taken are
defective, as either in the sensible sign, or in the institution and
commandment, or in the promise of grace, notwithstanding that all must
concur according to the Church of Rome to a true Sacrament. Now therefore
although I could particularly show by the disabling of the other five, that
there are not seven Sacraments as the Council of Trent defines; yet because I
will avoid prolixitie, I will only prove it by showing that penance is no such
Sacrament.

4 All Divines of the Church of Rome do jointly agree that every Sacrament
consists of matter and form: Penance no Sacrament properly, neither is
auricular confession any essential part thereof. Tho. Aquin. part. 3. quaest.
84. art. 2. in corp. S. Tho. part 3. vbi supra art. 3. in corp.
the matter say they, of this sacrament are co^trition, confession and
satisfaction for the sins on the behalf of the penitent: the form is the
words of absolution pronounced by the Priest: Thomas of Aquine their chief
Doctor, says thus: The nearest matter of this Sacrament are the acts of the
penitent; whose matter are sins, which he repents, which he confesses and
for which he satisfies. And in the next article he shows the form, saying;
It is clear that this is the most convenient form of this Sacrament; I do
absolve thee. With whom Viguerius also agrees, saying; Ioannes Viguer. Instit.
cap. 16. verse. 1.
The nearest matter of the Sacrament of Penance are the acts of the penitent
contrition, confession and satisfaction; the matter of which acts, are sins,
which the penitent repents, which he confesses, and for which he satisfiesh.
In whose assertions I observe two notable errors; first that they count Penance
a Sacrament, which is only a virtue disposing men to the Sacrement of the
Eucharist, according to that, Probet seipsum homo and sic de pane illo edat,
Let a man prove himself, and so eat of that bread: which proving must be by
repentance. And secondly, that they make auricular confession consisting in a
circumstantiall enumeration of sins in their numerall distinct kinds to a
Priest, an effentiall part of that Sacrament; neither of which can be proved
in Scriptures. I cannot but admire to see so great a Doctor as Thomas Aquinas
was, Tho. Aquin. part. 3. de sacra poenit. art. 1. sed contra. Act. 8.
to make a most weak argument for proof of this Sacrament; saying, that as
Baptism is adhebited for the purification of sin, so Penance; Therefore
Peter said to Simon, do penance for this thy wickedness, but Baptism is a
Sacrament as is said before; therefore Penance also for the like reason. Here
is a stout reason and of great force certes, especially when we consider that
the Angelical doctor following the vulgar translation, misalleageth the
Scripture; for in the Greek set out by Arias Montanus, the Greek word (...),
signifies not, do penance, Arias Montan. in 8. Act. Apost. verse. 22.
but repent thou, as the same Author though a Romanist translateth it. Neither
is it here to be omitted how notoriously the Rhemists do deprave the same
place of Scripture, who in excuse of their following the vulgar translation
add a notable falsehood and untruth, saying; In annot. Act. 8. verse. 22.
That the Greek (...) does signify as much; is it not strange then that Arias
Montanus, I think as good a Grecian as any of them, would have swarued from
their translation? but their imposture in this place is most inexcusable,
showing that they care not what they say, so they may cross the reformed
Churches, as appears: when in the table before the new Testament printed anno
1600 wherein they charge the English editions of false translation they say most
impudently: Matthew. 23.2.
that, for [do Penance] they translate [Repent] charging Protestants to corrupt
the Greek it self which they pretend to transtate; is not this a shameless
impudency? considering that the foresaid Arias Montanus following the Greek
translateth as Protestants do, Aries Mont, in Matthew. 3.2.
poenitemini, repent ye, out of the Greek word (...). Why is he permitted in
the Church of Rome, if his translation be corrupt? or if his be good, why
should Protestants be condemned for corruption in that place, and the former?

5 But the Angelical Doctor proceeds to prove penance to be a Sacrament by
impertinently alleging a place out of S. Luke; Vbi supra art. 7. sed contra
Luc. vlt.
It was behoouefull for Christ to suffer, and to rise from death the third day,
and penance to be preached in his name, and remission of sins to all people. In
which text, if you consider the words following, you shall find that he
speaks of such penance and remission as began at Jerusalem; according to
Montanus, who translateth (...), incipiente^ beginning at Jerusalem. Now I pray
what was the penance and remission of sins beginning at Jerusalem? it is clear
in the Acts of the Apostles what it was: for after S. Peter had ended his first
Sermon, the hearers were compunct in heart, Act. 2 37.
and asking S. Peter with the rest of the Apostles, what they should do, S.
Peter answered Poenitemini, repent ye (as Arias translateth out of the Greek)
and let every one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins; Thomas apply the place of S. Luke, the plain words of the
Gospel, to prove a Sacrament; for I trow no Popish writer will say that the
repentance beginning at Jerusalem upon S. Peter's sermon before Baptism
received, was a Sacrament; for they all hold that their Sacrament of Penance
takes away only sins after Baptism. And the same Angelical Doctor
himself says; Tho. Aquin. part. 3. quaest. 84. art. 6. ad 2.
that Penance which goes before Baptism, is not the Sacrament of Penance.
Hence appears the first error of Thomas Aquinas and Viguerius holding penance
to be a Sacrament.

6 Now secondly, Auricular confession not infti^uted by Christ as an essential
part of a Sacrament.
I find most clearly that auricular confession by the penitent to a Priest
made, by a particular enumeratio^ of al a man's sins according to their
numerical and distinct kinds, is by no place of Scriptures to be proved, nor
was instituted by Christ as an essential part of a Sacrament, howsoever the
Council of Florence call Penance a Sacrament, and the material parts thereof
the acts of the Penitent: and Lucius the third calls confession a Sacrament:
Cap. ad abolendum de Haereticis. De sacra Poenit. lib. 1. cap. 15.
But how shall this be true, says Bellarmine, if it belong not to the
essential part of the Sacrament? As for those Scriptures which Bellarmine
alleges for confession as a part of his Sacrament of Penance, they are very
impertinently alleged; first I find that he affirming the three parts of
Penance to be Contrition, Confession, Bellar. de sacra poenit. lib. 1. c. 11.
and Satisfaction; and to prove Confession to be a part of Penance, Numb.
5.6.7.
cites a place out of Numbers, which is this; The man or woman when they have
done all the sins which use to happen unto men, they shall confess their
sin; which place according to the meaning can have no reference to the
Sacrament instituted in the law of grace; for here mention is made of
acknowledgement and confession to God, or of some public act of injustice to
a man's neighbor, which is to be satisfied by restitution, as the words
following do express. And therefore if the meaning of this place belong to
Penance as a Sacrament, it will follow, that then it was a Sacrament of the old
Law also, Vbi supra.
and not a Sacrament only of the new Law instituted by Christ. Again, a
second place for his Confession as a part of his Sacrament of Penance, he
cites as if he cared not what he said, a place of David, saying to God; 2.
King. 24.10.
Peccaui valde in hoc facto: which is most ridiculously applied, because there
David confesses not to any Priest but to God. Jonas 3.5.
A third place he cites out of Jonas the Prophet to the same purpose, And let
them cry to God in fortitude: which place is meant of importunate prayer to
God for pardon for their sins; which he wrestes to Confession; so he
wresteth also the prayer of the Publican, Luke 18.13.
O God be merciful unto me a sinner; which he says belongs to
confession. Now the judicial Reader, if he mark well the force of his
argument and the end, shall easily see that the Cardinal does very
impertinently allege these places, for though these places do somewhat make in
general for the acknowledgement which a man ought to make of his sins to
God, yet they nothing make for that auricular confession which the church of
Rome teaches is to be made to a Priest. For he there going to prove that
Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction, are acts of the virtue of Penance,
will needs infer thence by necessary consequence, that therefore they are
parts of actual penance, under the nature of a Sacrament for the remission of
sins, which in truth is one of the most ridiculous arguments, and such a
profanation of the sacred word of God, as I never read the like: and I wonder
how such an illation could be inferred from such a premissie by so learned a
man. If it were true that a certain Hampshire Recusant calumniously reported
of me not long since, to one of his Majesty's housebold, viz. that I was
distracted, and out of my wits, and therefore no marvel if I were become a
Protestant: I verily think I could scarce make a more witless argument, or
with less judgment allege Scriptures, then their learned Cardinal the
chief pillar of their Church here has done. But I hope that almighty GOD
(unto whom I often say with the most zealous and humble affections of my heart,
Da mihi intellectum Domme and scrutabor legem tuam, Give me understanding, O
Lord, and I will search thy law;) will preserve me from such sinister
understanding, and give me such judgment as may daily discover the like
impostures against truth, and GODS holy word, and free the truth of Gods cause
from many of their disgraceful calumniations, which can issue from no other
source then the Devil the Author of lies, whose implacable hatred and malice
will never cease against the true Church of GOD to stir up such lying
children as will imitate his own wicked nature.

7 As impertinently as this text, Another impertinent allegation. 2. Cor. 5.18.
the Cardinal alleges an other for proof of the Romish auricular confession
out of S. Paul to the Corinthians, he has given unto us the ministry of
reconciliation; and he has put in us the word of reconciliation: for Christ
therefore we are Legates. O God, O heaven, Paul, or not? I will not judge my
self, I will only oppose what lies in Saint Paul going before, and following
these passages cited by him. Can this place be meant of absolution after a
particular enumeration of sins to man, if you consider what Saint Paul says
before; Behold, Verse 17. and 18
all things are made new, but all of God, who has reconciled us unto himself
by Christ: where it appears the chief means of reconciliation is by Christ,
as it is said in the nineteenth verse, Not imputing unto them their sins; and
the ministerial means of reconciliation by the Clergy, does it not appear
to be by preaching the word and exhortation, and not by any power to absolve
after auricular confession? for the Apostle after he had said; He has given
us the ministry of reconciliation, and has put in us the word of
reconciliation: Does he not show the means of this ministerial
reconciliation, to be by preaching and exhorting? God working it so, and no
otherwise by them, when he says; For Christ therefore we are Legates, God
as it were exhorting by us. Who forthwith performs this ministerial office
and duty of reconciliation, saying; For Christ we beseech you be reconciled
to God. Paul, judge whether Christ be not the chief cause by not imputing to
sinners their sins; and surther, whether the Priest be here expressed to be
the ministerial cause, otherwise than by way of exhortation; concluding, Him
that knew no sin for us he made sin (that is, Upon this place
a Sacrifice for sin) That we might be made the justice of GOD in him.
Judge ye now therefore out of all these places, whether the Cardinals
allegation of Saint Paul make any thing for auricular confession, or not, as
it is a part of the Romish Sacrament of Penance.

8 A third place of Scripture alleged for auricular confession by Cardinal
Bellarmine, is taken out of Saint James, chap. 5. where it is said; Confess
therefore your sins one to another; and pray one to an other, that ye may
be saved. Which place does neither make for Auricular Confession, nor for
absolution by the Priest; for immediately before Saint James imputes the
remission of sins to prayer in Faith, saying; The prayer of Faith shall save
the sick, and our Lord shall lift him up, and if he be in sins they shall
be remitted him. Again, the words seem not to import that Auricular
Confession the Church of Rome uses, for they are spoken as well of the Priest,
who is to pray, as of the sick, for a mutual and reciprocal prayer each one
for the other; now the Priest is not by Auricular Confessio to confess to Lay
people that he may be prayed for, for according to the Papists, that
Confession is for absolution only; but this Confession Saint James speaks
of, is meant of such a Confession, as joined with prayer a man may be saved by
it; and that which in the Romish sacramental Confession saves a man, is the
absolution of the Priest, who as a Judge gives a judicial sentence of pardon,
which is the form of the Sacrament of Penance, and not as a suppliant prays
for his neighbor, which is only intimated by Saint James: neither is it
apparent that Saint James means more by this text, than mutual Confession of
them who have trespassed one the other; and therefore may be thought right
well, that he means in these words no more than Christ did concerning
reconciling our selves with our brother offended, that so the offerings of our
prayers to God may be acceptable one for an other, when he said, Matthew. 4.25.
Go first to be reconciled to thy brother, and then coming thou shall offer
thy gift.

9 A fourth place which I discover most miserably and fondly wrested by
Cardinal Bellarmine, A text mise. rably wrested. 1. John 1. verse 9
is out of the first Epistle of Saint John, where he says; If we confess
our sins, he is faith full and just for to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all iniquity: whereupon he says; Vbi supra.
Hence is Sacrament all Confession probably gathered: but it may more truly be
said; Hence is Confession of our sins to God most clearly to be gath ered,
and the other most probably confuted, For first the words, He is faithful to
forgive our sins, is spoken of GOD, and not of any Priest, as may appear by
the words following, if we co^nfesse not to GOD; If we shall say that we
have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us: By which it is
clear, that Saint John also speaks here only of Confession in general to
GOD, as also may appear by the words before, If we shall say, that we have
no sin, we seduce our selves, and the truth is not in us. Secondly, that by
this confession is meant that which we ought to make to GOD, is evident by the
Rhemists, who for the better understanding of this place do refer us in the
inner margent to the third book of Kings, chap. 8. verse 47. and to the second
of Paralipomenon chap. 6. verse 36. both which places make against Auricular
Confession; the first mentioning prayer to God and acknowledgement of sins
only in general. Peccauimus, inique egimus, ininste gessimus; We have
sinned, we have done naughtily, we have behaved our selves wickedly: The
second place also expressing as much almost in the very same words. Whereby it
appears how much the Cardinal abuses this Scripture, and wresteth this Text
against all right sense and meaning, which cannot possibly be applied for the
justifying, of his Auricular Confession. Now therefore finding by due search
and examination, that none of the places of Scripture cited by Cardinal
Bellarmine, the chief Pillar in this our age of the Roman faith, do prove
either Auricular Confession to be necessary to salvation, or to be truly
any material part of Penance, as a Sacrament instituted by Christ Jesus, it
follows as a most certain truth, that the Church of Rome has most grossly
erred in defining the number of Sacraments to be seven, cursing all those
which shall hold and maintain the contrary. Which curse and threatening of
the Church of Rome no man has cause to scare, that esteems of S. Paul's curse
upon those that shall teach other doctrine than wha the taught, or that findteh
himself less surprised with the fear of men's threatenings, than with the
fear of God, who can cast our souls into hell fire.

10 And in very truth, Diverse Authors show auricular confession not to be
ancient. Socr. li. 5. ca 19. Tripartit. hist. lib 9. and 35. Sozom. li. 7. c.
16 Niceph. libr. 12. cap 28. Wald. tom. 2 de saora. ca 141. Dom a Sot 4. dest.
8 q 1. Henriq sum. page 325. And^ Orthodox expl c. page 663. B^ron tom. 1. ann
56. nu 28. Homil 22. ad pop. Antioch.
when I look backward upon the beginning of Christianity, as by the
Scriptures I find no such doctrine of auricular Confession to Priests, as a
thing necessary to salvation, so do I find it a novel doctrine, not
agreeable to Antiquity, but to have had beginning after the planting of
Christianity: For Nectarius the Bishop of Constantinople; Put it down in his
Church, and all the Bishops of the East did the like in theirs: This the
learned est Writers of the Roman Church know well enough and acknowledge,
railing upon Nectarius for so doing; as Andradius and Baronius do: which is a
sign that the reformed Churches rejecting confession, break no commandment
of God, but follow the example of the primitive church that refused it. This
seems to be most clear by S. Chrysostom, saying; This is wonderful in God,
that he not only forgiueth us our sins, but neyth^r does he disclose them,
or make them known, neither enjorceth he us to come forth and teil them; he
requires no more but that we speak to him alone, and to him alone confess
our faults. It is not likely that these learned and holy Bishops would thus
have done and also taught, if Auricular Confession with a numerall account of
every particular sin to a Priest had been generally received as an
essential part of penance, necessary to salvation in their times. I do
find by diverse that there is scarce any kind of thing which causes more
scandal unto the Clergy it self, than this Doctrine of particular
enumeration of sins; For a certain Writer says: Religious men themselves in
no thing sin so much as in dissembling confessions. Alua. Pelag. de planot.
Eccles. lib 2. art. 28. p. 255.
For scarce or seldom at all do they confess otherwise then in general
terms, naming no great sin. What they say one day, that they say the next,
as if every day they sinned alike. Yet this abuse is nothing to that the same
Author adds, saying: That it was an ordinary practice for the Priests to
commit execrable villainy with the Women at confession, as if they were the
Sons of Eli, Art. 127. pa. 111
rauishing wives, and deflouring maids in the Church, Art. 2. page 83.
and committing Sodomie with young men; with other stuff then this, affirming
That the Church was made a stews. I find further that an other Romish Writer
says: Art. 2. and 73. and 83. Cornel. Agrippa. de vanit. c. 64.
I could by many examples fresh in memory show how fit this confession is for
bawderie: for Priests, Monks, and Nuns have this special prerogative, that
under pretense of religion they may go up and down, when, and whither they
will; and under color of confession talk with any woman, whom they
oftentimes entertayne but homely, closely they go to the stews, ravish
virgins and widows; yea many times, which my self have seen and known,
run away with men's wives, and carry them to their fellows; and hereby whose
souls they should gain to God, their bodies they sanctify to the Devil.

II. ^isconueniences overthrowing auricular confession.
Many other proofs might be alleged of the inconveniences of auricular
Confession, as by opening such sins by women or young men, as the very hearing
of them strikes impression in the Priests, and many times engenders such
occasions of temptations to them, as they have no power to resist them:
besides, even to the penitents also some sins into which they may fall by
humane infirmity, may be of that nature that they can never have the heart
through bashfulnesse to confess them, and then follow imperfect confessions,
and after continual remorse, and perplexities of mind, which make their whole
lives irksome unto them, drawing them into the remediless gulf of
desperation; especially when the sins are such in weak natures, as the
Apostle Saint Paul himself thought unfit to be named, which are fitter to be
opened to GOD than to Men. Therefore no man can well think that auricular
confession is a sovereign medicine for sin, which often is an occasion of
much sin. No doubt JESUS CHRIST, and the Apostles, were as careful to
preserve men from sin as the Pope can be, and yet they never prescribed this
medicine. For certes, whosoever fears not to commit sin in the presence of
God that sees all men, will as little blush to confess it after their manner
to a Priest, whom they may deceive; and he that regards not the law of God,
will care as little for the Priests absolution; the fear of God, and awe of
his truth, being of more force to bridle our sinful nature than the policy
of man: so that to conclude, observing this auricular confession not to be an
essential part of Penance, nor to have any warrant in the word of God, nor to
be ancient doctrine without beginning since Christ and his Aposses, nor to be
agreeable to reason in respect of many inconveniences that ensue of it: it
follows that Penance is not a Sacrament, instituted by Christ, and
consequently that there are not seven Sacraments instituted by him, as the
Church of Rome teaches: and therefore I could no longer be frighted with the
Excommunication of the Council of Trent, against those that should deny this
doctrine; like those qui trepidant timore vbi non est timor; Who tremble for
sear, where there is no cause of fear.

12. Strange sables devised for the pr^ose of auricular coniession.
I remember a notable fable worth the relating, devised to breed fear and
terror for want of total confession into the ears of a Priest, which is
recorded in diverse Writers of the Church of Rome, of which two one of them was
Penitentiarius to the Pope, a man of great learning and good life; and the
other, to wit, the youngest was a simple unlearned man. In mag. Spec. exemplor.
did 9. p. 531. Guil. Pip. tr. 1. super Conc. c. 13. ex lib. qui dicitur Scala
coeli.
It happened that these two travailing abroad together, were lodged at a
certain Castle where a great Lady dwelt, that had committed Adultery, nay
Incest, with one of her own Kin. Who out of the shame she had conceived,
for having committed so enormous an offense, remained for the space of eleven
years without going to confession to her Curate, who entertaining this
religious couple, and observing them in their carriages to be virtuous and
grane, and not to have any acquaintance with her, and considering that perhaps
they might never come again to her house, she thought she might do well to
make her confession to the elder of the two, and chiefly in respect of his
authority. The next morning she went to him, desiring him to hear her
confession; who being willing, bad his companion to withdraw himself a little
a side, which he did; yet sometimes casting his eyes toward them, he
perceived that at every sin the Lady confessed, a Toade went out of her
mouth: but being at last near the point of confessing her most odious and
detestable sin, where with her soul was charged, for fear and shame she
durst not express it; whereupon the young religious Friar, who stood at the end
of the Chapel, saw all the mentioned Toades return again into her mouth.
Soon after these two religious men departed; and being upon the way, the
youngest began to tell the elder that which he had scene when the Lady was at
confession with him; whereby the elder understood that the same Lady, A strange
tale about a Lady not confessing all her sins.
willingly and to her knowledge had concealed some sin, which she had not
confessed, who forthwith returned back again unto her, to admonish her to
look well to her conscience, but alas he found her dead. And as he prayed to
God for her three days together, at length she appeared unto him with a
chain of read hot iron about her neck, with two Serpents embracing her, and
sucking her breasts, with two Toades in her cies; from her mouth and nostrills
issued forth fire and brimstone, and about the hair of her head there were a
great number of Lizardes: who said unto him. O Father I am that accursed and
miserable woman, that two days since made a confession unto you, but because I
did willingly conceal the sin of Adultery and Incest, behold I am damned
for ever. With that the Confessarius adjured her by the living God to declare
two things unto him; first, the signification and meaning of these diverse
pains. Unto whom she answered, that the Lizards crawling about her head, were
for the punishment of the dressings she wore about her head: the two Toades
which covered hereies, were the punishment of her wanton and lascivious looks:
the flaming darts were for punishment of her detractions, defamations, foul
and dishonest songs and speeches: The two Serpents which suck my breasts
signify the foul touchings which have been committed upon me: The cruelty
of the Dogs that devour my hands, are punishments for mine own unchaste
touchings of my self, and for that I have given presents unto my Lovers, out
of the goods wherewith I might have relecued the poor Servants of CHRIST
JESUS: I am seated upon this Dragon that puts me to unspeakable pain and
torment, burning my legs and thighs in punishment of all my wicked deeds.
Then the Penitentiarius willed her to expound his other doubt, namely for what
sins men of these times were principally damned. She answered, that men went
down to Hell for all manner of sins: but women chiefly for four sorts of
sins; for the sin of luxury; for their sins of vain apparel and
painting; for witchcraft; and for their shame to confess their sins. And so
when she had said thus much, the Dragon with a wonderful great noise, raised
up himself, and carried her to hell, where she remains in endless
torments. If this were a true story, no doubt it would make much for auricular
confession: but the cause of suspicion is, that there is no place named where
this should happen, or where this Lady dwelt: besides, it stands only upon
the bare relation of a Friar (which kind of people are by many much suspected
of forgerie in such devises and lying miracles) which often the very
circumstances of them do discover to be false. Is it likely, that she, who had
long concealed her sins, would have gone at all to confession, unless she
had purposed to open them, he being a stranger and unknown? But the story may
serve, in Friars judgments, to terrify poor women withal, as the Popes
Anathemaes do terrify many men, who stand more in fear of them than of Gods
threatenings. But sweet Jesus keep men from believing such lying wonders, and
give them grace not to give ear to any thing not warranted in Scriptures, or
justified by antiquity, and as thou have mercifully led me from believing such
lies, so of the same goodness impart also the shining beams of truth unto
others, and grant, that thy only two Sacraments, Baptism and the holy
Eucharist, iustituted by thy self, may have their due esteem, and other
institutions to be esteemed not as Sacraments, but as matters profitable for
use, and fit to be practiced in the Church.

CHAP. XVII. Containing an observation about the doctrine of the Virgin Mary's
conception in original sin.
ALbeit I find, The doctrine of the Virgin Mary's immunitie from original
sin does derogate from the honor of God.
yet it is to be done with such moderation and careful discretion, that
whilst we glorify him in them, we be wary not to attribute more unto the
Saints than will stand with the condition of servants, in giving that glory
which is due to the master, unto his inferiors: for although God himself have
said, Whosoever shall honor me, 1. Reg.
I will glorify him; so has he also left it recorded from his own mouth, I
will not give my glory unto any other. Whence it follows, that although God
have bestowed such rare and singular privileges and prerogatives upon the
virgin Marie, the mother of Christ, as he has not done the like to any
creature whatsoever, insomuch, that she her self knowing and feeling the
happiness of them, said; All generations shall call me blessed, 1. Luc. 47.
because he has done me great favors who is powerful, and holy be his name:
which is to be fulfilled amongst all good Christians, regarding the word of
God, because she was blessed indeed above all women, for the blessed fruit of
her womb, as S. Elizabeth said, who being the Redeemer of the world, brought
benediction, and overcame the devil, the anthor of all malediction. Yet ought
not any be so much transported with an ouer-deeming affection and judgment to
this virgin, as to give her such glory as surpasses the nature of a creature,
descended from Adam, and only may be given to Christ Jesus, greater in glory
than his mother, who being God and man, was her Savior, because he came to save
all: which benefit she acknowledged her self most thankfully in her Canticle,
saying, My spirit has exulted in God my Savior.

2 And I do most plainly observe by the Scriptures, And it is most repuguant
to Gods word. Romans 8. Tho. 12. q. 81.
that she was to be conceived as well as others in original sin: for all
mankind sinned in Adam, S. Paul saying; Death passed to all, in whom all
sinned. And Thomas Aquinas says. According to the Catholic faith it is
firmly to be held, that all men besides Christ alone, derived from Adam, do
contract original sin from Adam. Now if this be a matter of faith, that all
have contracted sin from Adam, shall it not be against faith to hold, that
the virgin Marie did not contract sin from Adam? What? did she not deseend
from Adam by the line of corporal generation? Or is there any Scripture or
reuciation to the contrary? Is there any exemption of this Virgin? No
curtainely: Nay, I dare confidently affirm, that it would have been a great
discomfort to this holy Virgin, not to have been partaker of that seet
redemption by Christ, which others were partakers of. If she were not partaker
of the benefit of redemption, why did she say, 1. Luc. 47.
Magnificat anima mea Dom et exultauit spiritus m^us in Deo salutarimeo: My
soul does magnisie the Lord, and my spirit does rejoice in God my Sanior? How
could it be true that God was her Savior, unless it were by Christ? of whom
we read in S. Matthew, Ipse saiuu^ faciet populu^ suu^ a peccatis eoru^; 1.
Matthew. 21.
He shall sane his people from their sins. If she had only been preserved
from original sin by extraordinary privilege, she would have said, that
she did rejoice in God her preserver: therefore in that she said she reioiced
in God her Savior, according to the phrase of Scripture, it is right well
inferred, that she acknowledged her self saved from original sin by
Christ, whom she had thus conceived by the help of the holy Ghost, without
the seed of man, to save people from their sins, and so consequently her
self, calling ^im her Savior. If it be true that S. Paul says, Ephesians. 2.
Eramus omnes silij irae, we were all the children of wrath; and sivnus pro
omnibus mortuus est, if one died for all; ergo omnes mortui sunt, 1. Cor. 2. v.
14. and 15.
therefore all died; Et pro omnibus mortuus est Christus, and Christ died for
all, it necessarily follows, that the virgin Marie was also a child of wrath
by original sin, through Adam; and that Christ, who did for all, died also
for her; or else how can it be verified, that he died for all? If my illation
is not to be credited herein, Thomas of Aquin may be demanded his opinion, and
he will be found to agree with me herein; Tho. 3. p.q. 27. art. 2. in corp.
his words are these: The sanctification of the virgin Marie cannot be
understood before giving of soul or life, for a twofold respect. First,
because sanctification, of which we speak, is no other than a cleansing from
original sin; Cap. 12. de diui. Nomi. parum a principio.
for holiness is perfect cleanenesse, as Dionysius sayty: but sin cannot be
cleansed but by grace, whereunto the reasonable creature is only subject:
Therefore before the infusion of the reasonable soul, the blessed Virgin was
not sanctified. Secondly, for that since only the reasonable creature can have
sin before the infusion of the reasonable soul, the fruit conceived is not
obnoxious to sin. And therefore by what means soever the blessed Virgin was
sanctified, before giving soul or life, she should never have incurred the
blot of original sin: and so she should not have stood in need of
redemption or salvation, which is by Chris, of whom it is said, Matthew. 1. He
shall save the people from their sins. But this is inconvenient, that Christ
should not be the Savior of all men, as we reale in the first to Timothy, the
fourth: Therefore it rests, that the sanctification of the blessed virgin
was after she received soul or life. Here then it is apparent, that this
their Angelical Doctor held the virgin Marie to be obnoxious to original
sin, because the sanctification he speaks of (as himself says) is a
cleansing from original sin; as also for that he shows, that it would have
been inconvenient for her not to have incurred the blot of original sin,
because then she should not have stood in need of redemption. So that I
think it is hereby plain by the Scriptures, according to Thomas Aquinas
understanding, that the virgin Marie was conceived in original sin: and
therefore this doctrine is a point of faith.

3. Hence I observe farther, The disagreement in the Church of Rome about the
virgin Mary's conception. Ban. part. 1. page 75. De consecratione d. 4.
firmissime. nu. 12. page 101.
upon more serious consideration of the doctrine, holding the contrary, how
much the late Divines of the Romish Church, especially the Jesuits, do swerve
from former Divines, who taught the virgin Marie to be conceived in original
sin. Bannes acknowledges, that all the Fathers with one consent held the
virgin Marie to be conceived in original sin. And Turrecremata says, That
almost all the Schoolmen held the virgin Marie had original sin; yea, that
is the common opinion among the famousest of them, and he has colleced an
hundred of that mind. I observe a notable contradiction amongst some Roman
Writers in this point. Cardinal Bellarmine indeed comes near the truth,
when he says, To affirm that the blessed virgin was conceived in original
sin, Bellar. de stat. peccat. l. 4. c. 15.
is not against faith. He had said well if he had said, it is de side, it is a
matter of faith: for is not that a matter of faith which is plain by the
express word of God, as I have showed? Yet others say she had no original
sin, Almain. potest. eccles. c. 16. Clicto. super Damas. l. 3. c. 2. Frac.
Titl. Io. 2.
and that it is a point of our faith so to believe, and that it is impiety to
think otherwise. Now if they say true, then do they make the Cardinal an
Heretic, when in the second conclusion he affirms, That the blessed Virgin
is piously thought to have been conceived without original sin by the
singular privilege of God. Is that thing to be but piously believed, which is
a point of our faith, as the former said? Or is not that thing against faith
which is contrary to that proposition, which they say is a point of faith, and
that it is impiety to think otherwise? But in very truth, omitting the
contradictions of their writings about this doctrine, if we look but into the
institution of the Feast of the Virines conception, which they keep every
year, we shall find it very novel, in respect of antiquity, and such
occasions thereof, as are unfit to ground their doctrine upon, contrary to all
antiquity.

4. To. 1. c. 4. tit. 1. p. 6.
Anthony d'Aneroult in his Historical Catechism shows, how the Feast of
the Conception of the Virgin Marie was instituted, which he recounteth in this
manner: William the Duke of Normandy, An apparition whereupon this doctrine
was grounded, and the Feast of her Conception first instituted.
a man fearing God, after he had conquered England, and reformed the Church in
the same Kingdom, was advertised, that the Dacians made preparations for the
wars against him: Whereupon he sent the Abbot Hersinus unto them, to know the
truth of their designements. The Abbot then being upon his return at sea, was
surprised with such a tempestuous storm, that he and all his people were in
danger of their lives, if they had not sought for succor of the virgin Marie:
for as they inuoked her with all the devotion they could, behold there came
from Heaven a venerable Personage, apparrelled like a Bishop; who after he had
saluted the Abbot, said unto him, Will you be delivered from this danger? he
answered, that he desired nothing more. Know you then (said the Personage) that
I am sent from the virgin Marie to advertise you, that you shall be delivered
from all danger, if you will obey me. Command (said the Abbot) all that you
please, and you shall be willingly obeyed. Hereafter then (said he) you shall
keep a solemn Feast of the Conception of the virgin Marie, and in preaching
you shall declare that it is to be kept. The abbot asking upon what day it
should be kept, and what Service the Church should say thereon, he answered,
it should be kept the eight of December, and for the Service they should take
that of the Nativity, putting the word Conception in lieu of Nativity. Anno
1060.
Then the Personage vanished away, the storm ceased, and the Abbot escaped
with all his company, and afterward performed his promise. Is not this a
strong foundation to build an article of Faith upon? Let the circumstances be
considered; as that the Bishop that appeared coming from the virgin Marie,
used such great familiarity with the Abbot, as to salute him; that he appeared
in a storm, when wicked spirits are busiest; that he willed him to keep a
Feast of that act concerning the blessed Virgin, which cannot be freed from
sin; and judge whether it be not time to fly to the Scriptures revealed from
God, when such visions must serve (as it is probably devised by the devil, to
delude men withal) for the establishment of a new article of faith, as diverse
of the Roman Church hold this to be. It may be this vision might be such a
one, as I have sometimes heard of the like nature, by a certain Gentleman, as
acquaintance of mine; who told me, that one appeared unto him in the form of
a Bishop, telling him he must be a Roman Catholic, if he would be saved, and
that he should travel over the seas, escape many dangers, acquainting him with
future events, concerning the Earl of Essex and himself, which he would not
speak of. Which vision some of his kindred gave credit unto, and furthered him
in his journey. And I have heard since, when his money was spent beyond the
seas, he returned home again, and finding himself deluded by his vision,
embraced again his former religion, and continues in it to this day. Some
Romanists have thought that this vision was but an invention, that thereby he
might find a few golden pieces out of his friends, the better to maintain his
travails. The truth of his vision I leave to his own conscience; but this I
may truly say, there is a great resemblance betwixt his and the Abbots: and
therefore, in my judgment, if the Devil played the Bishop in the one, he
might as well do it in the other.

5. Another apparition to the same effect. Ibidem, part. 7. Dionys. Cor. ser.
2. Conc. Be. Mariae. Polbert. ibid.
I have noted another apparition recorded by diverse Writers of the Church of
Rome, tending to the same purpose, viz to make good the doctrine of the Virgin
Mary's conception, without original sin. In the time of Charles, King of
France, a certain young man, nephew to the King of Hungary, loved so much
the Virgin Marie, and was so addicted to her service, that daily before he
eat any thing, he said her Hours: who falling upon a time into a great
infirmity and sickness, vowed his chastity unto her, if she would help to
save his life. Forthwith the chamber was replenished with a great light, and he
was restored to his health. Soon after his uncle died without issue, which
made the Lords of the Country to persuade him to enter into the estate of
Marriage, to the end the Kingdom may not be without heirs, offering him a
fair Lady, which he married. But after he had received the blessing, he
remembered, that he had not yet that day read our Ladies office, he retired
himself to say them the more devoutly, sending the Lady Bride, with the rest
of the company, home to his house; and when he said that Anthieme, Pulchra es
and decora filia Jerusalem; that is to say, Thou art fair and gracious, O
daughter of Jerusalem; suddenly the virgin Marie appeared unto him, with two
Angels attending her, and said unto him; If I am fair, honest, and gracious,
as thou say, wherefore do thou forsake me for another? am not I more
beautiful than she? O Lady (said he) your beauty surpasses all the beauty
of the world, thou art exalted above the Angels: what is your pleasure that I
should do? If you leave (said she) your carnal espouse for the love of me,
you shall have me for wife in Heaven, and if you will keep a yearly solemn
Feast every year upon the eight day of December, of my conception, teaching
others to keep it, you shall be crowned with me in the Kingdom of my Son.
When she had spoken these words, she vanished out of sight; and the young man
transpoeted himself out of the City and Kingdom into a Wilderness, where
his comportement was so holy, that since he was made Patriarch of Aquil^ia,
where he preached and instituted the said Feast. Collections upon this story.
Judge now (gentle Reader) whether this be an apparition likely to come from
Heaven, when that which is commanded here, is so expressly against the word
of God, inuiting from that state of marriage which the Apostle calls
honorable, unto the service of that fained, and devised privilege of the
Virgin Mary's Conception without original sin, which I have already showed
to be expressly repugnant to the word of God, and therefore diametrally against
faith. Besides, the institution it self is so late, that it appears to be
cockle sowed by the envious man the Devil, not by Christ or his Apostles, and
therefore not to be received by those who know Antiquity to be the infallible
mark of truth. The due observation of all which premises considered in this
Chapter, was as forcible an inducement to lead my feet out of the dangerous
ways of Romish novelties, as any other; therefore (courteous Reader) let me
entreat thee with me to call the Virgin Marie most blessed amongst women, as
truly she was upon earth, and is so also in heaven in the glory of her soul,
but think her not yet so blessed, as in this point of her Conception to
parallel her with Christ, and to attribute more unto her then will stand with
the nature of a pure Creature, and derogate from her that most blessed benefit
of her Redemption by Christ. And further consider, that if the approbation but
of one heresy argues infidelity, and shows no true faith in other points,
as the Church of Rome teaches; then are they, who are led with this error, no
true believers at all.

CHAP. XVIII. Containing an observation of the honorable state of Marriage
prehibited by the Church of Rome to Priests, who by Gods Law may lawfully live
in it: and allowed to those who by Gods Law can not live together without
Incest.
AMongst all the fearful dangers wherewith the life of man is environed, How
miserably the Church of Rome is illuded by Satan's wily suggestions.
by reason of the continual outward assaults, and hidden ambushes of our three
Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: It is certain that none of them
can be more difficultly avoided, or hardly resisted, than those of the Devil,
who being least apparent, with greater subtletie can devise his plots, and
slily convey them with fair outward pretenses unto their designed ends, than
the other two can, who by their outward appearances and shows, either of
Beauty, Riches, Pomp, or sensual Preasures, may be discovered, and with the
more facility prevented, or foiled. The reason hereof is, because the Devil
has a knowledge surpassing man's knowledge, and has power so great that there
is none upon earth may be compared unto it; by the first be knows how to
deceive man; by the second he is most able to perform the intentions of his
deceiptfull nature. Hence he appeared to Eve in Pa adise in the disguised
shape of a serpent by GODS permission, that thereby were may learn how much
his craft is to be feared: The Seraphicall Doctor of the Church of Rome noting
as much, Bonauen. in breuiloquio, part. 3. cap. 3.
when he said. It was the providence of God that the Devil in tempting should
assume the form of a Serpent, that his craft might not only be discou^red,
but also that by that likeness the wiliness of the Devil (...) tempting
might be known to all the children of Adam. Hence also be appeared to our
merciful Redeemer in the Wilderness, as Saint Augustine, and others think,
under the shape of a R^igious man, that he might the more craftily tempt him,
saying: Si filius Deies die vt la pides isti panes fiant; If thou art the Son
of God say that those stones be made bread: Where, says Vega, Didacus de la
Vega. tom. 1. Dom. in Quadrag. Job 41.
You may see how the Devil under the show of piety, hides his malice.
Therefore well said Job of the Devil: Quis reuelabit faciem indumenti eius?
Who shall reveal the face of his garment? as if he should say; it is a
difficult thing to reveal the Devils countenance; for he often changes his
countenance to deceive men, and being full of fraud and malice he uses often
to change his countenance, and under the color of some piety and virtue to
hide himself. Which crafty imposture of the Devil is not more lively in any
one thing to be discovered than by his suggestions to the Church of Rome,
which under the color of chastity, and for greater perfection, he has
guilefully induced to make a prohibition of Priests marriages, which the law of
GOD does not forbid, thereby giving occasion of far greater abuses against
chastity, than otherwise could have happened, to the dishonor of God, to the
scandal of the Church, and to the ruin of infinite souls, who being debarred
of the lawful and honorable remedy of marriage, appointed and approved by
God himself, through the weakness of humane nature fall into such
abominable impurities, as are not to be named. Neither only has the Devil
cunningly under this pretense deceived the Church of Rome like a sly Serpent,
but also by too high a conceit and estimation of her self an other way, ever
praising her authority and pre-eminence of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, by a
sinister interpretation whereof she soareth so high above her self in
equality with God, that he has enduced her out of her pretended fulness of
authority and power, to dispense with Marriage in those degrees of affinity,
as GOD himself has prohibited. The doctrine of both which points are so
repugnant to the holy Scriptures, and so crossing the practice of the first
ages of the Church, as nothing can be more.

2. The prohibition of Priests marriages is not agreeable to the holy
Scriptures. Genes. 2. verse. 18.
For first, the prohibition of Priests marriage, can no way stand with Gods
truth, revealed in the holy Scriptures. For first, it is apparent that marriage
is an institution and ordination of God himself, instituted before the fall of
man, as appears in Genesis, where it is written: It is not good for man to be
alone, let us make a help like unto himself. Which place of Scripture
Cardinal Bellarmine most impetitinently wresteth in citing it, De Matri.
Sacram. lib. 3. c. 2.
to prove marriage to be a Sacrament of the new Law, instituted by God for
that purpose. If this place prove it to be a sacrament, it will follow that it
was also a Sacrament in the old Law, which were inconvenient, and against the
whole current of Romish Doctors. Thomas Aquinas teaching out of Saint
Augustine; That the Sacraments of the old Law are taken away, S. Thom. 3. part.
q. 61. art. 4. sed contra. August. contra Faustum. lib. 19. cap. 13. tom. 6.
Thom. in corp. vbi supra.
because they are fulfilled: and others are instituted, in power greater,
better for profit, more easy to perform, fewer in number. And further Aquinas
himself teaches: It is behouefull there should be other Sacraments in the
new Law, wherewith the things should be signified that went before of Christ,
besides the Sacraments of the old Law, by where future things were foretold.
Bellarmine to prove his purpose should show where in the new Law it is
instituted as a Sacrament: for as Thomas Aquinas says, marriage, as it is
ordained for the procreation of children, 3. p. q. 42. art. 2. in corp.
which was necessary before sin, was instituted before sin: but as it
affords a remedy against the wound of sin; it was instituted after sin
in the time of the Law of nature; but as it represents a mystery of the
conjunction of Christ and the Church, it has had an institution in the new
Law, and according to that institution, it is a Sacrament of the new Law. By
which Doctrine of Thomas Aquinas, first saying that it has had an institution
in the new Law, it is clear to be very absurdly cited by Bellarmine for the
institution of marriage before, to prove it to be a Sacrament: and secondly,
that this Doctor himself commits a great ouetsight in affirming it to have
had an institution in the new Law, whereby it is a Sacrament; since neither he
nor any other can show any such institution. But it follows by him
notwithstanding, that as I my self have cited the before said place of Genesis,
it well proves the state of marriage to have been ordained by GOD. For which
(as the Scripture says) a man shall forsake his father and mother, and he
shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh.

3 Which first institution was renewed by Christ, when he said, Have ye not
read, Diverse reasons grounded upon the Scriptures for the approbation of
priests marriages. Matthew 19. Hebr. 13.14.
that he which did make from the beginning, made them male and female, and he
said, for this cause man shall leave father and mother and shall cleave to his
wife, and they two shall be in one flesh. That therefore which God has joined
together, let no man separate. And the same Institution is Declared to be
honorable among all men, and their bodies undefiled: if therefore among all
men, then also among Priests; if it were honorable for respect of the Author
that ordained it, which was GOD himself, why shall it not also be honorable
for his Priests? If it were honorable in the time of innocence before it was
decayed, why should it not be honorable in the time of grace, wherein man is
repaired, as well for Priests as others; if it were honorable because it was
ordained in Paradise, the happiest place of the world, why shall it not also be
honorable in the Church of Christ amongst Churchmen, who honor God in the
happiest places, that is, in the Churches ordained to Gods honor? besides,
since God the Son honored the state of marriage with his presence at Canaan
of Galilee, where he wrought the first miracle that ever he did, turning water
into wine, with his prayers, comparing the kingdom of God to a wedding; and
holiness to a wedding garment.; why should we think that Christ will not be
well pleased that his Priests should honor that state with their own persons:
is not increase and multiplication of children, which is one principal end of
marriage, as honorable a blessing in Priests as in others? or, is not the
inconvenience of solitariness signified in these words, It is not good for man
to be alone: that is, without a help and comfort, which is an other end of
marriage, as fit for Priests, as for Lay people^ or, is it not as fit that
Priests should have a remedy for fornication, as well as other men? takes their
preshood from them the nature of men? or can their dignities in the Church of
God give them leave to live lasciuiously in a single life? are all Priests
assured, that during their lives, they shall always enjoy the gift of
continency? or is it absolutely in man's power, to have it, or not to have it?
why then does S. Paul say, Quipotest capere capiat: he that can take it let him
take it; no no, they have as much need of such a help as any other. How comes
it that many, yea most of the Clergy in the country of Liege, and diverse other
places keep concubines? what is the cause that most of the Priests of
Britain, have also their bedfellows living in the house with them in the
state of whoredom, but their want of marriage? whence so many de^^ourings of
virgins, so many fornicatio^s, so many adulteries, so many bestialities
recorded by diverse authors among Clergy men in the church of Rome but the want
of this remedy instituted by God, practiced in the old Law by the holiest, as
Henoch, Noah, Abraham, David, Ezechiel, Aaron, and other high Priests,
approved by Christ, called honorable by S. Paul amongst all men? What, is
not the doctrine of S. Paul to be approved, who allows the marriage and the
bed undefiled to all men, excluding none when he says: 1. Cor. 7.2.
Because of fornication let every man have his own wife? Here we see marriage
is prescribed a remedy for every man.

4 And if we look into the practice of the Primitive Church, The new
Testament makes for the marriage of Priests.
we shall find the same remedy to have been used without check or control.
May we think that S. Paul excluded Priests when he said; 1. Cor. 9.
It is better to marry than to burn. Does his Doctrine debar Priests of
marriage when he says; If thou take a wife, thou sinnest not. 1. Cor. 28.
Does not Saint Paul sharply reprove them that shall forbid marriages when
he says; In the latter days some shall depart from the faith, and shall
give heed unto spirits of error, Note this.
and doctrines of devils, which speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their
consciences burned with a hot iron, forbidding to marry? 1. Tim. 4.1.2, 3.
By diverse of my former Chapters I have showed the Church of Rome to have
departed from her former faith; now it is apparent they teach doctrine of
devils, because they forbid Priests to marry, and teach the Doctrine to be
good. Is it to be thought that Saint Paul did not allow Priests to marry,
when he said, A Bishop must be unreprovable, the husband of one wife,
having children under obedience with all honest 1. Timoth, 3.2.4. And when he
said; Let Deacons be the husbands of one wife, and such as can rule their
children well, and their own household 1. Timothy 3.12. Can it be said that
Saint Paul does not approve marriage in Priests and Deacons, when he allows
them one wife, children, and household to have care of? What may be probably
inferred upon the words of Saint Paul to the Philippians the last chapter,
translated by the Rhemists thus; I beseech thee my sincere companion. By
occasion of which words Cardinal Bellarmine says, that it is more probable
Saint Paul had no wife, Clem. Alexand. 3 stromat. Ignatius epist. ad Philadelph.
against Clemens Alexandrinus, and Ignatius in some Editions, who hold he had
a wife; which stands well with the translation of the Church of England
saying; My faithful yoke fellow; I will not stand much upon this place,
leaving the probability thereof to the Reader. But sure I am that Saint Peter
had a wife; for Saint Matthew says, Matthew. 8.14.
That our Savior entered into Saint Peter's house and saw his wifes mother. I
trow this is plain enough that he had a wife. It is left also recorded, That
Philip the Evangelist which was one of the s^auen Deacons, had four daughters
virgins which did prophecy. Acts 21.8, 9.
Ignatius the disciple of Saint John Evangelist writing to the Philadelphians,
Ignat. ad Philadelph.
makes report, That Peter, Paul, and other Apostles were married. Clemens
Alexandrinus writing against those that reproved marriage, Ecclesiast. hist.
libr. 3 cap. 3^.
amongst other things speaks thus; What do they reprove the Apostles? Peter
and Philip had wives, and they gave also their daughters in marriage to men.
Neither does Saint Paul the Apostle think much, in one of his Epistles to make
mention, or to give salutation to his consort ( Philippians 4.) whom he
therefore denies himself to carry about, that he may be the more ready to
preach the Gospel, (1. epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians.) And again in
the eight Book of his work he says; They say that Saint Peter, when he saw
his wife led unto martyrdom, he rejoiced in the grace of Election, and at her
return unto her own house, and cried out unto her, when she was led, and
calling her by her name, said; O wife, remember the Lord. Such were the
marriages of Saints, so perfect was the affection of the Blessed. Thus he who
lived about the year of our Lord God, one hundred ninety and seven, in the
time of Commodus the Emperor. By which Doctrines and Examples in the Apostles
times it is very evident, that Priests and Bishops had wives.

5 In the Canons of the Apostles it is decreed thus; A Bishop or Priest shall
not, The marriage of Priests proved by ancient Councels Did 28. canon. Si quis.
under the color of Religion, cast away his own wife: But if he do reject
her, he shall be excommunicated; but if he shall persevere, he shall be
deprived. Which Canon is related in an other place. The most renowned general
Council also held at Nice, in the time of Constantine the Emperor, about the
year of our Lord GOD three hundred and thirty, where were likewise assembled
three hundred and eighteen, whereof also mention is made in the Tripartite
History and elsewhere. In the which Caution was made with full consent of all
the Fathers, Not to prohibit Subdeacons, Deacons, Lib. 2. cap. 14. and did.
31. can. Ny^en. Sya^d.
Priests or Bishops from sleeping with their wives; lest by that means a
yoke should be imposed upon them, which might be a cause of fornication. In
which bufinesse Paphnutius, who being himself single, and most famous for
leading holiness of life, and power of doing miracles, labored and obtained
very much. Again, as in succeeding Ages some at Rome would have induced
Priests and Deacons unto single life, or to abstinence from their wives, and
went about to make Laws to this purpose, so in the year of our Lord God, six
hundred seauentie and seven, the sixth general Council was gathered at
Constantinople, in the time of Constantine the fourth, whereat there were
present two hundred four score and nine Bishops, for which cause some will
have it of the same authority with the Evangelical Books; in which Council
some things concerning the marriage of Priests were decreed, making mention of
them who at Rome labored much in that matter: the words of the Council are
recorded in the corpse of the Connon Law in these very words: Did. 31. can.
quoniam in Romam.
For as much as we understand it to be delivered in the order of the Roman
Canon, that those who are ordained Deacons or Priests, shall not accompany
with their wives; we following the ancient Canon of Apostolical diligence, and
the constitutions of holy men, will indeed have legal marriages to be of force,
in no case dissoluing their marriages which their wives, nor depriving them of
familiarity together in fit season. Whosoever therefore shall be found
worthy to be ordained Deacon, or Subdeacon, or Priest, such shall in no case
be prohibited from ascending to such degree, for cohabitation with his wife,
neither likewise shall they be constrained at the time of their ordination to
profess chastity. And forthwith sentence is pronounced against those that
shall presume againt this in these words. If therefore any shall presume
against the Apostles Canons, to deprive any Priests or Deacons from the company
and communion of their legal wife, let him be deposed; likewise the Priest or
Deacon who for religions sake shall expel his wife, let him be excommunicated:
and if he shall persist in this, let him be deposed. The same sixth Sinode
decreed as appears in the Canon law; That the Priest who lives not in
lawful marriage, Did. 28 Canon. Presbiterum.
should abstain from his office. Now when I observed thus in the Canon of the
general Council, mention to be made of the Canon of the Apostles, which I have
before rehearsed, and also the constitution of the Nicene Council; and with
the general consent of the Council of Constantinople, those to be condemned,
excommunicated and deposed, that would defend the Roman Canon, or compel any
to keep it; I could no way satisfy my self how the marriage of Priests
prohibited now in the present Church of Rome is not flat against these ancient
general Councels; If Bellarmines assertion be true, That a Council is an
assembly of true Judges, De Council. lib. 1. cap. 18. lib 2. de Council.
authorit. cap. 1.
whose decrees are necessarily to be followed: As also again, if it be true;
That by the Catholic faith we are to hold, that general Councels confirmed
by the high Bishop, cannot err neither in faith nor manners: As Bellarmine in
another place affirms; what excuse can the Church of Rome pretend to free her
self from disobedience to the aforesaid Councels, and dischrge her self from
heresy in not believing what the Councels, confirmed by a high Bishop, and by
the Christian world acknowledged. The cited ancient Councels allows Priests
marriages; the late Council disalloweth them; therefore the best conclusion
that any man of judgment can make hereupon, is that the former are to be
embraced, and the latter to be rejected.

6 I cannot but wonder to see how the Church of Rome swarueth from the mark of
antiquity in prohibiting or making a law to restrain Priests from the lawful
estate of wedlock. Proofs of antiquity for the marriage of Priests.
I find that one Dionisius Bishop of the Corinthians, who flourished in the
time of Antonius Verus, that is about the year of our Lord 164. as Eusebius
relates, Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 4 cap. 23.
wrote an Epistle to the Gnosians, in the which he warns and entreats
Pynitus their Bishop, not to lay heanie burdens upon the shoulders of his
disciples, nor to intimate unto his brethren the necessity of enforced
chastity, whereby the infirmity of many shall be end angered. Concerning the
which, Pynitus wrote back unto Dionisius, embraced his good advice and
counsel, and withal entreated him to send him whatsoever other spiritual
food what strong and sound. I have noted likewise that Origin who succeeded
Clement in the School of Al^xandria, Origin. hom. 25. in Matthew.
about the year two hundred, as Saint Hierome witnesses; expounding th
Gospel of Saint Matthew, has left these words toposteritie against the
commanders of single life. The Lord reprehendeth (says he) such teachers, who
only do not which they say, but also cruelly and without mercy not according
to the estimation of every hearers strength do enjoin things above their
power, as namely, who forbid to marry, and who compel from that which is
expedient, to immoderate uncleanness. I have read also that Gregory
Nazianzen, Gregor. Nazian.
Bishop, for the funeral of his father who was a Bishop, and of his Gorgonia,
that he made most learned sermons, in which it is manifest to be seen, with
what holiness the Bishops and Ministers of the Churches lived in the state of
wedlock. I find further that Saint John Chrysostom upon those words of Esaias,
I saw the Lord sitting; Chrysostom. hom. 4.
speaks most honorably of the marriage of the Apostles and Apostolical men.
Who also says in another of Saint Philogonius, that he was an advocate, In
orat. de S. Philogonio.
but afterward was made a Bishop, and in time of his being Bishop, had a
lawful wise and a daughter. I observe also that Saint Hierome seems to
insinuate, In 6. cap. Pauli ad Ephesios.
that till his time Bishops and Priests were married, according to the Apostles
meaning. Let Bishops and Priests read this (says he) who bring up their
children in ecular learning, and make them to read Comedies, and to sing the
lascivious writings of Iesters, being bred up perhaps with Ecclesiastical
revenues. And alittle after: Heli the Priest himself was holy, yet because he
instructed not his children in all discipline and correction, he fell downest
it to the ground and so died. Distinct 37. Canone legunt.
Which words are to be seen in the Canon law. I find also Saint Ambrose to
say, that the integrity of the body is to be wished for by us, which of
counsel I persuade, Quaest. 32. ca. 1. integritas.
and not out of power do command. For virginity alone is that which may be
persuaded, and may not be commanded, it is a matter rather of wish then of
precept. Which words do not a little t^xe them, that enact laws to make men
live single lives: neither are Saint Chrysostomes words unlike unto those of
Saint Ambrose, Hom. 10. in epist. ad Iimoth.
who treating of the marriage of Priests, speaks most plainly, saying: It is
lawful for him that will, honestly to embrace marriage: for as riches do
difficultly lead into the kingdom of heaven, yet many rich men have often
entered thither: even so marriages, though they have many difficulties in them,
yet they may be so used, as not to be any impediment to perfection of life. Who
in another place speaks more plainly upon those words of Saint Paul;
Whosoever without fault is a man of one wife; Chrysostom hom. 2. in epist. ad Tit.
says thus, The Apostle intends to stop her mouths of Heretics, that
condemn marriage, showing that thing to want fault, yea to be soprecious, that
therewith also any body may be promoted unto the holy seat of a Bishop. I find
further that Primasius a disciple of Saint Augustine as some hold, where the
Aostle prescribes what kind of children, Bishops children ought to be, does
not obscurely handle this matter, Primas. super verba Apostoli.
when he says; He that has not known how to instruct a few children, how
shall he govern so many children of God, that is, all the people? Neither are
Histories of antiquity wanting to prove the marriages of Priests. Eusebius
has left recorded; that Polycrates Bishop of the Ephesians makes mention of
seven of his predecessors, Eusebius eccles. Hist. lib. 5. c. 24.
of whom he was borne, who in order were Bishops, and himself to have been the
eight. Whose words also Saint Hierome reports, who lived in the timne of
Seuerus. In lib. de scripto eccles. Hist. eccles. lib. 6. cap. 42.
The same Author likewise has left recorded that Cheremon Bishop of Nilus, a
town of Egyyt, with his aged wife was banished for Christ; which Author makes
mention also of diverse other married Bishops. I have found that Spiridion
Bishop of Tremithunth, a husbandman also in the Bishopric of the Cyprians,
Hisotr. Tripartit. lib. (...). cap. cap. 10.
and a shepherd of sheep, had wife and children, neither, for that was he the
less famous for Divine matters. I have read also that Eupsychius of Caesaria
in Capadocea Priest, Histor. tripartii. lib. 5. cap. 14.
when he was but newly married, at that time to have ended his life, with a
glorious martyrdom. Many others might be alleged, and this was the custom of
the ancient Church; in the East many out of their own free will, even Bishops
abstained, Tripartit. hist. lib. 9. cap. 38.
and many of them also in time of their Bishoprics by their lawful wives had
children. Neither was it the custom in the East, but also in the West Church
Hilarie Bishop of Pictauia is well known, and is reported by many to have been
married. The words of Damasus are plain, who says, Exquadam Epist. ad diuum
Hieron.
Os^us Pope was the son of Steven a Subdeacon. Boniface Pope was the son of
Iucundus Priest, de titulo fasciolae; Agapetus Pope the son of Gordian
Priest; Theodorus Pope, the son of Theodorus Bishop of the city of
Jerusalem: Siluerius Pope, son of Hormista Bishop of Rome: Deusdedit Pope,
son of Iucundus Priest; Felix the third, a Roman, son of Felix Priest, who
was his father; Gelasius an Africane, was borne of his father Valerius Bishop,
and many other are found who have governed the Apostolical sea, that were
borne of Priests. Thus much says Damasus Pope, who was Bishop of the Church of
Rome about the year of our Lord 380. and a little after Gratianus ad canonem
Cenomanensem adds that they were borne in lawful marriages which then were
every where free for Priests. I omit to speak of Nicholas the first, who would
not trouble the Bulgarian Priests for marriage, but suffered them quietly to
live in that estate; Rescriptum eius ad Bulgaros: did. 28. canone consulendum.
who lived about the year of our Lord 866. And so I ouer-passe many other
Popes after his time, who were sons to Bishops and Priests, as might easily
be proved out of Platina who writes their lives. By all which proofs both out
of holy Fathers, and ancient Historiographers I find the state of marriages
justifiable before God and man.

7 Now when the law came in that debarred them of this privilege and honorable
estate, it is easily to be discovered, The Prohibition of Priests marriages,
when it came into the Church of Rome.
to have bin in the time of Siricius the Bishop of Rome; 380. years after
Christ: before which time it was believed and practiced, that Priests might
have wives as freely as other men, and Siricius was the first that forbad it. I
find first that before his time Priests exercised their functions being married
men, Aduers. haeres. verb. Sacerdot. haeres. 4.
asis acknowledged by Alphonsus who writes; that in the Primitive Church it
was observed, that he which was married might be promoted to Priesthood, though
it were not required of him that he should first be married, and he adds that
this eustome prevailed till the times of the Nycene Council. And diverse other
writers affirm, Scot. 3. d. 37. Cost. Enchir. page 51.
that in the most ancient times of the Church, and after the Apostles death
they had their wives. And I observe that he was the first that forbad Priests
to marry, Greg. a Valent. tom. 4. d sp 9. q. 5. punct. 5.. 1. Did. 82.
plurim. Invent. lib. 5. cap. 4. Did. 84. cum. in preterito, gloss.. qui
Sacrament. Index expurg. 381. uum. 261. Naucler. tom. 2. generat. 137. Jnuent.
lib. 5. cap. 4. Sigebert. an. 1074. Lambert. page 201. and 207. Auentine in
Annal. lib. 5. Naucl^r. vol. 2. ge. 36. Baron. an. 174. Sigon. reg. Jtal. lib.
9. an. 174. page 448. page 460.
by the decree thereof extant in the Canon law, as also by the confession of
Polydor Virgil; and the Gloss upon the Canon law, says: Syricius brought in
the continency of Priests and Deacons, yea some affirm that of old, before
the time of Siricius Priests might contract marriage. This Gloss Pius Quintus
the late Pope has commanded to be wiped out, because it makes against the
present doctrine of the Church of Rome: but Nauclerus says in effect as much,
that Syri^cius commanded Deacons to be continent. But although Pope Syricius
began this matter, yet as Polydor Virgil says; It could never be effected,
that their marriage should be taken away til Gregory the seventh came to be
Pope in the year 1074. Which thing when he attempted in Germany, he was
opposed against as one that brought in a new eustome never received before.
Auentine writes, that in those days Priests had wives openly as other men
bad, and begat children, their wives being called by aseemely name,
Presbyteresses. And when the Pope forbad them marriage, this to many Bishops
and other learned and good men seemed a new doctrine, and a pestilent heresy
as ever troubled any Christian kingdom. And he says the Bishops of Italy,
Germany and France met together, and for this cause decreed, that he had done
against Christian piety, and deposed him, for that among diverse other things,
he divorced men and their wives, denying such as bad their lawful wives to be
Priests; when yet in the mean time he admitted to the altars whore-mongers,
adulterers and incestuous persons. Fast. lib. 1.
Mantuan says that Hilarie a Fench Bishop was married, and that in his time it
was lawful. Sinesius the Bishop of Ptolomais writes thus of himself: Epist.
ad Enopt. and Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 55.
The sacred hand of Theophilus has given me a wife, and hereupon I testify
unto all men that I will neither forsake her, nor yet as an adulterer keep her
company, but I will pray God to send me by her many and good children.
Athanasius reports, that Bishops and Monks lived married, Epist. ade Dracont.
Epist. 321. Pius 2. apud Plaitn. in vita.
and had children. And Pius Secundus says; It is better for a Priest to marry
then to burn, though he have vowed not to marry. And moreover, that there
be many reasons to forbid Priests marriage, but more to allow it. But no
marvel that this restraint was made by the Pope, since the prohibition of
marriages is a plain mark of Antichrist, who should bring in the contempt of
women; for after that the Prophet Daniel had said that Antichrist should
persecute the holy teachers, and the pious believing people, Daniel 11.
and should exalt himself above all God, he adds; He shall know nothing of
the God of his Fathers, and he shall know nothing of the love of women, and of
every God, and that he shall magnify himself above all things. Which version
agrees with the Hebrew truth, and with the seventy Interpretors and Aquila.
Therefore let not any man oppose that, which is carried about, and in which it
is read; He shall be in the concupiscences of women. Where Saint Hierome
himself in his Comentaries upon Daniel, interprets this sentence thus; That
Antichrist shall counterfeit chastity to deceive many. By all which it is
manifest, that this law restraining Priests from marrying, is a novelty
brought into the Church by Popes by degrees, and a great wrong unto the state
of marriage, which I have showed to be honorable in all. This I could
exemplify by the abuses come into the Church by this restraint, both in former
ages, and in this present age wherein we live. If this law had not been, it is
likely that Matthaeus Parisiensis would have had no cause to leave recorded
unto posterity, that a Cardinal did all the day in a Synod here in England
inueigh against the marriages of Priests, Matthew. Parisan Henric. primum.
who at night was taken in bed with a strumpet; there are too many to be found
as carnal as this Cardinal. If this law of the Pope had not restrained
Priests from marrying, occasion would never have been given for a Gentleman in
Wales this last year to have written unto Master Birkhead the Archpriest,
complaining of a Jesuit, who by the heat of the powder treason was thought to
be driven into Ireland, where he got his own kinswoman with child; neither
would many the like abuses be complained of in diverse, if the wicked restraint
of marriages, which is in truth the very doctrine of Devils, had never been
made and invented? Gentle Reader pardon me if these obscaenities offend your
ears, I may as well relate truths in justification of true doctrine against
the Church of Rome; as that Church both by reports and printed books may
disgorge multitudes of lies against the reformed Church of England, your dear
country. I do not this of any delight I take to walk in the ways of sinners,
bt only to discover the wickedness of their doctrine by such their wicked
fruits: as just punishments inflicted by Gods permission that they may see
their errors, and forsake their wicked ways. Now therefore since it appeared
unto me by these premises, how the Church of Rome against the law of God,
against the practice of the purest ages, to the scandal of the Christian
world, through Satan's craft under pretense of chastity restrained Priests from
lawful marriages, I could not remain in the communion of that Church, lest by
Gods permission in time I might also be partaker of her just punishments.

8 And as I was moved to aba^don her by reason of this illusio^ whereby the
devil makes her his; The Church of Rome allows of incestuous marriages.
so was I no less moved by the consideration of her doctrine permitting such
marriages to be lawful in such degrees, as some of their own teach to be
prohibited by the law of God and nature; as namely, by suffering one brother to
marry his brothers wife, when the other is deceased. For so does the Pope by
dispencing in this case, which notwithstanding is justly to be reproved, as I
prove out of Ioannes Viguerius the learned Bishop of Spain, who delivers his
Doctrine thus; It is a doubt, Io. Viguer. Instit christ ca. 16. 7 verse. 9. non
modicum.
not of small importance, whether the Pope can dispense in the first degree of
the first kind of Affinity, that two brethren may successively have the same
wife, or two sisters the same husband. It seems that he can not, because the
Pope cannot dispense in the Law of Nature. But the first aforesaid degree of
Affinity is prohibited by the Law of Nature: (Thou shall not reveal the
turpitude of thy Brothers wife, because it is thy turpitude) for that as Rabbi
Moses says, the Law given in that place, excludes only those persons from
marriage, who are to converse and dwell together, amongst whom the one is to
keep the others pudicicitie: and so only he excepteth them, which by the law of
nature are excepted from matrimony, since the text brings a natural reason,
saying; Because it is the turpitude of thy brother: And the refore herein the
Law is not figurall, but moral; and no dispensation can be made of moral
precepts. And of this opinion S. Thomas seemed to be, for he says, In. 4
did. 39. q. 1 art. 3. ad tertium
that that Law does yet continue, because if Infidells (and he speaks not of
Jews, but absolutely of all Infidells) before they are converted have
contracted matrimony against that law, after faith received, they cannot
continue in such matrimony. Therefore this Law is moral, and not judicial. And
although from the beginning of mankind, when the Author of nature dispensed,
for the fewness of men, to contract marriages in the same degree; yet not
after multiplication, because the dispensation and inclination of contracting,
ceased not only in consanguinitie, but also in Affinity. And although God have
dispensed with the Jews, yea also cammanded a brother to take his brothers
wife, to raise his brothers seed, that his brother might have children, that
his name might not be blotted out of Israel. But if the brother had children,
it was forbidden; Deuteronom. 25 Leuiticus 20.
for it is said, He that shall marry the wife of his brother, shall do an
unlawful thing. Since therefore that of raising the brothers seed was a
judicial Law, and all the judicial Laws were finished in the death of
Christ, and God dispenceth not in them; it follows, that neither the Pope can
dispense with it, because it is moral and natural; neither is it alike in a
Vow and an Oath with the aforesaid degree of Affinity or Consanguinitie,
because although Christ gave power over all contracts and consents of men, to
annull them or change them: Vt habetur in cap. quemad. de iureiurando.
Because in all such, the condition is to be understood (if it please the
Superior) yet he gave them not power to change Nature; which should be done
if he should dispense in the first degree of Affinity, and in others recited
in Leuiticus: and if sometimes it may be found that dispensation has been
given to some; hoc fuit de facto, sed non de iure: This was a matter of fact,
and not of right. Hitherto Viguerius. By which discourse it is clear, that he
holds the precept of one brother not to marry his brothers wife, nor
contrariwise to be a moral precept which admits no dispensation: and therefore
if the Pope dispense in it, he does more than belongs to his ecclesiastical
power and authority, whereby we see now that which I said in the beginning of
this chapter to be specified viz. that the Church of Rome attributing too much
by an ouer-deeming conceit of her own power unto marriage, one way allowing it
where it is unlawful, and derogating from marriage an other way, by
restrayning it where it is by God allowed, she is miserably deluded by the
Devil.

9 Now therefore (courteous Reader) this being so, My conclusion upon the
premises.
have I not had reason to fly from her danger, observing the reformed
Churches to have discovered this perilous deceit of the Devils? Had I not
reason to unite my self to them, especially this of England, from the which my
Parents before me were most unfortunately seduced to the just punishment of my
name and family ever since; not thinking it fit to rest upon the example of
Eutiches the heretic saying; That as he had learned of his Fathers, and
believed in the faith wherein he was borne, even so he desired to die; but
rather to give ear unto the Council of God, Council. Calced. art. 2.
declared by the mouth of his Prophets, properly agreeing to my self; Walk
not ye in the ordinances of your Fathers, neither observe their ways, nor
defile your selves with their Idolles. Ezec. 20.18, 19.
I am the Lord your God, walk in my Statutes, and keep my judgments, and do
them.

CHAP. XIX. Contains the Conclusion to the Reader, with a recapitulation of
all the precedent observations for the Readers profit.
WHen I turn back my memory (courteous Reader) upon all the precedent
observations contained in this hook, An acknowledgement of Gods mercy and
love in drawing me to his truth Osee 11. verse 4.
by the which I see my self to have bin drawn, as it were, with so many
Ropes of Gods bountiful love and singular mercy from the manifold errors,
novelties, and the most sinful Idolatries of the Church of Rome, unto the
true Faith and Religion of Christ Jesus; Me thinks I do feel my self
possessed with a burning love of Gods goodness, enforced to rank my self as
one of the number of those, whom God by the mouth of his holy Prophet Osee
promised to draw unto him, saying: Traham eos in funiculis Adam in vinculis
Charitatis; I will draw them in the ropes of Adam, in the chains of Charity.
Could God draw me by stronger chains of Charity than such are, as he has
drawn me by from darkness to light; from ignorance to the knowledge of his
truth; when with a true feeling I do reflect upon my former observations, I
behold me thinks our Savior Christ Jesus shooting forth the bright beams
of his wisdom upon my endarkened Soul, by the which he has, as it were,
drawn me, and guided my ways, unto him as comfortably as he did the Sages of
the East, to adore and worship him in his Cribbe at Bethlem; which does
exceedingly replenish my heart with true joy and comfort in Christ Jesus our
Lord and Savior. In the serious speculation of which great favor from heaven
I am compelled to call to remembrance that strange thing which Saint
Augustine in his Book De Ciuitate Dei, and ninth chapter, vt refert Cornel.
Muss. auerreth himself to have seen, seeming to the hearer to be a great
prodigy, and a most wonderful miracle of Nature; who reports, that he saw
a Loadstone of so great power and efficacy, that it drew many Rings unto it,
which were one of them behind the other, placed far off asunder; first one,
then that drew the other, the third the fourth, and so consequently all the
rest, until that at length by the secret virtue of the Stone, after an
invisible manner adjoining the Rings together, a goodly entire Chain was made
of them. Even so (dearly beloved Christian Reader) I find Christ Jesus to
have been such a powerful and attractiue Loadstone unto my Soul by the
precedent observations, lincking the one unto the other with such infallible
truth, that therewith, even as with a most strong chain of his excessive love
and charity, he has now at the length drawn me to the knowledge of his
true Faith rightly taught and professed in the Church of England.

2 It is no other than a chain of Charity, A brief recapitulation of the
premised observations.
by which he has drawn me to write this Treatise, for the manifestation of
his truth, to those that are ignorant thereof; It was a chain of his
providence by ministering occasions of times, persons, and places, concurring to
my conversion: It is a chain of truth that every man's chief business in this
life must be to attain unto the end he is created unto by God, or else he
receives his soul in vain: It is a chain reaching from heaven, that a
supernatural and revealed knowledge from God is necessary to salvation. The
observation also of an absolute necessity of a supernatural Faith, is a
strong chain to draw any man to search diligently after it. The knowledge
likewise of the right rule and golden mete-wand of true Faith, consisting of
GODS sacred Word, is a most forcible chain to draw Christians unto the right
knowledge of GODS truth. The true known visible Church of Christ teaching the
true sense of Scriptures, is a powerful chain to draw men unto the right
faith of CHRIST JESUS. Conformity of Doctrine with the ancient doctrine of the
Primitive Church, being a proper mark of the true Church of God, is likewise a
most attractiue chain drawing to the true knowledge of right Christianity.
The wonders and supposed miracles which Christ foretold the Pseudo-Christs,
and false Prophets, should do for the seducing of Gods Elect, if it were
possible, are also a strong chain to draw any man from the Church of Rome. The
great hypocrisy of false Teachers fore-spoken of in the holy Scriptures,
agreeing chiefly with the Church of Rome, are a chain of great strength and
power to draw any man from that Church. The fruits by which false Prophets are
to be known, and discerned, abounding in the Church of Rome, are also a
powerful chain to draw any man of true judgment from the abhominiations of
that Church. The discovery of the Sacrifice of the Mass to be Idolatrous,
which is accounted by the Church of Rome the chiefest act of religion that can
be done to God, is a most forcible chain to draw any man to the knowledge of
CHRIST JESUS, once offered for us, procuring our Sanctification: Is not the
proof of Transubstantiation also to be a novelty, a potent chain, to draw
any man from Rome to the Church of England, where the Sacrament is freed from
such disgrace? Is not the Amputation also of the holy Eucharist a powerful
chain to draw men from the Church of Rome, that they may rightly, according to
Christ's institution, be partakers of the Lords Supper else where? Is not also
the novelty of the Popes Pardons and Indulgences, which is annexed to Crosses,
Grains, and Meddals, a powerful chain to draw any man that is not
ridiculously childish, a strong chain to draw him from the Church of Rome? If
the false doctrine of seven Sacraments be well discovered by any man, be can
not want a strong chain to draw him to acknowledgement of two true Sacraments
instituted by Christ: if the doctrine of the Virgin Mary's conception in
original sin be doubtful in the Church of Rome, the truth of Scriptures
showing it certain may serve for a strong chain to draw any man from that
doubtfulnesse: If the pretended chastity of the Romish Clergy, do make the
Church of Rome seem more pure and holy than any other; the prohibition of
lawful marriage to Priests, and the dispensation and permission of unlawful
marriage to kindred, may be as a strong chain to draw deceived souls from
the filth and impurities of her hypocritical holiness. By these the mighty
strength and power of all those chains, has the goodness of almighty God
delivered my long estraied soul out of her dangerous ways, and settled me in
the happy society of his true faithful believers, teaching the true ancient
Catholic and Apostolic faith: Oh how truly may I now say with holy David in
humble acknowledgement of Gods singular mercies unto my soul, Maruailous are
thy works, Psalm. 139.14.
O Lord, and that my soul knows right well!

3. Now it is time, To all Seminary Priests.
O all ye Seminary Priests in this Land or else where, who labor still in
the same blindness and errors, wherein hitherto I have been my self
inwrapped as in a dark cloud, that out of that true charity and zeal of
your souls good and happiness, wherewith I have cause to be affected toward
you, I direct my speech a while unto you, and manifest the sincere candor of my
heart and affections, to pity your case, as I have had cause to be sorry
for it heretofore in my self; and therefore I can not but admonish you of the
peril you live in, both of body and soul, for looking no better into the
doctrines which you teach. You pretend to be the salt of the earth; Math. 5.
verse. 13.
and the light of the world; therefore you have cause to see well that your
doctrine be sound wherewith you season men's souls; and that the example of
your virtues and life be not hypocritical and superstitious; if your salt be
infatuated with novelties and corrupt doctrines, all the world will trample
upon you, and you are only fit to be cast out unto the dunghills: if your
lives give no true light, but be a covered under the appearance only of
virtues, as under a bushel where there is no corn, your poor followers will
be hunger starued, and run into darkness, and never find the true light
of the world CHRIST JESUS, Who illuminateth, as Saint John says, Ioh. 1. verse.
9.
every man coming into this world. If it be true that CHRIST says, He that
does, and teaches, Math. 5.19.
shall be called great in the Kingdom of h^auen; Unless both these duties
go together without mixture of falsehood, and finne; you can neither be great
in Heaven nor in Earth, but certain I am your pains will be great in the
deepedungeon of hell. Examine well your own consciences, both for doctrine,
and conversation, build not upon other men's books only, but examine their
doctrines by the infallible rule of Scriptures; send your Disciples unto
Christ, as Saint John Baptist did, not to the Popes, who can and have erred,
both in doctrine and manners; say unto your Children, as Christ our Lord and
Master said: Search the Scriptures, etc. because they give testimony of me.
What good will all your sufferings do you? what your dangers? what your
imprisonments, what your temporal wants, or abundance, what your loving
frinds, or well affected kindred toward you, what I say will all this avail
you, if your dectrine be unsound, even in point of Faith? and what a miserable
calamity is it which you bring your followers unto, who for cleaning to your
erroneous doctrines, must hazard their temporal estates and fortunes, must
beggar their Families, undo their Posterities, and which is worst must damn
their souls for professing the usurped authority, and transcendencie of an
ambitious Pope, and other novelties through your encouragements. Look well
therefore to the cause of your sufferings and doctrines; for Christ says:
Blessed are they that suffer for justice sake, Math. 5. ver. 10.
for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven; therefore if you suffer for injustice,
as for superstition, for idolatry, for heresies, for disalleageance to God and
your Princes as you do, I may truly say, that not a Kingdom, but the
bottomless pit of hell will come to your share and lot, since you want the
garment of truth, in doctrine: with hands and feet bound, you will in the
end, if you turn not from your wicked ways, be cast into exterior
darkness, where you shall be vexed with most hideous howling, and gnashing
of teeth; my desire I have of your conuersions, makes me to say unto you;
Iere. 6. verse. 16.
State super vias and videte; Stand ye on the ways and see: And to ingeminate
the same Counsel; State super vias and videte; Stand ye on the ways and see.
For the way of the wicked is darkesome: Prou. 4. verse. 16. Prou. 14. ver. 12.
they know not where they fall, and the Scripture tells, there is a way which
seems right unto a man, but the issues thereof lead unto death. Out of which
it has pleased the goodness of God so to draw me, that I may say, his holy
Spirit has brought me into the right Land, Psalm. 142. ver 11
and to such a right way of truth to walk in, wherein I find more comfort
than ever I did in my whole life before in the P^pacie, by the Service and
Sacraments of the Church of England, so that for my perseverance therein from
my heart, I pray to God with King David, O God hold up my steps in thy paths,
Psalm. 17. v. 5.
that my footsteps slip not.

4. Now it is most behoofefull also that I speak unto you, all Recusants,
falsely styling your selves Catholics, An advise to all Romish Catholics.
that as I heartily love your persons, and wish well unto your souls, I may
give you good testimony thereof, by admonishing you not to be blindly led by
others, to the overthrow of your states in this world, and eternal damnation
of your souls in the next; desiring you, in the tender bowels of Christ Jesus,
that since God has made me a spectacle unto you of his singular mercy, not to
be so foolishly besotted, and ignorantly seduced, as not to make your advantage
by my observations, which (doubtless) God has helped me in, as well for your
example and benefit, as for the manifestation of his own goodness. Be not (I
beseech you) ouer-credulous in easily believing every thing that unadvisedly
your Teachers shall suggest unto you, but examine their Doctrines, according to
the rule Doctor Stapleton prescribes unto you, spoken of in my eleventh
chapter, number. 3.4.5. that is, by considering the fruits of your Teachers, and
whether the doctrine they teach you be conformable to the doctrine of former
times, generally received and taught in the Primitive Church: believe not all
they say of the Preachers of the Church of England, whom they often most
notoriously traduce with most false calumniations: as namely, I heard an
ancient Priest in the University of Louaine, some few years since, report of
the death of Bishop Iuell, Bishop Iuell calumniated.
affirming, that he traveling here in England, was taken with a sudden
sickness, and so compelled to light in a house where Doctor Harding had used
sometimes to lodge in, and growing worse and worse, he was forced to betake
himself to a bed, where his pains increasing, by the just judgment of God,
because Master Doctor Harding had often layen there before, he grew into
desperate fits, crying out, Doctor Harding, Doctor Harding, and wishing he had
never set pen to paper against him, and so died as a man in despair in
Doctor Hardings bed. This was told as a remarkable matter against him, for the
reproof of his doctrine, and magnifying of Master Harding; which I am informed
by credible men to be most untrue and false. Therefore I say unto you again
(dear Christians) be not ouer-credulous, but beware of false Prophets, who
have their consciences so seared, that they regard not how falsely they speak,
so they may any way traduce the credit and reputation of their adversaries
amongst you, charging both Calvin and Luther, and other true Conuertites of
Jesus, with such things as are not to be named, most injuriously; but no
marvel, when otherwise they cannot defend their cause. Again, let me obtain
so much of you, as to be frequent in reading the Word of God, which although
it have many difficult things in it, yet for so much as belongs to faith and
manners, necessary for every man to know, it is easy and facile. If you will
have an infallible rule, by which you may know the Shepherds, which like good
sheep you ought to follow remember that Christ said, In hoc cognoscent quod
discipuli mei sitis si charitatem habueritis ad inuicem. In this men shall
know that you are my Disciples, if you have charity one toward the other.
Now whether you find this mutual charity amongst your or our Clergy, either
in doctrine or manners, I leave to your own judgments to consider. And as for
my self, such as have been acquainted with me, if they will say truly, I am
sure that my conversation amongst them has always, since my Priesthood, been
such, as cannot be touched with any kind of disorder; my zeal in the
blindness of that faith as forward as others, to the small portion of Talent
which God has bestowed upon me, making me as ready by day and by night to
draw men to the Romish faith, as any man's, either by preaching, or other
labors, with as great sincerity as possibly might be. No man can charge me of
mercenarie covetousness, for making a Monopole of any of you for mine own
profit, or the wrong of others, having always been as ready to give as to
take, carrying in mind that of Saint Hierome, saying, Epist. ad Nouatianum.
Ignominia est omnium sacerdotum proprijs studere diuitiis, It is a reproach of
all Priests to study to enrich themselves. Therefore I have never repined,
that others should gain the profit of my pains, or gather the fruit of my
labors. Had I been of such an auaricious disposition (as is too frequent
amongst many) I could have provided sufficient means to have supplied my
present wants, in the case I now stand in, whereof I may truly say, Amici mei
and proximi mei aduersum me approprinquanerunt and steterunt, My lovers and
friends have approached against me, and have stood aloof from me. Therefore
since my carriage amongst you, even in the errors of that Church, was such, as
might beseem the duty of a good Shepherd, let this move you to think, that
God has blessed my sincerity so much, as to accept it in his sight for the
greater benefit of my conversion, unless you see a change and alteration in my
life and conversation, as I thank God I feel none my self, but rather an
abettrement by the religion I am come unto; esteem it the work of God, and
make your benefit of it, for your own souls good, through Gods mercy, who
draws unto him as much by example as by any other means. Therefore I beseech
you consider well these my observations, and turn to the true Catholic faith,
whereof you are ignorant, but in name and pretended claim.

5. And you (beloved Christians of England) who are right professors of the
Gospel, and by it of the true, ancient, To all true Catholics of England.
Catholic, and Apostolic Faith, not only in style, but also in truth, let me
be so bold with you as to exhort and encourage you in your profession, to show
your selves thankful unto Almighty God: you have the Word of God frequently
and with great care ministered amongst you; you have also the Sacraments
instituted by Christ himself, according to his institution applied unto you,
for the comfort of your souls; you are freed by Gods grace from the treditions
and inventions of men; you have the divine Service toward God in your own
Tongues, to your comforts, and not in unknown Languages; you are delivered by
Gods grace from the flauish bondage of the Popes government, and are blessed
under the sweet and mild regiment of a gracious Prince, who purchases by his
sweet merciful disposition your loves, and procures unto you peace and
happiness, free from civil wars and mutual contentions. Forget not
therefore these savors and benefits, which by the bountiful hand of God are
poured down most abundantly upon you, which others want (out of Gods especial
favor and mercy.) Be not (I say) ungrateful for such inestimable blessings,
least ingratitude to God should suddenly deprive you of them, and bestow them
upon others that will show themselves more thankful for them: For ingratitude
is the only bane of Christians, which soon bereaueth men of all Gods favors,
and therefore rightly Bernard calls it, Bernard. super Cantic.
Ventus vrens, fontem siccans pietatis, rorem misericordiae, fluenta gratiae, A
parching wind, drying up the fountain of piety, the deaw of mercy, the
streams of grace. Take heed that your unthankfulness for Gods benefits draw
not that exprobation against you, that Moses justly uttered against the
unthankful Jews, checking them for their foolishness, saying; O wicked and
perverse generation, O foolish and unwise people, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 6.
do thou render these things unto the Lord? Is not he thy Father, who has
possessed, made, and created thee? As though he should say, Are these the
thanks thou yeeldest for so many benefits affoorded thee? Thou rendrest evil
for good, which is the highest degree and greatest kind of malice. It is a
point of equity to render good for good, it is a part of perfection to render
good for evil, but to render evil for good is a part of the greatest
perverseness and ingratitude that can be. Take ye heed therefore of this
unthankfulness, least ye incur the just imputation and punishment of a
wicked and perverse generation. To the end therefore both you and my self may
enjoy still these blessings of Almighty God, and by our thankfulness in this
world arrive unto greater blessings in the next; out of a true desire hereof I
will conclude with Saint Paul, a true Conuertite through Gods singular mercy,
Bonum autem facientes non deficiamus, tempore enim suo metemus, Galat. 6. verse.
9.
non deficientes; And let us not be weary in well doing, for in due season we
shall reap if we faint not. These words of Saint Paul are fit for us, who
exhorts the Galathians to the works of holiness, the true effects of a
justifying faith: Wherein the Apostle performs the part of a prudent and wise
Husbandman, who to keep his workmen and laborers from sloth, and to
encourage them to go stoutly forward in their pains without fainting, puts
them in mind of the fruitful harvest that will follow, that strengthened with
the joyful hope of gain, they may willingly continue in the toil of their
work. For so Saint Paul, knowing all Christians to be laborers and workmen
in the field of Gods Church, and that it is as proper for them all to do the
works of virtue and sanctity, as it is for the birds to fly; to the end
they may not be tired out with the heat and burden of the day, nor be wearied
with the toil of tribulations and sufferings of any temptations, and so give
over good works, but persevere to the end and period of their lives, he
propounds unto them the great fruit that shall be reaped at Harvest, after
all their virtuous deeds, and all sufferings in any persecutions; when for
their tears they shall reap joy; when for earthly wants they shall enjoy
store of heavenly treasures; when for all the valiant combats against the
world, the flesh, and the devil, in the constant confession of their faith
before God and man, Heaven shall be their reward, and glory their crown. O
happy end, which shall end with endless eternity! Therefore even so to you
all, and to my self (with earnest desires of Gods blessing) for my conclusion,
I will instate once again Saint Paul, saying, Let us not be wearied in well
doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. By the expectation
of which glorious reward, let us be encouraged against all, either corporal or
spiritual oppositions, to stand faithfully in defense of the Gospel of
Christ, to the confusion and stopping the mouths of all that shall contradict
us: Which God grant we may do with true religious hearts, to the glory of
his most holy Name; with loyal affections for the safety of our dread
Sovereign; and with mutual charity for the everlasting combination of our
hearts in Christ Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
FOl. 6. line 6. read the whole Parenthesis thus, not considering the great
store and plenty of heretical novelties foretold by our Savior himself in
the Scripture, under the parable of Cockle and Tares ouer-sowed by the enemy
man, after the sowing of good seed when men were asleep, fol. 53. line 1.
read upon this rule, f. 68. l. 27. r. justifies, although not without good
works, line 28. works cannot justify, f. 153. l. 20. r. was carried into etc.
f. 159. l. 9. r. that Antichristian, f. 163. l. 1. r. words of consecration. f.
187. in marg. r. Tractat. de Indulgen. c. 1. f. 217. l. 20. r. and the bed
undefiled, f. 138. l. 17. r. it is easy and facile, f. 238. l. 21. r. that you
are, f. 234. l. 19. r. the Church, l. 25. r. by the mighty strength and power
of all these, l. 27. r. estraied soul, f. 230. l. 34. r. of the Devil, l. 35.
r. to this of England, f. 227. l. 24. r. he shall not be etc. f. 19. l. 12. r.
and chiefly the nearer, f. 40. l. 19. r. whereunto we must take heed, f. 97.
l. 14. r. that is a Papist, f. 101. l. 22. r. of no conscience in matters of
importance, l. 28. r. And ye have left the, f. 103. l. 9. in marg. r. agree
well together, f. 104. l. 4. r. months prisoner, f. 109. l. 8. r. perinde ac
si Deus foret, f. 110. l. 25. r. to be enclosed up again so, f. 111. l. 1. r.
in Spain depended, l. 18. r. glory of men, f. 112. l. 34. r. variety of
virtues, f. 113. l. 8. r. they are like, f. 117. l. 35. r. Canus, f. 118. l. 5.
r. forged, f. 120. l. 11. r. pretty things, f. 128. l. 6. r. confederats to
entertain the stage, while the lives and, f. 124. l. 31. r. we may do the
better, f. 133. l. 15. r. Chap. 12. f. 230. l. 25. r. to be verified, f. 234.
l. 25. r. by the mighty strength and power of all these chains.


