MEMORABLE CONCEITS OF DIVERSE NOble and famous personages of Christendom, of
this our modern time.

LONDON, Printed for James Shaw. 1602.

TO THE TOWARDLY YOUNG Gentleman, Master Walter Rawleigh, son and heir
apparent to the honorable Sir Walter Ravvleigh Knight, Lord Warden of the
Stanneries, Captain of her Majesty's Guard, Lieutenant of the County of
Cornevvell, and Governor of the Isle of Iarsey.
SIr,
having a great desire, by some means to signify my affection unto you: I
thought I could not better do it, nor find a more ready mean thereunto, then
by preferring and dedicating this little Pamphlet unto you: the which
containing most rare and excellent examples of wise and witty sayings, and
notable instructions to virtue and virtuous actions, I suppose cannot more
fitly be presented, then unto you, in whose young years does already appear
a most towardly inclination and hopeful expectation both of wit and virtue,
such as your riper years (I doubt not) will bring to an excellency of
perfection. To the furtherance whereof, albeit this small Treatise shall perhaps
be able to add little access, in regard of the plentiful helps, wherewith
you are already furnished to that effect: yet it may be that both the pleasure
and the profit thereof, may in some sort prove worthy, both of your labor in
reading and perusing of it, and of my affection in offering it unto you. Not
doubting therefore but it shall be accepted, as pleasingly as I have presented
it willingly, most humbly I take my leave.

Your Worships ever to be commanded. I. S.

The names of the Popes, Emperors, Kings, Lords, and others mentioned in this
Book.
A
ABbot of Baigne. 20 Adrian Pope. 21 Albert Emperor. 32 Alexander Seuerus
Emperor. 38 Alexander the third, Pope. 1. 2 Alexander the fifth, Pope. 11
Alexander the sixth, Pope. 215 Alfonsus ksng of Naples. 104. unto 119 Anna
Queen of France. 92 Anthony Panormitane. 112. 132 Anthony du Prat, Chancellor
of France. 196. Anthony Agnello and his interpretation. 204. Apothegme of an
Englishman. 186 Archbishop of Collaine. 18 Attila king of the Goths. 51
Aulilie. 46 Aim duke of Sauoy. 144
B
Bajazet the great Turk. 125 Barba widow to Sigismond the Emperor. 31
Bartholomew of Aluian. 156 Battles at Guingate and Fornoue. 161 Bayard
Captain. 163 Bertrand Guesclin Constable of France. 152. Benedict the
twelfth, Pope. 103 Bishop elect of Senlis. 162 Bishop of Seruia. 213 Byword of
three Nations. 199 Blanch Duchess of Orleance. 70 Borso duke of Ferrara. 143
Boniface the eight, Pope. 6. 7. 8
C
CAesar Borgias duke of Vrbin. 146 Calixt Pope. 11 Cardinal Cossa. 10 Charles
Martell. 119 Charles the Great, Emperor. 23 Charles the bald, Emperor. 25
Charles the fifth Emperor. 41. 220 Charles the sixth king of France. 75 Charles
the eight king of France. 90. 91 Charles duke of Burgundy. 199 Chabanes great
master of France. 227 Chiniton, or Kniton king of England 203. Clement the
fourth, Pope. 5 Clement the seventh, Pope. 179 Clouis king of France. 45
Clotair the first king of France. 51 Columna Ascanius. 158 Columna Prosper.
158 Conrade king of Naples. 130 Constantine Ducas Emperor. 42
D
DAnt the Italian Poet. 165 Duke of Millaines cook. 184 Duchess. 218
Duchess of Burbon. 217
E
Earl of Arminacke. 272 Earl of Lazaran. 126 Earl of Nassaw. 215 Earl of
Petillan. 142 Edward king of England. 67. 68. 71. 72 Elenor Countess of Foix.
173 Elizabeth of B^heme. 188 Emanuell king of Portugal. 21 Ambassadors of
Sicily. 128 Ambassadors of Venice. 192 Englishmens oath. 75
F
FErdinand king of Naples. 132 Flemings mock. 103 Fool to king Alphonsus. 202
Fool to the duke of Austrich. 189 Fool to the Marquess of Guast. 221 Fool
to the duke of Millain. 233 Fo^ques the fifth Earl of Aniow. 134. 135.
Frauncis the first king of France. 101. 102. Frauncis Phoebus king of Navarre.
174 Francis of Burbon Earl of Anguien 220 Frederick the Emperor. 178
Frederick the first, Emperor. 23 Frederick the second, Emperor. 3
Frederick the third, Emperor. 32. 35 Frederick Marquess of Mantua. 208
French Gentleman. 180 French Gentlemen. 165 French Knights. 162
G
GEin Ottoman a Turk. 207 Gentleman of Genoa. 160 Gordian the younger,
Emperor. 38 Godfrey of Bollogne. 125 Gonnor Duchess of Normandy. 187 Great
Captain. 206. 207 Gregory Pope. 9
H
HEnry the first Emperor. 42 Henry of Lancaster king of England 73. Hire a
French Captain. 155
I
James of Genouillay, Lord of Assier. 192. John king of France. 71 John duke
of Britain. 137 John Galeas duke of Millain. 138. 150 John of Ionuille. 181
John de Maingre Marshall of France 147. John of Saintre. 148 John Gonzaga. 209
John of Menu a Poet. 225 Jerome an Italian. 140 Innocent the fourth, Pope. 3
Innocent the eighth, Pope. 14 Iouian Pontanus. 174 Julius the second, Pope. 14.
15 Julius Cardinal of S. Angel. 17
K
KAtherine Queen of England. ^00 King of England. 231
L
Lady of Heluin. 183 Lamorabaquin king of Tartaria. 126 Lewis king of France.
58 Lewis the gross king of France. 56. 57. Lewis the 4. king of France. 61.
62. 63. Lewis the 11. king of France. 76. unto 87. and 182. 227. Lewis the 12.
king of France. 92. unto 100. Lewis son to king Philip. 169 Lewis duke of
Orleance. 73 Lewis Sforza. 213 Lord Sforza. 197. 198 Lord of Trimouille. 216
M
MAreschals Antrehan and Cleremont. 166 Margaret Dolphinesse of France. 229
Marcus Barbaricus duke of Venice. 143. Martian the Emperor. 37 Maurice Earl
of Aniow. 135 Maximilian the Emperor. 38. 39 Medices Cosme. 212 Medices
Lawrence. 211 Miles bishop of Chartres. 19. 20
N
NArses. 151
O
OTho de Varis. 17 Otho the third Emperor. 37
P
PAnormitans. 5 Parmesan. 223 Peter of Bresay, Seneschall of Normandy. 88. 89
Peter Earl of Sauoy. 148 Philip the first, king of France. 53 Philip Augustus
king of France. 60. 170 Philip the fair king of France. 65 Philip of Valois
king of France. 66. 70 Philip duke of Burgundy. 142 Philip the hardy duke of
Burgundy. 137 Philip of Villars, great Master of R^^odes 144 Philip of
Moruiller, President. 200 Philip Lantgraue of Hessen. 179 Pius the second Pope,
and his sentences. 12 Prochetta Archbishop of Genes. 6.
R
RAimier king of Arragon. 124 Raphael a painter of Vrbin. 210 Rene king of
Sicily. 131 Robert king of Sicily. 177 Roboald duke of Frize. 44 Rodericke
Gonthier. 141 Rodolph the Emperor. 31 Roger king of Naples. 122
S
SAladine king of Asia. 123 Sanctius brother to the king of Spain 175.
Septimius Seuerus Emperor. 37 Sico Chauncellor of Millaine. 213 Sigismond
Emperor. 27. 29. Soldier of Navarre. 166. Soliman the great Turk. 121. 145
Sophia the Empress. 191.
T
TAlbot an English captain. 156. 185 Theodosian Emperor. 191 Theodosius
Emperor. 25. 26 Thierry captain. 47. 48 Thomas Caraffa Earl of Mathalon. 146
Tiberius Constantine Emperor. 43 Tiphamy wife to Bertrand Guesclin. 167
V
VAquery President of Paris. 230 Venetians and their opinion. 186 Vladislaus
king of Hungary. 129 Urban the fifth Pope. 170
VV
VVAlaque Dracocles. 129 William duke of Normandy. 54. 55. William Rufus king
of England. 123
Z
ZAchary Pope.
A Table of the chapters of this Book.
OF the power of God. chap. 1. Of Love. chap. 2. Of Faith. chap. 3. Of Hope.
chap. 4. Of Adulation and flattery. chap. 5. Of Ambition. chap. 6. Of Envy.
chap. 7. Of Covetousness and covetous persons. chap. 8. Of Prodigality. chap.
9. Of Lying toungs, and presumptuous speeches. chap. 10. Of Silence, and words
delivered in convenient season. chap. 11. Of Indiscretion and want of wisdom.
chap. 12. Of Knowledge of a man's self. chap. 13. Of Amity and friends. chap.
14. Of Liberality and magnificence. chap. 15. Of Nobility and magnanimity
chap. 16. Of Goodness and humanity. chap. 17. Of Honor and well doing. chap.
18. Of Exercise and industry. chap. 19. Of Wrath. chap. 20. Of Patience.
chap. 21. Of the praise of Riches. chap. 22. Riches reproved. chap. 23. Of
Laws and customs. chap. 24. Of Fame and glory. chap 25. Of Short and sickly
life. chap. 26. Poverty contemned. chap. 27. Poverty commended. chap. 28. Of
Beauty. chap. 29. Of Presumption and boldness. chap. 30. Of Piety and
mercy. chap. 31. Of Liberty and bondage. chap. 32. Of Ignorance. chap. 33. Of
Doctrine and a good wit. chap. 34. Of Abstinence and continence. chap. 35. Of
Prudence. chap. 36. Of Strength* chap. 37. Of Justice and judgment. chap. 38.
Of VViues and marriage. chap. 39. Of Fortune. chap. 40. Of Kingdoms, and
Magistrates. chap. 41. Of Captains in war. chap. 42. Of diverse and ready
answers. chap. 43. Of Virtue. chap. 44. Of Death. chap* 45. Of Felicity.
chap. 46.
MEMORABLE Conceits, of diverse Noble and famous personages of Christendom,
of this our modern time.
Of Pope Alexander the third of that name, and the Emperor Frederick the
first, surnamed Barbarossa.
THE Emperor Frederick the first, having had long wars with Pope Alexander
the third: and having driven him for fear of him to forsake Rome, and to fly
disguised in the habit of a cook unto Venice: the said Pope of a long ^ime
served there in the place of a Gardener within the Monastery of ^ur Lady of
Charity: till such time as ^omming to be known to the Duke and Senate of
Venice, they took him thence: and having with great solemnity and
magnificence conducted him in all his Pontifical ornaments to the Church of
Saint Mark: and he there having bestowed his blessing upon them, they guarded
him from the power of the Emperor: who in the end being brought to reason and
reconciled unto him, came to do him reverence at the entry of the said Church
of Saint Mark in Venice: and there offering to kiss his feet: the said Pope
set his foot upon the Emperors neck, saying: It is written: Thou shall walk
upon the Aspe and the Basilisque: and thou shall tread upon the lion and the
dragon: whereunto the Emperor (as he lay prostrate at the Popes feet)
answered: Not to thee but to Saint Peter do I this honor: and to his
successor do I yield my obeisance. The Pope replied: Both to me and to Saint
Peter.

A Sentence of Pope Alexander.
THe same Pope being accustomed highly to commend the institution of the single
life of Priests, and to blame their using of concubines, was wont to use this
speech: God has forbidden us to get children: and the Devil has given us
Nephews in their stead.

Of Pope innocent the fourth, and the Emperor Frederick the second.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand, two hundred, forty and five, there fell
great contentions and division between Pope Innocent the fourth, and the
Emperor Frederick the second: in so much as the Pope in the Council of
Lions, denounced sentence against the said Frederick, to depose him from the
Empire: and the Emperor in despite sent certain verses to the Pope, who
returned him answer in the verses following.

Frederick Emperor, to the Pope.
Roma diu titubans varijs erroribus acta Corruet: and mundi desmet esse caput.
Rome that has long stood staggering in great danger
With sundry errors tossed and distracted.
Shall now to ruin: and worlds great Commander
Shall cease to be, reputed or respected.
The Pope to the Emperor.
Nitcris inassum naue^ submergere Petri:
Fluctuat, at nunqua^ mergitur illa ratis.
In vain thou seek S Peter's ship to drown,
It Will never sink, though tossed, be up and down.
Frederick.
Fatavolunt, stellaeque docent, auiumque volatus,
Quod Fridericus ego malleus orbis ero.
The destinies will, the stars foretell, the flying fowls foreshew,
That Frederick shall crush the world and keep Rome under awe.
The Pope.
Fata volunt, Scriptura docet, peccata loquuntur,
Quod tibi vita breuis, poena pere^nis crit
The destinies will, the Scripture tells, thy sins they do foreshow,
Thy life but short, thy punishment endless tormenting woe.
Of Pope Clement the fourth, and the Panormitanes.
THe Panormi^anes sent their Ambassadors to the Pope, to purge themselves from
the guilt of the conspiracy, whereof they had been accused as parties in that
famous murder of all the Frenchmen in Sicilia: called the Sicilian Euensong.
These Ambassadors having prostrated themselves at the Popes feet, began to
say unto him: Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, have
mercy upon us: and grant us thy peace. The Pope knowing them to be naturally
mutinous and seditious, told them: that they did as the Jews did to Christ,
who having saluted him with Hosanna in the highest, yet after many torments did
crucify him.

To rebellious flatterers a severe and rigorous answer is best befitting.

Of the same Pope Clement and his nephew.
THe said Clement caused a nephew of his, who had three Prebends, to resign
two of them, and to keep one only. And albeit he was very earnestly solicited
by many persons, that he would suffer his nephew to enjoy the said Benefices,
and to prefer him to more rather then to take those from him He made them
this answer: He is not worthy to be the successor of S. Peter, who gives more
to his kindred, then to the poor members of Christ.

A princ ipall part of the goods of the Church is in right due to the poor.

Of Pope Boniface the eighth, and his sprinkling of ashes on his Cardinals.
THere was in time past a certain famous faction in Italy between the Guelphes
and Gibellines: in the which Pope Boniface the 8. favored the party of the
Guelphs. Now it happened that on an Ash Wednesday, the Pope being to put Ashes
upon the heads of the Cardinals and Bishops (according to the usage and
institution of the Church of Rome:) one Prochet Archbishop of Genes (who was
of the faction of the Gibellines, and therefore hated of Boniface) came to
present him self on his knees before the Pope, to receive of his ashes: then
Boniface both changing the ordinary words used in that ceremony, and casting
the ashes in to the Archbishop his face: whereas the Pope should have said,
Memento homo quod cinis es, and in cinerem re^^erteris: that is, Remember man
thou art but dust and ashes, and into dust and ashes shall return: he said,
Remember man thou art a Gibelline, and die thou shall with the Gibellines.

This shows with how great power the passion of hatred does transport men:
when it causes even those which should be most holy and devout, to forget
their duty and their reverence to God and his religion.

Of the same Boniface, and the French king Philip le Bell.
THe same Boniface being at some difference with the French king, Philip the
fair, touching the supreme power and authority in matters both Ecclesiastical
and Temporal: in certain letters which he sent unto the King had these words:
We will that thou should know, that the whole Sovereignty both of
spiritual and temporal matters in thy Realm of France is of right and duty
belonging to us: and whosoever shall say the contrary, we repute them as
fools. The King returned him in writing this answer: Philip by the grace of
God King of France to Boniface calling himself Pope: we will thee to take
notice, that we acknowledge in our temporal affairs no superior but God
alone: and whosoever shall affirm the contrary, we hold him for a fool and a
sot.

Another conceit of Pope Boniface, touching one that resembled him in
countenance.
POpe Boniface being told by one of his Court, that there was a pilgrim of the
country of Bauyer come to Rome of purpose to visit the Religious places of the
city, who did altogether resemble him both in person and in countenance:
Boniface having caused him to be sent for to his presence, demanded of him, if
his mother had ever been at Rome. The pilgrim perceiving himself touched with
suppose of bastardie, answered: Holy Father, Some report this of Augustus
Caesar.
my mother was never in this country, but my father has bin here many times.

In this answer the pilgrim soberly returned that quippe upon the Pope, which
he thought to have put upon him.

Of Pope Gregory; and one that praised him to his face.
POpe Gregory hearing one to commend him beyond all measure, and more then
himself desired, said unto him: God grant (my friend) that I prove such a one
as thou reportest me, and that thou be so honest a man as the opinion which
thou have of me, may be free from blame and exception.

Of Cardinal Cossa who made himself Pope by force.
AFter the decease of Pope Alexander, the Cardinals being assembled in the
town of Bolonia the great: and shut up within the Conclaue to choose a new
Pope: the Cardinal Baltazar Cossa Bishop of that City, being there with great
forces, told the Cardinals freely and plainly: that if they did not choose such
a one to be Pope as should be to his liking, they should repent it. The
Cardinals ^^tonished at his menaces: and seeing his armed forces attending
round about the Conclaue, named diverse unto him, but none of them would
content him: whereupon they being the more terrified, willed him to nominate
some one, and promised that if so be he were a person capable of the place,
they would receive and admit him. With that Cossa called for the Popes Pall,
that he might set it on him whom he should choose: which being brought and given
unto him, he set it on his own shoulders, saying: I am Pope. The Cardinals,
howbeit this act was against all law and custom, yet durst not gainesay him,
but consenting to his election, they named him John the three and twentieth.

A saying of Pope Alexander the fifth.
POpe Alexander the fifth of that name, was very liberal and bountiful to the
poor, and to such as were learned. And he was wont to say in his common talk:
that when he was but a Bishop he was rich: and being made a Cardinal he became
poor: but after that he came to be Pope, he was a stark beggar.

Of Pope Calixtus which would have but one Benefice.
CAlixtus the third Pope of that name, the year before he was exalted to the
Popedom being only Bishop of Valentia and Cardinal: would never accept of any
other Benefice nor Ecclesiastical preferment: saying, that he was well content
to have one only virgin to his spouse and married wife.

Notable sentences of Pope Pius the second.
POpe Pius the second was wont to say, That in a town of liberty, every man
may speak liberally and freely.

Being told on a time, that a certain person had spoken very badly of him: he
answered the party reporting it: If thou had been in Campo de Fire, thou
should have heard many others, who would have spoken far worse of me.

In esteeming more of good books then of riches, he was wont to say: That the
most sumptuous and richest jewels and precious stones which he had, were
enclosed within his books.

His saying was: That by counsel a man might provide remedy for any
misfortunes or mishaps: like as in diseases there needed nothing but med^cine,
yet so as it be taken in time and place convenient.

He said: That the laws had the force and virtue to bridle the common and
inferior sort of people: but they had little or no command over the richer and
greater persons: and that the great affairs of Princes were not usually
determined or decided by the laws, but by force of arms.

Ignorant and unlearned persons (said he) are easily led and moved with
eloquent and artificial speeches: but wise men are nothing moved therewithal.

He was wont to say: that Physicians ought not to demand money of their
patients, but their health.

Of suits in law he had a saying: That the suitors or clients are the birds: the
courts or places of pleas, are the fields: the ludges are the nets: and the
Advocates are the birders.

He said: that men ought to be bestowed upon dignities, and not dignities upon
men.

An ignorant Bishop he compared to an ass.

Ignorant Ph^sitions (quoth he) kill the body: and ignorant Priests destroy
the souls of their patients.

He that is too hasty and easy in pardoning the follies of his child,
nourishes to himself an enemy.

A covetous man is not pleasing to men living, nor does any good till himself
be dead.

A luxurious and riotous life does at all times spoil a man, but in old age it
utterly kills him.

Lying is a most base and servile kind of vice.

A sentence of Pope Innocent.
POpe Innocent the eighth was wo^t to say: that it was not fit to make war to
get glory, or for conquest: but only to purchase peace and quietness.

The titles which Pope Julius gave unto his servants.
POpe Julius the second of that name, had his household servants of sundry
nations. And when he took his repast in private, he would for his sport and
recreation call those Spaniards that attended him, the birds of the air:
because he reputed them vaineglorious and great boasters, and desirous of the
upper hand. The Venetians and Genowaies, he named the fishes of the sea,
because they freque^ted the seas: and many times the fishes fed upon their dead
bodies. The Almaines he named the beasts of the field: judging them to be void
of understanding. The French men he termed winepissers. Whereupon it happened
that once a certain Norman (one of his tasters) merrily said unto him: Holy
Father, then are you a right Frenchman. Wherefore said the Pope? Because (quoth
he) you are the greatest winepisser of all others: if all the French of the
world were together

The speech of Pope Julius the second, touching his devise in wars.
THis Pope was a man that delighted greatly in wars, the which he did
ordinarily nourish and mainetaine between many Princes: and in especial
against the king of France. On a time some of his court said unto him: Holy
Father, many great personages do think it strange, that you should be so
desirous to entertain wars, considering the dignities of that calling wherein
God has placed you, which ought to be an estate of peace and quietness: and
seeing God has committed unto you the keys by which you should shut up the
way to discord, and open it to peace and amity: but you do quite contrary.
Whereunto the Pope gave them this answer: They which used those speeches unto
you, say they know not what. Have you not heard how S. Peter and S. Paul were
companions, and had but one Church between them. My predecessors used ^aint
Peter's key: and now will I help my self with S. Paul's sword. One of the
parties replied unto him: You know holy Father, that our Lord said unto Saint
Peter: Put up thy sword into thy sheath. The Pope answered: true but that was
after Saint Peter had first stricken with the sword.

This sh^vv^th that the said Pope was altogether a martialist.

Of a Cardinal that had his whole delight in siud^e.
O^to de Varis seeing Julian the Cardinal of S. Angel (who was President in
the Council of Basil) to spend most of his time in the reading of ancient
books: he said unto him: Sir, why do you live so solitary, and spend your
time amongst the dead of former ages? Come I pray and pass your days with us
that are alive. The Cardinal answered: you mistake the matter clean contrary.
For these Ancients do now live by their learning and rare knowledge: whereas
you live not, but be as dead men, both in your name and in your works: and
pass away your life time according to the nature of brute beasts.

The life of the spirit consists in conte^plation of learned vvritings,
which are the true Monuments, Relics, and testimonies of such as have
for^gone us in virtue and knowledge.

Of the Archbishop of Colaine, and a country pesant.
A Certain old man a poor laborer of the country seeing the Archbishop of
Coiaine to ride through the fields, armed and accompanied with armed forces,
fell out of a loud laughing whereupon being demanded wherefore he laughed: he
answered: Because he wondered that S. Peter, Christ's Vicar in the Church being
exceeding poor, had left his successors so rich and wealthy: and that their
trains should be more furnished with men at arms, then with Church men. The
Archbishop desirous that the fellow should have better knowledge of him in his
place and dignity, told him: that he was not only an Archbishop but a Duke
also: and that as a Duke he rode so accompanied with a train of men at arms:
Howbeit when he was in his Church, then he was attended on as an Archbishop.
Sir (said the labourer) I pray tell me: when my Lord the Duke shall be with the
Devil: what shall then become of the Archbishop?

Two heads upon one body, is a thing monstrous in nature.

Of the Bishop of Chartres and the French King, Lewis the eleventh.
KIng Lewis the eleventh, seeing on a time Miles Bishop of Chartres mounted
upon a Mule with trappings of velvet, and his bridle richly gilded, told him:
that the Bishops of elder ages were content to ride on an Ass, and with a
simple collar. O, (quoth the Bishop) that was when Kings were shepherds and
did keep sheep. The King replied: I speak not of the Bishops of the old
Testament, but of those under the new. The Bishop answered. I but that was when
Kings were great giuers of alms, and did use to set poor Lazers with them at
their tables, and to wash the feet of the poor.

Of the same Bishop, and certain Priests which he met.
THe same Bishop encountering with two or three Priests passing through the
fields, said unto them: God save you my masters and Clerks: the Priests
answered: we are not Clerks (sir) we are Priests. The Bishop replied: then
God save you my masters and Priests, no Clerks.

A conceipted speech of the Abbot of Baigne.
KIng L^vvis the eleventh demanded of the Abbot of Baigne to have his Abbey for
some small recompense: but the Abbot being wily, said unto the King: Sir, I
have spent almost forty years in learning the two first letters of the
Alphabet. A. B. and I shall need as long time to learn the two next letters,
C. D.

By the equivocation of these four letters in alluding A. B. to the word
Abbey, and C. D. to the Latin word cede which signifies to yield up: his
meaning was, that as he had been forty years ere he attained to the dignity
of an Abbot: so he would willingly keep it other forty years cre he would
yield it up.

A saying of Pope Adrian the fifth.
POpe Adrian being demanded, what was the greatest plague which he would wish
to his enemy, and not wish him dead: He answered. The greatest mischief I
would wish him, is that he were Pope, because I hold that to be a marvelous
affliction and vexation of spirit.

All kind of authority wherein a man has a care and conscience to do his
duty, should be rather refused for the charge, then desired for hope of gain.

The Absolution of the king of Portugal.
EManuel king of Portugal withheld from a Bishop of his kingdom the revenues
of his bishopric: whereof the Bishop complained to the Pope: who in favor of
the Bishop sent a Legate to the King, to cause him to make restitution or to
excommunicate him. The Legate upon the matter having denounced sentence of
excommunication, and being on his way to return, the King enraged at the
censure, mounted on horseback to follow the Legate, and having overtaken him,
he drew out his sword and threatened to kill him, unless he would absolve him:
which the Legate having done; the King retired to his Court, and the Legate
went on to Rome: where being come, and having made report unto the Pope of the
success of his journey: the Pope reproved him very sharply for yielding to
absolve the king. The Legate answered: most holy Father, if you had been in
danger of your life as I was, you would have given the king absolution double
and treble.

Fear of death may make a man sometimes do do that which he ought not
without regard both of honor and duty.

Of Charles the Great, and his Edicts.
THe Emperor Charlemaine did use to wear his seal of arms engraven in the
pomell of his sword: and he was wont to say, whenever he set his seal to any
letters of Edict, Ordinances or Commissions: See this is the sword that shall
maintain my Ordinances: and which shall make war against those who shall
contradict mine Edicts.

It is not a matter of so great importance to establish and make good laws
and decrees: as it is to cause them to be kept and observed.

Of the sentence which the Emperor Frederick gave against the Citizens of
Milan.
THe Emperor Frederick Barbarossa making war in Italy, compelled them of
Milan to yield themselves in subjection to the Empire. The Empress his wife
desirous to be seen of the Citizens, entered into the City in great pomp and
magnificence: supposing that she had been there in good security. But the
Milanois being ill affectioned to the Emperor, and bearing a grudge against
him in their hearts, in regard he had subdued them, they took the Empress and
set her upon a Mule, with her face toward the tail, the which they made her
hold between her hands in steed of a b^idle: and being so mounted, they caused
her to ride out at another gate of the City then that where she made her
entry. The Emperor highly incensed, and that justly with this outrage, did
besiege their City, and pressed them so hard, that he constrained them to
yield unto him body and goods, with this condition: that they which would save
their lives, should take or catch with their teeth certain figs hanging
between the genitals of a mad kicking Mule. Many of them preferred death
before a shameful life: the residue that were more desirous of life, then
careful of their honor, accepted and performed the condition. And hereof is
sprung that Proverb used in mocquerie amongst the Italians: when putting one
finger between two others, they say: see here is a fig for thee.

The common saying is: A dull Ass must have a sharp spur: a rebellious
people must have a reuengefull Prince.

The threats of Charles the bald.
THe Empire being in controversy between king Charles the bald and his
Nephews the children of Loys, kings of Germany: he sent a message unto them,
to let them understand, that he would bring such huge numbers of men at arms
over the Rhine, as their horses should drink that river so dry, that they
should be able to pass it and not wet their feet.

Of Theodosius the Emperor and his Decree.
THe Emperor Theodosius being highly incensed with the Thessalonians, for that
they had slain one of his knights within the Theater. He was determined to
have put all the inhabitants of Thessalonica to the sword: but being dissuaded
from the act: after he had well bethought himself he repented him of his
determination. And thereupon he made a law: that from thencefoorth, when any
sentence of death, or other punishment should be given or pronounced upon any
offender, either by the Prince, or by any inferior Judge his Lieutenant, the
execution of the judgment for three days after should be deferred: to the
intent there might be place left, on the one part for repentance, and on the
other for mercy.

The act of Theodosius for the repressing of his Choler.
Whenever his choler grew to be enflamed, he would suddenly withdraw himself
out of company: and being alone would pronounce over all the letters of the
Alphabet each after other with great leisure: to the intent that in mean time
his wrath and anger might wax cold, and be assuaged.

He that cannot subdue his choler by nature, must do it by art and cunning

Of the Emperor Sigismond and a Page of his chamber.
THe Emperor Sigismond, and one of the Pages of his chambet, passing over a
certain river at a foord on horseback: when they were in the midst of the
the river, the Emperors horse stood still and began to stale: which the Page
seeing, he said unto the Emperor: Most sacred Prince, your horse is ill
taught, and resembles you very well. The Emperor answered never a word, but
rode^ on toward his lodging: where being come, and in pulling off his boots,
he demanded of his Page, why he had likened his horse unto him. Because (quoth
the Page) the river had no need of any water, yet your horse in pissing there,
did add water unto water: and so do you: For you give wealth and riches to
the^ which have plenty, but to such as have none you give not any. It is now a
long time that I have been in your service, and yet did I never taste of your
liberality. The next morning the Emperor took two little iron Coffers both of
a greatness and like weight: the one of them being full of ducats, and the
other of lead: and putting them upon a table, he said unto his Page: here be
two Coffers, make thy choice of the two which thou shall like best, and take it
for thy wages and recompense of thy service. The Page choosing that which was
full of lead: the Emperor said, Now open it, and see what is within it: which
he did, and found it to be but lead. Then said the Emperor: now thou know
thy fortune: the fault was none of mine, that thy choice was no better, and
that thou were not made rich: for thou ^ast refused thy good fortune when it
was offered thee.

Some are poor through their own default, because when occasion is offered
to enrich themselves, they k^ovv not how to take their time and to lay hold of
it.

Diverse notable sentences of the same Sigismond.
THe said Emperor being demanded, what kind of man he esteemed most fit and
worthy to be a king: such a one (quoth he) as neither glories in his good
fortunes, nor is daunted with adversity.

When one complained unto him, that the city of Constance in Almaine, had not
free use of their liberties and franchises: he answered: If they had not great
liberty in the town of Co^stance, thou which art one of that city, would
not speak unto me so liberally: for franknesse of speech is a sign of
liberty.

He said also: That as God would be both loved and feared: so should Kings and
Princes be: for there can hardly be any true love where there is no fear.

There be three degrees of persons who ought to be both loved and honored.
Frst, God above all, and in all places. Secondly, Kings and Princes in their
kingdoms and estates. And lastly, parents and masters in their private
families.

The same Prince hearing one to praise him to his face, beyond all measure more
then he well liked of, and to resemble him to God: he stroke him on the cheek:
and the party saying unto him: Wherefore does your Majesty strike me? He
answered: Wherefore do thou bite me?

He had an ordinary saying: That kings should be exceeding happy in this
world: if all proud persons were chased out of their Courts: and that they were
followed and attended with none but such as were courteous and merciful.

He said also: that those were to be held for sage and wise persons, who could
modestly endure any reasonable jest or mocquerie: And that those who were
prompt in pretty jests and meriments, were to be reputed men of a good spirit.

The answer which Barba the widow of Sigismond, made to those that
persuaded her to continue a widow.
AFter that the Emperor Sigismond was deceased, the Lady Barba his widow was
persuaded by one to live still a widow, in imitation of the example of the
Turtle, which after the death of the male, does keep continual chastity.
Whereunto she made this answer: If so be thou will counsel me to follow the
conditions of the birds of the air which are destitute of reason: why do
not thou as well tell me of the Dove and the Sparrow.

A sentence of the Emperor Rodulph the first.
ROdulph Emperor, who first translated the Empire of Almaine into the house of
Austria: as he was devising with his familiar friends upon that matter, how the
same had been effected: It is no marvel (said he) if they be accounted fools
that know not how to reign: for there is not any man living that judges
himself to be a fool.

A Sentence of the Emperor Albert.
THe Emperor Albert, was wont to say: That the delight of hunting was an
exercise fit for a man: but dancing and leaping did appertain to women. And
howbeit he could temper himself to abstain from all other pleasures; yet he
could not restrain himself from the exercise of hunting.

The Fable of the Emperor Fred^ricke the third, propounded to the Ambassador
of king Lewis the eleventh.
CHarles duke of Burgundy having planted his siege before the city of Nuce,
which was succored by the Emperor Frederick the third and the Almaines: King
Lewis the eleventh of France (who sought nothing more then the ruin of the
said Duke of Burgundy) sent his Ambassador to the Emperor Frederick to
practice and persuade with him to seize and confiscate into his own hands all
those lands and Seignories which the Duke of Burgundy held of the Empire: and
that he for his part would do the like for the countries of Flanders, Artois,
Burgundy, and others dependants of the Crown of France. The Emperor upon
this motion, made the Ambassador this answer. Near unto a certain city in
Almain did once haunt a most cruel and dangerous Bear, which did many
mischiefs and displeasures to the inhabitants adjoining. Now it happened that
three merry companions (as they were drinking in a Tavern, and having little
money to pay their shot) they agreed with their host to make sale of the Bears
skin, and to pay him out of the money: and for the performance thereof, they
prepared themselves presently to go and take him. The bargain being made and
the dinner ended, they put themselves in quest of the beast: and approaching to
the Cave where he was lodged: the Bear issued out upon them so fiercely: that
being surprised with a sudden fear, one of them fled away back toward the
town: another saved himself by climing of a tree: and the third being
overtaken by the Bear, fell down under him as dead. And the Bear (without
doing him any other hurt) did often put his mouth to the ears of the poor
fellow, who all the while held his wind, and abstained from breathing: for the
nature of the Bear is not to touch or to offend any dead body. Now the Bear
being gone, the man got up and went his way also: after which he that was aloft
in the tree came down, and having overtaken his companion, demanded of hm:
what it was that the Bear told him in his ear: marry (quoth the fellow) he
bad me, that I should never after use to sell a Bears skin, till the beast
were dead.

By this fable the Emperor paid the Ambassador with an answer: as if he
should have said: Let us first be sure to take the Duke, and then afterward
let us make partition of his dominions.

Grave sentences and answers of the Emperor Frederick.
THe Emperor Frederick being demanded: whom he accounted his greatest
friends: He answered: Those men which fear me less then God.

Being likewise asked what he thought was the best thing which could happen to
a man: he answered: A happy and good departure out of this mortal life.

If the end of a man's life be not good and in the fear of God, all the rest is
little worth.

He said: That those Princes which are given to be cruel and too rigorous,
have great cause to fear death: For with the same judgment they have adjudged
others in their life, themselves are like to be adjudged after their death.

The same Frederick having subdued the Guntians a people in Hungary: he said,
We have now done a great deed: it remains yet that we do another deed more
great: that is: That we vanquish our selves, by refraining from avarice, and
from the desire of revenge.

This Emperor Frederick did bring up in his Court, even from an infant,
Ladislaus the son of the king of Hung^rie and of Boheme: and there were many
which persuaded and counseled him to ^^ke away the child, and to put him to
death: because in process of time, his life might cause him great hurt and
hinderance: and by his death, he might succeed him in his Realms and riches.
To whom the Emperor made this answer: I perceive then, that you had rather
have me a rich King, then a just Prince and a pitiful. But for my part I had
rather have an honorable report and good renown, then all the riches and
treasures of the world.

A sentence of Martian.
MArtian Emperor of Constantinople, would never enterprise any wars, except
it were upon great necessity: saying: That whatsoever Prince would live in
peace and quietness, he ought not in any case to entertain wars.

The title of Otho the third.
OTho the third of that name Emperor of Almaine, was of so great a spirit: as
he was commonly called: The wonder of the world.

The praise of Septimius Seuerus.
SEptimius Seuerus, Emperor of Rome, was a Prince so well beloved, and ruled
so well and commendably, that the Senate said of him: That it had been good,
either that he had never been borne, or that he might never dye.

A sentence of Alexander Seuerus.
ALexander Seuerus the Roman Emperor, whenever he appointed any one to be
punished openly, he caused the common Crier with a loud voice to pronounce this
sentence: Do not that to another, which thou would not have done to thee.
And the same sentence did he cause to be engraven in his Palace, and in the
public Edifices.

A sentence of Gordian.
GOrdian the younger, Emperor of Rome: had a saying sometimes: That the
Emperor of all other men is most miserable: because commonly the truth is
concealed from him.

The answer of Maximilian to one that would be made a Gentleman.
THe Emperor Maximilian being at Bologna: a citizen of that City, exceeding
rich and wealthy, but of base parentage, presented himself before the
Emperor, saying: May it please your sacred Majesty to make and create me a
Gentleman: For I have wealth sufficient to maintain the state and degree of a
Gentleman. The Emperor answered him: I can make thee much more rich the^ thou
art, but it is not in my power to make thee noble: For that is an honor which
thou must purchase by thy own proper virtue.

An answer of Maximilian to one that demanded an alms of him.
A Certain poor man very ill appointed, entered into the Palace of the
Emperor, and required that he might have access to his Majesty to speak
with him: which being denied him, he continued notwithstanding so to importune
the Vshers: that the Emperor willed the poor man to be brought unto him, to
whom he said: Most sacred Emperor: you and I are brothers borne of one Father,
Adam: and of one Mother Eve: and you see my poverty: may it therefore please
your Excellency to enlarge my estate, and to bestow some wealth upon me, as
each brother is bound to do one for another. The Emperor noting the rashness
and folly of this fellow, caused a small piece of money to be given him: where
at the poor man making show but of small contentment, because he found his
hope frustrate, in regard of that great liberality which he expected. The
Emperor said unto him: me thinks thou sholdest hold thy self contented with
that which I have given thee: For true it is (as thou saidest,) we are all
brothers: and if all the rest of our brethren would give thee as much as I have
done, thou would be much more rich, and a greater Lord then I am.

The wish of the same Maximilian.
AS he was one day devising with his familiar friends, and discoursing of
Empires, Realms, and Seignories: If it were possible for a man to be God: and
my self were so, having two sons, I would desire, that the eldest might be
God after me: and that the second might be king of France.

Of the act of the Emperor Charles the fifth, when he was to make a voyage
into Barbary.
CHarles the fifth Emperor of that name, being in a readiness to depart upon
his first voyage into Barbary, to the kingdom of Thunis against Barbarossa:
and desirous to provide a General for the army: and finding none whom he held
sufficient: he took the image of the Crucifixe: and in a general assembly of
his whole army, li^ting the same as high as he could, said: Our Lord jesus
Christ shall be Chiefta^e and Captain General of this enterprise, being so
glorious, so holy, and so honorable.

A notable sentence of Constantine the Emperor.
COnstantine Ducas the son of Andronicus, Emperor of Constantinople, was not
in any sort himself learned: and yet he did so exceedingly love both learning
and men of knowledge, that he was wont to say: I hold it far better to be
made noble and excellent by learning, then by the possession of the Empire.

A speech of the Emperor Henry touching his contentment.
THe Emperor Henry the first of that name, of the house of Saxony: before
that he came to be crowned in Italy, or to receive the ceremonious Titles of
the Empire. Howbeit that the Pope had offered him the Imperial Crown and
Diadem, and to anoint him Emperor: yet he neither accepted nor refused it:
saying unto his people: It suffices me that by the grace of God and you, I
have the name of Emperor. None of my predecessors and ancestors having ever
had the honor to attain thereunto.

The Charity of the Emperor Tiberius.
THe Emperor Tiberius Constantine, a Thracian borne, being reprehended by his
wife Sophia Augusta because he distributed in great abundance to the poor, all
the treasures which she and her first husband Justin had gathered together in
many years: he answered her: My trust is in God, that our treasure shall be
never a whit the less, for being distributed to the relief of the poor, and
the redeeming of captives and prisoners. For in so doing, we gather that great
treasure, whereof our Lord Jesus Christ spoke in the sixth chapter of Saint
Matthew his Gospel, saying. Lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where
neither mothes nor worms can corrupt the^, nor thieves can do you any damage
by stealing them.

The saying of the same Tiberius at the time of his deaeh to his son in law.
THe same Tiberius perceiving the time of his death to approach, by the connsell
and advice of the Empress Sophia, pronounced for his successor to the Empire
Mauritius, one borne in Cappadocia: and giving unto him in marriage his
daughter, with the Imperial vestures and ornaments, he said: Here I deliver
unto thee both my Empire, and this maiden for thy wife: wishing thee to serve
thee of her so, as may be for thy good and benefit: and that above all things
thou remember to maintain equity and justice.

The fairest flower of a Princes Crown, is justice: by which Kings do reign.

Of a duke of Freeze, which would not be baptized.
ROboald duke of Freezeland, at the preaching of VVal^^^n Archbishop of Sens,
had determined to have been baptized: to which end being stripped out of his
garments, as he stood naked and had put one foot into the water, he bethought
himself and asked the standers by, what was become of his parents and friends
deceased, whether they were in Paradise or in hell. Answer was made him: that
doubtless they were all damned in hell, and that not any of them was in
Paradise, because they were not Christians. At this speech he suddenly drew
back his foot, and contrary to the expectation of all the assembly, said
aloft: That he would not be baptized: but that he would go after his death,
where he knew he should find most of his friends. And the same day he dyed
suddenly.

The revvard which Clouis king of France, gave to those which had betrayed
their master.
CLouis the first Christian king of France, having wars with Richer duke of
Cambray, a man of very bad conditions and lewd life: the Barrons of the said
Duke promised the King, that if he would come and deliver battle to their
Lord, they would betake themselves to flight, and leave their Lord to be taken
prisoner. The king Clouis, for the effecting of this enterprise, sent unto the
traitors a number of Corcelets of Copper very richly guilt: And the plot being
executed according to the agreement, Richer was taken and put to death After
which the traitors being aggrieued that the presents which the King had sent
them were of so small valor: They complained unto him, saying: that they were
but badly recompensed: to whom the king answered, not without discretion: Do
you not konw how sufficiently I have rewarded you, in giving you your lives? In
your own judgments think with what torments they deserve to be punished which
have betrayed their Lord and master. Wherefore hold it for no small benefit
and favor, that I suffer you to live: and get you hence speedily, if you be
not weary of your lives. Where at the traitors being abashed, they soon
withdrew themselves from his presence.

Of the shame which Aulilia did unto her son Thierrie, whereby she was a
cause of his victory.
THierry being General for the Emperor Zenon in Italy: and having been
defeated by Odo^cer king of the Herules, fled toward Rauenna. On the way being
met by his mother Aulilia, and she persuading him to return again to the
field, and to renew the battle: and seeing him to make a difficulty so to do:
She said unto him: my son believe me, and assure thyself, thou have neither
castle nor fortres where thou can be safe, except I take up my clothes, and
suffer thee to return again into my belly from whence thou had thy first
being. Thierry being both ashamed, and enflamed at this speech of his mother,
reassembled his army, returned to the place of battle: and finding his
enemies in disorder, by reason of their first victory: he charged in upon them
and defeated them

Fevv words well spoken and well taken, cause great matters be put in
execution.

Of the good counsel which a Gentleman gave unto the same Thierry, Lieutenant
to Zenon the Emperor, under the couerture of a Fable: by means whereof,
Thi^^^y made himself king of Italy.
THierry was accused unto the Emperor Zenon by some envious persons, that he
affected the Empire: whereupon the Emperor sent for him home to
Constantinople, and there held him prisoner: till such time as being put to his
trial he purged him self. Within a while after, he was again accused for the
same matter: and being commanded by the Emperor to make his repair unto him,
who was purposed to put him to death: he sent a messenger to the Emperors
Court, unto one Tolomee his great friend and familiar, to understand his
opinion, if he held it good for him to come to the Court or not. Tolomee in
regard of his oath made unto the Emperor, durst not reveal the secret of the
Emperors purpose unto the messenger of Thierry: but appointing him to attend
the Emperor at dinner time: he straightly charged him to mark well what he
should hear him there say* to the intent he might rehearse the same unto his
master that sent him. The next day, the Emperor sitting at his table, and
keeping open state, Tolomee (who was one of his nearest fauorities) devising
with him of many things as they were at meat, let fall this fable of set
purpose. The Lion (quoth he) being chosen king by the other beasts: they all
came to do him reverence: the Heart (which is a goodly beast) approaching to
salute him with the rest, and bending himself before him, the Lion took him
by the horns purposing to devour him: but the Heart drew away his head with
that strength and force as he escaped and saved himself. The Reinard seeing
the Lion to frown, and to grow in a great rage, because the Heart had escaped
him, did promise the Lion to cause the Heart to come back again. And upon the
matter, he did so flatter the Heart with so many sweet and sugared words, that he
drew him back again to the Lion, to whom he doing reverence as before, the
Lion seized upon his horns, and the other beasts falling also upon him, so as
he was soon devoured. The Reinard pulling out his heart* did secretly eat it.
Each of the beasts sought very earnestly for his heart to make a present of it
to the king: but the same not being to be found, the blame was laid upon the
Renard with great threats and stripes: Alas (quoth the Reinard) I am wrongfully
punished: for the Heart had no heart at all: for if he had had any, he would
never have returned to be slain and devoured. This tale being marked and
understood by the messenger, he returned to Thie^^y, to whom he recited what he
had heard: whereby he was aduertized not to return any more to the Emperor:
and within a while after he made himself king of Italy.

A sentence of king Attila and his titles
ATtila king of the Goths, was wont to say: That the grief which he had
conceived in loosing of riches, was greater then all the pleasure that he ever
took in possessing of them. Amongst many other titles which he esteemed
excellent, he chiefly bore this to be called: The fear of the world: and the
scourge of God.

The words of Clotarius king of France, at the time of his death.
CLotarius the first of that name, king of France, at the time of his death
fell into these speeches, saying often: Vuach, Auach: How great is this King of
heaven, that thus kills and causes to dye the most great and mighty Kings
and Princes of the world?

To men that are too much in love with the world, the taste of death is very
bitter.

The sentence of Pope Zachary, concerning the electing of the King of France.
PEpin Master of the Palace of the king of France, sent his Ambassadors to
Pope Zachary, to have his advice whom he held to be most worthy to be King:
either him, who for the profit and common good of the Realm, did expose
himself to all turmoile and travel: or him that living in idleness and
sloth, had no care or regard of the Commonwealth, neither to augment it nor to
defend it. The Pope returned him in writing this answer: That he was the
fittest person to reign, and to be entitled King, which took upon him the
charge and managing of the public affairs, both for the defense of the
Realm, and for the maintaining of justice. The French being informed of this
answer, deposed their king Childericke, and thrusting him into a Monastery,
elected Pepin king of France in his stead.

The pleasant message of Philip king of France, to William duke of Normandy,
and king of England with his answer.
PHilip the first of that name, king of France, being resolved to make war
against William the ba^stard Duke of Normandy that conquered England, who had
lien long sick of a great swelling in his belly, sent him word: That he never
before heard of any woman in Normandy, that lay so long in childbed as he had
done: and that if he might understand the time of his vpris^ng, he would
provide him of lights against his Churching. The Duke returned him this answer:
That he would not fail to let him understand of his vprising: and that he
meant to come in person into France, where himself would cause a solemn
Mass to be song at his Churching: and that for lights, he would provide a
thousand Torches without wax, whose s^aues should be of wood, and a thousand
lances tipped with steel, to give fire to those torche^

By the Torches without wax and of wood, he meant houses, towns, and
villages, which he would set on fire: and by the lances, he meant men at
arms.

Of the letters of promise which the same William Duke of Normandy, sent unto
the Earl of Flanders.
THe same William Duke of Normandy having a determination, to make a conquest
of England, as being his right, in that it was given unto him by king Edward
the Confessor: he required diverse great Princes of France and elsewhere to
aid him in that enterprise both with me^ and money. Amongst others he prayed
the Earl of Flaunders (whose sister he had married) to aid him in that
exploit. The Earl demanded of him, what part he should have in the kingdom
of England, if the duke should conquer it^. The duke answered him: That he
would send him wor^ thereof in writing. After which the Duke being now ready
to depart out of Normandy upon his intended voyage, he caused a fair piece of
white parchment without any writing within it, to be folded and closed up in
form of a letter: upon the which for an inscription, he caused to be written
these two verses: sending them in way of a scoff to the Earl of Flaunders:

Beaufrere, d'Angleterre aurez
Ce que cy dedans trouuerez.
Fair brother, of England your portion shall be
That which here within written you shall see.
Another conceit of William the Conqueror, at his landing in England.
When the same Duke had passed the seas to the conquest of England, the first
fortune that befell him in his landing, was: that in leaping out of his ship,
he fell flat upon the sands, and the first part of his body that touched the
ground were his hands. The which accident some of his people interpreting to be
a sign of ill fortune: ^ush (quoth he out aloud) assure your selves my
masters, that this is the seizin an^d possession of this kingdom, which God
has given me: and it is his will that I shall take it with both my hands:
because by the aid both of him and you, I make no doubt but to conquer it. And
his success was answerable to his hope: for he came to be king, and left the
Crown of England to his posterity.

Of king L^vvis the gross, and Baldvvin Earl of Mons.
KIng Lewis the gross h^auing appointed the duke William of Normandy to be
Earl of Flaunders: Baldvvin Earl of Mons in Heynault, pretending right
thereunto, said unto the King: That he had wrong done him: for that the
Earldom did appertain unto him. He demanded with great instance to have the
combat granted him against those that should dare to auerre the contrary. The
king said unto him: It is against me the^ that you must have the combat: for
the Seignorie which you claim and strive for, is mine own proper right and
inheritance.

He that contendeth against his Lord and master, must needs have the worst of
the quarrel.

A brave speech of king Lewis the gross.
THe same king of France taking part with Hely Earl of Maine, against Henry
king of England in a certain battle fought between the^, found himself far
severed from his people. A certain English knight seeing him, and being in hope
to make himself rich by taking the king prisoner, he laid hold upon the reins
of the kings horse with intent to stay him and began to cry with a loud voice:
The King is taken. The king being valiant and of a noble courage, at one blow
with his sword overthrew the knight dead to the ground: and seeing him fall, he
said: It is not one man alone, that in Chesse play, can give the king the mate.

Of an invention found by king Lewis, to punish the Earl of Vermandois.
Lewis king of France, the son of king Charles the simple, desiring to be
revenged for the death of his said father, who dyed in the castle of Peronne,
being there imprisoned by H^bert the Earl of Vermandois his subject: And being
at Laudun with a great assembly of the Lords and Nobles of France, whom he had
reconciled unto him, he used a fine device to bring about his purpose: for he
had caused one to be attired like an Englishman, who being well instructed in
that which he had to do, came i^post to the Court, and required to be instantly
admitted to the presence of the kings Council, for the delivery of certain
letters to the king from the king of England. The party being entered into the
Council chamber, presented the letters to the king, which himself had before
caused to be written And as the Secretary read them to the King with a soft
and low voice, the King began to smile: whereof the Princes and Lords there
present demanded the occasion. Now I see well (quoth the King) that the
English are not a people of any great wisdom: for our cousin Harmant king of
England has written me here: that there is in his country a laboring man,
who having invited his master to his house to dine with him, caused him to be
slain: and he has sent to demand your counsel (my masters) what punishment
this fellow has deserved. Thibaut Earl of Bloys was the first that gave his
sentence, saying: That albeit the man was worthy of many grievous torments,
yet the most ignominious and shameful death that he could adiudge him, was,
that he ought to be hanged and strangled on a Gibbet. To this sentence all the
rest of the Lords there present did consent: and the County Hebert of
Vermandois also who had no sooner ended his speech, but he was apprehended by
the kings Officers, there provided in a readiness. And the King said unto him:
Hebert, thou art this wicked labourer, which have caused thy Lord and master
the king Charles my father to be put to death: now therefore receive the
punishment which thou have justly deserved, and which thou have denounced
against thy self. This said, Hebert was hanged on a Gibbet upon the top of a
mountain nere Lodun: which at this day is commonly called mount Hebert.

Of the wine which Philip Augustus king of France presented to the Barons and
Captains of his army.
PHilip Augustus king of France, co^ducting his army against the Emperor Otho
in the year 1214. and being by necessity constrained to join battle with
him: he took a great cup or bowl of gold, which he caused to be filled with
wine and sops of bread. After turning himself to the Princes and great Lords of
France which were with him, he said unto them: My friends and companions in
Arms: you which are resolved to live and dye with me this day: take each of you
one of these lops of bread dipped in wine, and eat the same as I have done
before you. He had no sooner spoken the word, but the cup was empty in an
instant. And immediately the battle being joined, he gained the victory at
Bouines, where the Emperor was put to flight: and the Earl of Flanders with
diverse other great Lords remained prisoners.

The titles which the king Saint Lewis of France gave himself.
THe king S. Lewis being demanded by certain of his Lords, with what title he
would choose to be honored in imitation of the old Roman Emperors, and of
other foreign kings, and the kings of France his predecessors: who for some
notable acts or victories had purchased unto themselves diverse titles of
honors, he answered: the greatest victory which I ever obtained was against
the devil, at such time as I was baptized in the church of Poissi. And
therefore the greatest honor which I would have done me, is: that men should
call me, Lewis of Poissi.

Of the same Lewis.
A Certain private friend of his did blame him, for that in writing his
private and familiar letters, he did not entitle himself king of France, but
Loys of Poissi. To whom he said: I am like the king which me^ choose with the
Bean at Twelfetide, who commonly does observe the feast of his royalty in the
evening.

His meaning was, that the Crown which he expected was the kingdom of
heaven: and by the evening, he meant the end of this mortal life.

The desire that Saint Lewis had to cut off all blasphemies out of his
kingdom.
KIng Lewis having caused one (who had blasphemed the name of God) to be
marked in the lips with a hot burning iron: and hearing that some of his
subjects did murmr at it: he said openly in the hearing of a great multitude:
I would to God that I my self were so marked with a hot iron on my lips, on
the condition that there were no oaths nor blasphemies used within my realm

Whenever he began to speak or to do any thing, and especially when he was
set in Council, the first thing he used to do, was to bless himsel^e with the
sign of the Cross, in calling upon the name of God. For his saying was: that
his mother had so taught him even from his infancy.

Of the instructions which the king Saint Lewis of France gave unto his
son Philip.
MY son, the first lesson which I give thee is: To love God with all thy
heart, with all thy strength, and with all thy soul.

Offend not God in any case.

Suffer any torments rather then sin.

Take patiently whatsoever adversity God shall send thee: and thank God for
it, acknowledging that thou have deserved it. Confess thy self often to some
good man, a Minister of the church.

Be dilligent to hear the divine Service song in the Church of God.

Observe carefully the good customs of thy kingdom: but take away such as are
evil.

Raise not any Taxes or Tallages upon thy subjects, but upon great necessity.

Entertain those into thy service who fear God: love justice and hate
covetousness.

Desire not that thy Judges should give judgment for thee in any cause against
thy subjects, farther then reason and truth will justify.

Preserve the cities and towns of thy kingdom in their franchises and
liberties, wherein thy predecessors before thee, have maintained them.

Give the Benefices and Offices of thy kingdom to good men, and such as are
capable of them.

Move not war against any Christian: and if any offense be committed, thou
ought to pardon it being required.

In places of justice and judgment see thou provide such as are good men and
godly.

Make diligent inquiry of thy household servants, whether they be addicted to
covetousness or to prodigality.

Be thou such a one in thy life and conversation, as men may take good example
by thee. For as the head is, such commonly are the members.

Take good heed that the expenses of thy house be moderate and in measure.

And the blessing of God be always with thee.

A notable saying of Philip the fair, king of France.
PHilip le bell, king of France, having a certain quarrel against Pope
Boniface the eight: (whereof has been before spoken) and being urged by some to
take revenge of the Bishop of Palmers, who was the principal procurer and
perswader of the contention between the^: he made the^ this answer: That it
was a greater glory for any Prince of courage and magnanimity to pardon those
of whom he might easily take revenge, then to execute revenge upon them.

Of king Philip de Valois, who confirmed the law Salique by the Scriptures.
CHarles le bell, king of Faunce, being deceased without heir male, Edward the
third king of England, entitled himself King and inheritour of France, in the
right of his mother Isabel, sister to the said king Charles. Philip de Valois
being the next heir male, opposed himself against the title of king Edward,
and obtained the kingdom by color of the law Salique which excludes women
from the Crown of France: and (as the common saying of the French is)
suffers it not to fall to the distaffe. And amongst many authorities cited
for the justification of that law, he alleged for one these words of the holy
Scripture: Consider the Lilies of the field, how they do grow, and do neither
labor nor spinne.

Of the Latin verses, which king Edward and king Philip de Valois sent each
to other.
AFter that king Edward of England had quartered the Arms of France with
those of England, and had joined the three flowers Deluce in a field Azure,
with the three Lions Or, in a field of Gules, the report goes that he sent to
king Philip d^ Valois these four verses: which howsoever they might be thought
of in that age, at this day are held but barbarous: vz.

Rex sum regnorum bina ratione duoru^.
Angloru^ r^gno sum rex ego iure paterno.
Matri^ iure quidem Francoru^ nuncupor idem.
Hinc est armorum variatio facta meoru^.
TO these verses of king Edward, king Philip replied in other six as good
stuff as the former.

Praedo regnorum qui diceris ess^duorum,
Francoru^ regno priuaberis atque paterno.
Matris vbique nullumius proles non habet vllum.
Iure mariti carens alia, mulier est prior illa,
Succendunt mares huic regno, non mulieres,
Hinc est armorum variatio stultatuoru^
The answer of king Edward the third, to those that required him to send aid
to his son the black Prince at the battle of Cressie.
THe same Edward king of England, in the field foughten between the army of
England, and the French power under Philip de Valois at the battle of Cressie
in Ponthieu: (where the French had a notable overthrow) being told by an
English knight: that his son the Prince of Wales (who had the conduct of the
maine battle of the English,) and the Noblemen (which were there with him)
were very fiercely assailed by the French, and did desire his Majesty to come
to their succor with the Reareward, whereof the king himself had the leading.
The king demanded of the knight, saying: Is my son dead, or hurt, or stricken
down. No Sir, (said the knight) but he is hardly bestead. Return then (quoth
the king) to them that sent you hither, and tell them: That my pleasure is,
they send no more to me for any aid, as long as my son is living: but let
him alone this day win his spurs. For (if God so will) my meaning is, that
the honor of this day shall be his. This message did so encourage the English,
that they carried away the victory.

By vvinning of his spurs he meant, he should get him the honor of a hardy
Knight: because one of the Ceremonies at the dubbing of a new Knight, is to tie
on a pair of gilt spurs.

Of two Latin verses made by king Philip de valois, against king Edward.
BEcause king Edward was supposed contrary to his faith and allegiance, to
have invaded the realm of France: king Philip to tax him with it, made these
two verses. Anglicus Angelus est, cui nunquam credere fas est*
Dum tibi dicit aue tanqua^ ab host cave.


Howbeit some say, that this was Pope Alexander the third, at such time as the
English went to Rome, to excuse and purge themselves to the Pope, of the death
of Saint Thomas of Canterbury, whom they had caused to be slain.

The bold speech of Blaunch the daughter of king Charles the fair.
THe same king Philip on a time speaking very bitterly to the Lady Blaunch,
Duchess of Orleance, daughter of king Charles the fair, touching the
succession of the realm of France: she said unto him very liberally and
boldly: Sir, if I had had a pair of stones, you durst not have used those
words which you have now uttered, but you had smarted for it.

Meaning, that if she had been a man, as she was a woman, she should have
been king of France.

The speech of king John of France to the Prince of Wales, when he was
taken at the batell of Poytiers.
John king of France being prisoner in the battle of Poytiers to the Prince
of Wales, was conducted to the English camp, where his supper was prepared
for him, at the which the Prince served him with his head uncovered. The king
prayed him diverse times to sit down with him: but the Prince excused
himself, saying: that it did not beseem the vassal to sit nere his Lord. The
king said unto him: my purpose was to have bestowed a supper on you this night:
but the fortune of war would that you should give it me.

The cautelous answer of king Edward to king John.
IN the time of truce accorded between John king of France, and Edward king
of England: the English men for a sum of money got by composition the castle
and town of Guines to be rendered unto the^: whereof king John being aggrieued,
complained to the king of England: and told him that he had broken the truce
contrary to the compact between them: whereunto king Edward made this answer:
I have not (quoth he) broken the truce: for there was not any article contained
in the Treaty between us, that did prohibit or defend us, from traffiquing
together, or to debar us or our subjects from the trade of merchandise each
with other.

The commendations which Edward king of England, gave to Charles the fifth
king of France.
THe same king Edward having taken the seas with a fleet of ships, wherein
were four thousand lances, and eleven thousand Archers, with intent to go and
raise the siege of the French before Tours in Aquitaine: he had the wind so
contrary, that he could not proceed nor prosecute his intended voyage into
France: wherefore returning much discontented into England, he used these or
such like words of king Charles the fifth. There was never yet (said he) any
king in France, who used less to bear Arms then this Prince: and that
without once stirring out of his chamber, but only by sending and writing of
letters, did so much trouble his enemies, or my self either, as he has done.

The Cartels which Henry king of England, and the duke of Orleance sent to each
other.
LEwis duke of Orleance son to king Charles the fifth, after that the truce
was accorded between the French king Charles the sixth, and Henry of Lancaster
king of England, the said Duke being young of years and desirous of glory
(contrary to the alliance which was made with the said king of England, sent
unto him a Cartell of Arms with a challenge of combat between them two, and a
hundredth Knights on each party: who for the love of their Ladies should try
their valor and prowess each against other: and that they which did best
should have the honor of the victory. Unto which Cartell the king of England
made this answer: We are not determined to break the truce, much less will we
violate or disanull the league of amity and alliance made between us: neither
do we mean to admit any equality between our royal Majesty and your
Lordship. Howbeit seeing you are disposed to combat, I can be content to accept
and make it good man to man, to the intent we may avoid effusion of blood, and
not either for our Ladies or for vain glory: but only for the honor,
increase, and preservation of our Realms, Countries, Territories and Dominions.

The true valor and magnanimity of men is not to hazard their persons and
lives: but only for the good of their country, or for their honor, or for
the safety of their lives.

The Oath used to be taken by the English men to their King, at their going to
the wars.
FRoissard reports: that when the English in former times came into France
to make wars, they had this custom: that the Captains putting their hands
into the hands of the king of England, did solemnly swear to observe
inuiolably these two things: The one was, that to no man living, but to and
amongst themselves they would never reveal the secrets of their voyage and
enterprise. And the second: that they would never make nor consent to any
treaty or accord with their ene^^^es, without the priuitie and good liking of
the King and his Council.

The choice of king Charles the sixth.
CHarles the fifth on a time having showed unto his son (afterward called
Charles the sixth) a Crown of gold richly set with precious stones, and a
helmet of steel fair gilt: demanded of him which of these two he would most
willingly have, if he were put to make his choice. His answer was: that he
would rather choose the Helmet then the Crown. The like affection did he bewray
at his new coming to the Crown of France. For when the Officers of his house
showed him the rich treasures and precious moueables of his father lately
deceased: and did afterward bring him to the sight of the goodly Armories,
wherein were all sorts of Arms, swords, Corcelets, Headpeeces, and other
furnitures fit for the wars, he said all aloft: Of the two (quoth he) I had
rather have these Arms, then the riches which my father has left me.

The Sayings and Sentences of king Lewis the eleventh.
KIng Lewis the eleventh, after the battle of Mountleherry, against the Count
of Charolois, bethinking himself of the Duchy of Burgundy, and how the same
was aliened in fee from the Crown of France, to the ancestors of the said
Count of Charolois Dukes of Burgundy, descended of a younger son of the
blood royal of France: he brake into these speeches: Men say (quoth he) that
Charles the fifth, was called Charles the sage: but they had little reason to
term him so: for it was but a foolish part to give unto his youngest brother
the Duchy of Burgundy for an inheritance: having given him therewithal
Margret the sole daughter and heir of Flaunders to his wife.

After the said battle of Mountleherie, one told him that his enemy the
County of Charolois did pass the night following in the place where the
battle was foughten. No marvel (quoth the king) if he remain and lodge in the
fields, seeing he has neither Town nor Castle to retire unto.

He was wont to say: That where pride rides before, shame and dishonor do
follow after.

He being on a day at Mass in a church of Chanons, he was told that one of the
Chanons was that day departed: whereupon casting his eye aside, and perceiving
a simple Priest which lay sleeping in a Chapel thereby adjoining: he said: I do
give this Prebend to that fellow that lies there: because he shall say
hereafter, that his wealth and good fortune came unto him sleeping.

THe Captain Maran making his repair to the Court of this king Lewis, with
purpose to advertise him of the exploits which he had done at Cambray, he wore
about his neck a rich collar or chain of gold, which (as the reportwe^t) had
been made of the relics of the church of Cambray. And as a certain Gentleman
standing by, was ready to handle the said collar: the King said unto the
Gentleman: Beware and take good heed sir how you touch that chain: for I can
tell you it is a holy thing.

By this saying he taxed the Captain with sacrilege, wherevvith soldiers
should not be tainted: because in sacking of any place, all holy things are to
be spared.

THe Archbishop of Tours talking familiarly with him, of the great troubles
which he had at the beginning of his reign, against the Princes of France: he
said unto him: If I had not caused my self to be feared, and showed my self
both of courage and experience, I might well have been put in the last chapter
of Boccace his book, where he entreats of unhappy and unfortunate Princes.

Having heard it reported, how Nicholas Raulin the Chauncelor of the duke of
Burgundy, a man of excessive wealth and riches, had founded at Beaune in
Burgundy a goodly Hospital, that did excel, both for the stateliness of the
building, and for the sumptuousness of the mouables wherewith it was
furnished: he said: There is great reason, that the Chancelour of Burgundy,
which in his life time has made many a man poore' should at his latter end
make an Hospital, where to nourish and lodge them.

THe said king Lewis being unwilling that his son Charles the eighth should
apply his mind to learning: he said: That the time which was spent in study,
ought to be employed rather in the care of governing the kingdom and
commonwealth: and that he which should betake himself to study and learning,
by the use thereof would become ^imerous and less hardy to undertake great
affairs: because in taking example of others out of histories, he would not
dare to enterprise any action of importance, the execution whereof might be
doubtful and uncertain.

He was wont to say: That he which knew not how to dissemble, was altogether
unskillful how to rule and govern.

One of the Pages of his chamber having taken a louse from off his garment: he
said: This shows that I am a man as others are.

One coming to tell him, that the Genowaies had a disposition to yield
themselves under his protection: he answered: They shall not long remain under
me: for I bequeath the^ to the Devil.

The said king Lewis being determined to send an Ambassador to the Venetians:
he conferred with his Council, whom he might choose as most fit and proper to
dispatch that service. A certain Nobleman naming one unto him that was his
near kinsman, and whom he was willing to advance: the King demanded of him:
what kind of man he was. The Nobleman answered: Sir, he is Bishop of such a
place: Abbot of such a Monastery: Lord of such a Seignorie: and so curiously
discovered al his qualities and Seignories. The King alluding to the brief
manner of writing then used, said: There where are so many titles, is little
learning or none at all.

A Certain great personage having told him how he was always troubled with
the Gowte, whilst he hued at ease, with good and dainty fare, and rich
clothing; and that afterward when he began to accustom himself to travel
and take pains, to fare grossly, and to go coursly clad: that then the gowte
began to leave him, the King said: and I for my part will never from
henceforth wear other clothes then of cloth: for that the gowt does sooner
take hold of silk then of wool.

He had a saying: That there was not any thing whatsoever but he cold find it
both in his kingdom, yea and in his house, save only one thing* And being
demanded by a great Lord: what thing that was: he answered: It was truth. For
I remember (said he) that my late Lord and father was wont to say: That in his
time truth was sick: but I think that now it is sta^ke dead, and that she
never had any ghostly father to confess her at her death.

A certain Nobleman demanded of him, how much the kingdom of France was
worth in a year? he answered: My Realm is a meadow, which I cut both every
year, and as often as I list.

A certain mean person of base condition following the Court of king Lewis,
and yet not knowing the king when he saw him: it happened that one day the king
aduising him, asked him what he gained by following the Court. The fellow
answered: I gain as much as the king: for both he and I live of God his
bounty: and at our departure out of this world he shall have no more with him
then I shall. The King esteeming well of the speech of the man, made him one of
the Pages of his chamber.

The life of men is different: but the end of all is common and alike.
BEing told that a certain great personage had a goodly Library, and a great
number of fair books: he said: Then may he well be resembled to a man that is
crook backed, who caryeth his great bosse behind him at his back and never
sees it. By this saying he taxed the party both of curiosity and ignorance.

Whensoever he had need or occasion to employ any man in his affairs, he
would gain them to do it with rewards and store of gold* For he was wont to
say: that when a man fights with silver lances, he commonly caryeth away the
victoria.

HE used to say: That many times too great services done to Princes, did cause
the loss of them that did the service, for that most commonly they are
recompensed with great ingratitude. Howbeit, that it might happen by the
default of the parties themselves, who in regard of their great service, do use
their good fortune with overmuch arrogancy, both toward their Lords, and
toward their friends and equals.

He said moreover: that to get to wealth and preferment in Court: it is a more
happy thing for a man to receive of his Prince benefits exceeding far beyond
his desert, then that his desert and service should be greater then the
recompense, whereby his Prince should remain indebted, and (as it were) bound
unto him. For I (quoth he) do more naturally love those that are beholding unto
me, the^ those to who^ I am beholding

AFter the enterview between him and Edward the fourth king of England at
Piqu^nie, where a peace was accorded between them for nine years: as he
returned he said to some of his familiars: I like not very well of the company
of the king of England on this side the seas: but being beyond the sea at home
in his own country, I can well love him as my brother and my good friend.

Having caused a goodly Tomb or Sepulture to be made in the castle of Loc^es
for the fair lady Agnes, the love of his late father^ within a while after,
the Chanons of the church did desire him that the Tomb might be removed out of
the heart of the Church, and set in a side Isle or chapel: he answered: Your
request is neither just nor reasonable: neither will I suffer her Sepulture
(whom my father loved so affectionately) to be violated: for it should be
against all law and equity.

He being to make his entry into Hesdin, whilst execution was in doing upon
certain of the principal Governors and Burgesses of Arras his enemies, which
were some two and twenty in number: and eighteen of them being executed, he
caused the execution to cease: and demanding if M. Oudard de Bussi were
beheaded or not: and answer being made, that he was: and that all the bodies of
the parties beheaded were buried: he commanded the head of the said de Bussi
to be again dug up: and caused a high pole of wood to be set up in the
midst of the market place, upon the which he caused the head of the dead
party to be placed, covered with a Cap of scarlet furred with Miniuere, as of
one that had been a Counselor of the Parliament. He held him in very great
reputation, because he had been a most prudent and wise man, and of sound
judgment in grave and weighty affairs. And he would once have given the said
Nobleman the office of Councellor in the Parliament of Paris: but the said
Bussi being not willing to accept of it in his life time, he did him this
honor after his death.

A certain person was a suter to him for an Office which was void in the town
where he dwelt: which the king refused to grant unto him: insomuch as the
party was out of all hope to obtain it: howbeit he humbly thanked the king
and so departed. King Lewis judging the man to be of no mean spirit, and
surmizing that he had not well understood what he had said unto him, caused him
to be called back again, and asked him if he had conceived aright of his
answer: the party said: Yea sir. Why, what said I unto thee? (quoth the king)
You denied me my suit (said he) Why did thou thank me then replied the king?
Because Sir (quoth he) you did me a greater pleasure the^ you thought of, in
giving me my dispatch so speedily, without causing me to loose my time in
coming after you upon vain and idle hopes. The King holding himself highly
satisfied, and taking great contentment by this answer, granted him the Office,
and caused his Patent to be made immediately.

An Apotheg of Monsieur Bresay, to king Lewis the eleventh.
THe same King being to ride on hunting, mounted on a very little horse:
Monsieur Peter de Bresay Seneshall of Normandy who accompanied him, asked him
where he had gotten that so goodly and so stout a horse. How mean you that
(quoth the King) seeing he is so weakean^d so little? Me thinks (said de
Bresay) he must needs be very strong, because he caryeth you with all your
counsel.

He taxed the king, in that he would many times believe no other counsel the^
his own, being wise in his own conceit: which sometimes he repented.

The counsel of the said Monsieur de Bresaie to the said King.
THe Ambassadors of the king of England, having on a time delivered their
charge to king Lewis: he demanded of Monsieur de Bresay his opinion, what
thing he might bestow upon the Ambassadors which might not cost him much: who
answered him: Sir, you were best to present them with your Musicians: for they
cost you much, and are chargeable unto you: they do you little or no service,
neither do you take any great pleasure in them.

The death of the said Seigneur de Bresay.
IN the battle foughten between Lewis the eleventh, and the County de
Charolois near mount Leherie: the said King (as his custom was to speak
hastily) said unto Seignor de Bresay, that he had no great trust nor affiance
in him for that journey. Sir, answered de Bresay, because you shall well see
that I am your loyal and faithful servant, give me your coat Armor that I
may wear it: for you know your enemies aim at nothing more then the
destruction of your person, and it may happen to save your life. Whereupon the
king and he exchaunged both Arms and En signs. And the Burgonians supposing
that de Bresay (whom they saw in the midst of the press) had been the king:
they charged furiously in upon him, and so slew him.

Of king Charles the eighth, who gave an answer to the Florentines in two
Italian verses.
KIng Charles the eighth being in Italy on the conquest of Naples, the
Florentines sent an Embassade unto his Majesty: the king reposing no trust in
them, for their answer caused two Italian verses to be read unto them which he
had written upon a wall in great letters: and were these. Concortesiae feed
poca.
Va a Fiorence vender loca.
Which is to say: To Florence he went of his goose to make sale,
Without any faith or courtesy at all.


The argument of which two verses was this: A pesant of the country near
Florence, sold a goose to a brave dame of Florence, only to have his pleasure
of her: which having had, yet notwithstanding in his agreement he used so
little fidelity or courtesy to the gentlewoman, as he exacted the price of
his goose in the presence of her husband, so as she durst not deny but to pay
him. And thence had this Italian Proverb his original^: which king Charles
pronounced to the Ambassadors for their answer.

A speech of king Charles the eighth, touching the keeping of his counsel.
When the said king Charles the eighth meant to discover any secret to any
man: he was wont to say unto him: If I thought that my shirt next my back knew
it, I would pluck it off and burn it.

The speech of Queen Anne, wife to Charles the eighth.
CHarles the eighth being deceased, and the tidings of his death being brought
to Queen Anne his wife, she said: Gods will be done. For my part I doubt not
but I shall be as great as I was before.

She promised herself in her hopes to be twice Queen of France, and so she
was: for she was afterward married to king Lewis the twelfth.

A notable sentence of king Lewis the twelfth.
AFter that Lewis duke of Orleance had attained to the Crown of France, some
of his familiars did persuade him to take vengeance upon them of Orleance, who
had shut the gates of their city against him, at such time as king Charles the
eighth made war upon him, and compelled him to fly into Britain. But the
said Lewis the twelfth of that name, made them this worthy answer: It
appertains not any thing to the king of France, to revenge the injuries done
to the duke of Orleance.

Other vvorthie speeches of the same King.
THe said Prince making war in Italy for the recovery of the Duchy of
Millaine: it was told him that his enemies had taken Agnadel: and that he would
come thither too late to lodge in it. Whereunto he answered with an hautie
courage: Then will I lodge upon their bellies, or else they shall lodge upon mine.

Another came unto him, saying: Sir, take heed to yourselfe that the great
Ordinance do not annoy you. He answered: There was never rightful king of
France slain with a shot of a canon: therefore whosoever is afraid let him
come behind me.

Another time the said king lying in Camp, and a certain soldier, a man at
arms which stood near him, being slain with a Canon shot, some of the
standers by showing him unto the king: he said laughing: He is but a little
cold in his hands.

His speech to certain soldiers, with the answer that they made him.
THe said king Lewis being determined to leauie a certain company of
footmen, gave commandment that choice should be made of the strongest and
most able and active men that could be found The day appointed for the muster
of the^ being come, there was presented unto him a goodly company of lusty
fellows, who having been trained up in the wars, and carrying diverse skarres
and wounds upon them, did appear to be old soldiers, whose marks did
testify that they had not lien idle nor vnemployed. The king seeing them so
hacked and hewed in their bodies, said unto their leaders: Indeed these be good
soldiers: but it seems they have been more willing to take then to give: and
those men which gave them these marks in their faces and elsewhere, seemed to
be far more expert in deeds of Arms then these were. The soldiers hearing
the king to give this ce^sure of them, presently made him this answer: Sir,
(saving our due reverence to your Majesty) they were not better men nor more
valiant then we: for if they hurt and wounded us, we slew them for their
labors.

A brave speech which he gave to a boaster.
A Certain Gentleman was very importunate upon king Lewis the twelfth, to have
some reward and recompense for the losses and damages which he had sustained
in the wars: and he showed him the wounds which he had received in his
visage. The king seeing him so rash and audacious: and being disposed to pay
him home for his brave vaunting and ostentation, said unto him: Take heed thou
turn not back thy face another time, when thou art flying from thy enemy.

His opinion of the Venetians.
BEing resolved to make war upon the Venetians, one of his nobles would have
dissuaded him from it, telling him: That he could not do it without great
peril to the French: and that the Venetians were a most prudent and sage
people. Be it so (quoth the king:) yet we will set so many fools upon them,
who shall so beard them to their teeth, as they shall not know which way to
turn themselves.

Certain Ambassadors of Greece being come to the French Court to demand
succors of king Lewis against the great Turk: and promising on their part to
do their best endeavors to chase the Turks out of such places as they had
possessed: the king reposing little trust in this strange Nation, excused
himself touching their request: and taxing the nature of the Greeks, he
alleged this verse of the old Grammarian Alexander de ville Dieu.

Barbara Graeca, genus retinent quod habere solebant.

A pleasant speech which he spoke to the Lords of the Parliament.
Having given a certain office of a Counselor of the Parliament to one that
was none of the wisest, the Court would not admit him into their society: but
sent two Counselors of the Parliament chamber to the king, to let him know
the insufficiency of the man. The king having heard them condemn the party
of ignorance, demanded of the^ this question: How many be there of you in your
Court? Sir, (said they) there be an hundred. And how is it (quoth the King)
that you being so many wise men together, cannot make one to become wise?

Another merry conceit of the same King.
Certain Gentlemen of his Court wondering at the unmeasurable stature of a
Courtier, whom every man reputed in manner of a Giant: the king taxing the
honesty of his parents, said: No marvel if he be so exceeding great: for his
mother took great pains to make him, and perhaps he had many fathers.

Of a certain Fable recited by him.
BEing in familiar discourse with the Ladies, he said unto them: In the
beginning nature gave horns as well to the Hinds as to the Hearts: but the Hinds
growing proud to see themselves have so goodly heads, they began to rebel
against the Hearts: wherewith nature being displeased, and willing to repress
their arrogancy and pride, and reduce them to the subjection of the males, she
deprived them of their horns: so that never afterward they wore any.

By this fable, he gave the Ladies to understand, that it was their duty to
be obedient to their husbands.
BEing one day in talk with Francis Duke of Angolesme, his son in law who
expected the Crown of France, as of right after his decease it was to come unto
him: he told him this parable: A certain father (quoth he) traveling with his
son on the way, held on their course to come unto a good town: the son
being very weary, by reason of the length of the way, yet perceiving a far
off the turrets and walls of the town, very chearefully said unto his father:
Father, me thinks I am now somewhat fresh, for we are even at the town
already. After these words, they went on so long, that it was full night
notwithstanding, ere they got to the town: where being ready to enter, the
father said unto his son: From henceforth son, never say: I am at the
town, till thou have gotten past the gates.

His speech of beneficed persons.
HE was wont to say: That the Asses had a better world then the horses: for the
horses (said he) do run post toward Rome, to get those Benefices, whereof
many asses are possessed.

An Apotheg of the said king.
A Motion being made unto him on a time to marie the Ladi^ Claude his daughter
to some strange Prince: he answered: No (quoth he) I will never make any other
alliance, then with the Cats and Mice of my own kingdom.

A Princely speech of king Frauncis.
KIng Frauncis the first of that name, to one that demanded pardon for another
man that had used ill speeches of his Majesty, said: Let him for whom thou
art a suter, learn to speak little, and I will learn to pardon much.

A speech of the same king touching Religion.
IN an Oration which he made on a time at Paris in the presence of his Princes
and Nobles against the Heretics, with intent to purge his realm of them,
amongst other words, he used this speech: If I knew that my arm were infected
with that contagion, I would cut it off and separate it from my body, and cast
it into the fire.

The opinion which he had of Noblemen.
HE was wont to say: that it much grieved him, that the Gentlemen of his Realm
did not give themselves to the study and exercise of letters, to the intent he
might provide them of the dignities and Offices appertaining to the long robe.
For he was persuaded, that that kind of men did do him the best service: and
that they ought to be less inclined to dishonest actions, then men of mean
parentage and base condition.

An excellent Apothegme of the same king.
THere being a purpose of a treaty of peace between the Emperor Charles the
fifth, and the said king Frauncis, and being even upon the point to conclude
it, he said: It is not possible that we can long continue in peace and amity:
because the Emperor cannot abide any equal or companion: and I can less
endure to have any man to my master.

Of Pope Benedict the twelfth, and his Epitaph.
POpe Benedict the twelfth was one that loved peace, and used to say: that he
would never use the sword against any person, because it was not belonging to
his place and calling. He made many good decrees and constitutions: and amongst
others prohibited religious persons to go to Rome to sue for Benefices:
notwithstanding after his death, whether it were right or wrong, or upon
hatred: some made this Epitaph of him. Hic, silus est Nero, laicis mors, Vipera
clero,
Deuius a vero: cupa repleta mero.
Which is to say: Here lies a Nero: to the laity a cruel tyrant: to the
Clergy a viper:
To truth a mortal enemy: and a notable wine bibber.


A mock of the Flemmings to king Philip.
IN the year, a thousand, three hundred, twenty and eight, the king Philip de
Valois in the quarrel and behalf of the Earl of Fla^ders, gave battle to
the Flemings at Mount Cassell, where were slain of the said Flemings 19800.
who before the conflict, seeing the mighty Army and puissance of the king,
very arrogantly caused the picture of a great cock to be painted upon a great
piece of cloth, about the which was written this Distichon: When this cock
shall happen to crovv,
The king shall here enter, and not before I trow.


But this mock cost them dear: for they sustained a bitter overthrow that
same day.

Princely sayings and sentences of Alphonsus king of Naples.
ALphonsus surnamed the courageous, the 17. king of Aragon, and king of both
Sicilies, hearing it reported how one of the kings of Spain was wont to say:
that it was not decent nor convenient for a Prince, or great personage to be
learned: he said: This speech was not the speech of a man, but of an Ass
crowned.

One day as he sat at supper, a certain old man being a suter unto him for
some thing, which importuned him exceedingly and beyond all measure to have his
petition granted him: in so much as the king could not eat his meat quietly,
so troublesome was this fellow unto him. Whereupo he brake into these speeches:
Assuredly I see that the state and condition of Asses is better then this of
Princes: for their masters do allow the^ time and leisure to eat: but kings
cannot obtain so much of their subjects.

A certain knight being imprisoned for debt, who for a long time had been a
prodigal and great spender, and had lived voluptuously upon the goods of
diverse Merchants and others, to whom he was become indebted: some of the
friends of the said knight became instant suppliants to the king, that he would
not permit the knight to be charged for the payment of his debts. To who^ the
king answered: Seeing this knight has not consumed himself, nor run into
debt for my service, nor for the good and benefit of his country, nor for his
own friends and kinseflkes: but has spent and wasted all his wealth for the
pleasure of his own body: it is good reason that he suffer the punishment of
his prodigality in his body.

Being one day reproved for his too too much clemency, and because he many
times pardoned those which had been most heinous offenders: his answer was:
That he did desire to stand ready prepared (whenever it should please God to
call him) to yield an account of those sheep which were committed to his
charge: and that when they should be demanded of him, he might render them up
safe and sound.

He had also an usual saying, That by executing of Justice he got the love of
good men: and by his clemency, he purchased the liking even of the wicked.

To some which at another time playned of his over great clemency and
humanity: he said: That they should consider and look upon the government of
Lions and of Bears: and that then they should soon see that Clemency was a
quality proper to man, but cruelty was proper to brute beasts.

He was wont likewise to say: That he who knew not how to rule himself, and
tomaister his own affections, was neither fit nor worthy to command over
others.

He said, that flatterers were like to wolves: for as the wolves by tickling
and scratching the Asses, do come to eat and devour them: so flatterers by
their assentations and leasings, do aim at nothing more, then to work
mischief unto Princes.

The Ambassadors of a certain Province repairing unto him, to crave his
advice, to which of these two famous Chieftaines, Frauncis Sforce, and Nicholas
Picinni they should gratify with their friendship and amity: he answered: That
it behooved them both to receive and entertain each of them in show of friends:
and yet to take good heed to either of them as to ehemies.

Whereas there was grown a secret hatred or dislike between the said king
Alphonsus and Cosmus de Medicis, a man of principal regard and authority in
Florence: the said Cosmus notwithstanding fent unto the king for a notable and
singular present the history of Titus Liuius with a Commentary, because he
well knew that the King would take great pleasure in it. The kings Physicians
being acquainted herewithall, told him: that he should do well not to read in
that book, but to take good heed of the subtlety of the Florentines: for
(said they) it is not good nor safe to trust an enemy: and it may be that some
venomous and infectious poise^n is secretly hidden either in the letters or
leaves of this book, which may empoison you as you are reading of it. For all
these disswasions the king opened the book, and having both read therein, and
turned it over in many leaves each after other: he the said unto his
Physicians: Learn now to leave these fooleries, and know this: that the spirit
of a king does not govern it self by the judgment of private persons.

Of a merry conceit uttered by one to the king Alphonsus.
THis king Alphonsus being well known to be a prince that took great pleasure
and delight in good speeches and witty sayings well and aptly placed: a
certain man of very mean and base estate, came as a suter unto him, and said:
Sir, do me justice: I have a certain creditour unto whom my late deceased
father ought a certain debt: and my father left me nothing wherewith to pay
him: howbeit afterward I paid this debt unto that creditour: who
notwithstanding demanded it of me again with great extremity, and I paid it
him the second time: he not so content, still demands of me the same debt
again and again, in so much as I have many and oftentimes paid it, and yet he
pursues me still for this debt, as if he had not been paid at all: Now sir, I
have not any more left wherewith to pay him: and if your Highness do not help
me to acquit me of this creditour, I know not what remedy to find for this
mischief, Believe me (quoth the king) this is a most rigorous and cruel
creditour: Who is it? Sir, (said the poor man) it is my belly, unto whom I
have so often paid the debt which is due unto him, as I have nothing more left
to give him: I humbly therefore beseech your Highness in charity to help and
relieve me to content him. Why (quoth the King) I my self have even such
another like creditour as thine. You say true, Sir, replied the poor man: but
you (God be thanked) have wherewithal to satisfy him, and I have not. The
king hearing this request, and esteeming it to proceed of a quick and good
invention, caused a certain sum of money to be delivered unto him.

An answer which Alphonsus made unto a Dreamer.
A Certain person in the kings presence, being in talk of dreams and of their
signification, there was a pleasant Courtier who to try the king, told with a
good grace before all the company: how the night before he dreamed a dream,
that the King bestowed upon him a bag full of ducats. Whereunto the king
presently answered: why fool, art thou so very a beast as to think that a
Christian man ought to give credit to dreams?

The same Alphonsus had a daughter called Eugenia, who being married had no
children: and one day it happened, that she brought out of her Coffer certain
Poppets which being made very finely, carried a resemblance of excellent
beauty, honesty and gracious carriage: whereupon Alphonsus said unto her: O my
daughter, how much better had it been both for thy father, thy husband, and thy
self also, if thou had had children of thy body so wise and virtuous, as
they might have represented the countenances of these l'oppets.

The answer of Anthony Panormitane, to king Alphonsus.
ANthony of Panorm being demanded by the king Alphonsus, what things were most
requisite and necessary to live a joyful and peaceable life in the estate of
marriage, considering that ordinarily it is full of troble^s, vexations and
discontentments: He answered: that there are two things most needful. The
first, that the husband be deaf, not to understand the follies, the ill
speeches, and manner of his wives behavior. The second, that the wife be blind,
not to see all the intemperate qualities and misdemeanors of her husband.

A speech which he used to one that had imbezilled his rings.
ON a time as he was ready to sit down at his table, being about to wash his
hands, he drew off his fingers certain rings of gold, which were very rich and
precious, and gave them to one that came first and next to hand, not much
heeding who it was that took them. The party to whom the King delivered
them, for that he did not again demand the^, thought that he had forgotten
them, and therefore was easily drawn to retain them: which he did. And for a
long time after, seeing that the matter was unremembered, he then kept them for
altogether. But ere the year was ended, the king being ready another time to
sit down at the table, the same man drew very near (for another booty) to the
king, and held out his hand to take his rings of him as he had done before. But
the king rounding him in the ear, said unto him with a very soft voice: Let it
suffice thee to have had the former: for these may serve for another turn.

He said, that in the flourishing estate of Rome, the Romans had caused to be
built right over against their Senatehouse, a temple which was dedicated to
Jupiter depositorie, wherein before their entry into the Senate, the Senators
and Counselors of Estate came to disrobe themselves of all affections of love,
favor, hatred, vengeance, and other private passions and affections.

Seeing on a time a woman to dance and vault very high, with great
shamelessness and immodesty: he said unto the standers by: Stay awhile, and you
shall see Sibilla will give forth her Oracles; noting thereby, dancing to be
a kind of fury: for the Sibils never gave their answers, but when they were
surprised with fury.

A certain Knight which had been taken prisoner in the wars, complained him
to the king Alphonsus of his losses and misfortunes, and demanded of him many
gifts, which being exceeding great, yet by his importunity he obtained them.
After he was departed, the king said unto his familiars: I was in a fear, lest
this importunate fellow, would have begged my wife also from me.

Another Courtier, who had very prodigally spent many a gift, which the king
had bestowed on him, did preffe him very vrgently to give him a certain piece
of money: to whom the king said: If I should continue to be thus liberal in
giving, I should sooner impouerish my self then enrich thee: for whosoever
gives thee does nothing else but power water into a Sieve.

Being demanded, which of his subjects he loved best: Those (quoth he) who are
more afraid for me then of me.

A Certain Knight a Neapolitane, named Stephen, having many Offices and places
of great charge under the king Alphonsus within his realm of Naples: and being
by means of an amorous potion, bereft of the use of his senses, some of the
Court begged his Offices of the King: pretending it to be a thing very unfit
and inconvenient that such places should be administered by one that was become
senseless: to whom the King answered: It were a very discourteous and inhumane
act, to take away from him his substance and means of living, from whom
fortune has alre adie taken his understanding.

He said, that those men seemed unto him merely senseless and void of
understanding, who would seek to have again their wives, which had been fled
and severed from them.

He said: that it were a very good thing, if men would so balance their wills
and affections, as they might stand indifferent between love and fear: to the
intent that when our love should constrain us to exceed, our fear might cause
us to retire, and to draw to the contrary.

HEaring certain laborers talking together, and telling how they had made
apples, which by their nature were very sour, by industry and diligence to
become very sweet and pleasant: he said: So ought we to do, that our people,
citizens, and subjects being rude perverse and evil minded, by our labor and
pains may be transformed and changed into wise, prudent, and good men.

He was wont to say: that the greatest argument which he had observed to prove
the immortality of the soul: was: That when we see our bodies to decay and
wear away, and to approach near to death, and that when all our members
begin to fail us, even then the powers and virtues of the soul do increase,
and as it were grow stronger, and more puissant in understanding, virtue and
wisdom.

Being one day hearing of Mass, and the church in great danger of falling, by
reason of a sudden earthquake: the people there present began to fly out of the
church, and the Priest made have to be gone with the foremost. But the king
Alphonsus stopping him, made him stay and make an end of his Mass. Afterward
being demanded why in a time of so great danger and common fear, he did not
offer to shun and abandon the place: he answered in great gravity with this
sentence of Solomon out of Ecclesiastes: Corda regum in manu Dei sunt.

The hearts of Kings are in the hands of God.

HE had a saying: that beauty most commonly was a significant sign and a token
of a good and gentle conversation: as the flower is a sign of the fruit.

Hearing one tell: how Titus the Roman Emperor was accustomed to say: That in
what day soever he had not given some one gift or another, he had lost that
day, Alphonsus said: That he thanked God, because he in that respect had never
lost one day in all his life.

He took so great pleasure and delight in studying, and in reading of
Divinity: that he would many times glory, how he had read over the old and
new Testament fourteen times, together with the gloses and Commentaries.

He was wont oftentimes to say: That he had not any better Councillors then
the dead. By the dead he meant his books: and he carried for his Ensign and
device a book open.

He was a great lover of antiquities, and of the ancient metals and moneys of
Princes, saying: That in the viewing and beholding of them, he seemed to grow
the more inflamed with the love of virtue and of glory.

Of the magnanimity of Charles Martell: as it is ^ritten of him in his Epitaph.
CHarles Martell, Mayor of the Palace of the Crown and kingdom of France
(which some say is the Office of Constable) did make four kings in France
each successively after other: to wit: Childericke called Daniel, Clotarius the
fourth, Theodorike the second, and Childericke the third. This last Childericke
offered unto the said Charles Martell the Realm and Crown of France, and
prayed him to take upon him both the name and the Diadem, which he refused
saying: That it was more glorious to reign and command over kings, then to be
a king: And in his Epitaph is written this sentence: Ille Brabantinus dux
primus in orb triumphat.
Malleus in mundo specialis Christicolarum,
Dux Domini^sque Ducum, Regum quo'que Rex fore spernit.
Non vult regnare sed regibus mperat^ ipse.


He was surnamed Martell, for the the exceeding great strength of his arm: and
in memory of the victories which he obtained in diverse battles.

The judgment of Sultan Soliman the great Scigneur or Emperor of Turks.
IN the city of Constantinople a certain Christian desired to borrow of a lew
the some of five hundred ducats. The lew lent them unto him with condition,
that for the use of the money lent, he should at the end of term give him two
ounces of his flesh, cut off in some one of the members of his body. The day
of payment being come, the Christian repayed the five hundred ducats to the
lew, but refused to give him any part of his flesh. The lew not willing to
loose his interest, conuented the Christian before the Grand Seigneur: who
having heard the demand of the one, and the answer of the other, and judging
of the matter according to equity, commanded a Razor to be brought, and to be
given to the Jew, to whom he said: Because thou shall know that justice is
done thee: take there and cut off of the flesh of this Christian the two ounces
which thou demandest: but take heed thou cut neither more nor less, for if
thou do thou shall surely dye. The Jew holding that to be a thing impossible,
durst not adventure, but acquitted the Christian of his interest.

Of a writing which the king of Naples caused to be engraven upon his svvord.
ROger the second of that name, king of Naples, held wars for a long time
with the Popes of Rome, by reason of those Lands and Territories which he
pretended to be his by conquest. And he had discomfited also the king of Thunis
in a battle at sea. Of the which victories he did so glory and triumph, that
he caused to be engraven on the blade of his sword this verse.

Apulus and Calaber, Siculus mihi seruit and Afer.

The sacrilegious vaunt of a King of England.
William Rufus king of England, having pilled the Churches and Monasteries of
his Realm, and taking away their Chalices and other Relics of gold and
silver, which he found in them, used these words: The bread of God is very
delicate and pleasant to eat, and it causes Princes to make good cheer.

The Testament of Saladin.
SAladin king of Asia, of Syria, and of Egypt showed at his death, how well he
knew the life of man to be most miserable. For he commanded that after his
decease, the shirt which he used* to wear, should be carried upon the top of a
lance throughout all his Camp in the open sight of all his Nobles, Captains
and soldiers: and that the party which should carry it, should cry with a loud
voice: Behold how Saladin the great Conqueror and Commander of Asia, of all
those great riches and conquests which he has purchased, does carry nothing
with him, save this only piece of linen

The chiefest thing wherein men can justly triumph at their departure out of
this world, are their virtuous deeds.

The revenge which a king of Arragon took of some of his Nobles that derided
him.
RAymire the second of that name king of Arragon, a very simple man, being
determined to make wars upon the Moors: his Barons caused him to be armed
and mounted on horseback, and put a shield in his left hand, and a lance in
his right hand: and offering to put the reins of his bridle in his hand
likewise. Let be (quoth the king) and give me the^ to hold in my mouth, for my
hands are full enough already. At which speech his Barons fell a laughing with
open mouth, and making a jest of it, demeaned themselves very unseemly without
any kind of reverence. But the king Raymire perceiving their mocquerie, got
eleven of the most noble and chiefest of his Barons to come into the town of
Osey, where he caused them to loose their heads without saying any other words
then these: La renardaille,
Nescait de qui elle se raille.


The humility of Godfrey of Buillon.
When the duke Godfrey of Buillon was chosen king of Jerusalem by the
Christian Princes, and the Diadem being presented unto him, he refused it
saying: It is not fit nor convenient for any Prince Christian to wear a Crown
of gold, sithence Jesus Christ the King of kings did wear one made but of
thorns.

The answer of the great Turk to the Ambassadors of Hungary.
Bajazet the son of Amurath, Emperor of the Turks, being with a great army
in Bulgaria, which is a part of Hungary: the king Sigismond sent his
Ambassadors unto him, to pray him that he would not molest his country and
Dominions, wherein he had no right nor interest. Bajazet for answer to this
Ambassade, caused all the armed forces of that Province to be assembled
together into a great hall, where having made the Ambassadors of the king of
Hungary to be called: he said unto them pointing to those forces with his
finger: Behold, said he: the reason and the right by which I have and do hold
the possession of Bulgarie.

Right and equity have no place in the Court of a Tyrant.

The answer of the Count de Lazaran to the Ambassadors of the Turk.
NO less notable was that answer which the County de Lazaran made unto the
Ambassadors of Lamorabaquin, or Bajazet the Amira or king of the Turks: who
purposing to invade the realm of Hungary with a mighty army, sent his
messengers to the Count de Lazaran with a mule laden with Rice, and demanded
to have passage through his country into Hungary. The Ambassadors proceeding
on their Commission, found the County in his castle called the Archforme, and
according to their charge did demand passage for their Lord and his army: and
that he should become his vassal and subject: otherwise that their Lord
Bajazet would bring into the country of the Count more men of war then there
were grains of Rice in the sackes wherewith their mule wa^ laden: and in so
saying, they powered out the grain in the midst of the castle yard. The
Count received and heard their message very courteously: and the third day
after being disposed to give them their answer, commanded to be brought into
his Castle court a great number of powltry which for three days together had
been shut up without any meat given unto them: the which in less then a
quarter of an hour, did eat up all the Rice which had been there powered out.
Whereupon he said unto the Ambassadors: Now go tell your Lord, that true it
is, he has a great number of armed soldiers: howbeit he cannot bring so many
into the field, but they shall be either slain or vanquished: as you have
seen these grains of Rice devoured by my pullen. And according to his hope the
Count had the victory.

A worthy Sentence of the Ambassadors of Sicilia.
Certain Ambassadors of Sicilia delivering that which they had in charge to
James the eleventh king of Arragon: he showed them that they ought to yield
their obedience to the Church: and to Charles king of Naples his father in law:
whereupon one of the Ambassadors said unto him: Sir, we read in many
histories, that peoples have been defeated by their Princes, and we have seen
the proof thereof in our time: but that subjects have bin destroyed by their
kings, we have never yet seen, or hard it spoken.

Of the death of Vladislaus king of Hungary.
VLadislaus king of Hungary and of Poland, whom the French named Lancelot,
leauying a puissant army against Amurath great Seigneur of the Turks, was
dissuaded from it by many Barons of his realm and other his allies. Amongst
whom one Dracocles a Valachian did dissuade him from that enterprise. But in
the end seeing that his advice took no effect, he yielded that his son should
go in his company with two thousand horse: and at their departure, he gave unto
the king Vladislaus and to his son two very swift and light horses, saying:
Because I foresee that the loss is like to fall on your side in this war
which you enterprise: I have given you these two horses, by whose swiftness of
foot you may save your selves, and serve you of them in your necessity: for I
fear me that you shall have great need of them. And accordingly it fell out:
for in a set battle foughten between Vladislaus and the Turks, in the year
1444. as Dracocles had foretold, the king there lost his life.

Of the two verses which Conrad king of Naples caused to be written upon a
horse of brass.
COnrad the son of Frederick, having taken the town of Naples by
composition in the year 1253. caused the walls, fortresses, and principal
houses of the city to be ruinated: and going into the great church within the
middle whereof was a horse of brass without a bridle, which had been kept
there of a long time for the antiquity of it: he caused a bridle to be put
upon him, and on the reins thereof were written these two verses: Hactenus
^ffrenis, Domini nun^ paret habenis
Rex domat hunc, aequus parthenopensis equum.
That is to say: This horse till now unbridled, now is made
To bear the reins which on his neck are laid:
His lord the rightful king of Naples town,
Did tame this horse, and bring his courage down.


The saying of Rene king of Sicilia.
REne king of Sicilie, said oftentimes unto the Princes and Ambassadors of
diverse places that came to visit him: I love the country life above all
others, because it is the best manner and the surest course of living, and the
most free from earthly ambition.

This King loved husbandry exceedingly: and was the first that caused to be
brought into France out of strange countries, white Peacockes, red
Partriges, white, black and red Conies: Betony and roses of Prouence. He was
a good Prince, a perfect Musician: and composed sundry books in verse and in
proes: amongst the which are that of the conquest of Gentle mercy, and that
of the mortification of vain pleasure, which I have read.

A conceited speech spoken to king Ferdinand.
THe king Ferdinand of Naples was very malecontent, and could not endure to see
men walk together two or three in a company, or to talk together of their
private affairs. A certain Courtier seeing the King in this passion, to
currie favor with him, said unto him: Sir, you ought to shun and take away
this usage that is so troublesome unto you, or else to make your benefit of
it: and in my advice, it were good that you imposed a tribute upon them that
use to walk in this manner up and down: for it would yield you a greater
revenue, then the customs which you leauie upon the merchandises of all your
Realm and Dominions.

Of a pretty quippe given by Anthony of Panor^e to a certain Knight.
THe king Alphponsus (of whom we have before spoken) being above all things
well affected to the exercise of hunting, did very earnestly enquire of Anthony
of Panorme, what Gentlemen of Naples were the greatest lovers of that game of
venerie: and whether any of them had written of the nature of dogs and
hounds. Why sir (quoth the Panormitan) how is it that you demand of me this
question? Have you not a person in your company every day, which has conuersed
with this kind of creatures for these forty years together: and night by night
has lien by a brach: he I trow is sufficiently able to write of the nature of
hounds, and the manner how to keep and cherish them. Now the party of who^
the Panormitan spoke, was a certain Knight, who was in very good grace and
favor in Court: which made the king immediately to fall on laughing, knowing
that the said Panormitan under the name of a brach, did mean the Gentleman's
wife, because she was a woman that did use to be very loud and clamoursom in
her speech, and was the most subject to furiousness and outrageous passions of
any woman living.

A contentious and quarelsome wife is an incurable disease.

The letters of the Earl of Aniovv to the king of France.
Lewis king of France, the son of king Charles the simple, being in the
church of S. Martin of Tours at divine service: diverse of his Gentlemen, young
Courtiers, showed him how Fovvkes the good Earl of Aniovv was set amongst the
singing men, and did sing with them, for the which they mocked and contemned
him. Whereof the County being informed, he sent letters unto the king, wherein
was nothing written save these words only: To the king of France the Earl of
Aniovv sends greeting. Sir know you: that a King unlearned is but an ass
crowned.

The counsel of the Earl of Aniovv to his brother at the time of his death.
MAurice Earl of Aniou at the time of his decease, giving some instructions to
his brother Fouques Nerra that succeeded him in his Earldom, said unto him:
My brother, I pray remember how in all my life time I have labored to get me
friends, knowing that this is great riches: and that the house which has many
friends ought not to be reputed poor nor destitute. And therefore I advise
thee in any case to hold them dear unto thee, who have heretofore been
faithful and trusty unto us.

A friend has no greater treasure then a true friend in time of necessity.

A Christian Act of the Earl of Aniou.
FOuques the fifth of that name, earl of Aniou having gained the victory in a
battle foughten against Henry king of England, near the town of Sees (where
the Angeuins and Manceaux took a great number of prisoners, whom they bound
and enchained together, and lodged in an Abbey church near the camp. On a
morning early the Count being disposed to go hear a Mass in the same church,
and being not able to enter into it for the multitude of prisoners there
enchained, he was very much discontented at it, and turning him to his men at
arms, he said: My companions and friends, what have you done? Do you not know
that the church is the house of God and of prayer: and have you turned it into
a prison? Do you not fear the wrath of God, in that you execute cruelty in
his temple? You ought to know that the church is our mother, and we are her
children: this place is a Sanctuary and a place of privilege: but you have
made it a place of servitude. This said, he caused the prisoners to be unbound:
and having made them to eat and drink, he set the^ at liberty without paying
of any ransom.

The same Earl on a time said: that to support or cherish the wicked was to do
injury to the good.

A Sentence of the duke of Britain.
John duke of Britain the fifth of that name, being willing to make a marriage
between his son the Lord Frauncis and the Lady Izabel daughter to the
Scottish king: the young Prince Francis enquired what kind of Lady that Izabel
was: to who^ answer was made: that she was a very goodly Gentlewoman, wise, and
discreet: and one that was likely to have fair issue of her body; saving that
she had some impediment in her speech. Then is she, such a one as I desire
quoth the Duke: For I hold a woman wise enough, that knows how to put a
difference between the wastcote and shirt of her husband.

The haughty courage of the duke of Burgundy.
PHilip the hardy duke of Burgundy was wont to say: That kingdoms,
Lordships, and Dominions, did of right appertain unto the^ that could by
conquest get and purchase them: he got the name of hardy: because at a
certain banquet, he leaped over the table, only to have the chiefest place
next to the person of king Charles the sixth: he had both the courage and the
speech of Alexander the Great.

An act of Galeace duke of Millain.
GAleace duke of Millain was given to understand, that there was a certain
Advocate in that city so subtle and cunning, that he could prolong suits in
law, and so draw the^ out in length, as he would make the^ almost endless,
whenever he listed to undertake to do it either for love or for money. The
Duke willing to make proof thereof, enquired of the chief steward of his
house, if there were not some debt due and owing by him to those that were to
serve him with provisions for his house. In the end it appeared that there was
owing to a certain Baker an hundred pounds: in whose name he caused himself to
be summoned, and a day to be set down for his appearance before the Senate, to
answer for the payment of this debt unto the said Baker. In the mean time he
sent to this Advocate, and demanded his counsel, how he might make delays,
and not be enforced to make payment of this money. The Advocate promised him to
find the means and to devise such sleights, as the Baker should not finger a
penny for one year at least, or not for two years if he listed. The action
being prosecuted, and judgment ready to be given: the Duke then demanded of
the Advocate, if it were not possible yet longer to protract it: where unto the
Advocate answered: that he would so handle the cause, as it should not be ended
for two years. Oh notable injustice! (quoth the Duke to the Advocate:) Thou
wicked man, did thou not know, nay did not I tell thee that I owed him an
hundred pounds: and yet would thou, even against thy own conscience and
mine also, frustrate the poor man of his due? Is there any reason to hold plea
against a just debt? Take the wretch (said he to his Officers) and let him be
presently hanged, and his body quartered: to the intent from henceforth the
commonweal may not by him be any more corrupted. And according as the duke had
pronounced this sentence, so with the consent of the Senate was the Advocate
executed.

The resolution of a Gentleman of Millaine at his death.
THe same duke Galeace was murdered within the church of Saint Stephen in
Millain, as he was hearing of divine Service. One of the conspiratours and
murderers was slain instantly in the place where the murder was committed:
the other named Jerome, having been hidden for three days under a Merchants
shop in the street, was constrained by famine to come forth: and being
apprehended, was adjudged to be quartered alive. The execution being to be
done, and he stretched out on a table, at the end whereof his head hanged down,
as his belly was ripped open: with pure strength he lifted up his head, to see
his intrails taken out of his body: and therewithal uttered these words:
Collige te, Ieronyme: Vita breuis, Mors acerba, Laus perpetua.

That is: Pluck up thy heart Jerome: life is but short: death is bitter: but
the renown will be perpetual.

And so saying, he gave up the ghost.

The cunning of Count Rodericke.
THe Count Radericke Gonthier having been taken prisoner in a battle, by
Ferdinand king of Catelonia: in the which Aluara the brother of the said
County was slain: the Count himself was set at liberty, upon his faith
given to return again, after he had caused his brother to be interred. Which
promise the said Rodericke being willing to perform, and yet withal desirous
to keep his liberty: he caused the dead body of his said brother to be
embaulmed, and to be put in a Coffin, the which he made to be carried with him
wheresoever he went: and he would never suffer it to be buried till after the
decease of king Ferdinand And by this policy he thought his oath sufficiently
observed, which he had formerly sworn to the King.

A sentence of the Count Pitilan.
THe Count Pitilan in discoursing of wars, was wont to use this saying: When
thine enemy is vvilling to fly, make him way though it were with a bridge
of gold.

The opinion of the duke of Burgoine.
PHilip duke of Burgoine, hearing say how they of Gaunt did exceedingly love
the Count Charolois his son* he said: Oh they practice the common Proverb,
which is this: The Gauntois do ever love the young Prince, the son and heir
of their Lord: but afterward when he comes to inherit the Duchy, and to
reign, then they hate him.

A Sentence of the duke of Venice.
Mark Barbaric^ duke of Venice, being unwilling to take revenge of certain
injuries that had been offered him, said: That a good Prince, and such a one as
was not inclined to cruelty, had a sufficient revenge of his enemies, when he
made it known to others, that he had the power to work revenge if he listed:
and that he would not do it upon private persons, though he did sharply punish
the public offenses.

A Sentence of the duke of Ferrara.
BOrso the first duke of Ferrara, was wont to say: That the hearts and
affections of men were sooner gained by benefits and good deeds, then by
force and constraint of Arms.

The charity of the duke of Sauoy.
Aim the second of that name, duke of Sauoy, being demanded by certain
Ambassadors, where were his hounds with which he used to hunt: and desiring to
have a sight of them, he told them that if they would come again to his Court
the next morning they should see them. The day after they came, and the Duke
led them into a Hal, where was a great number of poor people and beggars
eating and drinking at a table. Behold (said he to the Ambassadors) the dogs
which I keep and nourish: and with which I purpose to purchase and to lay hold
on the heavenly glory.

A memorable speech of the great master of Rhodes.
PHilip de Villiers, great master of the knights of the Rhodes, being be
sieged in the said city by Solomon the grand Seigneur of the Turks: and
having lost so many of his people, that he had very few left, said oftentimes:
That it was much better to save one of his own men, then to kill a thousand of
his enemies.

The speech of the great Turk to the said great Master.
AT what time the said Villiers was constrained to render the same town of
Rhodes to the said Sultan Soliman: and that he came to the presence of the said
grand Seigneur, to confirm the rendering of the place whereunto he had been
forced, and to take his leave of him for his departure toward Christendom:
the grand Seigneur used a speech unto him worthy of so great a Prince, which
was this: To loose towns, Lordships and Dominions is a thing so usual and
accustomable amongst men: that it is a sufficient testimony, how we are all of
us subject to infi^t miseries.

The device of the duke of Vrbin.
CAesar Borgias, duke of Valentinois and Vrbin, the son of Pope Alexander the
sixth, gave for his device this Mot: O Caesar, o nullo^ that is: E there I will
be Emperor or nothing. And so fell it out in the end accordingly: or ere he
came to that he aspired, his wicked conditions brought him to an unhappy end:
for he dyed prisoner in Spain.

The brauado of the Count de Mathalon.
THomas Carafa, Count de Matalo^, General of the Army of Ferdinand against
the French in the realm of Naples: after the return of king Charles the
eighth into France: being advised and dissuaded by many Captains of his Army
from joining battle with the French that were marching to Salerno: he
reproving their counsel, said out aloud: Tut, these Frenchmen now adays be
not those ancient Peers of France that have bin so renowned in the fabulous
Histories of the Romans: neither are we women furnished and armed in the
form of men, as were of old the Amazons. By this speech he encouraged his
soldiers: howbeit notwithstanding this brave oration, he lost the honor of
the battle.

A sage speech of a Marshall of France.
John le Maingre, called Bouci^ualt, Marshall of France, and Lieutenant for
king Charles the sixth at Genes, as he was riding one day through the streets
of that city, encountered two curtizans richly apparelled after the fashion of
that countrie^, who did him great reverence, and he rendered them the like.
Huguenin de Tolligney, a French gentleman which did then accompany him, caused
him to stay and said unto him: My lord: who are these two dames to whom you
have done this great reverence? I know not said the Marshall: Huguenin
replye'd: Why sir, they be common women. The Marshall answered: well, I know not
what they be, neither skils it: for I had leifer do reverence to ten common
women, then to fail of saluting any one that is honest.

A French Proverb.
IN the history of Bertrand du Guesclin, it is recorded: that in the reign of
Charles the fifth when the said Bouciqualt was Marshall of France, there lived
then also a famous renowned knight called John de Saintre: of which two
persons, the French in their commendation made these verses: Of much more worth
in an assault,
Is Saintre then is Bouciqualt:
But much better in a treaty,
Is Bo^^iqualt then is Saintre


An Act of the Earl of Sauoy.
PEter Earl of Sauoy, being to go before the Emperor Otho the fourth, to do
him homage for his lands which he held of the Empire: went apparelled with a
certain robe, the one half whereof was of steel in fashion of an armor
gilded: in such sort that on the right side he was most richly apparelled; and
on his left side he was armed: in this manner attired did he demand the
inuestiture of his lands of the Emperor: who having granted it unto him: and
the Earl being retired, and repairing to the Chancellor to have his
dispatch, showed him the ancient Evidence, and letters Patents granted to his
Predecessors whereby he held his lands. The Chancellor then demanded of
him, if he had the like for the territories of Chablais, Oste, and Vaux, well
knowing that he lately had gotten those lands by conquest. Whereupon the Earl
setting his hand on his sword, and drawing it naked out of the scabbard, showed
it unto the Chancellor, and said: that he had no other Evidence for those
lands but his sword: and by that he held them. After which the Emperor
demanded of him: why he ware such a garment, with the one half of cloth of
gold, and the other half of steel. The Earl answered: that he ware the cloth
of gold on his right side to do honor to his Majesty: and for my attire on
the left side, it signifies (quoth he) that if any man deal sinisterly and
ill with me, or offer me any injury, I am ready to defend me, and to fight
for my right enent to the death.

How the duke of Millain served an Astrologer.
A Certain Astrologer (which took upon him to foreshew things to come, and
the good and ill fortune of men,) regarding the countenance of John Galeace
duke of Millain, said unto him: Sir, dispose of your affairs betimes, for you
cannot live long. How know thou that, sard the duke? Marry sir, quoth he,
having observed the stars that are the governors of your life, I find that
they do threaten you death in your flourishing age. Well, (quoth the Duke) and
for thy self, how long shall thou live? Sir (said the Astrologer) my Planet
promises me long life. To the end therefore (said the Duke) that thou shall
never more have affiance in thy Planet, thou shall dye presently contrary to
thy opinion, and all the Planets of heaven shall not save thy life. And he had
no sooner spoken it but he performed it: for he commanded him instantly to be
hanged: which was accordingly executed.

The message sent from Narses to Sophia, the Empress of Constantinople.
NArses the Eunuch, a most excellent Chieftaine, who was Lieutenant General
for the Emperors Justinian and Justin of their wars in Italy, was sent for
by the Empress Sophia the wife of Justin (a most stout and proud Lady) and
commanded to return from Italy and Naples where he was Governor, and to come
to Constantinople to the Court: letting him to understand, that she meant to
employ him in another manner of service then the wars, and fitter for his
estate: namely, to spin and weaue wool with her women and maidens. To the which
message, Narses returned this answer: that he would weaue such a web, as
neither she nor her husband, (whom she ruled as she listed) should be able ever
to untwine. And he did no less the^ he promised: for he secretly sent for
Alboin king of the Lombards out of Hungary being his very great friend, and
set him in possession of Italy, so as both he and his successors enjoyed it
for a long time after.

A woman of insolent and proud carriage and haughty in speech, is the cause of
notable mischiefs.

The magnanimity of Bertra^d du Guesclin.
THis Bertrand du Guesclin was no less famous and renowned for his
magnanimity and courage, then was Narses the Grecian. For before that he was
Constable of France, he held the part of Henry king of Spain against king
Peter the brother of the said Henry. And in a battle foughten at Nadres
between the two brothers, Henry was put to flight and Bertrand was taken
prisoner by the black prince of Wales, who followed the party of king Peter,
who led him prisoner to Bordeaux: having held him there a time, he was willing
to deliver him, and to acquit and pay his debts, on condition that the said
Bertrand should never bear arms against him the said Prince, against the king
of England his father, nor against king Peter of Castill, nor their allies. But
Bertrand refusing to yield to those conditions, was notwithstanding put to his
ransom such as himself would nominate and set down. Bertrand (howbeit that
he was and alleged himself to be but a poor knight) yet hoping on his good
fortunes, offered the Prince an 100000. double Florins of gold. The Prince
supposing that he mocked him, quitted him for the quarter part: but Bertrand
standing on his honor, would not yield to pay less then sixty thousand,
saying: That he would be well able to pay it. The Prince accepting his offer:
Bertrand spoke out aloud before all the Lords and Nobles there present: now may
Henry of Castill well vaunt himself and boldly say: That he shall die king of
Spain: for I doubt not but to set the Crown on his head: and he shall yield
me the one moitie of my ransom: and king Charles of France shall furnish me
with the other moitie. Such was the haughty courage of this valiant
Chieftaine, who afterward accomplished and acquitted himself of that his
promise.

The same Pertrand being afterward Constable of France under Charles the
fifth, left a custom in France which he brought up in his time: That
whatsoever Gentleman had committed any forfeit against the reputation and
honor of his estate: if he did afterward happen to be in company at any
banquet: the meat which was set before him should be cut in pieces.

A hardy speech uttered by Hire, a French Captain to king Charles the seventh.
THe Hire a French Captain being sent from the army to the king of France
Charles the seventh, to show him in what estate the affairs of the wars then
stood: and that for default of victuals, money, and other necessaries, the
French had lost certain towns and battles to the English. The king willing to
entertain the Captain in good familiar sort, showed him all his delicate
preparations of his pleasures and delights, the sports, the Ladies, and the
banquets wherewith he recreated himself: and withal demanded of him how he
liked them. The Hire very freely and liberally answered him, saying: Sir, I
never in my life saw Prince, that lost his patrimony more pleasantly then you
do.

That man is to be reputed mad and senseless, that will sit playing, vvhilest
his house is a burning.

A prompt and ready answer of an English Captain the Lord Talbot.
TAlbot an English Captain, having besieged the city of Orleance in the time
of king Charles the seventh: the citizens fell to practice with the duke of
Burgundy, to yield themselves under his obeissance: whereupon the Duke wrote
to the said lord Talbot wishing him to leave the siege, and the rather for that
his long abode before that place, might be a great damage and prejudice unto
him. The lord Talbot suspecting the practice then in hand, would not consent to
the Dukes motion: but sent him this answer: I do not mean to beat the bush,
and that another shall have the birds.

This speech in some histories is attributed to the duke of Bedford Rege^t of
France under Henry the 6. king of England.

The answer of Bartholom^w Aluiano, to king Lewis the twelfth.
BArthelm^w Aluiano a Captain of the Venetians, and General of their army,
at the battle of Agnadell was there taken prisoner by the French, and
presented to king Lewis the twelfth: who demanding of him, upon what ground or
reason he bore arms against him: the said Barthelmevv made this answer: Sir, I
have undertaken the war against you for two special reasons. The first is,
for discharge of my duty to my country. The second is: for that having to
deal against so great and puissant a Prince as you are: if I had obtained the
victory, my renown and fame had been eternal: and being vanquished, I shall
have never the less honor and reputation with them of my country, when they
shall enter into due consideration of your greatness and excellency: for the
hardiness and courageous boldness which I had to resist against you, shall
turn to my glory and honor.

Men of haughty courage do not attempt other then great actions: the issue
whereof cannot but turn to their honor.

A tyrannical Sentence of Prospero Colonna.
PRospero Colonna being Colonel of the Italian men at arms which were within
Millain: a citizen of Millain came to complain unto him of the exactions and
pillaging of his soldiers: unto whom he said: Millain is like unto a bird, from
which if one pull away the feathers, she brings forth others much more fair
and beautiful.

The answer of an Italian to Ascanio Colonna.
AScanio Colonna having many goodly livings and possessions in Romania, arrived
in a certain town of his own: where all the chief men came unto him to salute
him and to do him reverence, only one citizen excepted: who being very rich,
yet no Gentleman, had one only son an honest fair conditioned young man, who
being singularly endued with all the gifts and graces wherewith nature cold
enrich him, was not inferior, but rather excelled all others there inhabiting.
Seigneur Ascanieo invited that same citizen to supper: at the end whereof, he
demanded of him to have his son to serve him: promising to prefer him and
advance him highly. The citizen said unto him: no sir, I will not that he
shall serve you: for I remember me of an old Proverb which withholdeth me from
condescending hereunto. What Proverb is that, said Seigneur Ascanio? The
citizen answered: Hearken sir, and I will repeat it unto you: Male e chi gli
serve.
Peggio e chi gli disserue,
Beato e chi non gli conosse.
That is to say: Ill is he that serves:
Worse is he that cannot please:
But happy is he that knows neither.


An excellent comparison made by a G^ntleman of Genua.
LEwis Sforce being determined to exact a great sum of money by compulsion
upon the city of Genes: sent an Ambassador thither to negotiate this
business: who being invited by a chief personage of the City to dine with
him, and walking into the garden of that citizen his house: there they two fell
into communication of that matter: the Gentleman Geneuois seeing the herb
Basell, said unto the Ambassador: My lord Ambassador, stroke your hand along
upon, and after smell unto it: which he did, and confessed that the savor of
it was most sweet and odoriferous: My Lord (quoth the Geneuois again) strain
the herb in your hand and then smell to it: which he did likewise, and said
that it yielded a very bad and loathsome sent. Whereupon the Geneuois said unto
him: My lord, if the duke Lewis will gently stroke the hand of his puissance
over this city without any violent dealing he shall find it to yield a good
savor, and very obedient unto him: but if he come to oppress it and to force
it by compulsion, surely it will yield but a sharp and ill taste by
disobedience and rebellion.

The admonition of certain French Captains given to their soldiers.
IN the battle of Fornoue given by the potestates of Italy to king Charles the
eight at his return from the conquest of Naples: the French Knights passing by
the ranks of the battles, as they were doing their deuoit in the thickest
press of their enemies, and fearing lest the covetousness of the soldiers
might make the French loose the victory: they cried unto their soldiers:
Remember the battle of Guinegare. This was a battle foughten in the time of
king Lewis the eleventh against Maximilian king of the Romans: the which the
French lost by giving themselves to the pillage.

Of a French Knight which taxed the Normans.
RAault the Dane, who was afterward the first duke of Normandy coming into
France with a great army: there was sent against him Robert Earl of Aniou,
Marshall of France: who demanded of one Hastingue (a Dane likewise, being
then County de Chartres) whether he thought best to give battle unto Raault
or not, and what was his advice therein? Hastingue for some reasons dissuaded
him. But a certain noble Knight which carried the Banner of France, persuaded
the Marshall to the contrary, saying: My Lord: did you ever see a wolf seize
upon a wolf: or one fox make war against another fox? Inferring hereby: that
they were both of one nation: and that therefore it was very unlikely that the
one would hurt the other.

THe Elect of Senlis encouraging the French men at arms against the Flemings
in the battle of Bouines, under the king Philip Augustus, amongst other words,
said: It is not the part of any noble and valiant Knight, to make the body of
another Knight to serve him for his shield and rampart.

The Sayings of Captain Baiard.
FRauncis de Stritigen, a Colonel under the Emperor Charles the fifth, having
besieged Mezieres, within the which was Captain Bayard: for Frauncis the first
of that name, king of France summoned him by a Herald to yield himself and
the place whereof he had the government. Whereunto Bayard made this answer. The
Baiard of France fears not the Roussin of Almaine.

This conceit was upon the allusion to his name, which was so famous and
renowned, that the Spaniards had this saying of him: In France are many
Graybeards, but there are but fevv Bayards.

A Gentleman demanded of Monsieur Bayard: What goods and possessions a
Gentleman ought to leave unto his children? he answered: Marry that which
needs not fear any storms nor te^pests, nor force of man, nor humane
justice: and that is wisdom and virtue. And it behooves the father to have
like care of his children, as a Gardener has of his garden: that is: to be
careful in trimming of it, to see it well sowed, and well planted with good
seeds and plants.

Another demanded of him, what difference there was between the learned and
the ignorant: As much (quoth he) as is between a Physician and his patient.

He said: that the greatest honor and Seignorie which any Nobleman could
possibly have, was to be familiar and conversant with men that are virtuous:
and the greatest evil which could possibly betide to any great person, was to
be accompanied with those for his familiar friends, who were ignorant and
vicious: for (said he) there cannot be a greater plague or pestilence, then
when audaciousnesse and puissance is accompanied with ignorance.

A certain Gentleman on a time said unto him: Sir, I see every where great
store of riches and worldly goods, but I see not that prudence and wisdom
which you have so highly commended. That is no marvel (answered Bayard) for
you have the earthly eyes of the body, with which you see earthly things: but
you have not the eyes of the spirit and understanding, wherewith to discern
and consider wisdom and prudence.

A dangerous jest of a soldier of Navarre.

IN the year 1916. at such time as the French and Venetians had laid siege
before Bressia, which the Spaniards held for the Emperor: after that the
soldiers of both parts had used each against other sundry taunts and
reproachful arrogant speeches: a certain soldier a Nauarrois, (to the intent
he might in some sort repress the vaunting speeches of the Spaniards) in
giving them occasion to suspect the mines wrought under the ground against
the^: he used this speech unto the^: My friends, you that are so full of your
mocks within the town take good heed and look well to yourselues, to prevent
the harm that may betide you, lest that when the hen has done scraping and
digging the ground with her feet, you repent you that you did not dream of it.

It is a good threatening, that gives a man good admonition.

Of the two Marshals of France, Monsieur de Antrehan, and Monsieur de
Cleremount.
THe Prince of Wales surnamed the Black Prince, having made sundry offers
unto John the French king before the battle of Poytiers: the king assembled
his Council to have their advice. The lord de Antrehan one of the Marshals,
did counsel the king to accept the offers of the Prince, and not to hazard the
battle and to adventure the certain for the uncertain. The lord of
Cleremount the other Marshall, reproching the Marshall de Antrehan, and
obiecting that his counsel proceeded of fear and cowardice, because he durst
not be at the battle, De Antrehan being very highly offended, and esteeming
himself much wronged in his honor and reputation, said unto him with a stout
courage: Cleremount, to the intent thou may know that it is no cowardly fear
that made me speak as I have done: I would thou should well know, that the
arrest of my lance shall be more forward in the battle, then thou shall be
with the point of thine. And the battle being foughten, the French lost the
field, and king John was taken prisoner.

The speech of Dame Tiphaine to her husband Bertrand du Guesclin.
AFter that the Lord Bertrand du Guesclin was espoused unto the Lady Tiphanie,
who was issued of a noble and great family: he discontinued for a time the use
and exercise of arms, which he had been accustomed to follow: for the which
his new espoused wise greatly blamed him, saying: my sweet friend and love,
before that we were married you were wont to follow the wars, and many fair
exploits have been achieved by your prowess: in such sort as many have
thought, that by you the realm of France would be recovered out of the hands
of the English. Surely, it cannot stand with the nature of a true gentleman,
that an over exceeding affection to a new wife should make you loose the honor
which you have formerly obtained: and sir, for my part, I who ought to be
honored by your means, shall esteem my self much disgraced, if you surcease
from following this course which you have so well begun: and I shall bear
you the less love and affection for it, because you ought not to leave and
forgo the honor and reputation of chivalry, and the art military which every
man has attributed unto you.

The persuasions of any honorable Lady, have great force and may prevail
much with a generous and haughty courage, to make it enterprise high and
great actions: as these of this Lady had with this Knight sir Bertrand: who
afterward became high Constable of France.

An honorable opinion of Levvi^ the son of King Philip of France.
Lewis the son of king Philip the first of that name, who was afterward
surnamed Lewis le gros: making war against certain Noblemen of France that
had rebelled against his father: and having besieged a certain castle, his
men at arms would needs leave him and depart, by reason of the
vnseasonablenes and ill disposition of the time: insomuch as he was not able
either by prayers or menaces to retain the^: wherefore being thus abandoned and
forsaken of his forces, he was constrained to retire and raise his siege,
saying and oftentimes repeating it: that it was better by far for a man to die
a cruel death (provided it were honest and honorable) rather the^ to prolong
his life with shame and dishonor.

A courteous and gentle answer of king Philip Augustus.
Certain Councillors and Courtiers showed unto the French king Philip
surnamed Augustus: that the Clergy of France did vsurp the authority and
royal jurisdictions appertaining to the Crown: whereby his princely dignity
and prerogative was greatly injured and endammaged: and wished him therefore to
cut off their authority so usurped: whereunto he wisely answered: I do easily
believe, that what you say is true: howbeit calling to mind the benefits
wherewith God has blessed me, I had rather suffer and endure loss and damage
in my rights, the^ to commence suit or to bring process against the seruitours
of God and his Church, whereof may arise and grow any offense and scandal.

A saying of Pope Urban the fifth.
KIng Charles the fifth being desirous to rid his country and kingdom of
France of those men at arms both English and French, which (after the treaty
of peace accorded between those two nations) did ouerrunne and spoil the
country of France: the lord Bertrand du Guesclin obtained leave of the king,
to lead them into the realm of Granada against the Saracens. And by reason of
the pilferies and robberies which these men at arms had committed, the Pope
Urban the fifth had excommunicated them: Bertrand du Guesclin having assembled
them together, and being chosen General of these forces to pass with them
into Spain, marched away with them by the way of Auignon, where the Pope Urban
the fifth was then resident: who sent a Cardinal unto them to know what was
their demand: to the which Cardinal, Bertrand answered: Sir, I pray tell his
Holiness, that these men of war do demand pardon and absolution both from
the gilt and the punishment of their sins which they have committed, and for
the which they have incurred the sentence of excommunication: and besides they
do require two thousand Florins of gold to maintain them and to defray their
charges in their voyage undertaken for the advancement of the Christian faith.
The Cardinal making report unto the Pope of his message: his answer was this:
This is very strange and a marvelous matter, that this people should demand
absolution and money: and our custom is to give absolution and to take money.

The opinion of the Earl of Arminacke.
THe Nobles and Barons of Guien being assembled in counsel to give an answer
unto the demands of the Prince of Wales, who was purposed to make war in
Spain, because the most part of them thought it unlawful, and an enterprise
of small reason: and were desirous to be resolved amongst themselves of the
truth of the matter. The Earl of Arminacke spoke unto them on this manner: It
is not fit, nor a thing appertinent to the subject, (who stands upon the
reputation of his faith and loyalty) to dispute of the rights and interests
which his Prince may have, in undertaking war against another Prince: but he
ought to yield him his best service and endeavors, whenever he shall be
required thereunto: for he ought to be persuaded, that his Prince in so doing,
does nothing but upon good counsel and advice: neither ought he any further to
be inquisitiue therinto.

Every war undertaken upon an unjust quarrel, is to the dishonor rather of
the Prince then of the subject.

The saying of the Earl of Foix.
GAston the second of that name, Earl of Foix, having taken to wife Elinor the
daughter of Coming, who was much elder then himself: certain Nobles of that
country being in communication with her of that marriage, told her: That she
had taken and chosen an husband, who was much younger then she: to who^ she
answered: If I had known that the Earl of Foix should have been my husband, I
would not have been borne so soon, but have stayed for him.

In every good marriage, it is requisite that the parties be equal and alike in
conditions, age and wealth.

The last words of the king of Navarre at his death.
FRauncis Phoebus Earl of Foix, and king of Navarre, lying upon his death bed,
in the very agony and last panges of death, used these words for his last
speech: Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo. I d^o relinquo mundum and non
conturbemini, quia vado ad patrem. My kingdom is not of this world: therefore
I leave the world: and be not you troubled, for I go to the father.

The answer of Iouian Pontanus.
IOuian Pontanus an excellent Philosopher and a notable Poet, being demanded
why he did eat but of one kind of meat at his meal: and of that also very
little and in great sobriety: he answered: Because I would not have any need of
the Physician.

All Physicians are of accordin this: that diversity of meats do hinder the
digestion, and engender sicknesses and diseases.

A pleasant conceit of the brother of Sanctius, brother to the king of Spain.
A Solemn Council being assembled at Rome, to consult upon the taking of arms
against the Saracens who had the possession of the holy land: it was of a long
time there debated who should be chosen as the most worthy and sufficient to
have the conduct and command of the army. After many opinions, it was
concluded, that Sanctius brother to the king of Spain in regard of his good
parts, his hardiness, courage, and virtues, should be the chief and General
of this honorable enterprise: because it was well known that he was a man
deuoide of covetousness and ambition: and of excellent expedition in deeds of
arms: whereupon he being after this election come to Rome, and repairing to the
Conclaue where the Pope, Cardinals, and Princes of Christendom were assembled
together: he was immediately in the presence of them all, by the decree and
ordinance of the Pope, amongst other articles proclaimed and declared King of
Egypt: upon the which Proclamation all the people showted with a public cry
and acclamation exceedingly rejoiced. He not skilled in the Latin tongue: and
not knowing whereat the Consistory did make that triumphing, demanded the
cause of his interpreter: who having told him that the Pope had granted and
proclaimed him king of Egypt: he said unto his interpreter: Stand up, and make
here presently a Proclamation before all this people here assembled: that
seeing the Pope has made me king of Egypt, he therefore shall be Caliph of
Babylon.

This was a sudden and royal liberality, to recompense him with a vain title
of Pontificalitie, from whom he had received the name and style of a king
without a kingdom.

The opinion of the king of Sicilie.
RObert king of Sicilie, being on a time in communication with that famous
Italian Poet Frauncis Petrarch, told him: That he was more in love with his
books then his own Crown: and that he held more dear the learning and
knowledge which he had got in the studying of good letters, then all the
honors and riches of his realm.

This opinion was clean contrary to that of the French king Lewis the
eleventh.

The mind of the Emperor Frederick, which he shevved toward his wife.
THe Emperor Frederick did never use to drink wine but at his meals: and
even then he used to mingle and temper it with a great quantity of water. His
wife the Empress Leonor did likewise never use to drink any wine whilst she
lived in her fathers house: and being come to the imperial dignity, the
Physicians of Almaine advised her to use wine, if she meant to have any
children, because the climate of that country was very cold: whereof Frederick
being advertised, commanded one of his near and familiar friends to go unto
the Empress, and to say this unto her from him: I had leifer have a wife that
is barren, then one that is subject to drinking of wine. The Empress returned
to the messenger this answer: During my life I shall ever be obedient to the
will and commandment of my Lord and husband: nevertheless, if the Emperor
should command me to use wine, I had rather dye then therein obey him.

A Sentence of Pope Clement the seventh.
POpe Clement the seventh, speaking of the retaining of Princes in peace and
amity for the quiet and tranquillity of the Christian commonweal, used to
say: that it was a dangerous and most perilous thing to be in amity with
some particulars only: but to entertain it with diverse, it was well
befitting and beseeming the duty and dignity of the Papal See: which ought
to declare it self the common father and well willer of all in general.

The allusion of the Lantgraue of Hesse.
THe Lantgraue Philip of Hesse, making wars against the king Ferdinand
brother to the Emperor Charles the fifth, for the restoring of Vtrich duke of
Wittenberg to his right: and being entered into the country and and territories
of the said Duchy, there he encountered with his enemies, whom he rudely put to
the repulse. And as he made his infanterie to march on, he demanded of the
aduaunteourrers where they had left their enemies. Answer was made him: that
they were at Loffen. Well said, (my good soldiers quoth he) I take this your
answer for a prognostication of our victory at hand: seeing it seems to
bring us tidings that our enemies are in flying.

Loffen in Dutch signifies flight, which made the Lantgraue by the allusion
of the word, to take it for a presage of their flight.

A pleasant conceit of a French Gentleman.
COmmunication being moved in the presence of the lord Claude Duke of Guiz^
touching a certain battle given by Frauncis the French king, against the
Emperor Charles the fifth: the duke of Guize began to use some speech unto a
French Gentleman who had been seen in the army gorgiously attired and well
armed at all points, and exceedingly well mounted: howbeit that he was not
seen in the battle. By my faith Sir (answered the Gentleman) I was there: and
I can bring good proof thereof, yea in such a place as you durst not have been
seen. The duke took this speech very ill, and supposed himself highly
touched, and therefore grew greatly offended with the answer: but the Gentleman
laughing very pleasantly appeased him in saying unto him: My Lord, I was with
the baggage, where I am sure your Lordship would not have vouchsafed to have
stayed as I did.

Sometimes a man that has lost his honor by his deeds, may recover the same
again by gracing it with good speeches.

An Apothegme of the Seneshall of Campaigne.
John lord of Ionuille, having given counsel unto the aforesaid French king
Saint Lewis not to return back into France, till he had ended his wars in
the holy land: was injured by some of the great lords and Nobles near about the
Kings person, who desired to depart from thence: in so much as they called him
Colt: which at that time was held a word of great disgrace amongst the pesants
of Fr^unce: but he very gently replied unto them: I had rather be a kicking
Colt, then a wincing Jade.

His meaning was, that a young Colt might help both himself and his master
out of dannger: but an old horse endangereth both himself and his rider.

The fidelity of the French king Saint Lewis.
AFter that the Saracens had been paid the sum of two hundred thousand pounds
for the ransom of the Earl of Poitiers, brother to the king Saint Lewis, who
had been taken prisoner by them in the holy land: Monsieur Philip de Mon^fort
made report to the king, that the Saracens were misreckened in their receipt of
ten thousand Franks whereupon the king presently made him swear, and to give
his faith, that he should see them paid, which he did accordingly: and the king
would not depart out of harbor, nor set sail to sea, where he was ready
embarked for his return, till the said sum of ten thousand Frankes were
delivered them.

The speech of the Lady of Heluin.
A Council being held within the city of Gaunt, for the marriage of the Lady
Mary Princess of Burgundy, (the daughter of duke Charles which dyed before
Nancie) with the Prince Dolphin of France son of king Lewis the eleventh,
who was afterward called Charles the eighth of that name king of France, who
was then very young in years: the lady of Heluin chief Lady of Honor to the
Princess, said: We have need of a man and not of an infant or child: for my
mistress is a woman sufficient to bear such a child as our country has
great need of.

This word to bear a child has two interpretations: either to be married to
a man of prudence and wisdom: or that by the marriage, there may issue a
child of a good and virtuous disposition: according to that sentence of
Solomon: The land is in weak estate of which a child is Prince: that is, a
child in understanding.

A pleasant conceit of the Duke of Millain his Cook.
THe duke of Millain being besieged in a Castle by the Florentin^s: one day as
he sat at dinner, he could not away but fell in mislike with the taste of all
his meat set before him: insomuch as he checked his Cook, and was very angry
with him. But the Cook read^e enough to justify and free himself from blame
(after many excuses made) said unto the Duke: My lord, your me at is well
enough dressed: but the Florentines have put your mouth out of taste.

To that man which in vvarres is timorous, all things prove tedious and
troublesome.

The persvvasion of the Lord Talbot to his son.
THe French under king Charles the seventh having laid siege before the town of
Chastillon which was possessed by the English in the year 1453. the Lord
Talbot then Lieutenant General for the king of England in Aquitaine, issued out
of Bordeaux to raise the siege of the French. Battle being joined between
them, and the loss likely to fall to the English: the lord Talbot said unto
his son: Son I would wish thee to provide for thy safety, and to reserve thy
self to some other time: as for me, it will be for my honor to die here, after
so many victories by me obtained in times past: but if thou should miscarie
in this fight, little honor would it be unto thee: who by saving thy self now
may augment it in time to come: in reserving thy self for more haughty
enterprises, and for the benefit of Enland thy native country.

This was a speech well beseeming a true and noble Gentleman, and one that was
a lover of his conntrey: how beit, his son would not yield unto that motion:
but both father and son there lost their lives.

An Apothegme of a certain Englishman.
THe English being chased out of France by king Charles the seventh, as
certain of them were ready to pass the sea, the French in mockage demanded
of an English Captain, when they would come again to make war in France?
who answered: That shall we when your sins do exceed ours in number.

It is our sins only that draws down the wrath of God: and causes him to
send us both vvarres, famine and pestilence.

A good opinion of the Venetians.
THe Venetians are very secret in their counsels and deliberations: and they
have an usual saying: That a good Council be it never so secret, is
oftentimes disclosed.

The answer of a Duchess of Normandy to her husband.
A Certain Damsel, named Gonnor, which in former times had been beloved by
Richard duke of Normandy, the son of William Long spath: being afterward
married to the said duke after the death of the Lady Auina his first wife, the
daughter of Hugues the great Earl of Paris: the first night after she was
married to the said duke being laid in bed with him, she turned her back
toward him. The duke maruelling at that manner of her behavior, said unto
her: Full often have you lien with me: yet did I never see you thus do before.
Whereunto she answered: True it is my sweet love: for heretofore I lay in your
bed, and therefore did as pleased you: but now I lie in the bed that is mine as
well as yours, and therefore I may rest me of what side do I please.

The constancy of Elizabeth the daughter of the King of Boheme.
ELizabeth the daughter of VVenceslaus king of Boheme, being conducted with
great honor to the city of Spire in Germany, of purpose there to be espoused
to John the eldest son of the Emperor Henry the seventh: and perceiving that
the celebrating of the marriage, was deferred, she made so secret inquiry of
the cause, that in the end she knew it was prolonged, in regard of a jealousy
which the Emperor had conceived that she had not kept her virginity: for the
truth is, she was of a most singular and incomparable beauty far excelling
all the Ladies of that age: knowing therefore whereupon this delay grew, she
stripped her self out of her clothes stark naked, and covering her self
only with a mantle of pure fine linen, which was soon and easy to be cast
off: in this form she presented her self to the Emperor, saying unto him:
Sacred Prince, I will now insta^tly make good proof of my virginity by the view
and search of my body: and the examination thereof made by sage and honest
women: and I will never stir foot from hence, till you be free from that
suspision which you have conceived of me. The Emperor astonished and afraid at
her speech, could not possibly remove her from her determination by any excuse
or persuasion that he could use: but he was constrained to cause her to be
searched: and she being found to be pure and a virgin inuiolate, he caused her
to be married unto his son.

True virtue is always of that strength and fortitude, as it can never he
vanquished.

A reason vvisely alleged by the fool of the duke of Austrich.
LVpoldus duke of Austrich making wars against the Swizzers who were in
alliance with the Emperor Lewis of Bauier: and having assembled under the
charge of certain captains of the estate of Germany to the number of 20000.
men horse and foot, to the end he might cause them to set forward: he consulted
with his Counsel, by what way he might best enter into the Svvizzers country.
The Council being resolved of the course which they meant to take, the dukes
fool named Kune de Stocken who was present, and had heard their deliberation,
said unto them in his accustomed habit and countenance of a fool: I do not
like of your counsel: for all of you have consulted, how, and by what means
we may enter into their country: but there is none of you that has given his
advice, how and in what sort we shall get away again from thence.

A good entry or beginning is not all, without it have a happy ending.

The good conditions of the Emperor Theodosian.
THe Emperor Theodosian could not endure to have any to his servants who were
proud and arrogant, or of too brave and vaunting an humor: much less could he
suffer them that were shameless, mutinous, dissolute, seditious, or rash in
their speech. And he was wont to say, that that Prince could never be well
beloved of his people, nor obeyed of his subjects, as long as he did suffer any
to be near him or about him for his ordinary servants, that were presumptuous
and arrogant: or if his Officers were ambitious and covetous: or if his
favorites and familiars were either dishonest, or imprudent, double hearted, or
double tounged.

By the servant, men judge what his lord is: and such a man, such a master.

A Sentence of the Empress Sophia.
Tiberius being appointed to have the government of the Roman Empire, in place
of the Emperor Justin, who was become sickely: Sophia the wife of the said
Justin entering into speech with Tiberius (who was a most bountiful Prince)
amongst other matters used this sentence in her speech unto him: It is much
better, and a thing more easy to be endured: that a Prince should be an ill
man and a good Prince: then to be an ill Prince and a good man.

Certain brave speeches of the Lord of Assier.
Jacques de Genouillay Lord of Assier, called Galeot, (who was grand Master of
the Ordinance to king Lewis the twelfth: being determined to go to Mitilen to
bear arms against the Turks, under the command of Monsieur de Rauestin: and
disposing of his affairs against he went on his voyage, he was admonished by
his friends to make his will, and to ordain his Sepulture, if he should happen
to be slain in that war: to whom he gave this answer: What need I take care
to trouble my self, with thinking where I shall be buried, or by whom? shall I
not have (trow ye) Pioners enough about me, who will not leave me unburied if I
fortune to dye there?

His so^^e taking his leave of him to go to the battle of Serizoles against the
army of the Emperor Charles the fifth, he said unto him: You cannot possibly
get to be at the battle in time. His son answered him: I will ride thither
post. The father replied: What, will you cause your horses to run, and your
armor to be carried post? No (quoth the son) when I my self shall have
gotten thither: I shall easily find horse and armor. Oh poor man (said the
Lord of Assier) will thou go seek thy death in post?

As if he had said unto him: you cannot find there such horse and arms as will
be fit for thy body, which will be the cause of thy death. And indeed there
he made his end.

A foolish speech of certain Ambassadors of Venice.
THe Venetia^s sent two young Ambassadors to the Emperor Frederick, unto whom
(...) would not give audience: they (...) to know the cause, understood: (...)
it was the custom to send on Ambassade to the Emperor, men that were aged and
of good years, and not young beardlesse men, such as they were. Whereupon they
humbly besought the Emperor that he would give them leave to speak a word
unto him nothing concerning their Ambassade: which being granted them, they
said unto the Emperor: Sacred Majesty: If the Seignorie of Venice had
thought, that knowledge and prudence had only had his abiding in beards, they
would have sent unto your Highness two Goats for Ambassadors.

The truth is, that the speeches of an Ambassador are of much more respect and
authority, when they are accompanied with aged years, prudence and
experience: and these young Ambassadors did sh^vv by their speech, that the
conceit and opinion of the Emperor was true which he had ronceiued of them.

A pleasa^^ speech of Dant the Italian Poet.
THe Poet Dant demanded of a citizen of Florence, what hour it was: who
answered him very rudely, that it was the hour, in which horses go to be
watered. Dant suddenly replied: What do thou here then, that go not with
them?

Of a cause decided by a French Gentleman.
Two French Gentlemen discoursing of single fight and combat, whether it be
lawful or not: the one of them said: That there was no agreement between
learning and the sword: the other answered: We which live in the Latin Church,
as Christians, are bound to observe those laws which it ordains: and to
protect and defend them with the sword: which ought not to be drawn but for
that cause only.

The law of man permits single combat, but the law of God prohibiteth it.

A sentence of the Chauncelor of France.
SPeech being had in the presence of Anthony de Prat Chauncelor of France,
touching the war of king Frauncis for the recovery of Millain: and some
affirming that it were good that Millaine were utterly destroyed and ruinated,
in regard of the damage that it had brought unto the French: he answered: It
is very necessary that Millaine should stand in state as it is: because it
serves as a purgation to the realm of France, to take away and remove the ill
humors of idle and ill disposed persons which otherwise might corrupt and
destroy it.

This was the sentence which Scipio Africanus used in his speech to the
Romans concerning the preservation of Carthage from being ruinated.

The patience of Seigneur Sforce.
A Knight of Nola came to tell Seigneur Sforce how a Gentleman one Tartaglia
had spoken very badly of him at a certain banquet, where he had reproched him
with all kind of villainy: and he affirmed his report with many great oaths,
to the intent he might the better be believed. The Lord Sforce said unto him:
My friend, thou need not pain thy self so much to make me believe that
which thou tellest me: because that Tartaglia does use never to speak of any
but evil: and it is very likely, that he would not make spare of his ill
speech with all kind of violence, licentiousness and liberty even to his
uttermost, especially being in place fit and convenient for such a purpose.

By this answer he gave the talebearer to understand: that Tartaglia was not
much to be regarded, both in respect he was reputed a common backebiter: and
in regard of his drunkenness whereunto he noted him to be subject.

An Apotheg of the same Sforce.
THe said Sforce being in doubt of the ambushes and forces of Paul Vrsin,
forsook the city of Rome where he was abiding, and went to encampe himself
in the forest of Aglio. The Cardinal of Saint Ang^ll the Popes Legate went
unto him to persuade him to return to Rome, with promise and assurance of
sa^etie during his being there: and amongst other speeches used unto him, he
said: Seigneur Sforce, will you be afraid of a Bear, being under the
protection and assurance of a strong Colonne or pillar to defend you? (for then
was the Pope of the house of the Colonnois which in Italian signifies a
pillar:) but Sforce made him this answer: My lord Cardinal, you might think
me a very fool, if I would rely or trust upon the succors and defense of a
deaf and dead piece of Marble: and not be afraid of a great monstrous beast:
who being armed with terrible teeth and nails, does walk notwithstanding as
men use to do.

By this allusion, he showed that the succors of the Pope were slow and long
in coming: and he discovered the high courage and great forces of Paul V^sin
his enemy.

The Epitaph of Charles duke of Burgu^dy, who was slain before Nancie in
Lorain in the year 1477.

Te piguit pacis vita taeduitq? quietis:
Hic iaces Charole, iamque quiesce tibi.
Unpleasing to thee in thy life was peace and quietness:
But Charles here now do thou lie: now therefore take thy rest.
Philip of Commines in his hostorie testifies, that this Charles duke of
Burgundy was of so turbulent a spirit and delighting in wars, as he had
never one hour of rest in all his life.

The properties of three Nations taxed.
A Great Lord was wont to say: that three sorts of men were to be taken heed
of: namely: A red Italian, a white French man, and a black German.

A notable sentence of the Queen of England.
KAtherine of Spain the wife of Henry the eight king of England, said: That
she loved better a temperate and mean fortune, then that which was either too
easy and prosperous, or too sharp and adverse. Nevertheless that if she
should be put to her choice which of the two last she would accept, she had
rather have the adverse then the prosperous: because (said she) commonly they
which are unfortunate, are not altogether destitute of some consolation and
comfort: but they which live in prosperity for the most part do want the true
use of understanding, reason and judgment.

Of the President Moruillier.
PHilip de Moruillier President of the Parliament of Paris in the time of king
Charles the 7. for some envy and malice conceived against him by the
Councillors of the Court, was greatly disliked of them, insomuch as he retired
himself to the kings Court: who as soon as occasion was offered preferred him
to the dignity of chief President. Within a while after being come into the
Parliament there to take possession of his new place and dignity: and being
set in the chief and principal seat, he began very aptly his Oration in this
manner with a place of the Scripture.

Lapidem que^ reprobauerunt aedificantes, hic factus est in caput anguli.

The stone which the builders refused, is become the head stone in the corner.

Monsieur de S. Romain at that time Procurer general for the king, answered
him with another text of the Psalmist as fit as the former, saying: A Domino
factum est istud, and est mirabile in oculis nostris.

This is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.

A merry conceit of king Alphonsus.
ALphonsus king of Naples had in his Court a fool or iester, who did use to
put down in a book or pair of writing tables all the follies, (at least
those which he thought such) of all the Lords, Gentlemen, and others of his
time which he knew to frequent the Court. It happened that the king Alphonsus
having a Moore in his house, sent him into the Leua^t with ten thousand ducats
there to buy him horses: the fool set down in his book this act of the king
as a trick of folly. A few days after, the king Alphonsus called to his fool
to see his book, having not seen it of a good time before: In reading within
it, in the end thereof he found the history of himself, and his Moore, and
the 10000. ducats which he had delivered him: whereat the king being offended,
and growing into choler demanded of the fool: wherefore he had put him in his
book? Because (quoth the fool) you did a very foolish act in giving your
money to a stranger, whom you are like to see no more. But how if he come
back again (said the king) and bring the horses with him, where is my folly
then? Marry (replied the fool) whenever he comes again, I will then blot
your name out of my book, and will put in his in stead of yours: for then I
shall hold him the more fool of the two.

The magnificence of a king of England.
CHiniton or Chinite king of England; who reigned about the year of Christ
1025. was of so haughty and so great a mind, that he caused a royal throne to
be prepared and erected for him near the sea side: and seeing the tide to beat
with the waves against his seat, he spoke out aloud unto the sea: Thou art my
subject, and the land whereon I am set is mine: and therefore I forbid thee to
rise against my land, or to wet the body and apparel of thy Lord and master:
the sea notwithstanding holding on his course in flowing, came to wet his
feet, which he seeing presently gave back and said: Now may all men know,
that all humane power is but mere vanity: and no mortal man is worthy to
bear the name of a king, but he only to whose command the heavens, the earth,
and the sea by a perpetual decree are subject and obedient.

A pleasant conceit of an Italian Gentleman, upon the interpretation of the
names of two Popes.
AFter the death of Pope Alexander the sixth, Nicholas the fifth being created
Pope, certain Italian Gentlemen walking in the Popes hall, devised together of
the death of the one and the creation of the other, and of the conditions of
the^ both. Amongst them was master Antonio Agnello, who with a good grace said
unto the rest of the company: My masters: you need not much to trouble your
selves in giving your judgments of the two Popes: for I believe that these two
inscriptions will easily resolve us of our doubts: and so saying he cast his
eye upon one of the two portals of the hall: and standing still showed them
with his finger this inscription:

Alexander PP. VI. which signifies: Alexander Pope the sixth of that name. See
(said he) what this inscription does import: Is it not as much as to say: that
Alexander was made Pope by force? Let us see now if we can understand any thing
touching the new Pope: and then turning himself (as if it had been at
adventures) to the other portall, he showed them this inscription: N. PP. V.
which signifies Nicholas Pope the fifth. O Lord God (quoth he) see, here is
ill news: Nihil Papa valet: that in English is: The Pope is nothing worth.

An honorable act of an Italian Lord.
AN Italian Nobleman surnamed the grand Captain, being set at his table, and
seeing two Gentlemen (who had served very valiantly in the wars) to stand
below in his hall because the seats at the table were all filled: he
immediately arose, and caused all the rest of his guests to make place for these
two, saying: Make place I pray for these two Gentlemen to dine: for if they had
not been in our company elsewhere, we should not have had at this time whereof
to eat.

Of a mock which he gave to another Gentleman.
THe same Captain seeing a Gentleman of his own come before him in good order,
and richly armed after the battle of Serignolle: and when all things were safe
and in quiet: he said unto his company: We need not now fear any storm, for
Saint Hermes has appeared unto us. By this quippe he taxed the Gentleman to be
of small valor, for coming to the field after al danger of fight was past:
for the common opinion is, that Saint Hermes does use to appear at sea to the
Mariners, after that the fury of a tempest at sea is gone and past.

A speech of the same Captain to a Gentleman touching himself.
DIego Garsia Spanish Gentleman counseled the grand Captain Gonsaluo, to
withdraw himself from a place of great danger where the Artillery of the
enemy did play upon them: O (quoth he) seeing that God has not put any fear
in thy courage, do not thou seek to put any in mine.

Of the brother of the great Turk.
GEin Ottoman brother unto the great Turk being prisoner at Rome, and seeing
the Gentlemen of Italy to just and tilt together: he said: That that manner of
turney (in his opinion) seemed too much to be done in sport, and too little to
be done in earnest.

It happened on a time that one in the presence of this Turk, highly commended
the young king Ferdinand of Naples, in regard he was a man of excellent agility
and active of his person for running, vaulting, leaping and other corporal
exercises of that kind: whereof he took occasion to say: That in his country,
those were the exercises of slaves: and that the young Gentlemen and Noblemen
did learn to practice bounty and liberality, and that by such virtues they
made themselves the more commendable.

Liberality is a virtue whereby Princes do purchase and entertain the love
both of their subjects and of strangers.

A pleasant quip given to a Gentleman by the Marquess of Mantua.
THe Marquess Frederick of Mantua sitting at the table in company of many
Gentlemen: one of them after he had eaten up all the broth, took his porenger
with that little that remained and threw it on the ground: saying withal (as
it were by way of excuse) my Lord, I pray pardon me: whereupon the Marquess
suddenly answered: Demand pardon of the swine: for if there be any harm done it
is to them and not to me.

A comparison made by John Gonzaga.
THe lord John de Gonzaga playing and loosing his money at dice, saw that his
son Alexander did grieve at his loss: whereupon he said unto some Gentlemen
there present: It is written of Alexander the Great, that when he heard of a
victory gotten by his father Philip king of Macedon, and of a realm which he
had conquered: he fell on weeping: and being demanded the cause why he wept:
he answered: Because his father got so many Countries, that he doubted lest he
would leave none for him to conquer: Clean contrary (said he) does my son
Alexander: for seeing me to loose, he is afraid lest I will lose so much, as I
will leave little or nothing for him to lose.

A quippe given by one Raphaell an Italian Painter to two Cardinals.
THe excellent and famous painter Raphael of Vrbin being very inward with two
Cardinals they (to see what he would say unto them) in his presence found fault
with a certain table or picture of his making, wherein S. Peter and S. Paul
were painted, saying: That the visage of those two images were too red:
whereunto he quickly made answer: My lords, think not much that they look so
red: for I have painted the^ as they now are in heaven: and this redness in
their faces comes of pure shame which they have to see the Church so ill
governed by such men as you are.

A prudent counsel of Laurence de Medicis.
SEigneur Lavvrence de Medicis not knowing how to restrain the excessive
liberality of his son Cosmus de Medicis, who used to give unmeasurable
sums both of gold and silver to his favorites: and not willing to have either
his son noted of prodigality, nor himself of avarice: and yet being withal
more unwilling to tell him of it, because he would not discontent him: he
devised a very subtle and honest policy how to effect his desire, which was
this: He commanded his pursebearer, that when his son did demand any money
of him, that he should not deny him any, but should give it him whatsoever he
desired, yet with this condition, that Seigneur Cosmus himself should count
and tell out the money which he desired. Within a while the son came to the
pursebearer, and demanded 8000. ducats, which he meant to give for a present
to some great personage: the pursebearer said unto him: that he would gladly
deliver him the sum he desired, upon condition that himself would count it
out, according as he had in charge given him from his Lord and master Seigneur
Laurence. Cosmus accepting the offer, fell to telling of his ducats, but he
had not counted the two thousand of them, but he began to bewearie, because he
thought too much time lost from his accustomed pleasures, insomuch as in the
midst of his count he left all: and fell into consideration with himself that
the sum was too great to give away: and so determined from thencefoorth to be
no more so prodigal.

A counsel of Cosmus de Medicis.
A Certain man had obtained an office near unto Florence, by the means and
mediation of Cosmus de Medicis, of whom he demanded his advice, what means
he might use in his office for the good managing of his affairs: Seigneur
Cosmus answered him: Cloth thy self with scarlet, and speak little.

The man that speaks little cannot be convinced of folly: and a goodly habit
(were it on a beast) will get him reputation: but a wise man will soon find a
difference.

A speech of a Pope.
THe Bishop of Seruia desirous to sound the Popes mind, touching a suit which
he would gladly have granted him, said unto him: Holy Father: it is a common
speech over all Rome, and in your palace: that your Holiness has made me
Governor of the city: whereunto the Pope answered: Let them say what they
list: they are some lewd fellows that talk so: But do not you believe it to
be so: for you shall find it nothing less.

The death of the Chauncelor of Millain.
Lewis Sforce being in the castle of Millain: and perceiving that the army of
the French king Lewis the twelfth was coming to besiege him, demanded of
Master Sico his Chancellor: what he thought the best mean to guard and
defend his castle against the French: he answered: L'amor de gli huomini: The
love of the people. The duke storming very exceedingly at his speech: and
knowing that the Chancellor was well beloved of the Millanois, entered into a
suspicion of him, that he had a purpose to deprive him of his principality.
And to set his mind at quiet from this conceit, he caused the Chancellor to
be beheaded on a high scaffold in an open and public place. The Chauncelor
before his death complaining of the cruelty of the said Lewis, said these
words: Ameil cappo a te il stato: which is, as if he would say: Thou causest me
to lose my head: but others will make thee lose thy Seigneurie and state: which
was in the end well verified: for within a small time after, having lost the
Duchy and castle of Millaine, he was led prisoner into France where he died
in great misery.

The love of the subjects is the most firm pillar for any Prince to lean
unto: for where hatred reigns, a Prince has no assurance. Also many men at
their death do foreshevv things to come, and that oftentimes, by the just
judgment of the divine vengeance.

A saying of Pope Alexander the sixth.
When king Charles the eighth passed into Italy toward the realm of Naples,
(which he conquered in a very short time:) Pope Alexander the sixth who then
lived, said: The French men are come into this country with their spurs made
of wood, and with chalk in their hands as though they came like Friars, to
mark out their lodgings without any further labor or travel.

By this speech he noted, with what ease and facility the French achieved the
conquest of the kingdom of Naples.

The answer of the County of Nansot.
THe Earl of Nansot Lieutenant for the Emperor Charles the fifth, having
besieged the town of Peronne which held for the French: the Queen of
Hungary, sister to the Emperor, and Regent of that country for him, sent
letters unto the said Earl, the contents whereof were: That she was ashamed
and much marvelled how he could spend so long time before Peronne, which was
but esteemed but in manner of a douecote? whereunto he returned this answer:
that true it was the town was but a little douecote: but yet the pigoens which
were within it were strong and not easy to be taken.

A small place, the stronger it is, the more difficult it is to be gotten: and
it is more easy to be defended, when the defendants are well appointed and
furnished for resistance.

Of the Lord of Trimouille.
KIng Frauncis the first ordinarily did use to go to Mass in his Chapel: but
the lord of Trimouille would ever go to the public church that was next
adjoining; and being on a time demanded why he went not to hear Mass in the
Chapel with the king: he answered: I will go thither where my great master
is.

An act of the Duchess of Burbon.
THe report is that the Duchess of Burbon had in her house a certain damsel,
who through love suffered her self to be gotten with child: for which fault
she being sharply reprehended, to purge her self she said, that a gentleman
in the house had enforced and ravished her against her will. The gentleman came
to the presence of the Duchess to excuse himself: whereupon the Duchess
took his Rapier, and put it into the damsels hand that accused him, keeping
the scabbard in her own hand, and then said unto her: Put the Rapier into this
scabbard: and as she endeavored to put it therein: the Duchess holding the
scabbard to her, stirred her hand up and down, so as by any means the damsel
could not sheath it: then the Duchess said unto her: If thou had done as thou
see me do with this scabbard, then this mischaunce had never befalne thee.

It is impossible for a woman to be forced against her will: notvvithstanding
that which is reported of Lucrece.

Another act of a Duchess.
I Have heard the report of another act which was most excellent and worthy to
be had in remembrance. A great Prince of France by the counsel of some of his
friends, and with the Popes dispensation had caused a separation between him
and his wife, only because she had no issue of her body, which he imputed to
her disabilitie: and thereupon married another wife. Within a small time after,
this Noble man remembering himself of his first wife, sent unto her on a
Newyeares day a most rich and precious robe by a Gentleman his familiar friend,
who presented it unto the Lady the same day. The Princess receiving the robe,
after long speech had with the Gentleman, demanded if it were her husband of
himself that sent her this present: and being assured by him that it came
directly from her husband: she presently cut it asunder, and separated the
upper from the nether part: and afterward delivering the upper part of the
garment back unto the Gentleman, she said unto him: My friend: thank your
master from me for the love and affection that he seems to continue toward
me: and carry him back again this part of his robe, and tell him from me,
that he keep well the upper part: and for the nether part, let him not doubt
but I will look well unto it, and keep it safely as long as it shall please
God to lend me life.

By this conceit the Princess meant that she would during her life keep her
chastity without marying again, which she did with great patience and
constancy.

A christian saying of the Emperor Charles the fifth.
AFter the victory which Charles the fifth, obtained against John Frederick
duke of Saxony Elector of the Empire, who was taken prisoner in a battle
foughten between them: the Emperor said all openly: I cannot (...) Julius
Caesar said: Veni, vidi, vici: (...) will only say: Veni, vidi, and (...) Deus
vicit.

A brave answer of the County of Anguien.
FRauncis of Burbon Earl of Anguien, being for king Frauncis in Piemont
against the army of the Emperor Charles the fifth, whereof was chief General
the Marquess of Guast: the said Marquess sent this message unto the said Lord
of Anguien, (who was very young) that his beard was to little for him to have
the hardiness to meet him in battle. Whereunto the Lord of Anguien sent this
answer: That it was not with their beards that the French did use to fight: but
that as this was the office of their swords: so with the sword he came to seek
him and to offer him battle.

There are many affairs of great importance, wherein regard is to be had not
to the age, but to the prudence and experience of him that has the managing of
them.

A sharp and pleasant speech of a fool belonging to the Marquess of Guast.
BEfore the battle foughten at Serizoles, the same Marquess of Guast assuring
himself of the victory, gave unto one that was his iester afaire gilt Armor,
and a Iener of Spain, promising him (over and above that of his own good
grace and pleasure) to give him five hundred ducats, to the intent he should
be the first that should go and carry unto his lady the Marquess the news of
his victory. It happened (as good fortune would) that the French gained the
journey, and the Emperors army was defeated. Amongst the Spaniards that were
taken prisoners, this iester of the Marquess happened to be one: who by reason
he was so well mounted and armed, was thought to be some great Lord or Knight:
and being brought before the Lord of Anguien after he had a while questioned
with him, he knew him what he was: and demanding of him who had furnished him
in that good order: the iester answered: My lord the Marquess gave me my horse
and arms: and should have given me besides five hundred ducats to go and tell
my lady his wife the first tidings of his victory: but I believe (said he)
that the Marquess will gain the money himself, and that he is posted thither
in person.

Of a Parmisan that by his subtilty saved himself from trouble.
A Certain man at arms a Parmisan, passing by Saluces arrived into a public
place, in the midst whereof was an high column or pillar erected, upon the
which was pitched an Eagle imperial: to the which this soldier casting up his
eyes very attentively, as if he had been suddenly astonished, he began in
manner of cursing to say: Oh foul mischief may befall him that set thee there
so high! Diverse standing there by, and walking up and down in that place,
acquainted the Magistrate with this speech of the Parmisan: who being led
before the Justice, and demanded if he had spoken such words as were objected
against him: he confessed that he had spoken them: and that the occasion which
moved him to say so, was, for that the Eagle was set over high. For (said he) I
bear so great reverence and love to the Eagle which represents the Majesty
imperial, that if it had been below where I might have reached it, I would not
have spared to have embraced and kissed it. By this answer turned contrary to
the intendment and expectation of them all, he saved himself from trouble, and
was suffered to depart safely out of the town.

Necessity will sometime constrain a man to avvaken his spirits: and to
avoid danger to turn his words in a double sense.

An honorable opinion of the Dolphinesse of France.
MArgaret daughter to the king of Scots, and wife to the Dolphine of France,
who was afterward king Lewis the eleventh, passing on a time through a hall,
where lay sleeping on a bench Alan Chartier Secretary to king Charles the
seventh, a man of singular learning, and a most excellent Poet and Orator in
the French tongue, went to kiss his mouth in the presence of al her company.
Whereupon one of those who attended her, said: Madame: It is very strange
that you should kiss a fellow so filthy and deformed. She answered: I did not
kiss the man but the mouth, out of which has proceeded so many excellent
conceits, grave matters, and most eloquent speeches.

The goods of the mind are to be preferred before the beauty of the body: and
many times in vessels of base stuff, are enclosed most precious liquours.

The subtle request of John de Menu, to save himself from the fury of
certain Ladies.
QVite contrary to the former act, was that which a Queen of France with her
ladies did unto John de Menu the first and principal Poet of the French
nation: for he having composed that renowned book of The Roman of the Rose:
(in the which he brings in a jealous man, that speaks all the evil that
possibly can be imagined of women and their dispositions) by reason thereof he
incurred the indignation and displeasure of the Queen and other Ladies, who
determined to be revenged of him. One day therefore the Queen by the means of
the other Ladies did so much that she got John de Menu in her power, and having
reviled, iniuried and threatened him exceedingly for speaking ill of womenkind:
she commanded her damsels to strippe him naked, and to tie him to a pillar,
purposing that they themselves should scourge him. He seeing that all the
reasons and excuses which he could make, could not prevail against their rage
and fury, humbly entreated that before they began to execute their wrath and
malice upon him, it would please the Queen to grant him one request, which
with great difficulty he obtained. Well then (quoth he) fair Ladies, seeing
you have vouchsafed me this favor, as to condescend unto my demand: I pray
you that the most arrant and notorious whore in all your company may begin to
whippe me, and to give me the first stripe. This said, they were all confounded
and amazed, and left him alone at his liberty.

The answer of the Lord Chabanes to king Lewis the eleventh.
KIng Lewis the eleventh having given charge to Balue Bishop of Eureux to go
take and receive the muster of the men of arms in Paris: The lord of Chabanes
great Master of France requested the king to grant him a Commission to go
and reform the Chanons of the Church of Eureux. Why (quoth the king) that is
no fit and convenient charge for you: yea but (said he) this is as well
befitting to my estate and calling, as it is for the Bishop of Eureux to have
to do with the ordering of men at arms.

A history of a Radish given to king Lewis the eleventh.
THe same king Lewis being but yet Dolphin of France did for a certain time
soiourne and remain in Burgundy for fear of his father: during the which,
using to take his pleasure and recreation in hunting, he did often frequent and
resort to the cottage of a poor forrester named Conon (as it is often seen
that great Princes do sometimes take pleasure to be familiar with people of
mean reckening) with whom taking his repast, he did use diverse times to eat
Radishes. Afterward coming to be king, this poor fellow Conon (by the
persuasion of his wife) in hope to feel the bounty and liberality of the
Prince, came into France, and brought with him of the fairest Radishes of his
garden, to make a present of them to his Majesty: but by constraint of hunger
for want of victuals on the way, he was enforced to eat them up al save one,
which was the greatest and fairest of them all. Being come to the Court, he was
known by the king, who sent for him to his presence, and he good man very
cheerfully presented the great Radish unto his Majesty. The king took it and
accepted it very graciously, and caused one that was near about him to lay it
up amongst his chiefest and most precious jewels: and after he made the
forrester to dine well, he gave him a thousand Crowns and so dismissed him. It
happened not long after, that a Courtier upon a vain hope presented the king
with a very goodly horse, of a most excellent making and perfection in all
parts: supposing that the king would recompense him for him most bountifully.
The king bethinking himself wherewith he might reward him, remembered him of his
Radish, which being wrapped up in white paper, he gave to the Courtier: telling
him that he should accept of that in good part. The gentleman returning to his
lodging, and hoping to find some great treasure, unfolded his packet and found
nothing but a Radish: whereupon he went and made his complaint unto the king,
thinking that he had but mistaken one thing for another: but the king presently
made him this answer: Passion of God, man: I think I have well paid for thy
horse: for the present which I gave thee cost me a thousand crowns.

This was a most royal kind of liberality, in recompensing bountifully the
good affections and long travels of a poor man well deserving: and to revvard
the audacious according to his demerites.

The speech of a President of Paris to king Lewis the twelfth.
A Great Lord of France betaking himself to force of arms, violently entered
the prison of the Castle of Paris, and took thence a Gentleman of his house
who was held there prisoner, and led him away. The lord of Vacquerie chief and
first President in the Parliament of Paris being advertised of this case, went
unto the king Lewis the twelfth, unto whom (after he had done due reverence)
he said: Sir, I wonder how you can be merry considering the wrong that is done
you, and me thinks you should feel it. Wherefore quoth the king? Because sir
(said he) your right arm is broken. I understand you not (replied the king:)
your right arm sir (quoth the President) is your justice, which is now broken
and violated: and so recounted unto him from point to point what had happened,
wherewith the king was highly displeased: and having caused the Lord to be sent
for to appear before him, he commanded him to repair his fault, and made him
to yield such satisfaction as was fit and according to reason.

Justice is that vvherby Princes do reign: and it is the principal force and
strength to preserve a realm in good estate.

A judgment of a king of England.
A King of England seeing two Gentlemen earnestly contending and desiring the
combat each of other for the arms of their houses (for both of them bore a
Bulls head in their shield) before they entered into the lists to darreine the
battle, he called them both before him severally and in secret, and said unto
them: As far as I can perceive, the only thing that induces you to claim
the combat each of other, is: that the one of you cannot suffer the other to
carry the arms of his family: But if I can bring it to pass, and show you
how the Arms of your adversary are far different from yours, will you be
contented to surcease your quarrel, and to leave the combat? Whereunto when
either of them had severally consented, the king by a Herald caused it to be
proclaimed, that he had found a mean to accord them: and that their arms were
diverse: for from henceforth (quoth the king) the one shall bear in his
shield the head of a Bull, and the other the head of a Cow.

This sentence was vvorthie to be commended: both in that it sauoured of a
pleasant and witty conceit, and (...) them also from proceeding to the
combat upon so trifling an occasion.

A similitude of the fool of the Duke of Millain.
IT happened that there fell a pleasant controversy in the presence of the
duke Sforce of Millain, whether was to be preferred as most worthy of honor
either the Advocate or the Physician. For (said one) the Aduocat pleads
causes for the conservation of right and equity, and for the augmentation both
of the private and public good. The Physician (said another) by his skill and
knowledge keeps man in health, and freeth him from sickness and diseases. Upon
this debate, the Dukes fool being in place, began to speak and said: If it
please my lord the Duke that I shall show my conceit upon this point, I shall
soon end the controversy. Marry and good reason (quoth the duke) speak on
hardly, and let us hear thy opinion. My lord (said the fool) you see
ordinarily: that when a felon is led to the gallows to be hanged, commonly the
thief goes before, and the hangman follows after.

By the thief be understood the Aduocat, and by the hangman the Physician:
because the one often robs his Clients of their money: and the other kills
his patients with his Physic.

FINIS.
NOTABLE AND excellent Sentences of ancient Authors, both Hebrews, Greeks,
and Latins: inducing every man to live well and virtuously.
FIRST, and above all things, show thy self religious toward God, not only
by thy oblations and sacrifices, but also in keeping the vows and promises
which thou swearest unto him: the one will be an argument of thy wealth and
ability: by the other is known thy faith and honesty.

2 Honor God daily: but principally after the manner and fashion instituted
and ordained by thy country wherein thou live: to the intent thou may be
esteemed both devout in thy religion, and obedient also to the laws: both
together and at one instant.

3 Be thou such a one in thy behavior toward thy parents, as thou would
that thy own children (when thou have any) should be toward thee.

4 Use thy body to labor and exercise, not only to make it strong and able,
but also healthful and well disposed: the which thou may well do, if thou
use to make an end of thy labor, whilst thou art able to continue and endure
labor.

5 Be not immoderate in thy laughter, nor too audacious in thy speech: for the
one is a sign of folly: and the other is an argument of pride and arrogancy.

6 That which is dishonest in the doing, do not thou think honest to be spoken.

7 Accustom thy self to a countenance not too much addicted to sorrow or
sadness: for that will be imputed to a proud and lofty spirit: but show thy
self imaginatiue and secret: for that is an office well beseeming a man of
wisdom and prudence.

8 There is nothing more beseeming a man, then to be neat, proper, modest, just
and temperate: all which things are maruellously fit for young men.

9 Think not in the doing of any ill deed that thou can conceal it: for
albeit it never come to be known of others: yet thou shall always find it in
the remorce of thy own conscience

10 Fear God: honor thy parents: reverence thy friends: obey the laws.

11 Embrace in all honest and good sort thy pleasure and delectation: for
honest recreation is good, though the contrary thereof be most pernicious.

12 Shun the calumniations of men to the uttermost of thy power, yea though
they be false and undeserved: for the most part of the world is ignorant of the
truth of matters, and is guided by opinion, not by judgment.

13 Whatsoever thou do enterprise and undertake, so do it as if it were to
come to the knowledge of all men: for albeit for a time thou may keep it
secret, yet in the end thou shall be sure to be discovered.

14 It is a most sure and ready way for a man to get credit and estimation,
not to commit those things which he shall reprehend in others that do the same.

15 If thou be greedy and desirous of knowledge, thou shall be sure to attain
to knowledge.

16 The best way for a man to retain in memory that which he knows, is to
exercise himself continually to the often remembrance of it.

17 That (whereof thou art ignorant) learn of them that are skillful: for it
is as shameful and foul a thing not to learn a good thing when thou hear
it: as it is to reject his friend in an honest gift when he presents it.

18 Lay hold of time whilst thou have leisure and time to learn: and be
diligent to give ear unto those that are wise and learned: for by this mean
thou shall easily get understanding and knowledge of that, which others have
invented with great difficulty.

19 Prefer knowledge before wealth and riches: the one soon fades, the
other abides for ever. For amongst all the goods of this life only wisdom is
immortal.

20 Be not slack or negligent to go into far and foreign countries, to
learn of those that are famous for their skill and knowledge in any good thing
or science: for it must needs be a shame unto thee, to see that Merchants will
adventure their lives to the danger and hazard of the seas to enrich
themselves: and that thou being lusty, young, and able, should not travel
throughout the world to better thy mind and understanding.

21 Be thou in thy manners courteous and full of humanity: and in thy speeches
affable and friendly: The courteous person will salute those whom he meets
gladly: and the affable will discourse with them familiarly.

22 Make thy self pleasing and agreeable to every man if it be possible: and
acquaint thy self only with such as are good and virtuous: for in so doing
thou shall shun the hatred of the one, and shall be sure to get the favor of
the other.

23 Frequent not the company of one and the same sort of men too often: nor
use not to discourse too long of one and the same matter: for there is nothing
but it may be tedious and wearisome.

24 Accustom thy self gladly and willingly to endure things with patience: to
the intent thou may the better do it, when thou shall be forced to sufferance.

25 Abstain from all such things wherein thou shall have little or no honesty
to be exercised: as to be too greedy and covetous of gain, to be choleric,
voluptuous, or melancholy: which thou shall easily do, if thou esteem it
gain to get honor rather then riches: and if thou use choler against those
that offend thee, as thou would that others should use it toward thee if
thou should offend them: and as thou iudgest it not seemly to be commanded
of thy servants: so is it not fit that thou sholdest be subject to thy
affections. And last of all, endure with patience and constancy misfortunes
and adversity: and fixing thine eye and regard upon the miseries of other men,
consider that thou thy self also art a man.

26 Be more careful to keep thy word and promise, then the money which is
committed to thee in trust: for honest and good men ought so to govern
themselves, that men should have more confidence on their honesty, then in
their oath.

27 There is no less reason for a man to be distrustful of the wicked then to
give credit to such as are good and virtuous.

28 Reveal not thy secret to any person living, unless they to whom thou
shall disclose it, have as great reason to conceal it in silence, as thou have
to impart it unto them.

29 When thou shall be enjoined to take an oath, thou ought for two reasons
to accept of it: either to clear and purge thy self of some villainous actio^
that may be objected unto thee: or to preserve and save thy friends from
danger.

30 Swear not in any case for lucre or desire of money, although thou have
just occasion to take an oath: for in so doing, thou shall be esteemed of some
little better then a perjured person: and of others thou shall be held a man
wretchedly covetous.

31 Never make choice of any man for thy friend, of whom thou have not first
gotten some informatio^ how he has used his friends before times: and be thou
very well assured that he will prove such toward thee, as he has been before
toward others.

32 Enter not suddenly or too hastily into amity with any man: and yet after
thou have once professed thy self to be a friend, persevere in his friendship
(if it be possible) unto the end. For as little honesty it is unto any man to
be without friends, as to change them and to make choice of new often.

33 Make not trial of thy friends with loss: and yet try them sometimes: the
which thou may do, if not having need of them, and before time of necessity,
thou do feign and make show as though thou had need of them.

34 Communicate thy affairs which thou would have known, as if thou
had a pretense and purpose to keep them secret: for if they (to whom thou
shall impart them) do conceal them, thou can not receive any damage by
their secrecy: but if they do reveal them: then have thou good proof and
trial of their manners and conditions, and thou may afterward take heed of
them.

35 There is no mean so ready for a man to know his friends, as in the midst
of the misfortunes of this mortal life: and by the help and succors which
they afford a man in his affairs. The former makes a trial of them as gold
is tried by the fire: and by the latter a man shall know how to trust his
friends in time of need.

36 He that preuenteth the request and entreaty of his friend, and succoureth
him in time before he be required, perfourmeth the true duty and deuoire of
perfect amity.

37 Persuade thy self that it is no less indignity to be surmounted in
benefits by thy friends, then it is to suffer them to be ouerborne with the
injuries of their enemies.

38 Receive into thy amity not only those which have compassion of thy
adversities, but them also which are not envious of thy prosperity. For there
are many who will condole the misfortunes of their friends, and yet afterward
when they see them in prosperity, will envy their good fortune.

39 Use to talk often of thy friends which are absent, before them that are
present: to the intent they may perceive and be persuaded, that thou will not
be forgetful of them likewise, when they shall be absent and far away from
thee.

40 Let the furniture and ornaments of thy person be fit and suitable for thine
honor, but not too curious: for the one is seemly and befitting a man of
great estate and magnificence: the other appertains to persons effeminate,
and such as delight in superfluity.

41 Esteem not of those, who have care of nothing else then to heap up
riches, not being able to use them: they are like to those men that have goodly
horses, and know not how to ride them.

42 Spare not to get riches; yet so, as thou do not only seek to have the
possession of them, but that thou labor also to have the true use of them: for
the true fruition of riches yields pleasure unto the^ that know how to take
it: and the possession of them serves unto those that can rightly use them.

43 Esteem of goods for two reasons: the one that thou may by their means
free thy self from an inconvenience: the other that thou may be able to
succor and help any honest man thy friend in time of his necessity.

44 Care not to attain to that fashion and kind of life, which being excessive
and superfluous, is used by other men: but regard the mean and moderate estate.

45 Grieve not nor trouble thy self at thy estate and condition present: but
labor to amend and better it.

46 Never reproach any man with his misery and calamity: for as much as the
like fortune is common to all in general: and there is no man that knows
what will befall him.

47 Succor and relieve the good in their time of need: for this is a great
treasure, to do good unto those that are virtuous, and to bind them unto thee
by thy benefits.

48 He that does good unto the wicked, is like unto him that gives meat unto
another man's dogs: for they bark as well at him as at others whom they meet:
and even so do the wicked men use to wrong and injury those that relieve them,
as others that do trouble and hurt them.

49 Abhor flatterers no less then common cousiners: for both of them do
exceedingly deceive such as have any trust or confidence in them.

50 If thy friends do not abandon and forsake thee in evil matters, much more
reason will they have to aid thee in all good actions.

51 Let thy carriage and behavior be familiar, and not too grave and austere
toward those that converse with thee. For servants can hardly bear the
haughtiness and pride of their masters: and all sorts of people, do gladly
fashion and frame themselves to converse with those that are private and
familiar with them. The way to be accounted companiable, is: not to be
quarrelsome, troublesome, nor contentious: and moreover, that thou do not too
rudely cross thy friend in his choler, (although he have grown into it upon a
wrong occasion) but rather yield and give way unto him during his anger: and
when it is ouerpast, reprehend him friendly

52 Affect not nor accustom thy self to gravity in trifling matters, nor
trifle not in matters of gravity and importance: for whatsoever is done out of
season is troublesome and tedious.

53 Be not unpleasing in doing of a pleasure to any man: as we see many use to
do, who know not how to do a pleasure to their friends with a good and gracious
countenance.

54 It is a very troublesome thing to be given to be quarrellous: and for any
man to study and beat his brains how to reprove another, does but incense
and irritate men.

55 Govern thy self with moderation and modesty in thy drink: but if it
happen that thou fall into company, arise and depart rather then be overcome
with drinking: for when the spirit is possessed with wine, it is like unto a
chariot or coach horses, which having overthrown their coachman, do run here
and there without all order, having none to guide and direct them: so is the
soul of a man very much offended, when the understanding is distempered and
troubled.

56 Propo^und unto thy self things immortal, as a man of courage and
magnanimity: and upon mortal things so set thy affections, as thou do use thy
goods which thou have with moderation and modesty.

57 Knowledge ought to be preferred before ignorance for many reasons, and
especially for that in all other things which are odious, yet there is some
profit to be found: but ignorance only is ever noisome and hurtful to the
ignorant, and does make them bear the pain of those offenses which they
commit, even in speaking ill of others. When thou would win the friendship
and love of any one, speak well of him unto the^ who may make report thereof
unto him.

58 The beginning of friendship is praise and commendation: and the original of
emnitie and hatred, is detraction and contempt.

59 When thou will consult upon any case, take example by that which is past
upon that which is to come: for it is easy to understand that which is obscure
and uncertain by that which has been formerly manifest and certain.

60 Be not too hasty in thy deliberations: but when thou have resolved upon
any enterprise, put it speedily in execution.

61 Think that the greatest blessing that can befall thee from God, is to
enjoy true felicity: and that the greatest good that can light upon thee by
thine own industry, is good counsel.

62 When thou doubtest with hardiness to undertake any matter, communicate the
same with thy friends, and confer with them upon it, making show as if it
were some other man's case: in so doing thou shall know their opinion without
discovering thy own secrets.

63 When thou will deliberate of any matter of importance with another,
consider first how he has carried himself in the like affairs of his own:
for it is very unlikely that he which has ill managed his own proper
business, can well and prouidently dispatch the affairs of another.

64 There is nothing that does more incite a man to bethink himself for the
good ordering of his affairs, then to regard the losses and damage which he
has formerly received by his own indiscretion: for it is commonly seen, that
we are more careful of our health, when we call to memory the extreme
dolours which we have suffered in time of our sickness.

65 Follow the manners and conditions of Princes, and accommodate thy self to
their manner of living: for in so doing, thou shall bring them to think that
their doings are to thy liking: whereof it will ensue, that thou shall both
purchase more authority and estimation amongst the people: and thou shall be
the better assured to stand in the good grace and favor of thy Prince.

66 Be obedient to the Edicts and Ordinances made by Princes: with this opinion
notwithstanding, that there is no law which has so much strength and efficacy
as their lives: for as it is very requisite for those that are governed by a
popular estate, to honor the people: so it behooves him that lives under a
Monarchy, to admire and reverence his Prince.

67 Whenever thou shall be advanced to any dignity, in any case use not the
aid and assistance of such as are wicked in any charge or affairs of
consequence whatsoever: because the blame of all the mischief and wickedness
by them committed, shall be imputed continually unto thee.

68 Whenever thou leauest any place of public charge, do it rather with a
good credit and reputation, then with the request of great wealth and riches:
for the praise and commendations of the people ought to be preferred far
before riches.

69 Take heed that thou give no aid nor assistance to any wicked action, nor
that thou countenance the same with thy company: for the faults of those whom
thou fauourest will be imputed unto thee as thine own.

70 So carry thy self in thy behauior, as thou may be always sure to have
the advantage and pre-eminence above others: yet so never thelesse as thou ever
embrace equity: to the intent that men may think thee to love and embrace
justice, not for want of power to do wrong, but of pure love to honesty and
modesty.

71 It is far better to be poor and honest, then to be rich and wicked. For
certainly justice is better then riches: because the latter is only
profitable to men living: but the former makes a man to be honored even after
his decease. Besides, add hereunto: that riches are oftentimes distributed and
bestowed upon wicked and lewd persons, who cannot in any sort notwithstanding
participate of virtue and justice.

72 Be not a follower of those that seek to enrich themselves by unlawful and
unjust gain: but of those rather, who can be content to sustain loss so they
may be reputed honest and good men: for admit that just men have no other
advantage or pre-eminence above the wicked: yet herein at least do they
surmount the^, in that they have good and virtuous hopes.

73 Have a care to embrace all that which concerns the life of man: but
principally and above all, exercise prudence: for it is not a thing of small
reck ening, for a man to have a body endowed and beautified with a mind of
good understanding.

74 Accustom thy body to labor and travel, and thy mind to knowledge and
learning: to the intent that by the mean and help of the one, thou may be
able to execute that which shall seem good unto thee: and by the aid of the
other, thou may foresee that which shall be for thy profit and commodity.

75 Bethink thy self well of that which thou art to speak: for of tentimes
the tongue runs before the thought.

76 Esteem not any thing in this world to be stable and certain: for so shall
thou not rejoice overmuch in thy prosperitien, or wax over sad or dismayed
with adversity.

77 There be two occasions wherein thou may freely and boldly speak thy mind:
the first is, in things which thou know perfectly and assuredly: the other
is, in matters that do necessarily concern thee: in both which, it is more
expedient for thee to speak liberally, then to be silent or say little. As
concerning al other matters, it is far better to be silent, then to talk of
them.

78 Take thy honest pleasure and recreation of any thing that is good: and
whatsoever evil befalls thee, endure and bear it quietly and contentedly.

79 Be close and secret to thy uttermost in any thing that concerns thee: for
it is small wisdom, and to little purpose, to keep thy wealth straight
locked up within thy house: and to have thy mind laid open to the world.

80 It behooves any man of discretion to fear reproach more the^ any danger
whatsoever.

81 Death is fearful and terrible to faint hearted and wicked persons: but
the good and virtuous ought not to fear any thing but dishonor and ignominy.

82 It is good for a man to live in the greatest assurance that he can
possibly: howbeit, if he be constrained to hazard and adventure himself, it is
more fit that he contend and strive with it honestly, then to shun and fly
from it shamefully, considering that we are all destinated to die: but nature
has only ordained and framed them that are virtuous to dye valiantly and
courageously.

And now to conclude, if thou find that most of these precepts are nor fit and
agreeable to thy age, marvel not hereat: for I my self do think no less:
notwithstanding I thought it not amiss by one and the same mean, both to give
thee counsel for the time present, and to leave thee also precepts for the time
to come: wherein thou may with more facility know what is most fit and
convenient to be used: for thou shall very hardly find any man that will
counsel thee friendly and faithfully, and therefore I was not willing to omit
any thing, which I thought would be for thy profi^: to the intent thou sholdest
not be driven, to borrow ought of others: but here to find of freecost
whatsoever shall be fit to serve thy turn. And I shall hold my self also much
bounden to thank God, when I shallsee that I am not deceived of that good
opinion which I have conceived of you. For even as it is a common thing with
men, to delight themselves in things which are pleasant, rather then such as
are wholesome: so do they more willingly converse with such as are of corrupt
behavior, and like unto themselves, then with those that seek to correct and
amend them of their ill dispositions. Nevertheless I think that thou will be of
a contrary opinion, if thou do but take a conjecture of the labor and trouble
which thou shall endure by addicting thy self to the study of other
disciplines. For it is very likely, that he which commands himself to do
good and virtuous acts, will willingly give ear to others who exhort him unto
virtue. Now there is no better mean to incite and provoke thee to enterprise
laudable deeds and actions, then to consider how the true pleasure and
contentment reaped by the^ does still continue and abide with us: and on the
contrary, how idleness and deliciousness does soon grow wearisome and
tedious: add therewithal, that voluptuous pleasures are always accompanied
with troubles and molestations: but to travel for virtue, and to live soberly,
brings with it true pleasure, and such as is always durable. I deny not but
that in the beginning voluptuousness may yield unto a man some pleasure and
delectation, howbeit sorrow and grief does soon overtake it. but in virtue
after great labors and travels comes true rest, contentment and perfect
pleasure. Now certain it is that in all our affairs we have more regard to
the issue and end thereof, the^ to the beginning: and we do in a manner estimate
all our actions by their events. Moreover, it is to be considered, how the
wicked are never at a stay of their wicked actions, but do continue in that
fashion and manner of life which they have taken at the beginning: and the
virtuous do hold it in no sort lawful to leave virtue, unless they will
wholly yield themselves to be a scorn and reproof to the whole world: for
this is to be noted, that men do not so much hate them that are notoriously
vicious, as those which boast themselves to be good and virtuous, when indeed
they are nothing different from the common and worst sort. Now if we do blame
liars for their leasings, much more reason have we to reprove them, which in
the whole course of their lives are depraved and corrupted: who do not only
therein offer wrong unto themselves, but do (as it were) betray that good
fortune which is put into their hands, even riches, honor, and abundance of
friends: and yet nevertheless do make themselves unworthy of their present
felicity. Furthermore, if man which is mortal, would but seek to observe and
regard the will of the immortal Gods, I suppose he should easily and evidently
know and understand it: because even in those that were most near and dear
unto the^, they have testified and made known what difference they make
between the virtuous and the vicious. For Jupiter having engendered both
Hercules and Tantalus, is said to have made the one immortal for his virtue,
and to have condemned the other to grievous punishment and torments for his
lewd life and wickedness.

In imitation therefore of these examples, it is fit and convenient for men to
love honesty, and to follow virtue: and not only to rely upon these
precepts, but to learn also the most choice ensignements of the most famous
and excellent Poets, and to read the writings of other good Authors. And as
the Bees flying and lighting on all sorts of flowers, do take of each that
which is fit and proper for honey: so it behooves them that desire knowledge
and understanding, to leave nothing that good is unproven, and to make profit
of all that comes to their knowledge: and yet when they have used all and
their uttermost diligence to that effect, it will be very hard and difficult
notwithstanding to correct the vices and imperfections of nature.

FINIS.
Of the power of God.
CHAP. I.
THE Poet Pindarus seeing men disputing of the nature of the soueraign and
supreme God, said: that they went about to gather an imperfect fruit of
wisdom.

2 A certain Astrologer being in a place where was a table having the stars
therein painted, showed them unto some standers by, and said: These stars
here be the wandering stars. Diogenes being in company, said unto him: My
friend lie not: for assuredly those be not the wandering stars, but these be
they: and in so saying, pointed to the men that stood about him.

3 Eusebius the Philosopher was wont to say: That it was a very hard and
difficult thing to know God: and that we cannot tell in what manner he is to be
comprehended: because we are not sufficient with the body, to express a thing
without a body: and a perfect thing cannot be comprehended of that which is
imperfect: and a thing eternal has no agreement or correspondencie with that
which is finite. The life of man is short, and passes away speedily: but God
is everlasting, and is truth, whereas man is but a shadow of imagination. There
is as great difference between a feeble man and a strong, between a little
dwarf and a giant: as there is between one that is dead, and one that is
immortal. Imagine then what God is, who cannot be expressed nor declared with
humane utterance.

4 Camillus a Captain of the Romans was wont to say thus: Thou shall find
that all things do happen prosperous to men that follow and serve God: and that
things fall out adverse to those that contemn and despise God.

5 Seneca the moral Philosopher said: That the Gods even to ungrateful men do
use to give many things.

6 Tertullian the Divine, said: That God the Creator of all the world, was not
easy to be found: nor that a man could well speak of him, but with great
difficulty.

7 Xenophon the Orator enjoined men, that in their prosperity they should
principally have God in remembrance.

8 Plato said: That a good man was like unto God: also that a good man was of
all worldly things the worthiest: and that contrariwise, the wicked man was of
all things the worst.

9 Apollonius of Thianea a sage and wise Philosopher, said: That it was a good
thing to sacrifice to the Gods, without whom we are nothing

10 The Poet Sophocles has written: That the Gods only have this power and
privilege, not to wax old: and that all other things are surmounted and
ouergone with time.

11 Plato writes: That in all things which are thought and spoken, the
beginning ought always to be taken from the foueraigne divine powers.

12 Plato said likewise: That the knowledge of God is wisdom and true virtue.

13 Diodorus the Historiographer has written: That in much and great
prosperity God is forgotten and contemned.

14 Lactantius has written: that God is not known of us but in adversity and
time of calamity.

15 Silius Italicus a Poet has written: That as long as the affairs of
mortal men are in any doubtful kind of state, or in great fear and danger:
so long they are very forward in doing honor to the Gods: but in time of
their prosperity, their al^ars do never smoke.

16 The Poet Virgil writes: that it is not lawful for any man to be
confident, or to trust in any thing against the will of the Gods.

17 Solomon says: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is all in
all to each man: and whatsoever is besides this is nothing.

18 Eusebius said: that the heavens the earth, the time, the sea, the Planets,
and all other things whatsoever do come to their perfection only by the word
and will of God.

19 Antistenes the Philosopher said: That God is not like to any thing: and
that therefore it is impossible to know him.

20 Xenophanes the Philosopher said: That there was one only God; who neither
in body, nor in thought was like unto men.

Of Love.
CHAP. 2.
Pliny said* That there is nothing in love worthy of commendation, but only
constancy.

2 Quintilian has written: That it is a thing usual and accustomed to lovers,
not to judge of beauty and favor rightly: because that love does dim and
darken the sight of the eyes.

3 If he which is in love be poor, he is tormented with a most miserable
calamity.

4 It is a thing unprofitable to desire the sight of that shape and figure, by
the which a man has been once taken captiu: and it is ill done for any man to
expose himself to the experience of those things, from the which he may
refrain and absent himself without any great difficulty.

5 It is better to love with severity, then to deceive with affability.

6 The custom of lovers is so to do, as they cannot cover their love.

7 The amorous person that loves the body more then the soul, is commonly
evil: because he is not constant and stable: and because the thing which he
pursues with his affections is unstable.

8 He that makes resistance to the first assaults of love, remains a
conqueror.

9 Love delights to dwell and inhabit in persons of high and noble houses.

10 He that nourishes and entertaineth love, shall hardly free himself from
the yoke which he has once taken upon his neck.

11 Lovers above all other persons, have a custom to number the days, and to
keep an account of the times.

12 The amorous after they have once had a fill of their luxurious desires, do
soon repent themselves of any good thing wherewith they have departed.

13 Love does many times put a bridle upon hearts that are obstinate.

14 Never was there any love, that could keep any measure.

15 In wine and banqueting love burns most cruelly.

16 With lovers it is a common use and custom to begin to speak: and in the
midst of their discourse suddenly to stop and to cut off their speech.

17 What thing is there in the world so great or so high, whereunto love will
not stir and animate the minds of mortal men?

Of Faith.
CHAP. 3:
1 PLato has written, that Theognis of M^gara was wont to say: That in a town
besieged, a man of faith and fidelity was better then all the gold and silver
of the world.

2 He which gives counsel to another: what thing can there be which he ought
sooner to give then faith?

3 Little or no faith is attributed to those persons that are fallen into any
great distress or misery.

4 It is commonly seen, that true friends do find little faith in requit all
of their friendship.

5 Faith is the ground and foundation of justice.

6 The faith of men, sleep, and the wind are very deceiptfull.

7 True faith is the best and chiefest good thing that is in the interior parts
of a man: for no necessity will constrain it to prove deceitful: no gifts
nor bribes can corrupt it: come fire, come sword, it knows not how to betray a
man.

8 In a great company of lewd and wicked persons, faith is not given to things
but with great difficulty.

9 He that has once lost his faith, has no more to lose.

10 Faith is a better guard for a Prince then the sword, or armed forces.

11 Faith is seldom seen to have any entrance or entertainment in Princes
palaces.

12 In no place is faith sure or in security.

13 The Ancients did sacrifice unto faith, having their hand covered with a
white cloth: to show, that their faith ought to be right and secret.

14 Philip king of Macedon, the father of Alexander the great, having made one
a Judge that used afterward to paint his beard and his hair, suddenly
deprived him of his office, saying: That he which would counterfeit his hair,
was not to be thought a man of that worth or integrity, that he should be
likely to keep his faith in all things.

15 Metellus Nepos having conceived great indignation and displeasure against
Ci^ero, told him: That he had brought more men to their death by his testimony
and bearing witness against them, then he had saved from death, by defending
and pleading for them: whereunto he answered: Truly that argues that my faith
is much, and more greater then my eloquence.

Of Hope.
CHAP. 4.
1 HOpe and fear are the two tormentors of things to come.

2 Oftentimes do happen sooner things unexpected, then those which are hoped
for.

3 Hope is the last solace and comfort of men that are in misery and
adversity.

4 When fortune does abandon us and deceive us in our first hopes: the things
that are to come, do seem and appear unto us to be better, then the present.

5 Hope is the thing that does nourish and feed false loves.

6 Like as by hope we are all saved: even so by hope are we to become truly and
perfectly happy.

7 We ought to hope for all things: and to despair of nothing.

8 The hopes of those which are discreet and wise, are not vain: but those of
unwise and imprudent men are light, void, and difficult.

9 Evil hopes may be compared to ill captains, who lead their followers in
errors, yet with pleasures.

10 A woman without a man, and good hopes without pains and industry, can
engender nothing that good is.

11 Neither ought a ship to trust to one anchor: nor the life of man ought to
rely upon one simple hope.

12 It is good always to be of good courage: for peradventure to morrow will
be better and more fortunate then the time past or present.

13 Hope is the dream of those that use watching.

14 Hope is a thing most common with all men: who when they have no other thing
remaining, they do wholly and altogether rely upon hope.

15 Where the hope of a lover is exceeding great: there is the mind most
desirous of luxuriousness.

Of adulation and flattery.
CHAP. 5.
1 THe world is grown to that corruption: that he that cannot flatter is
either accounted envious, or reputed proud and arrogant.

2 We have a custom to please our selves so much: that we desire to be praised
even in that, the contrary whereof we do most commonly put in practice.

3 I had rather offend in telling the truth: then to please by flattering of
any man.

4 Phocion an Athenian Captain being required by Antipater to do a thing that
was unjust, made him this answer: Thou can not use me both as thy friend and
thy flatterer.

5 Cato the elder suing for the office of Censorship in Rome, and seeing that
many did curry favor and flatter with the people to obtain it, with an high
and lofty voice, said unto them: that the people of Rome had as much need of
a severe, speedy, and sharp Physician, as they had of a strong purgation.

6 The same Cato said: That those which were studious of things ridiculous:
afterward in matters of gravity and weighty importance, would grow so to
demean themselves, as they would be mocked and derided of all men.

7 Where deceiptfull flattery and adulation is: there can never be any true
friendship nor amity.

8 They which have gotten and make it a custom to flatter continually, are of
no faith nor honesty.

9 Adulation is deadly, pestiferous, and deceiptfull.

10 If necessity should enforce a man to take his choice, he were better fall
amongst crows then among flatterers.

11 Crates the Philosopher seeing a rich and wealthy young man accompanied
with many flatterers, said unto him: O my youth, I am very sorry to see thee so
solitary.

12 Shun as a thing most abominable, both the benevolence of flatterers, and
the misfortunes of thy friends.

13 Remove far away from thee the audacious and bold speeches of flattering
persons.

14 The wolves do resemble dogs: so do flatterers seem friends: but
notwithstanding they desire things different.

15 Like as Actcon was torn in pieces by the dogs which himself had
nourished: so are many destroyed by flatterers that have familiarity with them.

16 The hunters take Hares by hunting them with dogs: and many others do take
foolish men with their false praises.

17 The flatterers are contemners of the poor: and live by soothing up and
pleasing the minds of the rich: they laugh at men secretly and amongst
themselves, though they have no occasion: they are free by fortune, and yet
they make themselves villains and slaves by their own election.

Of Ambition.
CHAP. 6.
1 AMbition and favor do then most signorize, when they hide and conceal
themselves under a kind of severity.

2 Ambition is easily maintained by old age.

3 It is most certain, that he which is covetous of glory, and desires to be
praised of the wicked, must of necessity himself be wicked.

4 It is not fit for men to become covetous of glory, in troubling themselves,
and bearing envy one toward another.

5 Ambition teaches men to become disloyal.

6 After ambition has once gotten possession of the honors which it desires,
she begins to wax old.

7 Ambition is the bestiall nurse of a^arice.

8 The glory that is ambitious, does many times work the ruin even of
brethren.

9 The man that desires superiority and power, does hardly observe justice:
and he which is covetous and greedy of glory, does most easily fall into
unjust actions.

Of Envy.
CHAP. 7.
1 NO man does lightly envy him who uses his fortune modestly and gently: the
enui^us do not bear envy so much to the persons of those whom they envy, as
they do to the good things which are in them.

2 Wicked men do not so much ^eioyce at their own proper good fortunes: as
they do at damage and discommodities of other men.

3 ^nuie is punished, not only with her own proper evils: but also by the
good and welfare of strangers.

4 The common use of the envious, is to desire that there come no good unto any.

5 Envy is engendered of the superfluity of goods.

6 A great blot and stain of this age wherein we live, is that virtue is never
without envy.

7 Bion the Philosopher seeing an envious man carry his head and countenance
hanging down toward the ground, said: Either some great mischief is befalne
to this man, or some great good to another.

8 No felicity is so modest as it can avoid the biting tooth of malignitie.

9 It is a very troublesome and uneasy matter to eschew and avoid the eye of
the envious.

10 This ought ever to be had by us in remembrance, that after glory ever
ensues envy.

11 Assuredly this vice of envy is very common in any great and free city:
and envy does always accompany glory.

12 Even as rust eats out the iron: so does envy consume the envious.

13 That envy which is secret and hidden, is more to be feared, then that
which is open and manifest.

14 Envy will never yield to give renown unto them which are living.

15 When the affairs of another are most joyous, then is envy most sad and
sorrowful.

16 Envy is the mistress of injustice: and it inciteth both the thought and
the hand to ill and wicked actions.

17 Whosoever bears envy to any good man and doing well, he may well say:
That he is envious both to the whole commonwealth, and to himself also.

18 Scipio the African for fear of the envious, very advisedly forsook Rome,
and went to dwell in a certain village, there to spend the rest of his life,
and to give liberty to the envious to breath their fill.

Of covetousness, and covetous persons.
CHAP. 8.
1 AVarice and covetousness do use to diminish and violate all offices, be
they of never so great holiness or solemnity.

2 Avarice does make both faith and bounty to decay.

3 Avarice and covetousness is not the vice of gold, but of man that uses
gold ill and wickedly.

4 The days of that man must needs be long, that hates and abhors
covetousness.

5 Many things are lacking to poverty: but to avarice all things are wanting.

6 There be two things that do soon incite and provoke a man to villainous and
base gain: that is to say, poverty and covetousness.

7 If there be any that possesses many goods, and yet leads his life in
anguish and trouble: certain it is that he will be the most unhappy of all
men that ever were living or shall be.

8 Covetous persons do lead such a life as Flies, who are ever traveling, and
busying themselves, as though they should live for ever.

9 I see many rich men that are hoorders and keepers of riches: but they are
not masters of their money.

10 We were borne once: and it is not granted unto us to be borne twice: and
as thou art not master of the day to morrow, so prolong not the time, and live
as thou should but live to day.

11 O then cursed hunger of gold, what perverse, unfortunate, and unhappy
mischiefs, do thou bring into the minds of mortal men?

12 The study of the covetous person is only to gather and gain money: which
no wise man ought to desire.

13 Out of the depth and bowels of the earth, has God showed gold unto men*
and they have made it the occasion of all mischiefs and wickedness

14 I may well say, that some me^ are so covetous, as if they were to live here
for ever: and other some are so prodigal, as if they were to dye instantly.

15 Man passes away his days with vain cares, because he knows not, nor
considers what is the true end of having.

16 Wicked men are as covetous of a little gain as of a great.

17 Money to many men is more dear then either faith or honesty.

Of Prodigality.
CHAP. 9.
1 SOme excusing the vice of prodigality, said: That in great abundance of
wealth and riches it may well be used to whom Zeno the Philosopher answering,
said: Truly then ought we as well to pardon our Cooks, if (for having store
and abundance of salt) they say that they have therefore made our meats too
salt.

2 Diogenes the Philosopher demanding of one that was a prodigal spender, a
piece of money which might be perhaps about some 150. pence, he said unto him:
Wherefore do thou ask of me so great a sum, whereas of others thou do
commonly beg but three small pence: to whom Diog^nes answered: Because I
hope that of others I may ask again another time: but of thee I think never
to have more.

3 Socrates the Philosopher seeing one without all reason, feasting all sorts
of persons with the wealth which he had: Ill may thou perish (quoth he) who
make thy graces which should be virgins to be strumpets: noting that true
bounty and liberality ought to be employed upon occasion of merit and virtue,
and not confusedly.

4 Crates the Philosopher was wont to say: That the moneys of rich prodigal
men were like unto figgetrees planted upon the tops of high rocks and
mountains: the fruits whereof no men could come to gather, but the crows and
kites only did take and devour them. So the treasures of prodigal rich men
were possessed and enjoyed only by bauds, harlots and flatterers.

5 Poverty is the torment of a luxurious life.

6 Prodigal persons do employ their money in things, by which they can leave,
either a very short or no memory at all of themselves to posterities.

7 No man ought to marvel at those, who do spend their goods to make
themselves more pleasing and agreeable to the multitude and common people.

8 The Emperor Nero had no other fruit of his riches and treasures, but only
an excessive charge of expenses made by exceeding prodigality.

9 Many do cast away their goods and patrimony, in giving it without either
judgment or reason: but what greater folly can there be, then to study and
willingly to take care for the doing of that which thou can not long endure
and continue to do?

Of a lying tongue, and boldness of speech.
CHAP. 10.
1 PHiloxenus a man of great knowledge, being imprisoned by Denis the tyrant of
Syracusa, for that he had dispraised or not commended certain verses which he
had made: was on a time taken out of prison, and brought before the tyrant once
again to hear and give his judgment of the same verses: being come and
having heard them pronounced and read, he made have to be gone away out of his
presence: The tyrant asking him whither he went: Philoxenus answered: I go
again to thy prison: noting that his verses were then as worthy to be
misliked as before.

2 Diogenes was wont to say: that some dogs did bark against their enemies
with purpose to bite them: but I (said he) do bark at my friends to the intent
to purge and heal the^ of their ill deeds.

3 Hippocrates the Philosopher being persuaded by one to go seek out Xerxes
the king of Persia, because he was a good king: he answered: I have not any
thing to do with so good a patron

4 Thales the Philosopher being demanded, how far different lying was from
truth, answered: As far as the eyes are distant from the ears.

5 Theophrastus the Orator being grown old and gray headed, and coming to
Lacedemon, thought to show himself as if he had been but young: for he
delighted to hide the whiteness of his hairs with a certain dye or painting:
and being there before the Judges pleading a certain cause wherein he was
retained: one Archidamus a man very free and liberal of his speech, happened
(notwithstanding he was so disguised) to know him: who suddenly burst out into
these words: But I pray what truth can you expect in this man's speech, who both
within and without him does carry nothing but lies and counterfeitings: and
that not only in his mind, but even in his gray and aged head?

6 There cannot happen any greater mishap or infelicitie to free men, then to
be deprived of their liberty of speech.

7 Diogenes being blamed by a Greek, who told him: that albeit he praised and
commended the Lacedaemonians more then any other people, yet he would not live
with them nor near them: he answered him: That the Physician which is studious
of health, had no reason to dwell amongst those which were healthful.

8 Zenon having a purpose to give an admonition to a certain young man whom he
saw more desirous to be talking then to hear others, said unto him: O thou
young man, I would wish thee to know, that nature has given thee two ea^es, to
the intent thou should hear more then thou should speak.

9 Antistenes the Philosopher having made a certain long and tedious speech in
the audience of certain persons, Plato said unto him: Thou know not
Antistenes, that the measure of man's speech ought not to be made by him that
speaks, but by them that give him the hearing.

10 Careon a man reputed a great babbler, came to Isocrates, and would needs be
his auditour to learn eloquence: who demanded of him double wages. Careon
suddenly asked him, what made him to demand double stipend? Isocrates
answered: I ask one, because I must learn thee to speak: and I will have the
other, because thou must learn also to hold thy peace.

11 Anaximenes being about to make a certain speech to an auditorie:
Theocritus said out all aloude: See how he is ready to power out a flood of
words, whereas he has not one drop of reason.

12 Lying is a thing most ready and prompt with those, who have accustomed
often to do evil.

13 Lying and falsehood is not befitting nor seemly to good and virtuous
persons.

14 Foolish men do account this a goodly treasure and an ornament to their
toungs, that they hold themselves to have made a fair purchase, when they have
spoken ill of good and honest men.

15 There is no one thing in us, wherein we are able to offend with more
facility, then the tongue.

16 Speech is the image of the mind: therefore the temperance of the tongue and
silence ought to be great: and men ought to use and employ their ears oftener
then their toungs.

17 It is not good to be too prompt and forward in speaking: because many words
and much speech is apparent sign of folly.

18 Some men in their speeches are so tedious, unprofitable, and importunate,
that all whatsoever they speak seems to come from the mouth only, and not
from the heart.

19 Cicero desired to hear one speak wisely without eloquence: rather then a
long eloquent oration stuffed with nothing but vanity and folly.

20 The tongue ought to be always kept short, and especially in the time of
repast.

21 We ought not much to trouble our selves, nor care for the tongs of men: but
we ought to have a care of our own conscience.

22 Do thou not know it to be most true: that both God and men have lying in
hatred and detestation?

23 Lying and falsehood comes from persons of a servile and slavish nature:
and truth proceeds from free men.

24 It is most certain, that it is a much more pleasant thing to speak and
utter matters of truth, then to give the hearing unto them.

25 Abundance of words and ignorance, do for the most part bear sway amongst
men.

Of Silence, and of speech spoken in time convenient.
CHAP. 11.
1 XEnocrates having an use to dispose of all his deeds and actions by the
several hours of the day: did ever use to employ one hour in silence.

2 I never repented me to have held my tongue, but I have oftentimes been sorry
that I have spoken.

3 Do you think (o you Athenians) that I do not well understand, how silence
is a sure thing!

4 My son, it is a good and necessary thing for thee to be silent, and to
use few words: for silence contains in it many good things.

5 Silence is a gift without danger and peril.

6 A question was demanded by one on a time, why and upon what occasion the
Lacedaemonians did use so great brevity in their language: whereunto Licurgus
made this answer: that brevity of speech is next unto silence.

7 We ought to have great regard, that we speak not things not fit and
convenient: because that it is the office and duty of a man of small wisdom
to speak and utter those things which ought to be kept secret.

8 A man ought to choose rather foolishly to roll and toss a stone up and
down in vain, then to speak any one idle and vain word.

9 Solon being set at table with Periander the tyrant of Corinth, and not using
any speech, was demanded of the tyrant, if his silence proceeded either
through default of knowledge how to speak, or else of folly. Whereunto Solon
gave him this present answer: That he is no fool that can be silent in a
banquet.

10 Solon the Philosopher did admonish men to seal and shut up their words
under silence: and that silence ought to be used and observed according to the
fitnes of the time and season.

11 Isocrates said: that there were two special times wherein it was lawful
for any man to speak without reprehension: the one, when we speak of things
which we know certainly and manifestly: the other, when we speak of things
needful and necessary. In these two times only speech is better then
silence: but at other times silence is to be preferred before speech.

12 It is a rare virtue to know how and when to be silent.

13 It is a most miserable thing when a man is constrained perforce to keep
secret those things which he would gladly and willingly utter and make known.

Of Folly and imprudence.
CHAP. 12.
1 IF any man do contrary to that good which is naturally in him: he ought to
be called and accounted imprudent, foolish and unhappy.

2 I say, that they which use their bodies to exercise, and despise the mind,
do no other thing but as it were carelessly neglect the things which are
commanded, and travel themselves about doing of things not commanded.

3 I see that men do with great care seek for the things which appertain to
this life: but they do not esteem and set by such as are profitable to live
well and happily

4 Proteus (as the common saying is) did use often to change himself into many
forms and shapes: so the ignorant man in every thing does change and alter.

5 Theocritus seeing one that was a schoolemaister, to teach some erroniously
in the nature of the Elements: he said unto him: Wherefore do thou not teach
Geometry? He answered him: I am not skilled in it. O good God (quoth
Theocritus) how great is thy folly, that take upon thee to teach, and can
hardly read!

6 Glory and riches without prudence, are possessions of no great assurance.

7 Bion being demanded what thing was folly, answered: That it is the
hinderance of felicity.

8 They ought to be reputed and esteemed for little less then fools, who
honor wicked men being rich, and despise such as are learned and men of virtue.

9 As the luxurious and intemperate persons, cannot be easily healed of their
diseases: so cannot fools receive any medecin against their adversities.

10 Dascius said: That they which despise the study of good letters, for the
exercise and gain of any mechanical art or trade: are like unto Penelopes
wooers, who being rejected by the mistress, fell to lasciviousness with her
maids.

11 Know you that there are two kinds of folly: the one is called frenzy and
fury: the other is truly named ignorance and gross simplicity.

12 Strangers and pilgrims do often go astray out of their way: so the ill
instructed, and men of gross understanding do go wandering in the way be it
never so plain.

13 Even as corrupt wine is not desired in banquets: so the rude and ignorant
person is not received in any good company.

Of the knowledge of a man's self.
CHAP. 13.
1 KIng Philip the father of Alexander the Great, having vanquished the
Athenians at Choe^onca: albeit he knew himself to be proud enough, by reason
of this great victory which he had gotten: yet following reason, he committed
no insolency against the people whom he had conquered: but considering well
with himself what was the force of felicity, and how difficult a thing it is
for a man to temper and moderate himself in so glorious a victory, he advised
himself that it was needful, and accordingly he took order, that one of the
Pages of his chamber for his aduerticement, should every morning rehearse unto
him this sentence: and say: O Philip, remember that thou art a man.

2 Heraclitus the Philosopher even in his younger years was held for a very
sage and wise man: only for that he confessed of himself, that he knew, he
knew nothing.

3 Demon the Philosopher being demanded, when, and at what time he first began
to be a Philosopher, he answered: When I began first to know my self.

4 One demanded of Theocritus, for what occasion he made no works? he
answered: Because I cannot make such as I would: therefore such as I can, and
am able to do, I will not.

5 It is affirmed by many, that this sentence: Know thy self: was the Proverb
of the Philosopher Chilo: which thing he said was very difficult.

6 Socrates knowing that Alcibiades a goodly fair young man did grow proud, by
reason of the great riches and livings which he possessed: he led him into a
secret place of the city, where he showed him a table, wherein was painted a
Map of the world: and willed him to see if he could there find the region of
Athens their native country. And when Alcibiades had showed it him: Socrates
then said unto him: See now if thou can find there the place where thy lands
and possessions do lie. Alcibiades said: I cannot see that they are here
painted at all. Whereupon Socrates presently replied: what reason then have
thou to grow proud, by reason of those lands which do not appear in any part
of the whole earth?

7 Seeing thou art borne a mortal man, thou ought to have remembrance of
the common fortune: and if thou had been borne a king, yet thou ought to
understand, that thou art mortal.

8 Things that are vain and empty, are easily blown up with the wind: and
fools are soon puffed up with pride.

9 They that can talk well and according to reason, and cannot themselves
hearken unto it: may be resembled unto harpes, which yield a most pleasant
sound and harmony unto others, but perceive no part thereof themselves.

10 Many men are defenders of their own faults, and sharp accusers of the
offenses of other men.

11 Whenever we are disposed to mock another: let us first look into our
selves, and consider if we be inclined to the same vices: for our selfeloue
does hide many offenses in us.

Of friendship and friends.
CHAP. 14.
1 OF all other things that wisdom has invented for men to live well and
happily: there is none greater, nor more goodly or pleasant then friendship.

2 He is to be reputed just, which makes no reckening of his own loss and
hinderance, to the intent he may keep his friend.

3 That friendship that has an end, was never to be accounted true friendship.

4 No man is friend unto a tyrant, but either for hope or for fear.

5 Friendship between men of equality is commonly stable: and amongst such
there is never experience made of their forces.

6 One friend ought not to be entreated by another, when they demand any thing
each of other.

7 This is true friendship, when both will one and the same thing: and both do
not will one and the same thing.

8 Friends are esteemed to be the only refuge in poverty, and in all other
calamities.

9 Perfect amity is between good men: and such as are like in virtue.

10 Friendship is an honest union of a perpetual good will.

11 Friendship is a kind of equality and semblance of persons: and the fruit
of friends, is to love.

12 A new friend is not to be judged or tried in time of feasting or
banqueting.

13 He commits a great oversight, that thinks to recommend himself unto
his friends.

14 A friend ought to be embraced even to the death.

15 It is a shame for any man to abandon, and not to aid and succor his friend.

16 Every man knows, that he cannot be held a friend to honest and good-men,
who lives so foolishly, as to make himself pleasing and acceptable unto
wicked men.

17 It is better to have a good friend then great wealth and multitude of
riches.

18 Friends ought to aid and help each other with many good deeds and
benefits: to the intent their friendship may grow more firm and greater.

Of Liberality and Magnificence.
CHAP. 15.
1 THis cannot be said perfect liberality: when a man gives more upon
occasion of vain glory, then for true compassion and pity.

2 Liberality ought always to be forward and hasty: for this is the proper
and true duty of him that gives willingly, to give promptly and readily: and
whosoever releeueth another in deferring him from day to day, he cannot be said
to give liberally and with a good heart.

3 Artaxerxes king of Persia, was wont to say: that it was much more befitting
and seemly for the royal majesty of a Prince, to give unto others, then to
receive of others.

4 King Philip the father of Alexander, having conceived great grief for the
death of Hipparchus, a man of Nigrepont: and one telling him, that he died not
but in good time and of full age. Philip answered: truly he died too too soon:
and so much the more too soon, because he had never received of me any kind of
bounty, worthy of my good love and affection toward him.

5 Perillus one of the friends of Alexander, demanded of him a certain sum
of money to marry a daughter which he had: to whom Alexander caused
immediately to be delivered above fifty talents, which was a very great sum.
Then said Perillus unto him. My Lord, ten talents will suffice: but Alexander
answered: It is enough for thee to receive ten talents: but it is not enough
for me to give so little.

6 Alexander the Great, having charged his Chamberlain to deliver to the
Philosopher Anaxarcus so much money as he would demand of him: Sir (said the
Chamberlain) he demands a hundred talents: whereunto Alexander answered: He
does well and like an honest man: for he knows that he has a friend, and
such a friend that can and will gladly bestow upon him as much gold as he will
desire.

7 King Ptolome did use to eat and drink very often in the house of his
friends: and he never cared for the possession of any thing more the^ was for
the necessity of life: and he would commonly say: that it was a more princely
thing to make others rich then himself.

8 True liberality is to give unto their nearest and next friends.

9 Simon a famous captain of the Athenia^s, was a man of that bounty and
liberality, that having many possessions and gardens in diverse places, he
never set any to watch the^, to hinder others from taking away the fruits that
grew in them, but suffered every man to use them at his pleasure.

10 The Emperor Domitian, refused many a fair inheritance, which diverse rich
men had left and bequeathed unto him.

11 I esteem that the most royal praise and commendation that can be given to
any man, is to do good unto others, and to be liberal.

12 It is a very hard and difficult matter for a rich man to be liberal:
because the liberal man does not use to be much sparie: but is inclined
plentifully to pour out and to depart with his riches.

13 Mark Anthony the Philosopher had nothing more in hatred and detestation
then covetousness.

Of Nobleness and magnanimity.
CHAP. 16.
1 THe same Anthony being reproched by a fife-player, that he was not borne of
noble blood, made him this answer: I am therefore the more worthy to be
commended, because the nobility of my lineage begins with me.

2 Beauty or comelines of countenance, and moderation of mind are two things
that do principally and especially belong to noble and men of honest
reputation: and those two qualities have need also of force and strength to be
joined with them. As for other delicacies and lasciuities, they have a good
grace in herbs and flowers.

3 Anachar^is the Philosopher being cast in the teeth as with a matter of
ignominy or infamy: That he was a Scithian or Tartarian borne, answered:
certainly I do not live according to the custom and fashion of the Tartarians.

4 Socrates being demanded what was nobility? answered: It is a temperance
both of soul and of body.

5 As we do not therefore judge bread to be good, because the corn grew in a
fair field, unless the same be leauened and baked with great labor and
travel: so do we not esteem any man noble, albeit he be borne of a noble
family, unless he be noble by virtue and honest conditions.

6 The man that is magnanimous and of a great spirit, does continually carry
himself upright under any burden be it never so puissant: and nothing does
happen displeasing unto him be it never so difficult and hard to be borne: for
he knows his own forces, and with virtue he vanquisheth fortune.

7 The nobility of another blood does not make thee noble, if thou do not
purchase thy nobility of and by thy self, and thy own virtue.

8 Nobility ought not to be measured and considered according to blood, but
according to the customs usually observed.

9 We do not say that any man is good, in regard of the nobility of his birth:
but for the excellency of his virtue.

10 True nobility depends of virtue, and all other things are of fortune.

11 The noble and courageous heart has this property, to be always doing of
things honest and virtuous: and you shall never see any man of an high and
great spirit to delight in small and base things, or in such as are dishonest.

12 What avails it any man to be of a noble lineage, and to be polluted with
vices? And what hurts it a man to be issued of a poor house, if he be
adorned and beautified with virtuous qualities?

13 True nobility is to rely upon a man's own proper virtues, and not upon
those of another.

14 Magnanimity and greatness of courage, is as a certain ornament of all
virtues.

15 That man only is to be called and accounted a man of a great spirit and
magnanimity, who both is and esteems himself worthy of great things: and
he which in his actions does not carry himself according to the power and
ability of his dignity, is reputed a simple and a foolish person.

16 There be four sorts of nobility or gentry: the first is, of those who
are borne of good and honest parents: the second, is of those whose parents
have been Princes and great personages: the third is of them, whose ancestors
have been renowned and famous: the fourth and most commendable of all is: when
a man is excellent by his own proper virtue, his own industry, and
haughtiness of courage.

Of Bounty and humanity.
CHAP. 17.
1 IT was said by Licurgus of Lacedemonia: that victory was gotten by riches,
and bounty by the perseverance of good customs.

2 Aristippus the Philosopher being demanded, what thing in this life was most
worthy of admiration? answered: that it was man: provided always that he were
such a one as were good and modest.

3 Scipio the Affrican observing the admonitions of Polibius, during his whole
life, would never lightly depart or leave any place where he came, but he would
first purchase himself some one or other for his friend.

4 Alexander the Great having sent for a present an hundred talents to Phocion
of Athens, was demanded by those which carried the silver: that seeing there
was so great number of Athenians besides him, why he should give unto Phocion
only so great a sum of money? Alexander answered: because I do not hold nor
judge any other Athenian so good and just a man as Phocion.

5 Themistocles in setting to open and public sale a certain piece of
inheritance, to him that would give most, said unto the Crier: Let it be cried,
that it has good neighbors dwelling round about it.

6 The Orator Demosthenes making an Oration unto the Senate, and seeing
Phocion coming a far off, said: Behold the hatchet, and the sharp cutting
sword of my speech comes here at hand: by which kind of speech, he meant that
the force of speech has no such effect and puissance, as the excellency of
good and virtuous conditions.

7 They who do accustom themselves to good fashions, their life commonly is
well fashioned and ordered.

8 It is a most assured sign and prognostication, that that city will
quickly run to ruin, wherein the good are not known nor discerned from the
wicked.

9 It is requisite that the good be stirred up to virtue by praise and rewards,
and the wicked by correction and punishment: and they that will not be
reformed, ought to be driven into exile.

10 It is a thing very unfit and inconvenient for a man to carry goodness in
his mouth, and none at all in his heart.

11 As it is a great fault and folly for a man to recite things that are
another man's, and to usurp them for his own: so it is a good thing and a
token of humanity, to make their names known and manifest by who^ a man
comes to learning and knowledge.

12 Julius Caesar was wont to forget nothing more soon and readily, then the
injuries which he had received.

13 No man can be good by the will and pleasure of another, but only of his
own will and disposition.

14 Titus Vespasian being crowned King of Jerusalem by the people, said: That
he was not worthy of so great honor, because it was not he that had gotten
that victory, but that God had favored him against the Jews.

15 Octauian Augustus would never recommend his children to the people: but
only in using these words: vz. If they deserve well.

16 There be three sorts of humanity: the first, when one saluteth others
courteously: the second, when one aideth those which are in misery, and which
have lost their goods by ill fortune: the third: when men do frankely of their
own freewils make banquets, and feast their friends and acquaintance.

17 A certain man came to tell Octauian, that Aemilius Elian spoke very ill of
his uncle Julius Caesar: to whom Augustus answered: I would wish that thou
make good proof of that which thou say: for I will make Aemilius Elian to
know, that I have a tongue left me.

18 Cecilius Metellus a Senator, was a great enemy to Scipio African as long
as he lived: howbeit, when he understood of the death of Scipio, he grew very
sorrowful, and commanded his sons presently to go and help to carry the
corpse of so worthy a personage to the sepulture: using these or the like
speeches: I yield infinite thanks to the immortal Gods for the love which I
have to Rome, that it is thus happened: that Scipio the African was not born in
another nation.

19 It is in our own power to be either good or evil.

20 Courtesy and fair behavior is a mean to appease wrath.

21 Humanity amongst men is a strong bond, and he which breaks it, is a most
wicked man and a murderer.

22 The office of humanity is to relieve men in time of necessity and peril.

23 The sovereign good of a man, is life eternal: and the sovereign and
chiefest ill of man is death everlasting.

Of Good deeds and honor.
CHAP. 18.
1 IN doing good to good men: it seems, that this is not to give but to
receive.

2 He which receives any good turn, especially of one that is his servant,
the which he makes any reckening of: let him regard not of who^ he receives
it, but what it is which he has received.

3 It behooves each man to be forward to do good unto another: and to have a
care also that such favor be not concealed.

4 When mortal men become benefactors, they imitate the gods.

5 Benefits received by importunate requests, are little or nothing worth.

6 It is no benefit to give a man that has no need nor necessity.

7 To give more honor to a man then he deserves, is to make way to fools
both to perceive and to think ill.

8 In my opinion it is an honorable action, to accuse the wicked, and to
defend the good.

9 Honor ought to be gotten by virtue, and not by deceit: for the one is the
office of wicked and leude persons, and the other of good and honest men.

10 Conon the Athenian being sent Ambassador by Pharnabazus, to the king
Artaxerxes, was counseled by Chiliarchus, that when he should come unto his
presence, he ought to incline and prostrate himself before him: to whom Conon
answered: It will not grieve me to do that honor unto the king which thou
aduisest me, but I doubt lest I shall dishonor my country in so doing:
because the city wherein I was borne, is such a place, as it has used to rule
and command over all other cities.

11 It is the part and duty of a friend to do good, especially to those that
stand in need of it: and that before they require and ask it: because both to
the one and to the other, it will then be a thing both more honest, and more
pleasing and acceptable.

12 There is no doubt but that rare virtue cannot have too much honor and
reverence done unto it.

Of Exercise and industry.
CHAP. 19.
1 HE which has begun to purchase himself praise and commendation with
glory, ought to take great pain and travel to continue it: for in truth
sloth and negligence do use to bring forth at the first a kind of pleasure
and delight, but the end thereof is grief and sorrow.

2 Labor and travel by use and custom, comes to be more easy, light, and
less burdensome.

3 There are many more men that grow and become good by exercise, then by
nature.

4 Cuus king of the Persians, did not love that glory for which he had not
first endured labor and travel: and he never dined nor supped, except he had
first by some vehement labor even wearied himself.

5 Pithagoras said: that art without exercise is nothing: and that exercise
without art likewise is nothing.

6 Demosthenes being demanded by what means he became more excellent then
others in the art of eloquence, answered: In consuming more oil then wine.

7 Demades the Orator being demanded: who was his schoolemaister, answered:
The Parliament of Athens: showing that experience is more noble and of more
worth then all discipline.

8 Denis the tyrant having entertained a Cook out of the country of Laconia:
and supping of a certain broth which he had prepared for him, cast away from
him the dish immediately, and demanded of him what should make the Laconians to
delight in eating such a kind of pottage the same being so sharp and without
any pleasant taste? The Cook answered him: Sir, this broth has not that kind
of taste which the broth of the Laconians is accustomed to have, and that is the
matter that you think it so unsavory. Denis replied: why what taste then have
their broths? Certes sir, (said the Cook) before they ever use to sit down to
meat, they use first to exercise the body.

9 Continual exercise surmounteth the ensignements and instructions of all
schoolemaisters.

10 No man ought to labor to make himself eloquent by the good of another.

11 Exercise is the most artificial and best mistress of eloquence: and to
learn to speak well.

12 Exercise in youth is a great aid and furtherance to any man.

Of Wrath and anger.
CHAP. 20.
1 PLato said unto a servant of his: Thou may thank God, for that if I had
not been angry, thou had surely felt the punishment of thy misdeeds.

2 The Philosopher Naucrates did resemble angry men unto a lamp, which if the
oil therein be too much and over abundant, will yield little or no light, or
rather puts out the flame.

3 It must be of necessity, that all things which angry men do, must needs be
full of blindness and necessity: because it is no easy matter for a man
troubled with anger, to have the true use of reason: and whatsoever is without
reason is without art. It behooves us therefore to take reason as our guide in all our actions, and to remove wrath and anger utterly from us.

4 Wrath is the enemy of counsel: and victory, naturally is proud.

5 Wrath is commendable, when the occasion is just.

6 Anger is an evil desire of revenge.

7 Darius king of Persia, being very angry, for that he was vanquished of the
Athenians by fraud, commanded one of his servants, that as often as he should
see him sit down at meals, he should use these words unto him: Sir, remember
the Athenians.

8 Anger is no infirmity: nor yet to be offended: but for a man to persevere in
his anger, that is an infirmity.

9 If a man subject to wrath and anger, have any power of command, or imperial
authority, he will soon bring al things to destruction: he will fall to
bloudshedding, overthrowing of cities, murdering of people, and making whole
Provinces and countries solitary and desert.

10 That man that can dispute or discourse well, ought to speak without choler.

11 Certainly they are much to be blamed, who are not moved with anger in such
things as are requisite, and when necessity and occasion requires it.

12 It is a goodly thing for a man to conquer his anger and wrathful passions.

13 There is nothing that makes a more enclining to anger, then delicate
nourishment full of niceness and flattery: for it is an usual thing with
prosperity to nourish choler and wrathfulnesse.

14 It is a more difficult thing (said Heraclitus) to strive and contend
against luxuriousness and lasciviousness, then against wrath and anger.

Of Patience.
CHAP. 21.
1 DEmosth^nes said unto one that used him reprochfully: My friend, I list not
enter into this contention with thee, wherein the vanquished is better then the
va^quisher.

2 Plato being gro^^ely iniuried by one with most vile terms, said unto him:
Thou speak ill, because thou have not yet learned to speak well.

3 Aristippus the Philosopher being abused by a fellow with most opprobrious
speeches, said thus unto him: Thou art a master of ill speaking, and I of ill
hearing.

4 Euripides seeing two men reuiling each other with injurious terms, said: He
of you which abstaineth most from villainous and lewd speeches, is to be held
the most sage and wisest of the two.

5 That man must needs be reputed of the greatest and best courage, who can
rather endure and bear out an unhappy and miserable life, then shun and
avoid it.

6 Archilocus said: That patience is the invention of the Gods.

7 Denis the tyrant being exiled for his tyranny, was demanded, wherein Plato
and his Philosophy had benefited him. He answered: They have taught me quietly
and with a patient spirit, to bear and endure the change and mutabilitie of
fortune.

8 That body which is accustomed to patience, will never quit or forsake any
place for any pain or travel whatsoever.

9 He is to be esteemed patient and valiant, who is not easily drawn to be
tender and delicate in the time of his prosperity.

10 The Philosopher Chilon, seeing one that was very pensive by reason of some
misfortune that had befallen him, and that in more unfit and unseemly sort
then was convenient, he said unto him: Assutedly if thou knew the
misfortunes of all other men, thou would not bear thine own adversity so
impatiently.

11 Pittacus the Philosopher said: That the office of a wise man was to take to
himself good advice and counsel, to the end no evil might befall and happen
unto him: and if it did afterward happen that any misfortune did betide him,
then to bear it courageously and patiently.

12 Socrates being in a disputation, and having in the midst of his discourse
heard tidings of the death of his son, was not any thing at all therewith
moved: but after that his disputation was ended, he then said unto those which
were with him: Come on, let us now go and accompany the corpse of my son
Sophronison to his funerals.

13 Democritus said: That it was a notable good thing, to know how to provide a
remedy for calamity.

14 Xantippe the wife of Socrates was wont to say: That albeit many chaunges
and variable chances did daily trouble and perplexe the whole city of Athens:
yet she never saw the countenance of her husband Socrates for any matter ever
changed or troubled: but that he continued still one and the self same man in
all fortunes. And indeed Socrates did so frame his mind, that he always bore
his visage in one sort, as well in adversity as prosperity.

15 As Xenophon was sacrificing in the city of Mantinea. there came a
missenger to bring him tidings how his son Grillus was dead: upon the receipt
of which news, he presently took the crown from off his head without further
interrupting of the sacrisice. But the messenger having added this unto his
tale, that his son died victoriously, he took up the crown and set it again
upon his head, and so went on with the finishing of his sacrifice.

Of the praise of riches.
CHAP. 22.
1 THe Poet Simonides being demanded, which of these two things he had rather
choose, either riches or wisdom: answered. I cannot tell whether: but
certain it is, that I see wise men ever attending about the gates of rich men.

2 It is a thing most requisite and necessary for a man to have money: without
which it is impossible to do or effect any thing with opportunity, or in time
convenient.

3 Money amongst mortal men is as the blood and the soul of a man: and he
which has it not, is as one that walks dead amongst the living.

4 Only gold and riches establishes customs and manners: makes and gives
beauty, nobility, friendship, and all other things whatsoever.

5 Ha father, speak not to me of gentry or nobility, for it relyeth
altogether upon wealth and riches: give me my house stored with gold: and if I
were left a slane, I shall then soon become and be reputed noble.

6 Money is it that finds friends, and brings men into favor and dignity
near about Princes.

7 Riches are the sure friends: but they which are commonly reputed for
friends, do soon forsake him which is poor.

8 Great riches are to be bestowed upon friends.

9 I see it is an ordinary humor in women, to take pleasure in riches and
jewels.

10 Apollonius of Thianea said unto Denis the tyrant: Thou shall be sure to
employ thy riches very well, and in better sort then all other kings use to do,
if thou bestow them upon the poor and needy.

11 Riches do hurt exceedingly, except the possessor of them use them well and
rightly.

Riches dispraised and condemned.
CHAP. 23.
1 THe common Prouerhe is: that a man should not put a knife into a child's hand:
and I say, that thou should neither give him knife nor yet riches.

2 Esteem not of those men, whose hearts are wholly set upon the riches which
they possess: because not knowing how to use them, they are to be held like
unto those men that have a fair and goodly horse, but know not how to ride nor
manage him.

3 Riches are most commonly made the ministers and instruments of vices rather
then of virtues: and they entice and allure young persons to foolish
voluptuousness.

4 The Poet Anacreon having had five talents bestowed upon him by the tyrant
Policrates: and for two nights after having been very sad and pe^siue, and not
able to sleep or take his rest, carried him back again his five tale^ts, saying
unto him: this money is not to be valued or prized at so high a rate: as that
for the same, I should suffer my self to be disquieted with continual care
and pensiveness.

5 It is a very hard thing naturally for a man to refrain and bridle his
appetites but if it happen to be accompanied with abundance of wealth and
riches, then is the appetite utterly untameable.

6 Bion the Philosopher said; that it was a thing merely ridiculous, for a man
to set his study and desire upon riches which are given and gotten only by
fortune, by miserable sparing and pinching, and by wretched covetousness: and
are soon spent and dispersed by bounty.

7 Diogenes was wont to say: that it was almost impossible for virtue to
inhabit or dwell in that city or house where riches were abounding.

8 Pithagoras said: that men cannot easily reine nor hold in an horse without a
bridle: nor rule riches without great prudence.

9 Pla^o being demanded what things a man most needed in this life, answered:
First, to be free from treachery: that he come not to be murdered by treason:
and next, that he be not in too great needinesse and necessity of things
necessary.

10 Riches do commonly seduce and draw a man out of the right way.

11 He that puts his trust in his riches, is in the high way to ruin and
destruction.

12 As riches are but impediments to those that are wicked: so to good men they
give an aid and assistance to their virtues.

13 It is most certain, that it is impossible for any man to be excellent both
in riches and in goodness.

14 Rich men are called monyed men: but if they be covetous, they are poor in
their thoughts: and so likewise the poor are named needy persons and indigent:
but inwardly they are rich, (if they be contented.)

15 The Cinicke Philosophers did altogether despise vain glory, nobility and
riches.

16 Riches are the possessions of fortune.

17 The life of rich men is very miserable.

18 Excess and over great abundance of riches, are as the rudders of great
ships put to small barks, which cannot well stir and guide them.

19 Riches are the occasions of all kinds of mischiefs.

20 Amongst many men, they who do abound in wealth and riches, are held and
reckened for honest and good men.

Of Laws and customs.
CHAP. 24.
1 THe peoples of Tartaria do use to eat for three whole days together: and
are in all things obedient to their wives. And they never suffer any of their
daughters to be married, except she have first stain with her own hand, one of
their enemies.

2 The Licians do honor their women more then their men: and they take their
surnames of the mother and not of the father: and they leave their daughters to
be their heirs and the inheritours of their lands and not their sons.

3 The kings of Persia before they do sacrifice to their gods, do use to
dispute of religion: before they drink, they argue of temperance: and before
they go to the wars, they dispute of their strength and forces.

4 The Atlanticke peoples of Libia, amongst all their daughters do esteem of
her best, that keeps her virginity longest.

5 The Autyles a people of Lybia in times of war do use to fight by night,
and in the day they do make truce and an abstinence from wars.

6 The Mirines a people of Licia in the act of generation do use their women in
common: their children for five years are nourished in common, and after in
the sixth year they put all their children of that age together: and then they
compare the children with the men; and that man to whom any child is most like
in resemblance, has that given unto him to bring up as his own.

7 The laws command: That men accustomed to wickedness and viciousness
should be cut off, without being spared or concealed: and that they which are
attainted and convinced as guilty of any crime, should never be let go without
punishment.

8 Those laws which grow and arise of customs, are much stronger then those
that are made by learning and civil prudence.

9 As man is the best of all creatures using laws and justice: so is man the
worst of all creatures when he swarueth from law and justice.

10 The law is the Queen of all creatures, both mortal and immortal.

11 To a wise man God is a law: but to a fool his own appetite.

12 I see that the ruin of that city is at hand, wherein the laws have not
the command over the magistrate: but the magistrate rules over the laws.

13 Pausanias a captain of Athens, being demanded by one: wherefore certain
ancient laws remaining in force amongst them, were not abrogated and
discontinued? answered: It is necessary that the laws should bear rule over
men, and not men over the laws.

14 They which have too many laws, and too many penalties and punishments, by
mere constraint must become wicked.

15 The true laws are those that bring forth honest things, and not abundance
of gain and riches.

16 The fear of the laws does not hide the wickedness of offenders: but
defends them from licentiousness and liberty of doing ill.

17 Laws were ordained, to the intent the audacious actions of men might be
restrained: and that innocence might live secure and in assurance amongst the
vicious and wicked.

18 The law is nothing else then a rule of right or reason, derived from the
divinity of the Gods: which commands that which is good and honest, and
defends the contrary.

19 Solon said: That the laws were like unto Spiders webbes: because commonly
by the extremity and severity of laws, the poorer and weaker sort of men are
entrapped and brought to punishment, but the rich and mighty men do break
through them uncontrolled.

Of Renown and glory.
CHAP. 25.
1 Renown commonly has more fame then defame.

2 A Prince ought to be bred and brought up in glory.

3 Glory despised, by time comes to be greater.

4 All sorts of men are drawn in with the desire and study of glory: and
therefore every good man is guided by glory.

5 Democritus a most excellent Philosopher, did glory in that he came to
Athens unknown of any person.

6 Alexander the Great said: If I were Parmenio, I had rather have wealth then
glory: but now as I am, I know my self to be a king and not a Merchant.

7 Many men fear their renown: but few or none fear their conscience.

8 I have learned to be afraid of that renown which is dishonest and shameful.

9 Of all humane things that are voluble and subject to inconstancy: there is
none more unstable then renown and glory.

10 Diogenes the Philosopher said: That nobility and glory were a couerture
for malice.

11 When as Appius Claudius the Competitour of Scipio African, did commend
himself, for that he could salute all the Romans by their names: Scipio said
unto him: my care has always been to be known of all men, rather then to
know any man.

Of a short life and sickely.
CHAP. 26.
1 ARistotle being demanded what man was? answered: he is the example of
sickness: the pray of time: the scorn and play of fortune: the image of
ruin: the balance of envy and calamity: and for the rest he is nothing but
fleame and choler.

2 Simonides the Poet being demanded how long he had lived: answered: A very
little time, but many years.

3 The Philosopher Zenon said: That there is nothing whereof we are so poor as
of time. The life of man is but short: but art to heal the maladies and
diseases of the body, is longer and much more then man can attain unto.

4 Socrates said: thae he thought the gods, in regarding and beholding our
vain studies and desires, could not but laugh continually.

5 All our life is uncertain and without conjecture, as that which goes on
wandering without any faith or constancy, and with vain hopes in idle words,
it feeds the thoughts and cogitations of men. No man knows what will happen
in time to come: howbeit God governs all mortal men in the midst of all
perils and dangers: and many times on the contrary, he blows upon us a
strong wind or tempest of adversity.

6 Albeit this life be full of troubles and miseries, nevertheless it is
greedily desired of all men.

7 Life is good, if a man live virtuously: but it is evil if it be accompanied
with wickedness.

8 In the Isle of Taprobana it is said, that men live without grief.

9 If thou know how to use thy life well, it will be of long continuance.

10 Oh how late is that hour, for a man then to begin to live well, when he
must of necessity dye and depart out of this life!

11 The life of man is frail and short.

12 That life is pleasant which is led in honesty.

13 A quiet and peaceable life ought to be preferred before all other things.

14 A man's care and study ought to be, how he may pass his life time in joy
and contentment.

15 Without joy and love this life of ours is bitter and uncomfortable.

16 The torments of this life are of diverse sorts.

17 A short life cutteth a man off from long hopes.

18 Not he which lives long, but he that lives justly and virtuously, is
worthy to be honored and commended, notwithstanding that he live but a short
and small time.

Of Poverty despised.
CHAP. 27.
1 A Man has no greater enemy then poverty: the poor man is fearful in
every thing.

2 Diogenes being reproched by one because of his poverty, answered him,
saying: O wretch, thou did never see any man exercise tyranny for
poverty: but many tyrants do it to get wealth and riches.

3 If thou do not desire much and many things: that little which thou have will
seem much unto thee.

4 After that poverty became once to be held in contempt, and to be accounted
a thing disgracious amongst men, riches and wealth have ever since been sought
of men by all kind of wickedness and mischie^es

5 Poverty is content to satisfy the demand of desire.

6 There is no man living which is borne rich: but he may well be accounted
great, who in the midst of his riches does show himself to be poor.

7 Nature desires and is contented with a very little, but the fancy and
opinion of man coueteth much.

8 Honest poverty is a joyful and pleasant thing.

9 He is not poor that possesses small wealth: but he which desires reth
much.

Of Poverty commended.
CHAP. 28.
1 ARistides, Phocion, and Socrates Athenians, Epaminondas also and Pelopidas
Thebans, all of them most famous and renowned persons, were very poor men: and
yet they were better, more honest and just men the^ any other of the several
nations and countries where they lived.

2 Diogenes being vpbraided by one that he was poor, answered: I never saw any
man tormented for his poverty: but I have seen many p^nished for their vices.

3 To be poor by nature is no shame unto a man: but we hate to see any man
made poor by any evil or unhappy occasion.

4 There is one thing only for which poverty ought to be beloved: because
that makes show and trial of whom thou art beloved.

Of Beauty.
CHAP. 29.
1 THere is no man be he never so beautiful and of an excellent spirit, that
can therefore boast or vaunt of himself: for in a very short time he loses
the flower of all his pride.

2 The Philosopher Diogenes did use to call those harlots and strumpets which
were fair and beautiful, by the name and title of queens: because men held
them in no less reverence then queens: and most men were ready to do
whatsoever they commanded them.

3 It is a most pleasant and joyful thing to regard and behold beautiful
persons: but to touch and handle them is very danngerous.

4 Fire does burn only near at hand: but beautiful faces, be they never so
far off, do inflame and burn men.

5 Beauty being natural and without art, is much more pleasing and
delightful.

6 Beauty is a very frail thing: and is soon diminished by time.

7 That beauty is passing rare, which is without any fault or defect.

8 Beauty ought not to be adjudged by night.

9 Beauty unto many has been the cause of extreme damage.

10 Beauty only has this good fortune, that above all other things it is
exceeding glorious and amiable.

11 Aristotle said: That in one recommendation, beauty had more force and
valor, then all the letters missiue of the world.

Of Audaciousnnesse, or audacitie.
CHAP. 30.
1 Fly infamy sooner then any danger whatsoever: for certainly it becomes
none but cowards to be fearful and timorous.

2 Audacitie does far surpass the mea^u^e of all forces.

3 A^^hida^us a captain of the Laced^monians, seeing his son combat most
obstinately against the Athenians, said unto him. Either add more strengrh to
thy forces, or leave thy audacitie.

4 Strength with prudence does much profit and help any man: but without it
the same is very hurtful.

5 In things of great danger, hardiness and audacitie begun with reason, is
highly to be commended: because it is most certain that this is the true
fortitude: but fierceness without reason is to be held no other then mere
temeritie.

6 It seems that the audacious person is arrogant and a dissembler of his
force.

7 Audacious persons are headlong before time of peril* and when they are
near danger, they turn their backs.

8 When strength enters into actions that are perilous without an honest
occasion, it is called temerity.

9 In these days, it is lawful to use audacitie in stead of wisdom and
prudence.

Of Piety and Clemency.
CHAP. 31.
1 Piety in my judgment is the foundation of all virtue.

2 This is true clemency, when one pardons the life of another as his own
proper life.

3 There is nothing more commendable then clemency: nor is there any thing
more worthy of a great and noble man, then to be soon appeased.

4 Lucius Paulus a captain of the Romans, having taken Perseus king of
Macedonie, and entertaining this his prisoner with great humanity, he said
unto him: If it be an honor for a man to suppress and subdue his enemy, it
is no less praise worthy to have compassion of him that is fallen into
misfortune.

5 God keeps the good and virtuous man from all evil and mishap: the only
good thing that can be in man is piety and religion.

6 Piety is the true knowledge of God.

7 They which have written of piety, have given the first place unto the
burying of the dead.

8 Clemency is not so fit and convenient to any, as to kings and Princes.

9 Piety was never yet rewarded with any punishment.

Of Liberty and servitude.
CHAP. 32.
1 Whosoever accompanies with a tyrant, although he be in liberty, yet he is
his servant.

2 Liberty ought not to be lost without loss of life.

3 All kind of servitude is miserable, but that especially is intolerable,
when a man is enforced to serve one that is dishonest and vicious.

4 It is fitter for any man to rejoice when he has done any good service, and
has performed the part of a good servant: then when he has played the part of
a great master and commander.

5 He serves honestly, who gives place unto time.

6 If any man have found a servant that is willing and diligent, he can never
have a better or more precious treasure.

7 There cannot be a heavier charge, then for a man to have a servant which
will take upon him to know more then appertains unto him: and there cannon be
a worse thing or more unprofitable, in any house, then such a one.

8 A certain Spartan said: We only of all the Grecians have learned to be
truly free, and not to be subject to any.

9 Caesar desired to be despised, and to have nothing of himself, to the
intent his soldiers might be frank and free.

10 It is better to live free with a little out of fear, then to be in
servitude with much and great abundance.

Of Ignorance.
CHAP. 33.
1 IT is a sign of great folly for a man to blame those things which he
understands not.

2 They may well be reputed for ignorant persons, who condemn things they know
not, notwithstanding they deserve to be abhorred.

3 It is a very unjust and unseemly thing, that ignorant persons should be
preferred before those that are skillful masters in any faculty: or new men
before the old and ancient: or fools before those that be wise and learned.

4 It is a matter worthy to be considered^ what and how great a mischief
ignorance is unto men: it being so, that by the same, the faults which we do
are concealed and kept from us.

5 It is better to be a beggar the^ to be ignorant.

6 Ignorance and too much abundance of speech are faults that have dominion
over the most part of men.

7 Ignorant persons commonly do live viciously: the life of which men is their
death.

8 The Poet Ausonius did make a mock and a jest of the ignorant Philomuso, who
used to buy many books, because he would be thought to be learned.

9 Catullus said: that many did use to buy books to their great charge and
expenses, although they knew little or nothing at all.

Of Doctrine and a good spirit.
CHAP. 34.
1 IN my judgment it is not too late for any of what age soever, to learn
that which is necessary.

2 Choose thee such a master, at whom thou may take more occasion of
admiration by seeing, then by hearing of him.

3 Honorable actions and customs are not so much gotten to man by nature, as
by doctrine and learning.

4 Who can endure to see a rich man placed in the seat of honor and dignity?
and that one which is more honest and of greater wisdom, should be despised
and contemned?

5 In very truth, there is nothing more divine, and whereof a man ought to take
counsel sooner then of his own learning, and by his friends.

6 Certainly the spirit of a man cannot devise to make any artificial
workmanship perfect without doctrine: neither can doctrine come to perfection,
without a good spirit.

7 Oh how often are the most excellent spirits concealed in secret, and remain
unknown!

8 Even as the health is the preservation of the body: so is doctrine the
safeguard of the soul.

9 A good spirit may well be hidden under any skin whatsoever.

10 Alexander desired to surmount and excel all others rather in knowledge and
learning, then by numbers of soldiers and men at arms.

11 Many men of most excellent wisdom and knowledge, have bin of this mind:
that learning and the study of good letters was the only remedy against all
adversities.

12 Men who are of a subtle and crafty spirit, are to be feared and
mistrusted.

13 The spirits and minds of men generally are intentive to the getting and
heaping of riches.

14 Those men who are of an excellent and extraordinary spirit, for the most
part are continually blamed.

15 Learned men do live ever.

16 Desire only to please them that are learned, and care not for the vulgar
and common sort.

17 To noble spirits, commonly short life is incident.

18 It is seldom seen, that learned men are ouerpestered with multitude of
affairs.

19 Propertius said: that there was no such excellency as to be made famous
and renowned by the poems and verses of Poets, for that the goods of the mind
are perpetual, and continue for ever.

20 Man gets wisdom and prudence by a good spirit, and understanding, and
not by age.

21 Plato Museus, Melampus, Eudoxus, Licurgus, Solon, Orpheus, Homer,
Pithagoras and Democritus, being all men of excellent skill and science, yet
went into Egypt to increase their knowledge and learning.

22 Socrates admonished all such as have a desire to get fame and renown: that
they never come to have enmity or contention with the learned, because men of
learning and knowledge have a great power both on the one part and the other.

23 Octauian Augustus by all means possible that he could devise, did favor the
learned and ingenions men of his time.

Of Abstinencie and Continence.
CHAP. 35.
1 I Hold that they only are troublesome and tedious to our ears, who fall
into the praise and commendation of voluptuous pleasures.

2 The Ambassadors of the Samnites being come with great treasure to the camp
of the Romans, and purposing to make a present thereof, unto Fabritius: he
suddenly laid his hands on his ears, on his eyes, on his nostrels, on his
mouth, on his throat, and on his belly, and said unto them: As long as I can
strive and get the masterie over all these my members which I have touched, I
will never have need of any thing that may be an ornament unto me.

3 Alexander the great having taken the daughters of Darius king of Persia: and
so likewise Scipio the Africane having in his possession the daughter of his
enemy, neither of them would take the pain to go and see them, judging it to
be a thing dishonorable and nothing seemly for them, who were the conquerors
of their enemies, to be in any sort subjected unto those, whom they had
conquered and taken captives.

4 The continency of Alexander the Great was such, as he would never be drawn
by constraint to see any woman, but he ever showed himself most haughty
toward such as were fairest and most beautiful: but to all others he was
exceeding full of courtesy and humanity.

5 Amongst domestical things, continency deserves the chiefest commendation:
and amongst public things, dignity and estimation.

6 Continency sustaineth and de^fendeth all the virtues of the mind: as a most
firm foundation and underprop of the rest of the edifices.

7 He that passes measure in drinking, is no more master of his thoughts nor
of his tongue: and without shame he speaks of al dishonest things and such as
are unseemly: and of a man he becomes a child.

8 The gold-finers make a trial of the goodness of gold and silver by the
fire: but wine manifests the thoughts of a man, be he never so prudent.

9 A ship, a coach or any other exercise governed by a drunken man suddenly
runs to ruin and perdition.

10 It is a thing of exceeding great difficulty for a man to conceal and hide
his ignorance: but much more difficult is it for a man to conceal any thing
when he has drunk well.

11 Socrates said: that true continency, was to shun and avoid the pleasures
of the body.

12 Pericles a noble captain of Athens, when Sophocles the Poet showed unto
him a very fair young boy, said unto him: O Sophocles, it is very fit and
convenient for a modest and temperate captain, that not only his hands, but
his eyes also should be continent.

13 Hieron the tyrant having heard Epicarmus the comicall Poet use some
dishonest and lascivious words in the presence of his wife condemned him in a
cerraine fine for his punishment.

14 Philon of Thebes being disposed to give certain things unto Philip the
father of Alexander, who had conquered the city of Thebes: he said unto him: I
pray thee do not deprive me of the glory and honor of my conquest: for by thy
benefit and courtesy which thou offer^st me, thou would make me to be not
as a Conqueror, but as one rather overcome and conquered.

15 Cato the elder making an oration against the prodigality and superfluous
expenses of the Romans, said, that it was no easy matter for a man to use
speech against the belly which was without ears: and that he marvelled how
that city could be long preserved from destruction, wherein a fish should be
of more value and cost more then a Beef.

16 Antiochus the third king of Syria, seeing a very fair Nun in the city
of Ephesus, consecrated and vowed to the Goddess Diana, speedily departed
thence, for fear lest her beauty should draw and constrain him to do that
thing which was evil, eue^ against the opinion of his own mind and spirit.

17 After that Carthage was taken by Scipio, certain soldiers presented him
with a very beautiful maiden: to whom he answered: If I were a private man
and not a General, I would gladly accept of your present.

18 Pythagorus did esteem it much better to die, then for a man to pol^lute
and contaminate his mind with incontinencie and other vices.

19 Alexander the great having sent his orators to Zenocrates with a present
of more then fifty talents: he invited (according to his usual custom) the
said Ambassadors to his sparie and sober dinner, and said unto them, Tell
Alexander from me, that as long as I have wherewith to maintain this life, I
shall not know what to do with these fifty talents.

20 Demonsthenes said, not every pleasure, but that only which is honest and
virtuous ought to be chosen and embraced.

21 The temperate man, although he have not the ordinary use of those things
which bring pleasure, yet is he in want of none of them.

22 Diogenes being gone to Delphos, and seeing a statue of gold made in the
name of Phirna a most famous strumpet, he said: This is for the intemperancie
of the Greeks.

23 The Philosopher Epictetus said: That no man ought to adorn and trim up
his house with fair tables and pictures, but with continency and good
customs.

Of Prudence.
CHAP. 36.
1 THe king Darius the father of Xerxes said: that he came to be much more
prudent by the experience of the battles which he had had, and of his
forepassed perils and adversities.

2 Paulus Emilius assailing certain places in Macedonie, Scipio Nasica said
unto him: Wherefore do thou not rather affront the camp of thy enemies
which is furnished and fortified against thee? To whom he answered:
Certainly, if I were of thy age, I would do so as thou aduisest me.

3 Denis the tyrant having sent certain goodly vestments to the daughters of
Lisander for a present: he sent the same back again unto him, saying: that he
was greatly afraid lest his daughters with those habites should appear much
more deformed then they were.

4 Archidamus being praised by certain men, who demanded of him in what time
he had subdued the peoples of Arcadia? he answered: that it had been better for
him to have overcome them by prudence then by force.

5 Prudence has great need of fortune to accompany it: but wisdom only has
no need of any counsel for the acquisition and attainement of that end
whereunto it tends: because it applies and keeps her self continually to
things that are eternal.

6 Prudence properly is a virtue belonging and appertaining to a Prince.

7 Whosoever is prudent must needs be temperate and constant: he that is
constant is not troubled: he that is not troubled with any thing, must of
necessity be without grief and sorrow: he therefore that is prudent, cannot
choose but be happy.

8 Prudence is compounded of the knowledge of good and evil things.

9 Prudence of all other virtues is the greatest: for by it all things both
civil and domestical are guided and governed: and the name thereof is
temperance and justice.

10 They are to be esteemed and held for prudent and just men, who know both
how to say and do those things which are needful and convenient to be
observed toward God and men.

Of Force.
CHAP. 37.
1 THey are not called nor truly accounted valiant and courageous persons, who
do and offer injury: but they which do repel and keep injury and violence
from them. And in truth he only is of a valiant and constant courage, who is
not troubled with adversity.

2 He ought to be esteemed the most stout and valiant, who drives away from
him covetous persons as his enemies.

3 He is said and held to be a valiant man, who endures and fears the things
that ought to be feared and endured, upon all occasions both whence, how, and
when it is needful: and he likewise that is confident in himself and in his
own courage.

4 Fortitude or valiantness is the science and knowledge of things which are
to be held, and not to be feared, as well in danger of wars as of all other
things.

5 If force and valor do hazard it self into perils and dangers, not
constrained by necessity, or upon any occasion not honest: it is no longer to
be reputed for valor, but rashness and temeritie.

6 Scipio the African seeing a soldier of his to show his buckler with bragges
and ostentation, said unto him: My friend, true it is, thou have a fair
buckler, but it is a more seemly and decent thing for a Roman, to have his
hopes depending rather upon his right then his left hand.

7 Caius Popilius being sent by the Senate of Rome as Ambassador to Antiochus
king of Syria, to show unto him, that their pleasure was, he should desist from
molesting the children and orphans of the late deceased Ptolome king of Egypt,
was by the said Antiochus saluted and entertained with great courtesy: which
notwithstanding he would scarce vouchsafe to requite with thanks, but
delivering him his letters, and being answered upon the reading of them by the
king, that he would consult with his Counsel upon the contents thereof,
Popilius having a white rod in his hand, made therewith a round circle about
the king where he stood, and said unto him: Sir, I would wish you even here as
you stand to advise your self, and to give me your present answer. The Nobles
there present with the king, marvelled at that his exceeding greatness of
courage: and Antiochus himself immediately answered: that he would do all that
the Romans required: whereupon Popilius instantly saluted him with great
reverence, and embraced him as the friend of the Romans.

8 Agesilaus the Lacedemonian being demanded, which of the two was the better
virtue, either fortitude or justice, answered: That valor without justice was
of no fruit nor profit

9 Pausanias a captain of the Lacedaemonians hearing Pedaretus say, Oh what a
multitude of enemies do come against us! answered: so many the more shall we
have the killing of.

10 Agesilaus being demanded by one, why the city of Sparta was not environed
with walls: he showed unto him the citizens armed, and said: Behold these be the
walls of the Lacedaemonians.

11 Argeleonida the mother of Brasidas a renowned captain of the
Lacedaemonians, being given to understand by the Ambassadors of Greece, that
her son was slain in battle, demanded of them if he died valiantly: the
Ambassadors answered, that there was never man that died with more honor and
renown. To whom she replied: O my masters, for all this do you not know, that
though my son Brasidas was a man of great worth, yet has our city of
Sparta a great number better and more worthy then he.

12 Philip king of Macedonie being come with great fury into the territories
of the Lacedaemonians, one said unto him: Oh what a world of miseries will the
Lacedaemonians be enforced to endure, if they do not reconcile themselves to the
good grace and favor of king Philip: Whereunto Daminda answered: Thou speak
like a woman: what misery can we suffer, if we be not afraid of death?

13 When the Ambassadors of Pirrhus being come before the Lacedaemonians did
menace them, that if they did not frame themselves to the good liking and
contentation of their king, they should find that his forces were greater then
theirs. Dercilida answered: Certainly if your king be a God, yet we fear him
not, because we never did him any injury: but if he be a man, assuredly he is
no better then we are.

Of Justice and judgment.
CHAP. 38.
1 IF thou will judge uprightly, thou ought to have a regard nor respect to
nothing but to justice only.

2 In India he which is most learned is made the minister of their sacrifices:
And he demands no other thing of the gods, but justice.

3 As the touchstone by the touch approves the gold, not the gold the stone:
so the just and upright man which sits in judgment, is not corrupted with
gold.

4 He is not only just which does no injury nor wrong, but he also, who having
power to do wrong, does shun and avoid the occasions thereof, to the intent
he may not do any. Again, he is not just which receives small gifts: but he
is just, who having power to take great bribes, does abstain from doing it.
Besides, he is not just that observes al things: but he is just, who with an
vncorrupt and free nature, will rather be, then seem and appear to be just.

5 Those men are chiefly, and in the first rank to be praised, who prefer
not any matter of profit, before honesty and justice.

6 Science and knowledge separated from justice and other virtues, ought not to
be termed wisdom, but craft and cunning.

7 God in no place, nor in any manner is to be held unjust, but most perfectly
and absolutely just: and there is nothing that more or better resembles him,
then that man who amongst us is most just.

8 The man that is just, though he be a stranger, is not only to be preferred
before a free borne citizen: but before those also that are of a man's own
kindred.

9 There is nothing, whereof can come profit or commodity by force, if justice
be absent: but if all were just we should have no need offorce.

10 They only are to be held and received as friends unto God, to whom justice
is welcome as a friend.

11 There were certain which said unto Antigonus king of Macedonie, that all
things were honest and just unto a king: to whom he answered: It is true
indeed: but that is to such kings as are barbarous, but unto us those things
only are honest which are indeed honest, and those only just which are indeed
just.

12 The Poet Simonides contending against Themistocles, and affirming that in a
certain controversy he had not judged according to right, he answered him:
that he could not be a good Poet, if he should compose his verses out of that
form and number which appertained unto the^: even so I (quoth he) should not
be a good citizen, if I should judge beyond the laws.

13 It is the office of a good and sage Judge to take counsel of the law, of
religion, of faith and of equity: and also to remove far from him
luxuriousness, hatred, envy, fear and covetousness.

14 The precepts of justice are very bitter to the vicious and ill livers.

15 Justice is the mistress and queen of all virtues.

16 Cities are then well (...) when the unjust are seuere^^ (...).

17 Judges have great (...) of virtue: and especially of (...) and prudence.

Of a wife and of marriage.
CHAP. 39.
1 THe peoples of Lacedemonia had this law: that whosoever did not marry should
be punished: and another punishment was ordained for them that married too late:
and a third and most grievous punishment for him that married an evil wife.

2 She cannot be thought a true mother of her son, who hireth a strange
nurse to give him suck, and denies him her own teates: the two dugges of a
woman are not given her only for an ornament to her breast, but also for the
nourishment of her children.

3 If thou have a fair wife, thou shall be in danger: if she be deformed thou will repent thee to have married her: the mean and indifferent fortune
therefore is the best and most assured.

4 Socrates being demanded, why he did not ^ue a divorce between him and his
wife Xantippe, who was a woman of a most perverse and crooked disposition, and
used him very injuriously: he answered: Because by enduring within my house a
wife that is so disloyal and disobedient, I have learned to suffer more easily
when I am abroad the injuries offered me by other men.

5 A wise man may take a wife if she be fair, well behaved, and of a noble
lineage.

6 The principal and chiefest virtue appertaining to womankind, is pudicitie
and shamefastness: which being once lost in any woman, all other virtues are
clean gone and decayed in her.

7 Amongst all the wars of Christians, the worst are the assaults and attempts
given by men to the undermining of Chastity: where the war is continual
without end, and the conquest is little or none at all.

8 There are 3. good things in marriage: lineage, faith, and a sacrament.

9 The pudicitie and honor of a woman cannot be violated, if her mind be sound
and preserved in chastity.

10 Chastity in a woman is the fortress and bulwark of her beauty.

11 To be governed by the wife, is an exceeding great injury to the honor and
reputation of the husband.

12 Like as the worm eats out the wood: so does the ill wife consume the
husband.

13 It is much better to dwell in the common high way, then to abide in a house
with a wife full of words.

14 Hell, the love of a woman, the dry earth, and the fire, are never
satisfied, nor ever cry, ho.

15 Martia the daughter of Cato, being a widow, was demanded why she did not
marry again. Her answer was: Because I cannot find any man, that had rather
have me then my goods.

16 To nourish or maintain a poor wife is a thing very difficult, but to
endure a rich wife is a hellish torment.

17 Theana a Greek Lady of notable fame and memory, by chance on a time
drawing up her smock so high over her arm as she showed her naked elbow: One
standing by said unto her: Oh what a fair white arm is there! to whom she
answered: and yet for all that it is not commonly open: and in truth it is very
requisite that not only the elbow of a chaste woman should not be public, but
secret in her speech likewise.

18 The wife of Philo being demanded, why she did not wear jewels at the
public feasts, answered: It suffices me that I have for my ornament the
virtue of my husband.

19 Cato the elder condemned a Senator to be banished, because he had kissed
his own wife in the presence of his daughter.

20 Even as the mirror or glass does not yield any more profit, in being set
out and garnished with precious stones, or with gold and silver, if it do not
perfectly represent the form that is presented unto it: So a rich wife is
little worth or of small estimate, if her life and behavior be not suitable
and convenient to the customs and fashions of her husband.

21 Those husbands which will not recreate and sport themselves, drink, laugh,
and make merry, and use other amiable pleasures with their own wives: it is
sign that they will seek and take their secret solace by stealth with other
women.

22 We see that the Moon is most bright and clear shining, when she is far
off from the Sun: and when she is near it she becomes obscure, and her
light is darkened: but a good wife is of a contrary quality, because her
husband being in place, she cares not to be seen of every body: but when he
is away, she keeps her self private, and shut up within her house.

23 The lawful wives of the kings of Persia, were accustomed to sit at meals
with their husbands: where if they listed to use any lascivious or light
behavior at the table, as to admit any cu^tisanes, or to have any dancing or
reuelling, they would never suffer their queens to be present at such sports:
because they would not have them to participate of their intemperancie.

24 A young woman of Sparta being questioned by one to tell him if she had ever
entreated the company of any man: she answered him, no truly: but a man is
welcome unto me: teaching thereby all honest women not to be desirous to seek
their pleasures, but to attend til their husbands come to offer it them.

25 The husband that takes a delight in lascivious pleasure, and is willing
that his wife should yield her consent and good liking thereunto: in my advise
may be resembled unto him, that commands his wife to fight with his enemies,
to whom he has already yielded himself a prisoner.

26 The foundation of all feminine vices is avarice and covetousness.

27 Necessity is a most disloyal guardian, and keeper of the chastity of
women.

28 Many women care not though they be poor of good counsel: but most
skillful in all wicked subtleties.

29 The death of the husband does not cut off the love of a chaste wife.

30 The woman is more subject to love then the man.

31 That bed is full of disquiet and contention where the wife brings with
her a great dowry or portion.

32 Wandering and outloaping wives are easily corrupted and seduced.

33 By how much more a woman is kept straight so much the more is she desirous
of luxuriousness and lasciviousness.

34 Some women do more gladly read things that are lascivious then such as are
honest.

35 A woman is (as it were) a brief and compendious way to all mischieues: and
an artificial invention of all wickedness.

36 Nature has denied unto women strengh and great force: for otherwise their
courage being strengthened with trumperie and deceit would be vnexpugnable and
unconquerable.

37 A woman is always mutable and unconstant.

38 There be three things that be notable evils: the sea, the fire, and a woman.

39 Diog^nes the Philosopher was wont to commend those young men that did
promise to marie and take a wife, but did never take any at all.

Of Fortune.
CHAP. 40.
1 APelles a painter of Athens, being demanded why he painted Fortune standing
upon her feet: answered: because she cannot sit.

2 Denis the younger being demanded, how it could be, that his father of a
private man had attained to a tyrannical government: and that he the son of
a tyrant was expelled and chased from his rule and scepter? he answered:
Truly, my father left me his tyranny, but not his fortune.

3 Philip the father of Alexander^, having in one day many good fortunes
befallen him, said: O fortune for these so great and notable good fortunes,
grant me that I may have but one unfortunate day.

4 In all adversities and misfortunes, the most unhappy condition of the
unfortunate, is to remember that once he was happy.

5 The Poet Ion said: that fortune and wisdom being two diverse and far
different things, did make notwithstanding and bring forth most like and
semblable effects: because both the one and the other did exalt, adorn, and
lift men up to the highest degree of glory.

6 The goods of fortune are such, as a man has need of reason for the use of
things, and of patience in the necessity of them.

7 He which is ashamed of his fortune, is worthy of all misfortune.

8 As every man can use his happy and better fortunes: so is he most
excellent, when he can use well his adverse fortunes.

9 Fortune is more favorable to the unjust then to the just: as therein
showing her puissance and temeritie.

10 He which is held too much embraced and favored of fortune, becomes to be
little better then a fool.

11 It seldom happens but that fortune does offend the greatest and most
excellent virtues.

12 No man ought to refuse that fortune which all others do endure.

13 Fortune is a sudden occurrence of things unthought of and unexpected.

14 Fortune is a proud Goddess, drunken and audacious.

15 All things are governed by the will of Fortune.

16 Pompey the great said: alas Fortune, seeing thou do rend and break in
sunder all things, I think that I have not any thing which I can esteem as my
own.

17 The same Pompey said likewise, I never had any prosperous or happy fortune
that made me proud: neither did ever any adversity make me fearful.

18 Fortune gives too much to many: but to none that which is sufficient.

Of Realms, Princes, and Magistrates.
CHAP. 41.
1 THere is none whatsoever advanced, or that can attain to be a Prince
without the will and permission of God.

2 Principality and sovereignty of command is given by fatal disposition.

3 Kings are ordained and created by Jupiter.

4 It is not necessary that any should understand things better then a Prince,
whose knowledge and learning should be a help to al his subjects.

5 A good Prince ought to carry himself toward his subjects, as a father
amongst his children, and as God does toward the world.

6 The Poet Pindarus said, that a king was (as it were) a custom and example
to all others.

7 A King or Prince ought to show himself terrible and severe rather by
threats and menaces, then by punishments and executions.

8 The virtue of a Prince is to be valiant, just, severe, grave, magnanimous, a
benefactor to many, bountiful and liberal.

9 A good prince is known by the good qualities and gifts of his mind: and
not by gold, or rich and sumptuous apparel.

10 The sovereign and chief wisdom of a king, is to know how to govern
himself.

11 The friends of a Prince ought to feel his power and puissance, rather by
his benefits, then by injuries and oppressions.

12 The people must needs complain, when wicked persons come to be their
Princes.

13 The king Anaxilaus being demanded, what thing was to be said most happy
in any Realm? answered: Not to be overcome by any benefits.

14 Alexander complaining himself, for that his father had left so many sons
by diverse women, who might pretend title to his realm and kingdom: king
Philip his father said unto him: Labor to become an honest and good man, and
then by thy own deserts and good behavior, and not by mine, thou shall be
sure to enjoy and inherit my kingdom.

15 Alcamenes a Spartan being demanded, how a realm might long continue in
happy estate, answered: When the king that reigns over it, shall not care
for his own private gain and profit.

16 In each commonwealth, this above all things ought to be regarded and
established, that offices be not set to sale for gain or rewards.

17 The public wealth is the life of a city: and where the laws have no
force, it cannot be named a weal public.

18 The Philosopher Antisthenes was demanded, why he said, that hangmen had
more humanity then tyrants? Because (quoth he) only guilty persons and
offenders are put to death by the hangman: but tyrants do kill and murder the
harmless and innocent.

19 A man is then fit to rule and govern, when he has first learned how to
govern.

20 The Philosopher Bion said: That it was needful for a good and just
magistrate to depart and leave his charge in the commonwealth, rather with
increase of honor then of wealth.

21 Those Princes that punish them who do outrage and injury to others, are
the cause that others will abstain from profering the like injuries.

22 In a certain great and open place within Thebes, were set up the images of
Judges without hands, and the chief Judges with their eyes blindfolded:
whereby they showed that justice ought to be without any corruption of bribes
or rewards.

23 When thou shall be placed in any public charge or office, admit not about
thee lewd or dishonest men for thy ministers: because the evils which they
commit, will be imputed and attributed unto thee.

24 He which is in an office or place of command, and makes laws for other
men, ought not to govern only by might and stronghand: but by his dignity,
understanding, and other virtues, he ought to make himself known above other
men.

25 Like as the sun which is the life of the world, does not attend nor
expect, that the morning should entreat it to arise in the East: so the prince
should not look by praises and flatteries to do good deeds, but he ought of
himself to enlarge his hand and mind to bountiful and liberal and actions.

Of Captains of war, and of their commauudements in time of battle.
CHAP. 42.
1 EPaminondas a Captain of the Thebanes, had never any mutiny amongst his
soldiers.

2 Agesilaus king of the Lacedaemonians, being demanded, what thing was
needful and necessary to a good captain, answered: Audacitie against his
enemies, benevolence to his soldiers in such things as are convenient, and
counsel for the managing of his affairs.

3 Pelopidas a captain of the Thebanes being to go to his army, his wife
prayed him that when he came into the field, he would have a special care to
his own safety: to whom he answered: that as touching that matter, she should
do well to counsel others so to do, but for his part he held it the part of a
captain and commander, to have a special regard to the safety of his
citizens.

4 The camp of the Numantines in Spain, having of a long time used to be
victorious against all the captains that came against them with the Roman
forces, seeing afterward that Scipio came as General against them, by whom
they were defeated and slaughtered: the Senators of Numantia did exclaim
against their people and soldiers, reproching them, for that they had so
shamefully betaken themselves to flight: unto whom a certain Numantine
soldier said in this manner: My Lords, I would you should understand, that in
the camp of the Romans there are still the same beasts that were there
before, but they have not the same shepherd.

5 Cecilius Met^llus a Roman, having pitched his camp against the Almaines in
a very dry place, where his people were much pained with thirst and want of
water, the river running close by the rampart of his enemies; in a di^contented
humor, pointing with his finger to the valley beneath his camp which was full
of water, he showed the same unto his soldiers and said unto them: There my
masters you may have water enough and drink your fills, if you list pain your
selves to take it.

6 Lauinius a Roman having taken the city of Corinth, did not carry away any
riches or treasure to his own house: and albeit all Italy were enriched with
the pillage of that city: yet was he in such poverty and necessity, as the
Senate of Rome did marry his daughter at the common charge of the city.

7 Quintus Fabius Minutius being advised by his son to seize upon a certain
place, as a thing which he might do with the loss of a very few men: he said
unto him: Will thou be one of those few?

8 Scipio the African being accused by one, that he was always fighting, and
in the field, answered: It is true, for my mother bred me from the cradle to be
a captain and a soldier.

9 Marcus Iiuius being exhorted by some to pursue without ceassing the camp of
Hasdarubal, which he had defeated and put to flight: answered: Let them alone,
let some of the^ live, that they may carry to our enemies the news of our
victory.

10 Chabius a captain of Athens said: that those captains knew well how to
command, who could discern and know the plots and purposes of their enemies.

11 Lamacus a Lacedemonian, reprehending a certain captain for a fault which
he had committed: and he telling him, that he would not commit the like
oversight again: Lamacus answered: that in war it was not fit for any to
err twice: because in the first, special regard ought to be had, that no fault
be committed.

12 Antigonus king of Macedony being demanded, in what manner he ought to
as^aile his enemies? he answered: Either by policy and cunning, or by force:
either openly or secretly.

13 The king Pirrhus said unto one to whom he had given a commission to leauie
soldiers: do thou make choice of them which be great: and I will make them
stout and valiant.

14 Tiberius Scaurus a Captain of the Romans being certified, how his son
was put to flight by the Tarentines, commanded him, that during his life he
should never presume to come into his presence: in so much as the young man
being surprised with shame and ignominy died for very grief.

Of diverse and prompt Answers.
CHAP. 43.
1 PHilip the father of Alexander having the ankle of his foot broken, and his
Physician daily demanding money of him: he said unto him: Go too, take as much
money as thou will, for thou have the key in thy own keeping.

2 The same king Philip being once laid to sleep about noonetime: the Greeks
that came to speak with him, did murmr, in being made to attend him: to whom
Parmenio said: Marvel not if Philip be now a sleep: for he many times waketh
when you sleep.

3 Alexander the Great being to make a sore journey against Darius: a certain
soldier came unto him in a great heat and told him: that he had heard diverse
of his soldiers say, that they would not allow any of their part of the pray or
booty unto the king: who smiling thereat answered presently: Thou tellest me
good news, and that which I take for a sign of good fortune: for now I see
that my soldiers have resolved rather to vanquish their enemies then to fly
away.

4 The Athenians having received an answer from the Oracle, warning them, that
there was one man in Athens who was contrary and opposite to the wills and
opinions of all the rest, and wishing them to search out by some means or
other who it should be: Phocion suddenly said: I only am the man, who do not
take pleasure in any thing which the common people either does or says.

5 Cicero being demanded by Metellus who was his father, answered: Whosoever
should ask thee this question, it would be hard for thee to answer it, by
reason of thy mother. This he said, because he knew that the mother of Metellus
was held a woman scarce honest.

6 Ag^sides king of the Lacedemonions hearing a certain Orator extolling a
very small matter even to the heavens, said: This man is no good shoemaker: for
he would put a great shoe on a little foot.

7 Cleomen^s the Lacedemonian hearing a certain Logitian discoursing of force
and prowess, fell out into a loud laughter: to whom the S^phister said: O
Cleomenes, do thou which art a king laugh, because I discourse offorce!
Cleomenes answered: My friend, so would I do if I did hear a swallow speak of
force and strength: but if an Eagle did speak thereof, I should think well
thereof.

8 And^oclidas of Sparta being blamed by an Athenian, which said unto him: you
Lacedaemonians are ignorant of letters, answered: Then are we of all others the
only men, who have not learned any evil of you.

9 Archidamus the son of Ag^silaus having received a very arrogant letter
from king Philip, returned him in writing this answer: Before that we come to
get the victory of thee, I would wish thee (if thou will) to measure thy own
shadow: for I do not think that thou will find it now to be greater, then it
has bin heretofore.

10 Eudamidas the son of Archidamus, seeing Xenocrates now grown old,
disputing with one of his familiars, demanded of him who that man was:
whereunto answer being made, that he was one of the most wise and sagest men
that knew how to search out virtue* he replied, And when trow you will he use
virtue, that now at these years is but seeking and searching for it.

11 Pausanias after he was sent into exile, giving great commendations of the
Lacedaemonians, a stranger said unto him: Why art not thou then in Sparta? he
answered: Because it is not the custom of Physicians to dwell with them that be
sound and healthful: but in that place where men are sick and diseased.

12 Archidamus being demanded by one, what territories the Lacedaemonians
possessed, answered: So much as they could get and purchase by the sword.

13 There was one that blamed Ethecateus the Orator, who having one day dined
with Archidamidas, did not speak a word during all the time they were at meat:
to whom Archidamidas made this answer: Thou ought to know, that he which
knows how to speak well, knows also the time when to speak.

14 Iphicrates the Athenian being demanded by a certain Orator, what place
he had in the army, (because he thought him a man exceeding hardy and cruel:)
Why (quoth he) what art thou? a man at arms, or a footman, an archer, or a
light horseman? he answered: I am none of all these: but I am he which have
learned to command over all these whom thou have named.

Of Virtue.
CHAP. 44.
1 THe practice of virtue is seen to be ever conversant about the affections
and the actions, in which consists much, little and a mean. It many times
falls out, that we fear one more and another less: that one is confident,
another desires: one is fierce, and another is angry and choleric: and there
is not any good either in the one sort or other: and especially when it is
needful, and to who^, and for what occasion, and how. But mediocritie is the
best, the which of it self properly is the true virtue: Then virtue is an
habit of election which consists in the mean, which men call mediocritie.

2 I have made search if it be possible for a man to know those things which
are manifest in virtue: but I could never yet find them.

3 It appertains unto the virtue of the sex feminine to govern the house
well and rightly, and to have the custody, and looking to domestical matters,
and to be obedient to her husband.

4 Force, wisdom, temperance, magnificence, are virtues with many others: but
virtue cannot be caught: seeing then that virtue cannot be had by doctrine, it
is not a science.

5 If virtue do fail and escheat in man, (which no man can deny:) then does
felicity also fail in him.

6 Virtue is a thing which is able to give us immortality, and to make us
equal to the gods.

7 Virtues are diverse Alexander was ingenious: Cirus was of an excellent
spirit: Agesilaus excelled in te^perance: Themis^ocles in wisdom: Aristides
in justice: Philip in experience: and Pericles in the skill and knowledge to
govern a commonwealth.

8 Virtue has this quality: that her beauty and excellency being showed
especially toward a man's enemies, she is accustomed to rejoice even the most
valiant.

9 Nature cannot establish any thing so high, but virtue can reach unto it.

10 To die continually for virtue, is not to dye.

11 Virtue it self ought to be honored, and not the image of virtue.

12 There is no virtue in this life, except it be to love the thing that is to
be beloved: and to love that, is prudence: and not to be moved or troubled for
any matter of molestation, that is fortitude: nor for any matter of flattery
and delight, that is temperance: nor for pride, that is justice.

13 Gorgias the Orator being demanded if the king of Persia were happy,
answered: I know not how much virtue he has.

14 I never knew any man, who trusting in his own virtue, did envy the virtue
of another man.

15 Virtue is courageous through her own proper riches: and she cares not to
be celebrated with the favor of the common people, because she has no need of
praise and commendation.

16 The virtue of the mind lives, when all other things do dye and perish.

17 That virtue which proceeds out of a comely and beautiful p^^son, is much
more amiable, and purchases the greater grace and favor.

Of Death.
CHAP. 45.
1 ONe saying, that it was a hard and difficult thing to live: Nay (quoth
Diogenes) but it is hard to live ill.

2 If a young man do live to old age then he comes to lament and to plain
himself to the gods, saying: that when it is requisite his labors and
troubles should cease and he live at rest: even then is he most troubled and
surcharged with affairs: afterward when death approaches, then would he live,
and requesteth the Physicians not to be careless of his health and welfare.

3 O strange and wonderful minded men, who would not willingly neither live
nor dye!

4 I had rather live and serve a man that is poor and beggarly, and one to
whom means of living are wanting, then to commauud over all dead men.

5 Death is no grievous thing: nevertheless it is a kind of injury in the
end, which is full of fear and terror

6 Seeing all men must needs dye, I do hold that it is a happy thing to dye
not late but honorably.

7 The Poet Simonides said: That death is the medicine of all evils incident to
man.

8 There is nothing better for a man then to be borne, nor any thing better for
him then to dye soon and quickly.

9 Gorgias Leontin being near his end, and departing by little and little as
it were in a sleep or dream, was demanded by a familiar friend of his: what do
you? To whom he answered: Now does sleep begin to recommend me to her sister.

Of Felicity.
CHAP. 46.
1 Felicity is the end of all things which are to be desired. Some have said,
that felicity is prosperity of fortune: and some say virtue: but it is fit
and convenient, that felicity be given from the Gods. The felicity of the
soul, is an operation perfected by virtue.

2 Virtue comes of science, and of virtue proceeds the sovereign good:
what can this soueraign and chief good be, but God and heaven, whence our
soul is derived?

3 The sovereign good of the soul is to be like unto God.

4 This is felicity (as says Aristotle) which is not consisting in one only
art, but in all the course of a perfect life.

5 They are truly happy which are with truth: but they which live in vanity
cannot be happy.

6 Some by too great felicity, care nothing for God at all.

7 To happy men, the consideration of miseries seems to be a very straight
and difficult thing.

8 To be happy, is to live well and to do well.

9 No man can be happy, but he that is wise and good. It follows then that
wicked men are miserable: and therefore not the rich man but the prudent man
flies and shunneth misery.

10 Felicity is divided into five parts. The first is, to take good counsel:
the second is, to have the senses strong and sound, and to be of a good
disposition of body: the third is, to be fortunate in all actions: the fourth
to be always near and in company with men excellent in glory and renown:
the fifth is to abound in wealth and all other such things as serve for the
necessity of man's life.

11 Happy are they that have a good soul: and that is given them from heaven.

12 Felicity is either by destiny, or of fortune, or of virtue.

13 As sick men cannot taste the savor of any meats, so cannot any man
attain to happiness and felicity, if he embrace not virtue.

14 They are not happy whom the common sort reputeth happy.

15 No man in truth is happy amongst all mortal men living.

FINIS.

