A RELIGIOUS INQVISITION: OR, A short Scrutinie after RELIGION.

Wherein the large Cope of true RELIGION is narrowly inquired.

BY JOHN COPE, of Grayes-Inne, ESQVIRE.

LONDON, Printed by FELIX KINGSTON, and are to be sold by JAMES BOLER at the
Marigold in Paul's Churchyard, 1629.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND right virtuous Lady, ELIZABETH, Countess of
Holland.
Madam,
I Had, and have buried a good wife, since which time, God has not disposed of
me in a second marriage; by reason whereof, I have not a Child of my body: being
single, I converted to my self, and (I know not how) my brain became in
labor, and is delivered of this (I know not what to call it:) it is not worthy
the name of a book, except your Ladyship will deigne to patronage it, and give
it desert, which favor if your Ladyship indulge toward me, then my Book like
some mean man, that has been entertained by some great personage, under the
protection of your favorable approbation, shall walk abroad without shame of it
own unworthiness: and my self shall remain, as always I shall have cause to
do from your former large favors:

Your devoted servant, John Cope.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, (for so you must be to me, if you have patience, or will
spend time in reading so slight a piece of writing as this is) instead of an
Epistle, I will tell you a tale, which is this. There was a young man, who after
the death of his Parents, was minded to venture his fortunes upon the Seas, and
was furnished as he thought, with a pretty tite vessel, which was likewise
fraught with commodities that were passable. This young man lanched out into the
Ocean, where, for a long time together, he had so fair gales of wind as his
heart could desire: thus with full sails he made his way through the deepes,
but being ignorant of the passages of the Sea, and would not be ruled by the
Pilotes, and Mariners, of which kind he had some that were skillful, he
suddenly ran himself into a cross Sea; where (after he had been sorely
tossed, and troubled, and washed with the surging waves) his Bark began to
leake, which wrought in him a sore dismay: but the dashing of these angry
billows one against another, was a means to work this weather-beaten Vessel
into a calmer Sea. This Young man resolves to return home, and (though with
much loss) to desist from his adventure, or to repair his decays; but
coming into the narrow Seas, where he found a boisterous passage, he
discovered his own Country, and knowing of a safe Haven that had been open,
whence he put forth at his going to Sea, where many a tottered ship had found
harbor, he intended to put in there: but so it was, through the neglect of
keeping the Haven in repair, it was so choked with quicksandes, that no ship
could venture to make passage into it, without danger of shipwreck; as it fell
out with this young man, who putting to shore, split the prore of his bark upon
a sand. This young man had two Jewels given him by his Parents, in both which
they had in their lines a joint interest. At his going to Sea, he lest one of
them with his friends to keep for him; the other he wore, tied with a string
about his neck next his heart; and though he had sustained great loss, at
last a Fisherman light upon him, who finding a Jewel about his neck, that
seemed of some worth, though much blemished with the beating of the salt water
upon it, being moved with compassion, took him into his boat, and setting him
on shore, help him to land so much of his goods as could be preserved, and
with much difficulty he saved his broken Vessel. If the Reader desire to know
any farther meaning of this Fable, thus it is applied: The young man was my
self, my Parents known to be deceased, the Sea, was the world, the vessel,
my estate, as well of mind and body, as that of my outward means; the
fraught, some measure of understanding, apprehension, and memory: some
knowledge both in humanity and divinity: farther, my health, strength of body,
and use of senses, which were good indowments and part of this adventure. The
Ocean may resemble the large scope I gave my self, wherein I was carried
amain by the whisteling gales of all manner of pleasures, which did so fill
the sails of my empty affections, as that I feared not to pass through any
deepes of hazard. My ignorance in the world was like, with the Young man's upon
the Sea. The Pilots, and Mariners, whose direction I refused to follow, were
some of my friends, that better knew the course of the world then my self. The
cross Sea I fell into, was the encounter between prosperity, and adversity:
as the encounter between plenty and want, between pleasure and trouble,
between sickness and health: and so between any present good inioyed, and
any contrary evil that approaches: and now my Bark began to leake amain,
when I could not with all the power of my understanding, body, or estate, so
fast pumpe out the waters of adversity, as they brake in upon me, which made
me almost heartlesse: yet after much tossing and struggling in vain against
the insulting fury of the billows, I was cast upon a calmer Sea of patience.
The^ I resolved to return home to a better understanding of my self, and see
if I could find any means to repair my decay: yet when I came near home, I
found but an unquiet passage through the narrow Straights I had put my self
into: how-euer, discovering where I was, I adue^tured to put in whence I had
hoysed sail, expecting harbor; but found the Young man's success. The two
Jewels bestowed upon me by my Parents, were Religion, and a good name: the
former I kept as near my heart as I could, which yet had lost much of its
luster, being continually dashed upon with the brinish water of many
corruptions which I passed through. The Fisherman that took me up, who had
good knowledge of my Jewel, was such a one, as our Savior Christ undertook
to make his Apostles, fishers of men.

Now, gentle Reader, be pleased out of my Fable with the moral, to take my
intention in putting forth these few and imperfect Leaves, which is to let all
that know me understand, what my Religion is; which they may well suspect
either to be none, or not the right, after so dangerous passages in the world.
And in the next place, my earnest suite to my friends is, that (as far as
charity will move them,) they would endeavor (without apparent cause, to
suspend their good word or opinion of me) to preserve my good name; which I
therefore desire to leave in their custody. And lastly, my purpose in divulging
these worthless Lines, is, to tie my self by them, to the observation of my
own directions: (the frailties of corrupt nature being tolerated withal:)
which success if I find, I shall have my full desire; and so rest a
well-wisher to you and all good Christians:

JOHN COPE.

A SHORT SCRVTINY AFTER RELIGION.
THe Poets tell of a Minerua ( The raritie of Religion.
whereby is understood the knowledge of Arts and Sciences) begotten of Jupiters
brain. The Philosophers speak of a first matter, which must be part of every
thing, and it self nothing, being without form: which matter is so
efficacious, as nothing can be without it, and yet of it self, so pure and
simple, as it is not to be found in any thing. He that undertakes to set forth
Religion what it is, seems to go about the Fiction of a Minerua, or the
description of a first matter: for the holy Ghost, who is the worker of all
grace in a man, may not altogether unfitly be resembled to the brain or
conceiving faculty of God, as a man may with reverence speak; and this first
matter, Religion, is presumed in every man, to be in himself, and yet is not
to be found perfect in any man.

Luke. 1.28. Religion persecuted.
In the Evangelist Saint Luke, the Angel Gabriel pronounces the Virgin Mary to
be blessed amongst women; and yet examine her condition upon earth, you shall
hardly find a woman more miserable; at the birth of our Savior she had not a
house to put her head in, but was constrained to take up her Lodging in a back
Stable: no sooner was she delivered of that King (which was the cause why she
was pronounced blessed) but she must fly, to save her Sons life, into Egypt;
and all the time of our Saviors being upon earth, was a sharer with him in his
persecutions: whilst here she lived, she was suspected of her best friend
Joseph, of incontinency: since she departed hence, yea to this day, is accused
of sacrilege, to rob God of his Worship, in being prayed unto, and of
blasphemy, to undertake to command God to perform her own will. Thus fares it
with blessed Religion: when it comes into any Country or City, it finds every
door shut against it, except it steal in at some back door, into the heart of
some poor Christian; and if it make not the more speedy flight into some
unknown Country, or Desert Wilderness, sudden weight will be laid to cut off
the very life of Religion; as we see it at this day chased out of its native
country of Jury, and out of the seats of foreign Monarkes, into an Island or
two, and the confines of the earth: next, as it fell out with the Virgin Mary,
so this Religion shall be reputed a harlot, yea suspected by her own friends,
and supplanted by the Strumpet of Heresy, if God should not assist her, and
that sacrilege and blasphemy have been ever laid to her charge, will appear
by the accusations of her adversaries.

Neither is good and true Religion rejected as odious, impious, and erroneous,
Religion produced for the maintenance of errors.
but called to the patronage of all errors, vicious livers, and wicked
practices. The Papist, because he holds the Catholic faith, though stuffed
with all manner of corruption, he must be accounted Religious: the Brownist,
because he will not endure the corruption of Church Discipline, though he
forsake the Church, yet he must be counted Religious: the Anabaptist, the
Family of love, the Pelagians, and all the rabble of the like Heretics,
because they acknowledge Christ, though never so full of erroneous opinions,
yet they must be accounted religious: nay, the Turk that worships Mahomet; the
Infidels, that worship the Sun, the Moon, or other creatures; yea, some
Nations that worship the Devil himself for fear of him, because they
worship something, though never so much against reason or common sense, yet
they account themselves to be Religious.

Religion the excuse of wicked livers.
Tell the Drunkard, that Adultery is a sin; he thanks God he is no adulterer,
and he is of the right Religion, and he hopes it will go well with him. Tell
the Oppessor, that Drunkenness, and Adultery are sins; he thanks God, he is
neither Drunkard, nor Adulterer, and he is of the right Religion, and he hopes
it will go well with him. Tell the Swearer, that Drunkenness, Adultery, and
Oppression are sins; he thanks God, he is neither Drunkard, Adulterer, nor
Oppressor, and he is of the right Religion, and he hopes it will go well with
him. Tell any man of one sin in another man, that he finds himself not
given over unto, though he live in all other sins, yet he hopes he is not so
badde as that man that lives in that sin, and he is of the true Religion,
and hopes God will be merciful to him in Christ, and it will go well with him.
But there is a kind of man that goes to Church upon Sundays, and receives the
Communion once a year at the least, and that is at Easter, because hereby he
hopes to go to heaven; believes the Articles of the Creed, because he is
taught so to do; that hopes God is merciful, because he looks for a share in
his mercy; that swears not but small oaths, because to be a great swearer, is
of ill report; that will not drink extraordinary, because it is chargeable;
that is very painful and diligent in his calling, because he desires to grow
rich; that keeps touch in payment of money, because he expects others should
do so to him; or if they do not, he will lay them as close as the Prison can
keep them; that gives to the poor at his door, because he would not be
hardly spoken of; that has few suites in Law, because as near as he can, he
will wrong no body, that is either able or likely to go to Law with him: in a
word, he that lives the life of an ordinary civil man, and holds himself to
be a good Protestant: And this man, if you esteem him not a religious man,
will think you do him great wrong. And yet there is another that goes beyond
this civil man, and that is he that is upright in his dealing for justice
sake; he that is a true play master of his debts for honesties sake; he that is
industrious for Prudence sake; he that is absteynious for tempera^ce sake; and
he that is morally virtuous in any kind (which is his Religion) for virtues
sake; who for point of faith is content with a general belief, as the Church
believes; and this man holds himself to have climed up to a high degree in
Religion.

Religion the pretense of evil practices.
Farther, what is made the color of most sedicious, bloody wars, and horrid
practices, but Religion? As Sir Francis Baco^ in his Essays wittily observes,
they bring down the holy Ghost in sted of the likeness of a Dove, in the
likeness of a Vulture or Raven: and out of the Bark of S. Peter, set forth the
flagge of a Bark of Pirates. When Demetrius the Siluer-smith, with all his
fellow workmen, found their trade like to go down, if the Gospel of Jesus
Christ were received at Ephesus, the^ they cry out, that the magnifice^ce of
the great goddess Diana would be destroyed. Act. 19.27.
And what was pretended the cause of that tumultuous sedition, but ye
preservation of their Religion to their great goddess Diana? Liu. in Historia
Romana, Existimauit. Ancus Marcius, qu^nia^ Numa in pace religiones
instituisset, a se bellicae ceremoniae producerentur, etc.
Liuie in the History of the Romans, relates of Marcus Ancus, of the Progeny
of Numa and his successor; that when he had received some injury from the
Latins; as unlawful taking away the commodities of his Realm, and holding
diverse of his subjects captive; and receiving, as he thought, an insolent
answer, upon demand of them to be restored, being minded to recover them by
war, all his labor is to find out a fair pretense, and give a fair
challenge: and upon these considerations he begins: that since his
predecessor Numa had founded Religion in peace, it concerned him to ground his
war upon Religion; whereupon his Ambassador being dispatched with Commission
to proclaim war, Audi, Jupiter, ego sum pulibcus nuncius populi Romani:
just pieque venio: si ego impie illos homines dedier, nuncio populi Romani
mihi exposco, tum Patriae compotem me nunquam sinas esse, haec quicunque ei
ob^ius fuit, haec portum ingrediens, haec forum ingressus peragit.
thus runs his message: Hear, O Jupiter, I am sent by the general consent of
the Roman people, and that what I do as Ambassador, is just and religious; I
call thee to witness, and if I do herein unjustly, or impiously; then never
suffer me to be a man thought fit for service, or worthy regard in my Country:
and these things the Legate buzzed into every man's ear that met him; thinking
that when he had made Religion the color of his Masters war, and inuoked
God, that then he might fairly denounce war, for the effecting of his
particular end. When the Pharisees were almost ready to burst with malice
against our Savior Christ, and could find no rest within themselves, till
they had committed that deuillish, matchless, and colourlesse murder upon
him: (for Pilate confesses he could find no cause,) they pretend he was a
Sabbath-breaker, he was a Devil, he was a Blasphemer, he was a mouer of
Sedition: and these things could not be tolerated in their Religion; and
therefore away with him, crucify him, crucify him. So that here the
maintenance of Religion, is the cloak of this horrible fact. But there are too
many witnesses of later days before our eyes, of this truth. What unsheathed
the sword of so many Massacrers in France not long since, to the taking away of
so many Christian souls in one night? They will tell you, Religion. What gave
boldness to that desperate Villain, to make his Sovereigns, the late King of
France his bowels, the Scabberd for his poisoned dagger? If he were alive, he
would tell you, Religion. What sharpened the wits, and steeled the hearts of
our Englishmen lately; that if there had been a Council called in Hell, and a
company of grand Devils sent upon earth, for the executing of their designs,
they could not have found out a more damnable Plot, nor with greater resolution
have prosecuted it, then they did the Gunpowder Treason? All their excuse
would be, that it was in the cause of Religion. What has plucked of late, the
loving Husband from his Wifes tender embraces, the beloved Son from his
Parents careful government, the diligent Servant, from his Masters serious
employment; and the Loyal subject from his Kings peaceable Dominions; and all
from their native Country, either to make way for their enterprises, through the
bowels of men, women, and children, or expose themselves to unavoidable
slaughter? Is it not, because men pretend Religion the color of their war,
though they intend nothing but the getting of some Town or Country? So that
look into men of all nations and conditions, you shall find every man claim
an interest in Religion; and yet how hard a thing it is, to find sincere and
true Religion planted in any Nation (our own excepted,) or particular man's
heart? Wherefore it is not altogether inexpedient for a man, as well as he
may, to inform himself, what true Religion is.

Some will have the word, Religion, to be derived from a Latin word, Rlgo.
which signifies, to read over again, or to remember: but this seems not to
be so proper a deriuation; because reading is an act of the tongue, and
conversant as well about falsehood, as truth: and Religion is chiefly seated in
the mind, and imbraceth nothing but truth. Again, for remembrance, it is of
something forepast: but never man yet knew what belonged to Religion, before it
is wrought in him by the holy Ghost; and therefore cannot remember that, of
which he never had so much as a notion. Farther, if it should have this former
deriuation, it should only intimate a bare remembrance of a thing, and no way
give light to the nature of the thing.

There is a word which more fitly offers it self, and signifies in Latin,
Religo. August. de vera relig. religat ergo nos vera religio vni omnipotenti
Deo, vnde religio dicta est.
to bind or tie. True Religion, says an ancient Writer, does tie us to the
only and Almighty God; and from this tying does Religion take its name. Adam
had no sooner transgressed the commandment of God, but takes his flight,
seeks shelter under the trees of the Garden, to hide him self from the
presence of the Lord God: but when God apprehends him with his call, there is no
longer keeping out. Adam being arraigned, and having received the sentence of
his punishment, he might yet be like to many children or servants, that when
they have once gotten a custom of running away from their Fathers or Masters,
they shall never keep them at home, without they shackle, or tie them fast;
and therefore God, to prevent this runnagacy in Adam and his posterity, has
provided this bond of Religion, to tie them fast to himself, as the reverend
Father says. Ierem. super nonum cap. Amos. Ecclesia est fasciculus, vna Domini
religione constrictus, vnde and ipsa religio a religando and in fascem domini
vinciendo nomen accepit.
The Church, says another, is a bundle tied together with the wreath of
Religion; whence, says he, religion takes the name from binding. Till the
coming of our blessed Savior, the Church of God was only amongst the Jews:
but they, when he came into the world, refused subjection to him. Whereupon our
blessed Lord sends his Apostles throughout all the World, to gather up, as it
were, here a stick, and there a Christian stick; which being presented to
God, he makes a bundle, and ties it up with this wreath of Religion, and so
has made himself a new Church: and this latter word, binding, gives some
insight into the nature of Religion; which is either a binding to, or a binding
from a thing: a binding to, is a binding to faith and obedience; a binding to
faith in all that is declared in Gods Word, and obedience to all that is
commanded by Gods Word: the binding from, is from all error and heresy in
point of doctrine, contrary to Gods Word; and from all impiety in course of
life, forbidden by Gods Word. And this latter deriuation of the word, religion,
seems to make it more full: for as in the word, reluctation, which signifies a
strife or struggling, there is an opposition employed; so this aduerbe, re, in
religion, does seem to intimate an auersenesse in the nature of man, to what
he is required unto by the Word of God. Whereupon consequently follows a
third tie, or binding, which is to repentance, for the pronenesse of man's
nature to every thing, contrary to Gods will, and the wicked actions he cannot
choose but fall into, out of that natural and depraved inclination. Calvin. in
23. cap. Job. Iobus adijcit se non ab ea recessisse: eo significa^ homines
semper pru^itis quodam deflectendi a recta via sollicitari.
To which purpose Calvin, in his coment upon the 23. Chapter of Job, out of
Job's resolution to walk in the way of God, adding these words, that he had
not gone out of the same, has this observation, that there is a certain kind
of itching desire in every man, to swerue and decline from that certain way;
and therefore he had need to be kept in with this hedge of Religion.

There are three words amongst others, which the Grecians have given, to
signify Religion: the one signifies right or true worship. (...).
It is not enough to have knowledge, nor to believe in God, though these are
never severed from Religion: but there must be a worship, and this worship must
not be every worship, but a true worship. Another of these words signifies the
worship of God; (...).
so that in this name of Religion, is included a worship, but not the worship
of man, or any other creature; but the worship of God.

The third word is thought to take its deriuatio^ from the name of the
Thracians, Verse. 27. (...).
and is used by the Apostle in the first Chapter of James his Epistle. But
because the perfectest knowledge man can have of any thing, is from the causes
thereof, therefore it will not be amiss for the understanding of the nature of
Religion, to inquire into the causes of it more at large; some of which are
shortly contained in the words before.

Amongst causes, God the efficient cause of Religion.
the efficient cause takes the first place, as well does this efficient of
Religion deserve it, which was truly the first, yea, before the first thing in
the World; God was before all things: Psalm. 19.2.
so that the efficient cause, and worker of true Religion, either in a public
estate, or private man's heart, is no other then God himself: God is the worker
of all grace; Iam. 1.17.
all good gifts proceed from above. And Saint Paul, one of the
master-workemen in this plantation of Religion, has these words in his Epistle
to the Corinthians; 2. Cor. 12.4.
No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Spirit. There are
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit: there are differences of
administrations, but the same Lord: and there are diversities of operations,
but it is the same God that works all in all. In Ezekiel, God first
undertakes to cleanse them of their false religion, but leaves them not there;
for then they were never the nearer; but in the next words says, Ezekiel. 36.27.
A new heart will I give you, and also a new Spirit will I put within you; and
I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes: so that
God takes to himself the work of framing them to true Religion; and the whole
Scripture is very full of proofs to this purpose. There was a worthy man, who
out of his observation upon these words of our Savior; I am the way, the truth
and the life; brought in Christ speaking to the Christian soul in this manner,
August. in tract. 22. Ambulare vis? Ego sum via. Falli non vis? Ego sum
veritas. Mori non vis? Ego sum vita. haec dicit Saluator tu^^, Non est quo eas
nisi ad me, non est qua^ eas nisi per me.
and answering himself; Will thou walk (says Christ?) I am the way. Will thou
not be deluded? I am the truth. Will thou not die? I am the life. This (says
the learned Man) is the speech of our Savior to this silly soul: Thou have
not whither to go, but to me; nor any way to come to me, but by me: so that if
we will walk in the way of Religion, we must walk with Christ, for he is the
way; if we will not be seduced by error, which is contrary to Religion, we
must be directed by him, for he is the truth: if we will live religiously
here, and gloriously hereafter; we must live by him, and in him, and he in us,
for he is the life. The same Author says in another place; Ipsum donum Dei
Spiritus cum Patre and Filio aeque inco^mutabile colere and tenere nos conuenit.
We ought to embrace the gift of the Spirit of God, equally dispensed and
unchangeable from the Father and the Son.

Another reverend Father says in his Comment upon the first Chap. of Amos,
upon these words: God, Ierom, super primum cap. Amos; Deus versatur in vera
religione, non in Jsrael vrbibus.
or the Lord will roar from Sion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem. God is
conversant (says he) in true Religion professed in Jerusalem, not in the
Cities of Israel. So that from both these may be gathered, that as Religion is
the gift of God, yea, of the whole Trinity: so where Religion is, God is; and
where he is not, there is no true Religion; and from that that does precede,
the conclusion will easily arise, that God is the efficient cause of religion.

Neither is he only the efficient, God, the only efficient cause.
but the only efficient cause. Man is a mere patient. No, not so much as a
patient: for all matter is held to have an aptitude, or an appetite, or at
least, a possibility to receive a form. But such is the indisposition of man's
depraved nature, that it has no capacity, nay, it has a contrary affection to
the receiving of the form of Religion, which God puts upon him. The Apostle
Paul to the Romans says; Romans 8.7.
that the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God: (...).
where the word is very express, and signifies the best thoughts and
affections; the same Apostle in his Epistle to the Ephesians, says, that all
men by nature are dead in sins and trespasses. Ephesians. 2.1.
And in the second to the Philippians; It is God that works both the will and
the deed. Phil. 2.13.
In orat. pro Marco Marcello. Bellicas lauds solent quidam extenuare verbis,
easque communicare cum militibu^, n^ propriae sint Imperatorum, and certe in
armis millitum virtus, locorum opportunitas, multum iuuant: maximam vero partem
quasi suo iure fortuna sibi vendicat.
Tully in one of his Orations, commends Caesar above all things for his
clemency, because that was his proper glory, and his only. In his victories, he
tells him, he should have sharers; the Captains and common soldiers would
every one claym his share; yea, a great part of the glory of those co^quests
would be ascribed to the co^uenience of the place, or to Fortune: but for his
clemency, none could challenge any part of that glory. So for outward works, as
building of houses, planting of Vineyards and Orchards, husbanding of the
earth, ordering and disposing of creatures, yea, and governing of nations
(though God indeed be the giver and governor of all; and it is his blessing
that makes all things useful, and commodious to man, and so excludes Fortune;)
yet in these things, he has given man leave to exercise his own judgment
and industry, and, as it were, to share with him in his praise: but for the
working of Grace and Religion, whereby he largely expresses his clemency to
man, there is none either admitted, or able to join with him. A King has
certain prerogatives reserved to himself; as sealing of his Patents, stamping
of his Coin, choosing of his servants, creating of his Nobility, and the like:
So God allows of no Parents for Heaven, without they have his broad Seal of
Religion; allows no Christian for current, except he have his stamp of
Religion; and whosoever shall counterfeite either of these, is guilty of high
treason: and as no man can challenge to be the Kings servant out of his own
desert, but holds himself highly regarded by the King, in being called to his
service; and likewise expects continual means from the King, to enable him to
serve him: So in this spiritual service of God, there is no man worthy of him
self, neither has he inward ability to maintain himself in the place that
God calls him unto, without a supply of grace from God, which works in him
this Religion. And so to be a Nobleman of heaven, is out of Gods mere favor;
and as you shall see in a mean man, created a Nobleman, a great alteration in
his behavior, in his speeches, in his actions, in his whole carriage; yea, in
his mind he has those thoughts, now he is a Peer to the King, that never
came into his head before: so more properly you may discern in a Christian
man, a great change throughout body and soul, whose base nature is turned into
a truly noble disposition, despising the trash of the earth, and all servile
conditions; and aims only to conform himself in a religious course of life
to his Sovereign, Jesus Christ, to whom he is now made a Peer. Kings, when
they make favorites, for the most part, choose such as are of small means, and
an ordinary rank, that the greater glory might redound to themselves; for
therein they something seem to resemble God in his Creation, who made all
things out of nothing: so these make a great man out of nothing, in comparison
of what he is raised to. Thus God in his work of regeneration, finds man void
of grace or religion, and assumeth to himself the effecting of these things in
him, whereby he is made a Child and Favorite of God; and yet in this work,
does not take from a man his humanity, and natural abilities; but so frames
these, as they shall become conducible to this effect, though no way operative;
neither does this give any way to free will, that there is a use of the faculty
of will in man, yea, toward his regeneration. When a man is said to have no
free will, it is not to be conceived in natural actions; as to go, or stand
still; to speak, or to be silent; to do this thing, or not to do it, as a
natural actio^; or that the use of the senses is not common and free to good
and bad men, as seeing, hearing, and the like; or that a man has no power in
moral actions, as to be temperate, and just in his dealings, and liberal, and
the like; or in the outward acts of Ecclesiastical duties; as to go to Church,
to receive the Sacrament, and do things of that nature; or to forbear the
outward practice of some sins; as a drunkard, or a swearer may be hired not to
drink, or swear for a time, and yet in none of these, is to be found freewill
to grace, which is denied to be in a man, and that is to be able out of his own
freewill, to do these natural actions, and observe these moral duties, and
all other Religious duties, or forbear evil, according to the Word of God, and
in obedience to his commandments: for sin is a breach of the Law, and
therefore, to do good, (...).
is to do what man does in obedience to the Law, which no man can do of
himself, but must receive a new form put upon him; and himself, and that
natural will, which is in its self active, must be merely passive: wherein
is the difference between the Papist and the Protestant: the one says a man
does cooperate with the Spirit: the other, that the Spirit works all, and that
a man is a mere patient. In the beginning of the world God made a Coas, a rude
indigested substance, which had an active power in it self, but in relation to
the several forms God put upon it, was a mere patient. So plants have a
vegetative and growing form, but in regard of that sensitive form, which in
all sensitive living creatures, this vegetative substance is to be considered,
but as the matter of the ensuing sensitive creature; and that sensitive soul
is but merely passive, in respect of the reasonable soul wherewith God
informs a man. So is it with a man, he has natural power over his body, and
in many moral duties, is able to put them in practice: but to attain to
Grace, he has no ability nor will, but is a mere patient to the work of the
Spirit. The grand Patron of the Romish profession, Bellar. in li. 3. de gratia,
and libero arbitrio.
has gathered a definition of Free Will, out of the doctrine of one of the
chief Ex doctrinae S. Thomae definitio collecta. Liberum arbitrium, est libera
p^testas ex his quae ad finem conducunt, vnum prae alio eligendi, aut vnum and
idem acceptandi, vel pro arbitrio respuendi, intelligenti naturae ad magnam Dei
gloriam attributa.
Schoolmen, which is this; that Freewill is a free power of choosing one of
those things which tend to an end before another, or accepting or rejecting out
of its own power, one and the same thing, and is attributed to an intelligent
or reasonable nature: for the great glory of God, who shortly analising, or
opening this definition, Liberum arbitrium est potentia, non habitus vel actus,
quae potentia est genus and libera differentia, and quia potentia omnis est
accidens subiectum liberi arbitrij, est intelligens natura, obiectum liberi
arbitrij est ex his quae ad finem conducunt. Siquidem liberum arbitrium non
versatur circa finem, sed media: electio est proprius actus liberi arbitrij.
says, that Free Will is a power, not a habit or act; and after he has
assigned power to be the genus, or material cause, and an intelligent nature
to be the subject of it, and the means conversant about the end, not the end
it self to be object of it, concludes at last, that Election is the proper act
of Free Will: where, besides that he brings in a description for a definition,
he seems to m^k^ that which before he said, to be neither habit nor act, but a
mere power to be active in Election. But admit him, that a bare power is the
material cause, or the genus of Free Will: yet there is a learned Father will
soon make it appear, that this power is none of man's: for, says he, August.
in ex^ositione 12. Cap. Euang. Johannis: Ne exist^numus fidem nostram esse in
libero arbitrio, vt diuino non aegeat ^d intorio: audiamus Euangelistam
dicentem, Dedit eis potes^at^m Filios Dei fieri.
speaking of Free Will, let us hear the Evangelist, saying, God gave them
power to be made the sons of God. So that this power spoken of, is the gift
and Grace of God. And admit the Papist thus much, that man does cooperate with
the Spirit, as Protestant Divines hold, a regenerate man does, yet this is no
argument to prove Freewill, because a man may cooperate without power of
Election to the contrary.

Neither yet is man to depend altogether upon this inward work of God: The
Word, the instrumental cause of Religion.
for he has appointed his Word as an instrument of this blessed effect of
Religion; and this Word is a plentiful Storehouse of all instruments of
Religion. The instruments of a soldier, are his arms. Let the spiritual
Soldier go to Paul, one of the chief Officers in that Armory, and he will
furnish him from head, to toe, Ephesians. 6. Chap. 14, 15, 16, 17. verses.
with the Helmet of Salvation, the Brestplate of Righteousness, the Girdle of
Verity, the Shield of Faith, the Sword of the Spirit, and the Shoes of the
preparation of the Gospel. The instruments of a scholar, are his books. Let
the Scholar in Gods School, or University, resort to this Library of the
Word, and there he shall find such Philosophy, as is beyond all other Writers
in that kind; such History, as makes all other Historians that meddle with the
same subject, for point of truth, liers; and for Antiquity, nouices: such
profound Prophesies verified by the performance of every the least tittle, as
make all other prophesies appear fables: such Divine Poetry, as makes all
other Poets seem bunglers, being compared with the sweet Singer of Israel,
and the Wise Preacher: such elegancy, that if you look into Esaias, you shall
find such a lofty style, as is in no other book but the Scripture. If you
look into the other Prophets, you shall find such hidden Rethoricke, as is no
where to be found, but in holy Writ: if you look into our Blessed Saviors
speeches, you shall find such Metaphors, and Parables, and Wise sayings, as
confounded all that rose up to speak against him, and amazed all that heard
him: if you look into S. Paul's Apologeticall Orations, you shall find the
famous Orator Tertullus put to silence, Act. 24.10.
and ash^med to plead any more against him; and Felix afterward, trembling at
what he spoke. But last of all, in his holy Word, you shall find such
Divinity, as whosoever undertakes to set forth the excellency of it, shall give
it a blemish; and when man has beaten his brain to the uttermost, he must
break forth only into admiration, and say; Oh, the height, the depth, and the
breadth of this unsearchable Mystery of Divinity! The Instruments of a builder
are his tools: and here in this Word, the Christian builder shall find a
Masons hammer, to rough how the hard heart of man, and a two-edged sword, more
ex^^llent for that purpose, then any Saw to cut asunder the stony heart of man,
and a Square to level and shape a man to some fitness for this spiritual
building. There are two maine Pillars of Religion, upon which if it be firmly
settled, it cannot sink, and that is a well-grounded faith, and a well-ordered
life. And how to establish Religion upon these two, that Famous Calvin will
teach a man. For the first, in his Comment upon the twelfth Psalm, where he
asks the question, whether or no at any time there do steal into a man's
mind, any doubt of believing in the promises of God? which if there do, then
he directs him how to fence himself against such a temptation, Let him
presently, says he, Call. in Com. 12. Psalm. Quoties de fide promissionum Dei
obrepit aliqua dubitatio, statim hunc clipeum opponere conuenit sermones Dei
esse puros. Call. in Com. 23. Cap. Job, Discamus been and recte vtuendi
rationem, quam Deus nobis probat, hanc esse vt pedes p^namus in via, quam non
ipsi instituimus, sed ipse nobis verbo suo commonstrauit.
take this into his hand for a shield or buckler, that all the words of God are
pure. And for the second, how to frame a man's life, in his Comment upon the 23.
Chap. of Job, he gives this instruction: Let a man learn this to be the course
which God does allow of living well and uprightly, namely, to set his feet in
a way, not such a one as he shall propose to himself, but such a one as God
shall show unto him out of his Word: neither does God use this isntrumental
cause of the Word, in working Religion in a man, as though he needed it: for
he was as well able, after the fall of man, to have made him perfectly good
again, as he was before: but God saw this the fittest way: and some reason may
be given to the apprehension of man, to persuade him so much.



let man know his infinite love unto him, in sending his Beloved Son Jesus
Christ into the world, to suffer for man: and our instruction in this point, is
the scope of the whole Scripture; which Passion of our Savior had not needed,
if God had suddenly settled man in his former uprightness.

have man to see the deprauation of all parts, inward, and outward, and work
them through the efficacy of the Word, to incline to Grace, and so to temper
them, as to yield to the impression of Religion; with which the Holy Ghost is
sealing him up to eternal life. This cannot but bring a great deal of sweet
comfort to the heart of man, which would otherwise be lost.

a man had been made perfect again, he should have had only a willing and a
divine contemplation and obedience, and never have needed the bent or intention
of his mind, as now he does.





Worship the material cause of Religion.
Now it has been declared that God alone is the efficient, and the Word, the
isntrumental cause of Religion. The next cause is, Worship, the material
cause of Religion.
the material cause of Religion, and that is Worship. The Psalmist says,
Psalm. 145.17.
The Eyes of all things look up and wait upon thee: and in another place,
Psalm. 148.1.
calls upon the Heavens, and all the creatures, to praise the Lord; which
waiting, and praising may be taken as part of the worship of God: but as for
insensible creatures, they only are said to praise God, because they set forth
his praise: for sensible creatures, as in many things they seem to have that
reason which is only in a man, in choosing or refusing good or evil for
themselves: yet this is nothing but an inward instinct, without the discourse
of the mind. In these creatures, there is a kind of expectation from God, of
good things; and an inward cheerefulnes, which is a kind of acknowledgement,
or thanksgiving for good things received, and likewise, a patient mourning, or
humiliation, as a man may say, under the hand of God, when they want his gifts,
(wherein they may condemn many men that are ready to murmur, upon the
withdrawing of the least of Gods mercies,) yet because they do not this by the
direction of reason, it cannot be properly called worship.

There are diverse words which have sometimes, and in some places, as well in
Scriptures, as other writers, an equivalent or promiscuous signification, and
in other places, a more distinct construction; as the same words, (...).
which in the Greek tongue more properly signify worship, and honor, and
service, are used all of them oftentimes, and in several places, to express
one and the same thing; and each of them signifies the same that any one of
them does; as in the Worship of God, is understood and comprised his Honor,
and Service; and in his Honor, his Worship and Service; and in his Service,
his Worship and Honor.

Now this matter of Religion, which is Worship, or Honor, is found to be
ascribed to man, to Angels, and to Idols. To man, when the same words are used
to set forth the reverence or respect a child owes to his Parents, or an
inferior to a superior, or any man to another, for any extraordinary gift, that
are used to express the Honor of God. The words of the commandment are, that
a child should honor his Father and Mother: and in the Poem of Phocilides,
(...).
children are exhorted in the first place, to honor God, and in the next
place, their Parents. Paul, in his Epistle to Timothy, 1. Tim. 5.17.
wills, that the Elders that rule well, should be accounted worthy of double
honor. And Xenophon says, (...).
that the Rulers under Cyrus worshipped him, or reverenced him as a Father.
Lib. de beata vita: Virtutem vt Deos, and eius professores, vt antistites
colite.
Seneca would have men to worship virtue, as the gods themselves; and the
Professors of it, as the Antistites, which were the chief Priests of the
Temples, and were overseers, and disposers of all things that did belong to the
worship of the gods. (...).
In Pithagoras is required a worship, or worthy esteem of the unmarried;
intimating an extraordinary kind of reverence to be given to them, that had
either such a gift of continence, or power to keep themselves in a chaste
course of life unmarried. This worship is likewise ascribed to Angels, as a
worthy Writer has not long since observed. Beza, 2. Cap. ad Colos. Est forma
Religionis, quae ex speculationibus c^riosis, and tamen reconditae cuiusdam
sapientiae specimen habentibus oritur, cruusmodi est (...).
There is a worship (says he) which arises out of curious speculations, which
yet makes a show of certain hidden wisdom; of which sort, is the worship of
Angels. And John in the Revelation is said, To offer worship to the Angel.
Lastly, this worship or service, is attributed to Idols, as the word Idolatry
will teach, (...).
which signifies the worship of Idols. The first of these acceptions of worship
or honor, a it is applied to a man, is allowable; the other two acceptions, as
worship, is attributed to Angels and Idols: the former of them requires a
cautelous construction, lest it prove derogatorie to Gods Worship, and implies
a worthy regard of them, for their excellent nature and employment: the latter,
is absolutely sinful, and directly forbidden by God himself. Whence may be
gathered a threefold distinction of worship, which is either a reverend and
respectfull esteem of some creature, out of any duty belonging to them; or any
special excellency in them, which may be expressed in a man's outward carriage;
or such an application of a man's service to an Idol, as that he sets it in the
place of God: or lastly, the worship which God challenges to himself; and
thus worship, or honor may be said in general to be given, as well to the
creature as to the Creator.

But it is the form of every thing that gives it being. The truth of worship
to Godward, the formal cause of Religion.
Now the form of this Religion may be taken to consist in two things. In the
Worship of God, and in the truth of that Worship. Here is not meant that form
spoken of by Paul to Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.5. (...), etc.
which a man may have, and yet deny the power of Religion; but that form which
is powerful to make a man truly religious, and must inform a man what
Religion is. So that he that will be religious, must worship God, and that in
Truth. First, he must worship God. And what is God? Himself tells us, that his
Name is, Exodus 3.14.
I AM, and Christ, in the Gospel of S. John, Ioh. 8.58.
being asked of the Jews; whether he had seen Abraham, being not yet fifty
years old, does not answer them; That before Abraham was, I was: but said unto
them; before Abraham was, I AM. And what is he? That I AM, says God; and that
is All, and that All, is All. Let a man mount upon the wings of cogitation,
(which is swifter then any flying bird,) into the highest Heaven, which is the
Seat of Gods incomprehensible Majesty; and there imagine an vnimaginable
glory; that He is: let him come down into the Firmament; and (if he can
without dazeling,) look upon that orient Ruby, and that splendent Diamond, the
bigger, and lesser light, round beset with the sparkling Stars; all which do
as much excel in operative virtue, the most precious Stone the Earth
affoordes, as there is distance between heaven and earth: and that He is. Let
him pass through the element of fire, and there make a little stay, where he
shall stand in the midst of fire, and not burn, nor be sensible of the
heat, if he were bodily there; which fire sets on fire all other bodies, and
that He is. Let him make a step lower into the element of Air, and there he
shall find such a friendly discord, as that neither moisture shall quench
heat, nor heat dry up moisture; without temperature, no living creature could
breathe: and that He is. Let him take a iourny to the uttermost parts of the
earth, and where-euer he comes, inquire of God, and there he shall here of
Him; for the earth and the fullness thereof is the Lords. Psalm. 24.1.
Let him descend into the Storehouse of the earth, and search the several
Cabinets of Gods Jewels, and the whole Treasury of his Riches, and there he is
to be found: Psalm. 104.5.
For he has laid the foundation of the earth. Let him go down into the deepes
of the water, and there take view of Gods creatures; which are for number
incredible, and many of them for shape, proportion, and condition, accounted
Monsters: and likewise think upon that common benefit, which all living
creatures receive from this element of water (without which they could not
subsist,) and there he shall understand of Him; they are the words of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 135.6.
Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in the heaven, and in the earth, and
in the sea. And when a man has taken a sight of the Mycrocosme, or great
world, and received some apprehension of God therein, let him cast his eye upon
that Mycrocosme, or little world himself, wherein is as much contracted, and
compacted, as is contained in the whole Universe: and see if there he can
receive any farther information of God. There a man shall see (as it were the
Sun and Moon,) understanding, and sense, placed in the uppermost and
sphericall part of his body. The opinion of the Naturalist is, that the Sun
and a man generate a man, Sol and homo genera^t hominem.
which in this fabric is true; that the sun of understanding working upon
the terrene and elementary parts of a man, makes up a man, and withal, this
glorious and Heavenly Planet sends forth light and influence, whereby the whole
man is continually directed and preserved. Here likewise may be observed the
Quotidian motion of this Planet, which daily visits the whole man with sweet
comfort and illumination, and the annual motion, like unto that yearly
progress of the Sun, wherein it takes a more particular and serious view of
all the parts of the Earth. And indeed it is a good years work, for the
swiftest contemplation, to take an exact consideration of all the faculties and
parts of a man, and that inward, and estimatiue sense, which is called by some,
the common sense, and represents the Moon, receives all the light it has from
the understanding, whence comes the Eclipse; as may be said of this Moon
within a man, when the earthly, carnal, and external parts of a man, are
interposed between sense, and the light of the understanding; and the like
eclipse is there of the Sun, which is resembled by the understanding, when
sense interposeth it self between a man, and true reason. Let a man look
into the firmament of thoughts and cogitations, which are in number and
quality, like the twinkling Stars of Heaven, whereof some are fixed, but most
wandering; and he shall easily discern a similitude between the things
compared, which is likewise to be found in the whole body of a man. The shape
of a man, as long as he is contained in the round womb of his Mother, is
Globary, till that divine part of him be infused, which requires a maiestike,
and commanding stature: since God has subjected all the creatures under his
government; which is lively expressed by Ovid the Poet, who having set forth
the Creation of the world, with the creatures inhabiting therein, proceeds with
words to this purpose; There was yet wanting, (says he) a more perfect and
sacred living creature that should be capable of transcendent knowledge, Ovid.
Metamorph. lib. 1. Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius altae, Deerat adhuc,
and quod dominari in caetera posset. Natus homo est, Proraque cum spectent
animalia caetera terram, Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre, Iussit, and
erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
and might bear rule over all other things. Man was borne: and whereas all
other creatures were framed, with their eyes cast down upon the earth; God
gave man a lofty countenance, and an upright and stately proportion, commanding
him to look up to heaven, from whence he came. But the elements retain the
same qualities and opposition in the body of a man, which they had before this
composition; for heat, and coldness, and moisture, and dryness are in
continual strife, which shall have the predominancy; and which is a strange
thing, this discord is a cause both of the conservation, and destruction of the
same subject: for without all the elements, there is no body could subsist; and
yet this war amongst the elements, is the ruin of every body: in which
war, they are all conquerers, and yet all overcome: for the fire dries up the
water, and the water quenches the fire; the air moulders the earth, and the
earth expels the air; and yet they have a mutual concord: for the fire and
air agree in heat; the air and water agree in moistnes; the water and earth
agree in coldness; and the earth and fire agree in drienesse; and they all
agree in this, that none of them will depart the field, till they have
destroyed the subject of their contention which is the body of a man: and in
this is to be admired the wonderful workmanship of God. But yet for all this
search, the knowledge of God is not to be found: for he is incomprehensible;
and how can a man comprehend an incomprehensible? He is a Spirit; and how can
flesh and blood apprehend a Spirit? God is infinite, not to be limited in time;
he is every where, and yet no where, either circumscriptiuely or definitiuely;
and how can a man circumscribed within two yards, receive a notion of him, that
fills all things, and all places? He is omnipotent; and how can the weak brain
of a man conceive what He is? He is only good; and how can a man that is only
evil, be able to understand what He is, that is all good? He is Wisdom,
Strength, Justice, Fortitude, and all Virtue divine and moral, yea, in Him are
comprehended all Arts and Sciences; what man is, He is; what any other living
creature is, He is; yea, what is in heaven and earth, He is; for evil, it is a
privation, and therefore is not, nor cannot have any being in him; and this is
all the knowledge man can have of God, that what he himself, or any other
creature is not, that God is; yea, God only is, and man is nothing but what he
is in God: God is in man, and yet no part of man; man is in God, and yet no
part of God: yea, God is absolute without man; man is nothing without God; and
this knowledge of God, as imperfect as it is, is yet sufficient to direct man
to worship God, in whom he lives, moves, and has his being.

But how shall man worship him whom he has not known? The manner how to
worship God, which is part of the form of Gods worship, is in truth. Seneca, a
heathen man, could make a distinction between Religion, and Superstition, or
Idolatry, Religio Deos colit, superstitio violat.
when he says, That Religion is an observation of God in his Worship, whereas
Superstition is a violating of his Worship, in drawing it from truth and
sincerity: but what the true Worship of God is, man can no way come to the
knowledge of, but from God himself, because no man does in any degree of
perfection know what God is. Now there are two Books, that God has given man
to study upon; the Book of Nature, and the Book of the Word. In the Book of
Nature, although man may read sufficient to condemn himself, yet there he
shall find nothing but what will confound him: In the Book of his Word, God
has been graciously pleased more at large to open himself unto man, and
thereout to afford him not only instruments, to frame him fit for his
Worship; but directions how to worship him aright. Every natural man walks in
darkness, as is wrriten by the Prophet Isaiah, ^saiah, 9.2.
The people that walked in darkness, have seen a great light; that is, in
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The Word, says the Prophet in the Psalm, Psalm.
119.105.
Is a Lamp, or a Lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths. And David
shows how he got understanding, and was grown to a hatred of false-hood, and
error, namely, by the Precepts, and Word of God. Solomon, or Christ, is said
to ride upon the Word of Truth, Psalm. 45.5.
as one that would ride in triumph over all Heresy. Now every man is content
to have some form of Religion; but this true worship does so strictly tie the
conscience to that form and practcie of Religion, which is taught out of the
Word of God, as that a man is ready to frame to himself any kind of Religion,
whereby he might have some dispensation for his evil course of life, rather
then to be held to so hard terms: and hence it comes to pass, that so many
fall to Popery, who when they are loath to deny and cross themselves in the
lusts of the flesh, and yet are desirous to go to heaven, they embrace this
Religion, wherein they believe that though they commit never so great sins;
yet if they can get Pardons of Indulgences from the Pope, or absolution from
the Priest, or do some works of Charity, or such as are meritorious in their
own opinion; or procure some intercession of Saints, or some prayers to be
made for them after they are dead, they think God to be well satisfied for
their sins, and well pleased with them: Nay, such is their gross stupidity,
as that they think the sprinkling of a little holy water, to be salutary for
soul and body; which appears plain in those conjuring words spoken by the
Priest, in divine Service: In Manual. ad vsum ecclesiae Sarisburiensis.
Exorcise te creatura salis, per Deum viuum. Sis omnibus te sumentibus sanitas
animae and carporis, and effugiat atque discedat ab eo loco quo aspersum
fuerit, omnis nequitia.
I exorcise, or conjure thee, O creature of Salt, that thou be to all that
shall partake of thee, sanitie of soul and body, and that all evil shall
depart from that place, where thou art sprinkled. And farther he says, I
exorcise, or conjure thee, O creature of water, that thou may serve to the
casting out of Devils, Exorciso te creatura aquae, in nomine Dei Pa^^ris, vt
fias aqua exorcisata ad effugandam omnem potestatem inimici, etc. Ad
abijciendos daemones, morbosque pellendos, vt quicquid in domibus vel in locis
fidelium haec vnda respersit, careat omni immunditia, liberetur a noxa, non
illic resideat spiritus pestilens, non aura corrumpens, etc.
to the expelling of diseases, that upon whatsoever thou art sprinkled in any
house of the faithful, it may have taken from it all uncleanness, it may be
freed from all obnoxitie; that no pestilent spirit may remain upon it, nor any
corrupt air. Let all the trecheries of the hidden enemy depart: and if there
be any thing adverse to the health, or quiet of the inhabitants, let it be
chased away by the aspersion of this water. And then the Priest casts the salt
into the water, crossewayes, after the manner of the Cross, and says
privately, Let there be an equal co^mixture of salt and water. And thus is
their Holy water made, and sprinkled. And who would not be a Papist, to have
this benediction of Holy water? And the like benediction is there of the Bread.
Nay, such is their horrible blasphemy, as that they hold ye wax Candles to be
enlightened, with the light of Gods heavenly Benediction, as they call it, and
kindled at the fire of his most sweet clarity; and who would not be a Papist,
to partake of this light? Farther, some of their Prayers for the dead, are
these:

We commend unto thee, O Lord, the souls of thy Servants, that being dead,
they may live with thee for ever; and what sins they have fallen into,
through the frailty of their worldly conversation, do thou wipe them away, by
the Pardon of thy most merciful goodness.

Another is this, God, which art the giver of Pardon, and lover of man's
salvation; we implore thy Clemency, that those Brothers and Sisters of our
Congregations, which are gone out of this world, may come to the society of
thy everlasting blessing, by the intercession of the blessed Mary, for ever a
Virgin, and of Michael the Archangel, and of all the Saints.

A third is this, Make good, we beseech thee, O omnipotent, and merciful God,
that the souls of our Brethren and Sisters of our Congregations, for whom we
offer up to thee this sacrifice of Praise, being expiated by virtue of this
Sacrament from all their sins, may receive the blessing of thy everlasting
light.

And who would not be a Papist, to have these Prayers said for him after his
death, if they were effectual? The Heathen, since they could not be so
religious to God, as the light of Nature informed them, they ought to be,
framed to themselves gods of men, that since they could not, or would not be
like God, they would make gods like themselves. And thus Saturn, and Jupiter,
and diverse other men, being famous upon earth, for some extraordinary
qualities, or exploytes, were called gods after their deaths. Seneca observes,
that amongst Heathen men that worshipped Jupiter, one will have him to be
winged, another will have him to bear horns, another accuses him of Adultery,
another complains, that he is cruel toward the gods. In all which, says
the Author, they intend nothing, but to take away the shame of sinning from
men, who believed such gods as these, and conceived it no shame for them, to do
as their gods did. And hereby appears the truth of the Worship of God
declared in his Word, in that it opposes sin: and the reason why Idolatry
and false religion draw away so many, is, because they either give a liberty to
sin, or a Pardon of sin, upon easy conditions; but these men which are
thus seduced, are of another mind, then David was, who hid the Word of God in
his heart, that he might not sin. He found no safety, so long as he
continued in sin, nor any means to avoid sin, but the Word of God, which
is the Touchstone to try all metals of Religion. If a man doubt of the
doctrine of Religion, let him bring it to this Touchstone, and he shall soon
discern, whether it be current or no: If he bring his life, and actions to
this Touchstone, he shall quickly know, whether they be good or no: If he
bring his faith, and repentance, to this Touchstone, it will quickly show,
whether they be sound, or no: If he bring his honesty and justice to this
Touchstone, he shall easily discover, whether they be counterfeit, or no. It
is the special care of every good Schoolmaster, to see that his Scholars
perform all their exercises truly; so this Schoolmaster, the Word, which
undertakes to teach the Worship of God, directs to the true Worship of God.

And this truth, is not only required in the outward practice of Religion, but
in the heart and inward soul of a man. Behold, Psalm. 51.6.
thou requirest truth in the inward parts, says the Psalm: and it is the
complaint of God in Isaiah, Isai. 29.13.
That the people drew near unto him with their mouths, and with their lips
did honor him, but had removed their hearts far from him. A man may be a
great Scholar, well read in all controversies, able to distinguish between
true Religion, and false opinions, well grounded, and of good understanding, in
the doctrine and discipline of Religion, orthodoxall in point of faith, a
careful obseruer of divine worship, a just dealer amongst men, civil in his
course of life, well reported of for hospitality, diligent in all his
affairs, true in all his Words, and of a fair demeanor in all his actions:
and yet, if this inward uprightness to God and man for conscience sake of Gods
Commandment, be wanting to this man, he may be wanting of true Religion.
Joshua, 24.14.
For Joshua requires the people to fear the Lord, and serve him, but how? In
sincerity, and truth. And Samuel commands them not only to serve the Lord, but
it must be done in truth, and with all their hearts. Religion then appears
from the efficient cause thereof, to be the work of God; from the material
cause, to be worship; The final causes of Religion, the glory of God, and
man's salvation. Nihil sit frustra.
and from the formal cause, to be true, and only, and properly applied to
God. But the Natural Philosopher could reach so far, as to apprehend, that
nothing could be made in vain; and therefore if in that inferior workmanship
of God, in the framing of all the creatures, was expressed a rare Art; and in
this work, there was intended an end: then certainly, much more in the
framing a man after Gods own Image. Man must believe an end, yea, a more
special end, by how much the effect is of a more excellent nature. There are
two final causes of Gods Works, the one communicated to man, with all other
creatures, which is the last, the uttermost and chiefest end, the other, only
for man's sake; the former of these ends, is the glory of God, to which end he
made all that is made, and does dispose of all things that are done; to which
purpose are the words in the Revelation, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive
glory, and honor, and power, for thou have created all things, etc. If God had
not made the world (to our apprehension,) he had lost the glory of his power;
if he had not made man perfect, he had lost the glory of his goodness; if man
had not fallen (though God was not the Author thereof,) he had lost the glory
of his Justice; if he had not redeemed man, he had lost the glory of his
Mercy; if he had not continued man, he had lost the glory of his Providence;
and if he had not been the worker of Religion in man, he had lost all his
glory upon Earth. For to what end was it to make a world, if man had not been
placed as a Governor over it? To what end was it to make man perfect, but to
try his obedience? To what end was it to continue man, but to wayt for his
Redemption? To what end was it to redeem man, but to serve him in holiness
and righteousness all the days of his life? And how could man so do, if God
had not wrought this work of Religion in him?

Neither is God only a Creator of man, and Religion in man, to his own glory;
but a loving Father to man, in suffering him by this Religion, to work out his
own salvation, which is the second final cause thereof, as the holy Ghost
sets it down in the Philippians, where a Christian is commanded to work out
his salvation in fear and trembling. And the Apostle to Titus Titus 1.2.
makes eternal life, the end of all Religion, and godliness; and in this is
declared the wonderful love of God to man, notwithstanding his disobedience in
his fall. What man buys any cattle, but either to droyle them out, or fat
them for the Shambles? but this God bought man from death, to life; yea,
himself was led as a sheep to the slaughter, Isai. 35.7.
that he might save man. What Master, when he has hired a servant, bids him
employ his time and labor, to his own use? But this God does so to man, and
bids him, if he want stock to set up withal, to come unto him, and he will
furnish him. What Landlord, when the Rent-day comes, bids his Tenant lay out
his Rent for his own best profit? But this God, the Landlord of the World,
when man brings him his Rent, which is his Worship in a religious life, bids
him improve it for his own good, and makes his own salvation, the scope and
end of all his labor. And is it no less then salvation, that a man aims at
in being Religious? Was there ever any man, that had a slave that ran away from
him, and subjected himself to his deadly enemy, that would not only spare him
punishment, but make him a freeman? Yet behold, man that sold himself as a
slave to the Devil, is made a Free-denizen of Heaven. Was there ever any
Soldier that rose up in mutiny, that did not only escape Martial Law, but
was sent home to inherit the Generals own Land? Yet behold, man, that did not
only rise himself, but drew the whole Regiment of Jesus Christ, mankind, into
mutiny; he is sent to inherit the Kingdom of heaven, Christ's own inheritance.
Was there ever any King, that when his subject was convicted of high Treason,
would not only spare his life, but make him one of his Privy Chamber; or
Bedchamber, where he should be nearest to his Person? Yet behold, when man
had risen in rebellion against God; he is not only pardoned his Treason, but
is received into Gods Chamber of Presence in this world, which is the Church;
and shall hereafter be made a Privy Chamber-man of heaven. Why then, is it to
no end to be Religious, when he shall not only thereby promote the glory of
his Creator, but purchase to himself an eternal Mansion in that new Jerusalem?

The effects of Religion, Obedience, Sanctity, and Wisdom.
Neither is this Religion which proceeds from so excellent causes, without the
like effects, amongst which, these three may be noted; Obedience, Sanctity, and
Wisdom. Obedience is either active, or passive. For active obedience, God in
his Covenant declared to his Children, by his Prophet Ezekiel, promises first
to work Religion in the^, A new heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I
put within you; and what follows upon this? Then (says the Lord) you shall
walk in my statutes, Ezekiel. 36.26.
and you shall keep my Judgments and do them. But this practical obedience
must be general, such as is enjoined by God in the Prophecy of Jeremiah,
Iere. 11.4.
that they should obey his voice, and do the words of his Covenant, according
to all that he had commanded them. And God threatens his people in Leuiticus,
that if they would not do all his Commandments, then he would appoint over
them terror, consumption, and the like, Cursed is he that does not abide in
all, etc. Leuit. 26.14, 15, 16.
It is farther required, that this obedience should be constant; thereupon our
Savior grounds his promise, That he that endures to the end, Mat. 24.13.
the same shall be saved. And it is the condition that Christ propounds to his
Disciples, in the Gospel of Saint John, Ioh. 8.31.
If ye continue in my Word, the^ are ye my Disciples indeed. Passive obedience,
is to suffer with patience, all the afflictions that befall a man: for Paul
has given every Christian his doom, where he says, 2. Tim. 3.12.
All that will live godly in Jesus Christ, shall suffer persecution: And
therefore Christ exhorts his Disciples to possess their souls in patience;
Luke 21.19.
of which David is a singular example in suffering the curse of Shimei; when he
says, 2. Sam. 16.10, 11, 12.
Let him curse, because the Lord has said unto him, Curse; and makes an excuse
for Shimei, by way of extenuating his fault, since his own son that came
forth of his bowels, sought his life: and in conclusion, casts himself upon
the Lord, It may be (says he,) the Lord will look upon my affliction. Neither
is it enough to suffer calamity, but to be humbled under Gods hand in time of
distress, which is the admonition of James, Be afflicted, and mourn, Iam.
4.9, 10.
and weep, humble your selves in the sight of the Lord.

The next effect of Religion, is Sanctity; the speech of Paul to the
Thessalonians, These. 4.1, 3, 5, 6.
is this, when we beseech you brethren, that as ye have received from us how ye
ought to walk, (that is, in the way of Religion) and please God, so you would
abound more and more; for this is the will of God, even your sanctification.
And this sanctifying consists either in the forbearing sin, to which purpose,
the Apostle in the same place instanceth in two evils, from which they should
abstain, namely, the lust, and concupiscence, or uncleanness, and fraud, or
deceit: or else it consists in the practice of holiness; to which end God
would have the children of Israel to wear frindges on their garments, Number.
15.41.
that they might remember and do all his Commandments, and be holy unto God.
And Peter sets God, as a Pattern of holiness, exhorting them as obedient
children, to be holy in all manner of conversation, 1. Pet. 1.14.15.
as he that called them, is holy: and indeed this holiness is a marvelous
effect, whereby is wrought such a secret alteration in a true Convert, as that
none knows how it comes to pass, but his own soul within him, which yet
himself is not able to express, neither would any one take him to be the same
man he was before. Is it not a strange thing to find a man, that for twenty,
thirty, forty years together, has swoom in abundance of all earthly things,
has denied himself no manner of pleasure that is to be found out under the
Sun; has had the general applause of all that knew him, for an
understanding, a just, a temperate, and a liberal man; has had continual
health; has never known what the least misery is? To see this man all on a
sudden, in the midst of his happiness, perplexed, and troubled within
himself, complaining of the miserable estate he is in; laying to his own
charge, blindness of mind, injustice of his actions, a want of government in
his course of life, and neglect of charitable works, accusing himself of all
manner of sin, and finding no comfort at all, till the same power has raised
him up, that before had thus cast him down; and then to see him changing his
vain company, disregarding his superfluous wealth, laying aside his
unprofitable and time-consuming pleasures, contemning popular applause,
laboring for the true knowledge of God, and of the means how to serve him
aright, performing all good works in obedience to the Commandment of God;
which before he observed only in a civil respect, and abstaining from those
evil actions for conscience sake, which (happily) before he had forborne the
practice of, for some sinister, or outward regard, and making a sanctified use
of all Gods blessings, as of health, peace, liberty, and the like: Is not this
a wonderful alteration, which in some measure is found in every man, so soon
as true Religion enters into his heart?

The third effect of Religion, is Wisdom; and this is either Sapience, or
Prudence. In definition. (...). Ethic. lib. 6. cap. 5. (...).
Sapience is defined by Plato, to be a simple or incompounded Science, or the
knowledge of Divine and Eternal things, or a knowledge that proceeds from
contemplation of the cause of things. And Aristotle, his Scholar, defines
Prudence to be a true habit working with reason, upon those things that are,
good or evil to a man: but the chief Preacher and Teacher of Wisdom, has
included them both in one verse, where he says, that Sapience is the reverence
of God, and Prudence the communion of Saints, as Tremellius interprets it, so
that out of a true knowledge of God, infused by God himself, proceeds this
reverence of God, which is Sapience, and the virtuous carriage of a man's self
toward men, especially the Saints, is Prudence. The object of Sapience, is
ens, or being, and the object of Prudence, is the chief good. Now God is the
only Being, or I AM; and he is the chief, yea, the only Good, and therefore
Religion, containing the true knowledge and worship of God, works this
Wisdom in a man. There are four things which accomplish a man's happiness,
pleasure, profit, honor, and long life to enjoy them in: all which Solomon
comprehends in Wisdom, where he says, that All other delights of a man are
not to be compared unto her, Prou. 3.15, 16.
and length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and
honor.

But there is no speaking of any thing under God, Man, the subject of Religion.
but it must have a place of residence. So Religion must have a subject to
reside in, which is man that has been so often named. And here Religion sits
like a Queen in her Majesty, she keeps her Court in the soul of man, and
her chair of State, is the heart of man, so that to man may be well said, Let
your doors stand open, you everlasting gates, and let the Queen of glory come
in. She is so wise of her self, and so powerful, as that she needs no
counsel, only she has continually waiting upon her, two Secretaries of
State, and a Recorder or Register, the first of these Secretaries is
Understanding; to this she referres the examining of all suites preferred, and
the information of what nature they are. The second Secretary is the Will, and
to this she referres the returning of Answer to all Petitions made: the
Recorder to this great Queen, is Memory, and here are registered all Petiions,
with their answers, to the end that man might not be without a president for
whatsoever he shall be a suitor; if here he can find, that such and such things
have been to such and such persons, at such and such times, and in such and
such a place gtanted, he may have hope to obtain his desire in that kind: but
if he find, that such things have been denied, and thought altogether unfit
to be asked, or granted, let him desist from Petitions, in this nature. In this
office of the Memory, likewise are recorded all the Letters Patents that ever
have bin granted unto any man; so that if he chance at any time to lose his
evidence, or assurance, here he may take out a new Copy of it when he will.
In this Office likewise are entered all the Actions of man, that if at any time
he have done any memorable service, he may crave reward, (for this is a
bountiful Queen,) or if he have committed any crime, he may sue for his
Pardon; for God that has placed Religion his Vicegerent upon earth, is a
merciful God. Now the household servants of this Queen, are the affections, so
that where she commands to love, the Religious man loves; where she commands
to hate, he hates; where she commands to rejoice, he rejoices; where she
commands to sorrow, he sorrows; where she commands to fear, he fears; where
she commands confidence, he is bold: so that all the actions are ready at her
command. The common subjects of this Queen, (for she admits no Peers in her
Dominions,) are all the parts of the body; the eye, the ear, the hand, the
foot, and all the members of a Christian man's body are governed by her, and
receive protection, and direction from her; she feeds the hungry mouth,
clothes the naked back, strengthens every weak part, and sustaines the whole.
The revenue of this Great Queen, is all that a man has in this world; no
sooner was she entered into the hearts of the Christians in the Acts, but they
came and laid all they had at the Apostles feet: where she bids Give, man must
give; yea, if she call for his children, or himself, he must be ready with
the answer, which Seneca reports Demetrius to make to the gods: Seneca, lib.
cur. bonis viris mala fiunt. Hanc quoque animosam Demetrij fortissimi viri
vocem audiffe me mominisse hoc vnum, inquit, Dij immortales, de vobis queri
possum, quod non ante mihi voluntatem vestram notam fecistis: prior enim ad
ista venissem, ad quae nunc vocatus sum. vultis liberos illos vobis sustuli?
vultis aliquam partem corporis? Sumite. Non magnam rem promitto, cito totum
relinqua^. Vultis spiritum? quidni? nullam moram faciam, quo minus recipiatis
quod dedistis: a volente recipietis, quidquid petieritis. quid ergo est?
malu^sse^ offerre quam tradere. Quod opus fuit anferre? accipere potuistis, sed
ne nunc quidem auseretis, quia nihil eripitur nisi retinenti.
There is one thing, O ye immortal gods, I have to complain of you, that you
would not let me know your pleasure beforehand, for I would have first offered
my self, to what I am now called by you: will you have my children? I have
bred them up for you: will you have any member of my body? Take it: I promise
no great matter; for within a short time I shall leave the whole. Will you have
my life? what else? I will make no delay to hinder you from receiving what you
have given: you shall willingly receive whatsoever you require: I had rather
offer all to you unasked, then deliver it to you being demanded: you shall not
need to use any violence, you may take them: nothing is said to be taken, away
from him, that does not withhold it, and I deny you nothing: where she bids
Keep, man must keep; if she call for all a man has, he must part with it: if
she bring never so great an increase, she must have the disposing of all; yet
she does not always turn her Tenants out of possession; only she will have
them know, that they are but Tenants at will: and as this Religion is only an
adiunct to man (no man has it borne with him,) so it is a subject to diverse
adjuncts.

The adjuncts of Religion, The proper adjuncts of Religion, knowledge, faith,
love, and fear.
are either proper, or common: the proper adjuncts of Religion, some of them
may be these; knowledge, faith, love, and fear.

This knowledge, which is a proper adiunct of Religion, is not an Historical
knowledge, but a saving knowledge, such a knowledge as is taught by him that
works Religion in the heart; which our Savior verifies, Mat. 1 1.27.
in saying, That no man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son
reuealeth him. And this was the knowledge that Paul was infused withal, 2.
Cor. 12.4.
when he was caught up to the third heaven: so that it is wrought together with
Religion, and without which there is no Religion. The Philosopher observes a
twofold knowledge; A priori and posteriori.
the one proceeding from the precedent causes, which are for the most part
unknown: the other from the subsequent effects, and adjoining qualities; and
the latter of these, is all the knowledge a man can likely have in natural
things; but this is a certain distinction in Divinity, wherein both parts are
to be noted for the natural man, by observation, experience, and discourse,
may, out of effects and qualities, gather some knowledge of God and his Divine
being, and a worship to be due to him, and an infinite power to be in him, and
he may grope out so much (according to the words of the Author of the Acts of
the Apostles) as will direct him to seek out the true knowledge of God and his
worship, Acts 17.^7. (...).
from God himself; but this saving knowledge here spoken of, is such a one, as
that no man can have it in him, without the same God that gives it, reveal it
to him out of those hidden principles wrought in the heart of man, which are
not possible to be expressed.

The next proper adiunct is faith, which is so linked to the former of
knowledge, as that who has not the one, has not the other; and who has not
true Religion, has neither; and therefore the Apostle ioynes them together, as
things inseperable, and infallible tokens, or signs one of another; where he
exhorts the Corinthians to try themselves whether they were in the faith, or
no; but how should they try themselves? by no way, but by their knowledge; and
therefore he asks them in the next words, 2. Cor. 13.5.
Do you not know your selves? and shows them farther, how they come, by this
knowledge, namely, Because Jesus Christ was in them, except they were
Reprobates. Is it not a strange thing, that Herod should send the Wise men to
the Pharisees, to inform themselves where Christ should be borne, and they
could direct them to Bethlem, and show them what had been prophesied, and yet
could not believe in him? But this shows the difference between that
knowledge, and faith grounded thereupon, which was revealed to the Apostles by
Christ himself; and that other of the Pharisees, which is none of this saving
knowledge or faith which is proper to Religion.

The third proper adiunct of Religion, is love, and that love is not every
love, but the love of God, and our brethren for Gods sake, which love is
wrought in man, by the same Spirit that Religion it self is wrought: The
Apostle says, Romans 5.5.
That the love of of God is shed abroad into our hearts, by the holy Ghost,
which is given to us. And in another place; he acknowledges great thanks to
be due to God, for the increase of faith, and abundance of love, which was in
the Thessalonians, 2. These. 1.3.
where he ioynes faith, and love, as the gifts of God, that go always
together: neither let a man deceive himself in this love of God: for many men
think they love God, when indeed they love only themselves: as Christ
vpbrayded them that followed him only for love of the loaves. Diverse Heathen
people have worshipped the Sun, the Moon, the Stars. Ceres, the goddess
of Corn, Bacchus, the god of Wine, and the like, for the benefit they have
received from these creatures; and no question, herein had some general
notation of a deity: but this love of God, which flows from true Religion,
must not be only a love of him for his goodness toward us, no, not for that
great gift of salvation to mankind, but a love of him, because he is so holy,
and absolute perfection; yea, though we received none of these mercies, yet
this Religion will cause us to love him, for himself, and his children, in
obedience to his Commandment, and for the communion they all have in Christ;
which is delivered by John, 1. Epist. Ioh. 3.21.
in these words, And this comfort have we from God, that he who loves God,
loves his brother also. And the Communion which all the Saints have in Christ,
requires the love, which the Apostle to the Ephesians Ephe. 4.15.
says, Is the knitting of the joints of Christ's body, from whence it receives
growth, and is built up.

The last of the proper adjuncts, is Fear: and this again must be the Fear
of God, which fear is never separated from true Religion; nor ever to be found
where true Religion is not. In the Scriptures Wisdom and Religion are
oftentimes taken in the same signification; and therefore it is said, The fear
of the Lord is Wisdom. Job 28.28.
And when a man is said to finish that great work of his salvation, which is
an end of his Religion, he is advised by the 2. Cor. 7.3.
Apostle to do it in the fear of the Lord. Religion consists in the observing
of the Law of God. Now, to fear God and observe his Commandments, is the
sum of the Law; but without the fear of God, there is no keeping of the
Commandments, and that makes a complete obedience. It is not punishment that a
man must only fear, but fear God, because he is God; yea, though there were
no punishment for offending him; and fear the committing of an evil act,
because it is displeasing to him, and contrary to his pure nature, which fear
in the Corinthians is called the perfection of holiness: and these four
qualities of knowledge, faith, love, and fear, are so linked together, as that
they are not to be found one without another, but make a golden bracelet to
adorn Religion withal; for out of knowledge a man must be able to give a
reason of his faith; as Peter 1. Pet. 3.15.
exhorts; and love is the efficacy of faith, Gal. 5.6.
as Paul affirms: and true fear is distinguished from slavish fear by love;
as will appear by comparing the Prophecy of Zacharias, which says, That we
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, Luke 1.74.
might serve him without fear; with the conclusion of the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.
ve. 119.120.
who professes that he loved the Testimonies of God, and his flesh trembled
before him, and he was afraid of his Judgments. Zacharias frees such as are
redeemed by Christ, Q. d. non quidem a praesentia tua metuo vt Adam, Genesis 3.
nam contra illam mihi adesse expeto, sed ab infirnutate mea ne prouocem iudicia
tua.
from a servile fear: but the Psalmist shows what caused a childlike fear
in him, namely, the love of Gods Testimonies. Tremellius and Iunius render this
exposition of the fear spoken of by the Psalmist, it is, as if he had said; I
fear not thy presence, (O God) as Adam did, but contrarily, I wish thee always
with me: but I fear my own weakness, lest I should provoke thee to
judgment. So that a Christian man may be said to believe in God, because he
spiritually knows him; to love him, because he believes in him; and to fear
him, because he loves him.

Besides these proper adjuncts of Religion, The common adjuncts of Religion,
all moral virtues.
there are common adjuncts of Religion, in the number of which, are Zeal, and
Mildness, and Patience, and Temperance, and Justice, and all moral virtues:
for though these do not so nearly depend upon Religion, as the other do, yet
where there is true Religion, these are in some measure to be found. For Zeal,
take the opinion of Paul, Gal. 4.18.
That it is good to be zealous always in a good thing. For Meekenes, take the
words of Solomon, Pro. 2.34.
Surely God scorneth the scorners, but gives grace unto the lowly. For
Patience, take the precept of Christ, Luke 21.19.
In your patience possess ye your souls. For Temperance, take our Sauiors
inquiry, and blessing, Mat. 24.45.
Who is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has made ruler over his
household, to give them meat in due season? Blessed is that servant, whom his
Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing. For Justice, Genesis 6.9.
take Noah for a Pattern: Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations,
and walked with God. And for all manner of moral virtues, there are Precepts,
Promises, and Examples to be found in the Scripture, which directs all men to
Religion.

And now, out of what has gone before, there may be a guess given what this
Religion is, which is taken upon them by many, but found in few. To define
Religion from its essential causes and internal, is not so easy; it being a
difficult thing to find out the matter and form of elementarie substances, and
distinguish between them and their properties: much more hard then must it be,
precisely to set forth the matter and form of incorporall substances, and most
difficult to give a definition out of the essential causes of a spiritual
thing; yet from what was taken before, to be the matter and form of Religion;
this definition may be given; Definition of Religion. Zanch. de relig. These.
1. vera religio quae idem est quod (...) in vero dei cultu posita est.
That Religion is the true Worship of God. It is first worship: it is secondly,
the Worship of God in truth; and this is the definition of Zanchy: but where a
definition may not be easily gathered, a description may give more light; and a
description of Religion may be this: That Religion, A descripti^n of Reli^ion.
is the true Worship of God, wrought by God himself in man, by means of his
Word, which works in a man, Obedience, Sanctity, and Wisdom; and is seated
principally in the soul of man, whence it disposes of, and directs all the
faculties of the mind, the actions of the body, and the whole estate of man to
Gods glory, and the salvation of man, and is always accompanied with saving
knowledge, a lively faith, love of God and his Saints, and fear of God, and
all virtues Spiritual and Moral, in some measure: and this description is
gathered out of all the consentany artificial arguments of Logic. There was a
Heathen man that describes Religion to be that, Cic. 2. Invent. Religio qu^
superioris et iusdam naturam (quam diuinam. vocaut) curam caeremoniem que
aff^rt.
which works a care, and ceremonious observation of some superior nature,
which, says he, they call Divine: but this man seemed only to point at the
outward form of Religion, which indeed was all the Religion they had. Calvin
in one place, says, Call. in Comment. super 2. Cap. Johan Vera antiqu^ religio,
quae in Christo sundata est.
that true, and ancient Religion is that, which is founded upon Christ, where
he seemed to direct only to the true foundation; whereupon the doctrine of
Religion was to be grounded, namely, Christ Jesus. Mel. de simplicibus
thematibus religio constat esse cultum Dei.
Melancton defines Religion to be the Worship of God; and though indeed God is
not worshipped, but rather dishonored, where he is not truly worshipped: and
so this definition may stand complete; yet because most pretended Religions
acknowledge a Worship of God: and many Learned Divines have made a definition
between true, and false worship: and this Melancton himself, in a description
he makes of Religion, says, that Religion is the Worship of God, which
consists in the fear of God, and belief in God; including in that
description, two of the proper adjuncts, before named. In these regards, truth
may not be altogether superfluously called, part of ye form of Religion; and
yet is it not to be conceived, that the form of Religion is to be divided; but
truth to Godward of that worship, (which was taken to be the matter) may be
received to man's apprehension, as a form of Religion: and if these things are
all true, notwithstanding so many claims laid to Religion, as there are, yet
it will appear, that Religion is not so conversant in the world, as every man
would have it.

It were to be wished, that men would not rest content with a bare name of
Religion, deceiving themselves, whilst many of them think to deceive others:
certainly, some women that use to paint themselves, conceive that the colors
which they use for that purpose when they once are laid on by them, are the
natural coluors of their faces: for else, why should they be proud, except it
be of their skill in painting? So men that have put on a guise of Religion,
imagine themselves to be such as they outwardly appear to be: for else why
should they glory in it, except it be of their art in hypocrising? Narcissus
seeing himself in the water, fell in love with himself, and was turned into a
Flower; so a man, when he looks upon himself, in the waterie conceit of his
own swimming fancy, is subject to grow in love with himself, who yet shall
prove but a fading flower, suddenly converting to rottennes: but if he view
himself in the Crystal Glass of the pure Word of God, he shall appear
before Regeneration, to be a Leper, a Swine, a Dog, a Devil; yet
notwithstanding, when this blessed form of Religion is put upon him, he shall
be here like David, a man after Gods own heart; and in heaven, conformed unto
the likeness of the Son of God, his elder Brother, and Savior, Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

