An admonition to Doctor Story being condemned of high Treason, sent to him
before his death, but because it came to late to his hands: it is now put in
print t^ be a warning to all other papists where by they may repent and (...)
mercy, cleue to his holy word and live ac^ Doctrine of the same.
BEstur your stompes good Story now, ye gallous^
I am sorry you came so late, that you must hang alone.
If you had come but one year past, company you might
John Felton and ye Nortons both, of you would have been glad^
Alas what luck had you good man, to bide from hence so long^
And hang behind your company, no dout you had (...)
But since Dame Fortune so does frown, and your (...)
I see that weeping will not help, it boots not to be (...)
Therefore I wish you to repent, while you have time (...)
Lay hold on Faith in Christ's blood, and call to God (...)
And now prepare your self with speed, to sail up Holbou^
And drinck you of that deadly cup, that you to us did fil^
Gods word must needs be proved true, which you do st^ue
Such measure as your self did give, such measure shall you have. Math. 6.

Remember well your crueltye, in killing of Gods Saints:
whose blood for vegean^ce still does cry, and god hearth their co^plai^te.
and you have now your just reward, which you have well deserved:
Because from God and princes laws, so tratorously you swarued.
As I hear say you do appele, unto your God the Pope:
But his Pardons cannot prevail, to save you from the rope.
Nor yet his Masses many fold, they cannot you defend:
From Tiburn neither yet from hell, except you do amend.
but when these news are brought to Rome, how yt you are attai^ted
Of high treason and hanged therefore, no dout you shall be Sainted.
These names and titles shall you have, in Rome when you be dead:
The Pope no dout will you inrole, under his bulls of lea^
A Doctor and a Confessor, thus shall you be extolds:
A Martyr and a Saint also, but yet a traitor bolds:
That day that you hanged shall be, it shall be holy day:
And so ordained by the Pope, that men to you may pray.
Thus shall you be canonized, as Saint as I have said:
Then to be hanged for high treason, what need you be afraid?
For you shall have Trentalls great store, of Masses said and sung:
And all the belles that be in Room, for your soul shall be rung.
If some good popish catholic, of your heart could take hold:
And bring it to the Pope in Rome, it should be shrinde in gold.
Because that in the Popes defense, you dyed so bold and stout:
If that your soul do go to bell, the Pope will Mass it out. The popes ^^oue^
next house to hell.

And place you by his own white side, where all ye saints do dwell
In that heaven which him self has made, not very far from hell.
Where you shall have such plesa^t joys, Mass and mattens by note These are
the Popes Saints.

Saint Pluto there sings Mass him self, in a red strye cote.
Saint Dunstone is one of his clerks, Saint Hildebrand another
There shall you see Saint Dominick, and S. Erancis his brother.
Saint Friar Forest is the Priest, to hear the Saints confession: Look in
Legend au^^a and there shall you find what S Remege tras.

Saint Friar Bacon beres the Cross, before them in ^ssion.
There shall you meet S. Thomas Becket, yt had the g^ne
And S. Thomas of Hareford shere, both costly brau^
There shall you meet S. Boniface, S Remige and S. (...)
Saint Brigid and S. Clare the Nun, with the holy m^ Sir Thomas More once Lord
chaunceler of England.

There shall you meet S. Cardinal Poole, and (...)
S. Thomas More a traitor stout, with the ho^
There shall you see that blessed Saint, Pope V^
Who was the first that did invent, and make Corpse (...)
These Saints and y^, with all the Sl^pers seven Look in the Festiual for the
seven Sleepers.

Shall meet you wit^ and welcome you to H^
And there you shall ^ing still, from morning v
And meet with your fam^r friends, S. Edmond and S. (...) Boner and Gardene(...).

Saint Christopher that late was hanged, at Tiburn you (...)
There shall you meet S. Felton to, with many (...)
All these Good Saints as I have said, will meet Norton.

And did you welcome into Heaven, with joy wh^
The^ al these Angels and these Saints with great mirth
Unto the high infernal seat, and set you next the kin^
You shall be made the cheifest Saint, and sit abooue (...)
Higher then ever Dunstone was, or any Priest of Ba
You shall be judge of all the Saints, and highest in C^ion:
Even as you here upon Earth were, to maintain superstion.
But yet I dout you shall not shape, the Purgatory flame.
(...) Masses and Diriges do not help, to save you from the same,
^f which I know you shall lack none, for many will be fain:
^o have a thousand for your sake, to fetch you out again.
^ut you shall Masses great store have, in ye heaven where you go:
that will keep you from Purgatory, if that the Pope say no.
^hus master Doctor have I told, your joys after this life:
because with Gods word and your Prince, you dye so far at strife.
^hese be the joys yt you shall have, in ye Popes heaven to reign:
But in Gods heaven where true joys be, no traitor shall remain
No Papist nor Idolater, that do refuse gods word:
No worshipper of Images, shall stand before the Lord,
Nor yet Rebellious Massemonger, that does his Prince despise:
Against all Popish blood suckers, the Lord will turn his eyes.
No witch nor wicked whoremo^ger, which your pope does defend
No Coniurer nor yet such like, to Gods heaven shall ascend.
No Buggerers orels yet haudes, in Gods heaven shall have place:
No Briber nor Simoniack, nor Periurer past grace.
No supersticious Heretics, nor mainteners of whores:
No Sectaries nor Sodomits, shall come within heaven doors.
All wilful virgins with their vows, professing to live chaste:
That godly marriage do contemn, from Gods heaven shall be cast.
And such were all your popish Saints, that I before have named:
with all these sins most horible, the most of the^ were blamed
But in such filthy stinking Saints the Lord has no delight:
And from the toys celestial, he will excluds them quite.
But these Saints that in Gods heaven, shall have their habitatio^:
Who by true faith in Christ's blood, do seek their whole salvation
And such as do unfeignedly, believe Gods holy word:
Whose life and good profession, together do accord.
And live like subjects to their prince, obeying godly laws:
Not thus to hang like traitors stout, as do you popish dawes.
Lo master Doctor these be they, whom we good Saints do call:
One of these Saints do plese God more, the^ do ye popes saints all
And if you be vnhangd as yet, God grant you may repent:
That you may be one of these Saints, of Christ omnipotent.
But if you be all ready hanged, I leave you to your judge:
And let the Papists by you take heed, how they do spurn and grudge
Against God and their lawful Queen, I would not wish the^ run It is ti^.

Lest that they drink of that same cup, as you before have done.
God be thanked that our Queen, begins to look about:
To draw the sword out of the shethe, to weed such trators out.
Therefore you popish traitors all, forsake your Roomish sects:
Obey your Queen like subjects true, or else beware your necks.
Take heed how you provoke your Prince, at any time to wrath: Pro. 20.

Whose anger is says Solomon, the messanger of death.
The Kings displeasure is even as, the roaring Lions voice:
Then to provoke the Queen to wrath, papists do not rejoice.
Abuse not the Queens lenity, that she to you does show:
What small vantage is got thereby, some papists late do know.
Consider what great benefits, we have of her good grace, ^ tiborne tippets.

She does maintain Gods holy word, to shine in every place.
How godly has she ruled us, by wise councels advice:
Of such a precious jewel you, papists know not the price.
She seeks to do harm to none, but to do all men good:
Yea, to her foes yt sought her death, she has not sought their blood
Til now of late they did rebel, high treason to conspire:
Then was it time to cut them of, and hang them somewhat hier.
To end, God save her majesty, from boody papists vain:
And Lord send her old Nestors years, with us to live and reign.
FINIS.
quod John. Cornet. Minister.

Imprinted at London at the long Shop adjoining unto Saint Mildreds Church in
the Pultrie, by John Allde.


