A new Ballad entitled, the stout Cripple of Cornwall, wherein is showed his
dissolute life and deserved death.
To the tune of the blind Beggar.
OF a stout Cripple that kept the high way,
and begged for his living all time of the day,
A story I Will tell you that pleasant shall be,
the Cripple of Cornwall sir-named was he.
He crept on his hands and his knees up and down,
in a torn Iacket and ragged patcht Gown*
For he had never a leg to the knee,
the Cripple of Cornwall sir-named was he.
He was of stomach courageous and stout,
for he had no cause to complain of the Gout:
To go upon stilts most cunning was he,
with a staff on his neck gallant and free.
Yea, no good fellowship would he forsake,
were it in secret a purse for to take:
His help was as good as any might be,
the Cripple of Cornwall sir-named was he.
When he upon any such service did go,
the crafty young Cripple provided it so:
His tools he kept close in an old hollow Tree,
that stood from the City a mile two or three.
Thus all the day long he begd for relief,
and late in the night he played the false Thief:
And seven years together this custom kept he,
and no man knew him such a person to be.
There were few Grafters went on the way,
but unto the Cripple for passage did pay,
And every brave Merchant that he did descry,
he emptied their purses ere they passed by.
The gallant Lord Courtney both valiant and bold,
rode forth with great plenty of silver and Gold:
At Exeter there a purchase to pay,
but that the false Cripple his journey did stay.
For why the false Cripple heard tidings of late,
as he lay for alms at this Noblemans gate:
What day and what hour his journey should be,
this is (quoth the Cripple* a booty for me.
Then to his Companions the matter he moned,
which their like actions beforetime had proned:
They make themselves ready and deeply they swear
this mony's their own before they come there.
Upon his two stilts the Cripple does mount,
to have his best share he makes his account:
All clothed in Canuas down to the ground,
he takes up his standing his mates with him round
Then comes the L. Courtney with half a scoremen
that little suspecting these thieves in their den:
And they perceiving them come to their hand,
in a dark evening they bid him to stand.
Deliver thy purse quoth the Cripple with speed,
for we be good fellows and thereof have need:
Not so, quoth Lord Courtney, but this I tell thee,
win it, and wear it, else get none of me.
With that the Lord Courtney stood in his defense,
and so did his servants, but ere they went since
Two of the true men were slain in the fight,
and four of the thieves were put to their flight
And while for their safeguard they ran thus away,
the jolly bold Cripple did hold the rest play:
And with his pike-staffe he wounded them so,
as they were unable to run or to go.
With fight the L. Courtney was driven out of breath
and most of his servants wounded to death:
Then came other horsemen riding so fast,
the Cripple was forced to fly at the last,
And over a River that ran there beside,
which was very deep and eighteen foot wide:
With his long staff and his stilts leaped he,
and shifted himself in an old hallow Tree.
Then through the Country was hue and cry made,
to have these thieves apprehended and stayed:
The Cripple he creeps on his hands and his knees,
and on the high way great posting he sees.
And as they came riding he begging does say,
O give me one penny, good Master* I pray:
And thus unto Exeter creepes he along,
no man suspecting that he had done wrong.
Anon the Lord Courtney he spyde in the street
he comes unto him and ^isles his feet:
Saying, God save your honor and keep you from il,
and from the hands of your enemies still.
Amen quoth. L. Courtney, and therewith slung down
unto the poor Cripple an English Crown:
Away went the Cripple and thus he did think,
500. pounds more would make me to drink.
In vain that hue and cry it was made,
they fon^d none of them though the Country was laid:
But this grieved the Cripple both night and day,
that he so unluckily m^st of his pray.
Nine hundred pounds this Cripple had got,
by begging and robbing so good was his lot,
A thousand pound he would make it he said,
and then he would quite give over his trade.
But as he striued his mind to fulfill,
in following his actions so lewd and so ill,
At last he was taken the law to suffice,
condemned and hanged at Exeter sise.
Which made all men amazed to see,
that such an impotent person as he,
Should venture himself to such actions as they,
to rob in such sort upon the high way.
FINIS.
London, Printed for I. W.


