The manner of the death and execution of Arnold Cosbie, for murdering the
Lord Boorke, who was executed at VVanswoorth towns end on the 27. of January
1591.

With certain verses written by the said Cosby in the time of his
imprisonment, containing matter of great effect, as well touching his life as
also his penitencie before his death.

Imprinted for William Wright.

1591.

The manner of the death and execution of Arnold Cosbie, for murdering the
Lord Bourke.
IMediatly after that Arnold Cosbie had received judgment, as you have before
heard, he had his hands fast bound, and by the knight Marshals men was
committed unto the Marshalsey, where he had learned preachers came and
conferred with him, showing him that this life was but frail and transitory,
and in no sort comparable unto the life to come, for therein consisted all
joy, pleasure, rest, solace, and continual comfort and that he might be
assured to dwell and live for ever among the Angels of of God, if so by
repentance of his former sins he would now call upon God, and steadfastly
believe that by faith in Christ Jesus, he should have free remission of all
his sins which from time to time he had committed. By means of which godly
conferences, the said Arnold Cosby called to mind the state wherein he had
before lived, and in what estate he now stood, and therewithal comparing the
one with the other, etc. seeing his sudden downfall through ^is pride and
folly before committed, he burst forth into bitter tears and grievously
lamented both his folly and his fall, wishing that he had never been borne to
perform an act so detestable, whereby he had lost the favor of his prince,
and good will of her people, not being able to make satisfaction for the least
drop of blood which he had wilfully wished, neither could he ever be
pardoned of the heinous sin which he thereby committed, but only by the
mercy of God which was ready (as he alleged) to rfreshe all penitent sinners
that sorrowed for their offenses even from the bottom of their hearts. Thus
meditating upon the New Testament, and having continual conference with these
that came to comfort him, he sometime red and sometime wrote such things as
might best content his woeful mind: until Wednesday about nine of the clock
in the morning, at which time he was conveyed from the Marshalsey in a cart
unto Wansworth towns end, where upon a high hill a gibbet was set up, and
being brought thither by the knight Marshals man he was taken from the cart,
and placed at the foot of the said hill, where at his coming he found the
Earl of Ormond, with many knights, captains and Gentlemen, who came to see
him suffer death, where he found at his coming Doctor Fletcher Lord Bishop of
Bristow and Almoner unto her majesty, to comfort him against the fear of
death, who persuaded him to defy murder and to acknowledge his offense: which
he did openly confess before all the people, and showed him self sorry for
the same, asking forgiveness both of God and the world, and therewithal
desired her majesty to forgive and forget his offense, so as it might be
hereafter no blot or blemish to his kindred or allies. Then after prayers which
the prisoner seemed to pour forth from a penitent heart, confessing that he
had before committed sundry heinous offenses, still calling upon God to forgive
him even to the last gasp, he was turned off from the ladder and there hanged
till he was dead, and now remains in the placed hanged up in chains,
according to his former judgment.

ARNOLD COSBIES vltimum vale to the vain world.
An Elegy written by himself in the Marshalsea after his condemnation.
Break heart, be mute my sorrows past compare,
Cosbie complain no more, but sit and die,
Tears are no tokens of such dreriment,
As thy true grief poures to the angry heavens,
The heavens offended with thy foul misdeeds,
O great Commander of this glorious round,
The workmanship of thine immortal hand,
Thou that do ride upon the Cherubins,
And tunest the deepes in dreadful harmony,
Cast down thine eye upon a wretched soul,
And from thy throne of grace great Jacobs God
Rain mercy on me, miserable man,
Fallen into snares of sin and shameful death,
From thee sweet Savior, Savior of the world.
O world, vain world, unconstant, and unkind,
Why have thou bred me, nursed me, brought me up,
To see this day of sorrow and of shame:
Cosbie complain. Captains and men of war,
With whom I whilome spent my carlesse days,
Days dated but to this, to end in shame,
Farewell, adieu to you and all the rest
That follow arms: and arms and life adieu,
From arms and life I pass drencht in the pit
Digde by my desperate hands hands full of blood.
Bleed heart to think what these accursed hands
Have perpetrated, Pardon heaven and earth,
And gentle Lord misled by my amiss,
Foully by me sent to thy longest home,
O pardon Cosbies cruel mind,
His mind enraged, and gentle blood by wrath
And fury tainted and empoisoned.
Why do I kill my doefull dying heart,
With sad rehearsal of this heavy chance.
O death rock me asleep, Father of heaven
That have sole power to pardon sins of men,
Forgive the faults and folly of my youth,
My youth misspent in wast and wantonness,
And for sweet Jesus sake forgive my soul,
Foully defild with this above the rest,
This wickedness, this hard unworthy deed.
And lastly you whose fame I have defild,
My kin, my Country men, friends and alies,
Pardon, o pardon, such as men to men
Can give, I beg for wronging you in all,
For shaming you in this my wretched end,
The fruitles crop, the meed of my deserts
My bad, my base deserts, sweet Friends forget,
Friends, country men, and kinsfolks all forget,
My name, my face, my fact, o blot me out,
Out of the world, put me out of your thoughts,
Or if you think, o think I never was,
Or if you think I was, think that I fell,
Before some forte, some hold in Belgia,
With this suppose beguile your sorrows friends,
Think that I fell before the Canons mouth,
Even in mine honors height that blessed day,
When in advancement of my name, I left
My countries enemy in his base revolt:
A wretched man to talk of honors height,
Fallen so basely into the pit of shame,
The pit of death: my God, my God forgive me,
Next to my God, my country pardon me,
Whose honor I have stained and laws infringe
And thou my sovereign Mistress and my Queen,
Bright star of Englandes globe, forgive my fact,
Nor let it touch thy Royal Princely heart,
That Cosbie has misdone so hainously.
The circle of my time is compassed,
Arrived to the point where it began.
World, country, kin, and friends farewell farewell,
Fly thou my soul to heaven the haven of bliss,
O body bear the scourge of thine amiss.

