The Araignment, Examination, Confession and Judgment of Arnold Cosbye:

WHO WILFVLLY Murdered the Lord Burke, near the Town of Wanswoorth, on the
14. day of this present Month of January and was executed the 27. of the same
month. 1591.

AT LONDON Printed for Edward White, and are to be sold at the little North
door of Saint Paul's Church, at the Sign of the Gunne.

The Araignment, Examination, confession and judgment, of Arnold Cosbye, who
wilfullye murdered the Lord Burke, near the Town of Wanswoorth, on the 14.
day of this present month of January. 1591.
Upon the 25. day of January last past, 1591. Arnold Colbye commonly called
and known by the name of Captain Cosbye, an Irish man borne, being before
committed to Newgate for the murdering of the Lord Burke, apparrelled in
ayellowe Fustian dublet, and alwse night gown cast over with his hands bound:
was brought from thence along the City of London over London bridge into the
borrough of Southwarke, within the County of Surrey, where the knight marshals
men were ready to receive him* and conducted him to the Sessions house on S.
Margets hill, whereupon he was immediatlye put into the docket, and had a great
pair of (...) boltes put upon his feet, his hands unbound and his arms
pinnioned: Soon after there came thither the right honorable the Lord
Chamberlayne, the Earl of Wormwood, sir George Carew knight Marshall of
England, with Master Popham the Queens Attorney general, and other of her
Majesty's Justices for Middlesex and Surrey: who being orderly placed,
proclamation was made for the people to be silent, after that a substantial
quest of inquiry was calde and impannelled, who having their charge given them
by her majesty's Attorney general to enquire if any wilful murders, rowts or
riots etc. were lately committed in the verdge of the Queens Majesty's
household: by virtue of which enquirye, they found this matter of wilful
murder.

That done, the Prisoner was commanded to hold up his hand at the barte, and
then the Clarke of the peace read the bill of indictment with alowde voice,
which contained in effect that the said Arnold Cosbye contrary to the peace
of our Sovereign Lady the Queen: upon the 14. day of January last past, not
having the fear of God before his eyes, did forceably set upon John Lord Burke
in the Town of Wanswoorth in a close: and there upon a diuelishe and most
malicious intent did wilfully murder him, then and there giving him one mortal
and deadly wound with a rapier, containing one inche wide, and 10. inches deep,
by means of which grievous and deadly wound, the said Lord Burke fell down,
and after that the said Arnold Cosbye with a Dagger price two shillinges, gave
unto the said John Lord Burke xxj. grievous and several wounds more: of which
said great and deep wound, the aforesaid Lord Burke died within two hours
after. Whereupon the prisoner being demanded if he were guiltye of the murder
for which he was accused? he answered and pleaded to the same not guiltye, and
for trial put himself to God and the Cuntry: whereupon there was a sufficient
Iewrie chosen for his trial, before whom the Prisoner stood to hear what
might be aleaged against him, for proof of the fact which before he had
denied. Then the Court did command proclamation to be made for all such to
come in and make their appeara^ce, as could say any thing against the prisoner
concerning the fact: otherwise he stood upon his discharge: whereupon the
Queens Attorney general first showed and openly commanded to be read, the
confession and examination of the said Arnold Cosbye taken the 16. of Ianuarye
before master William Fleetwood Sargiant at Law, and Recorder of the City
of London, which said examination contained, that about a twelve month before
the said Lord Burke and the prisoner, fell out and fought together at
Greenewich, and that afterward they were made friends; nevertheless it
appeared thereby by that Cosbye gave unto the said Lord Burke sundry very base
terms and vnsomely words with other such great abuses, as no noble Gentleman
would have put up at the hands of so mean a man as Arnold Cosbye was, and the
same always justified by the party, who from time to time did discover them to
my Lord, whom the prisoner in his examination aforesaid charged to do it of
malice: and in conclusion even in the scope and course of his said
examination, it evidently appeared that he had before wilfully pretended the
murder of the said Lord Burke, and in most shameful sort effected it as
aforesaid: as Master Attorney general did learnedly lay it open. And in the
said confession, the said Cosbye declared, that the Lord Burke and he rode
together from the Court, where the said examinate desired him to cross the
river upon the common way to London, to the end (as he said) if it were his
chance to endanger him, he might the more easily escape by means of his
friends, which my L. refused.

After that there was a letter openly showed and read, sent from Cosbye the
night before the Lord Burke died, containing very (...) terms, far unmeet for
so mean a man to send to so noble a personage, in which he did threaten a
sharp revenge to the said Lord and called him therein by the bare name of
Burke, so that by the said letter it appeered that he pretended a sharp
revenge upon the Lord Burke, and then his own confession aforesaid: proved that
the next day following he committed wilful murder upon him. Nevertheless for
further proof, witnesses were called in to declare what they could say
touching the same, whereupon one Master Powell of ^answoorth showed, that
being moved by the Lord Burkes foot man to make search for the said Lord, by
reason he was ridden forth with Captain Cosbye to fight: spared neither hedge
nor ditche, until he came to the place where the L. Burke lay sore wounded
ready to give up the Ghost, finding with him at his coming a woman that did
comfort him so much as she might, by casting her freeze safegarde on him, and
had labored to stop the wounds with clothes, such as she might conveniently
come by. M. Powell so soon as he came to the L. Burke, being in what grievous
estate he stood, ready to quake and quiver with the blood which cooled and bled
inwardly in his body: he first threw his cloak upon the L. Burke, and then
demanded of him how he came so sore hurt. Whereupon even in the very agony of
death, having supped up two or three dishfulls of new milk, oh said he, Cosbye
has villanously wounded me to death, I never striking blow nor giving thrust,
but whilst I was stooping to unbuckle one of my spurs, having unbuckled ye
other before through his persuasion, saying they would be some trouble unto me,
he most cowardly thrust me in at the top of the shoulder, which ran far into
the body, yet if I had stricken but two blows with him, it would never have
grieved me, had he the^ manfullye slain me in fight. Whereupon the said Powell
demanded if his Lordship could go or ride, but seeing he could do neither,
he was constrained to put him into a carte, (...) under him, which one had
before brought into the feelde for Cattle, and so conveyed him to his house,
in which his honor dyed, whose house was at Wanswoorth: Master Powell having
made an end of his speech, Cosbies Sword was showed openly before ye Lords
and Justices, which was all to be smeared with the blood of the Lord Burke, at
the least sixteen inches deep. And the same Master Powell being demanded
how many wounds he told on the body of the Lord Burke (he being before sworn
to what he should speak) answered, that he told one and twentye wounds about
the fore part of the body of the murdered Lord after he was dead, but the
Lord Chamberlayne affirmed there was four and twentye at the least, beside the
great wound of which he died.

many of which smaller wounds were in his hands, some in his arms, some in
the face, breast and sides, the rest in his thighs and legs, and some so low as
to his anckles. Which extreme cruelty showed a most bloody mind in the man,
and that he neither respected the commandment of God, who forbids murder,
neither did he regard the displeasure of the queens most excellent majesty,
by whom he had his maintenance, neither did he respect the towardliness of the
said Lord Boorke, nor his own credit in the Court, where he was well
beloved, but in all cowardice and rigor as appears, executed his
bloudthirstie and cruel mind as is aforesaid, all which the said Cosby seemed
to deny, and to color his shameful and unnatural act, he would have
persuaded the Lords and Justices there, that he meant no quarrel nor hurt to
the L. Boorke, but said that he persuaded the Lord Boorke being in the field
to break the point of his sword, and then to return again to the Court, and
there to acknowledge that they had fought, that the Lord Boorke had offended
the said Arnold Cosby, and that the Lord Boorkes life lay in Cosbies hands at
what time they fought, this should the Lord Boork have done, as the said Cosbie
affirmed, and why? Forsooth, because Cosbie (as he said at the bar) stood
upon his reputation, and yet it is doubtful, whether he ever made my Lord
Boorke that offer or not, no man testifying it but him self. And if he had
offered it yet it had been a matter of great disgrace unto the said Lord to
have performed it: or to any other of his degree to have stouped so low to so
mean a man, being in his highest degree and estate, but a captain by her
majesty's commission, preferred to that place by those that were of honorable
estimation, and doutlesse such was the courage of that noble man, that before
he would have done him self, so great a dishonor he would first manfully
have died in the field at Cosbies feet, neither is it to be supposed that
the Lord Boorke did offer that disgrace as Cosby alleged at the bar, which
was that he pulled him by the nose the night before they fought, whereas none
can come in and justly make report thereof, but Cosbie him self, yea it is a
matter manifest and plain that the Lord Boorke was a man of courage, that he
bore an undaunted mind, that he was vall^ant and a hardy man at arms, he was
courteous, mild, and liberal, and had been sufficiently tried, with better
men than ever Cosbye durst to encounter with hand to hand: and therefore as
the Lords said unto Cosbie, so it seemed to fall out, that it was only the
cowardice of Cosbie and not his courage that caused him so cruelly to murder
so towardly and courteous a Lord. Whereupon after that Captain Moston had
delivered to the Lords and Justices there assembled, the truth of all that had
passed between the Lord Boorke and the said Cosby justifying that the Lord
Boorke never gave him any just occasion of malice or inward grudge: and
therewithal having besides showed sandrie points of cowardice in the said
Cosbie, as well toward the said Moston as also toward diverse others,
justified by the honorable on the benche, the Jury went together and stayed
away some short space: in which time the right honorable Lord Chamberlain
uttered unto the prisoner a speech of great effect and deep consideration:
which was in manner and effect as follows.

The speech of the right Honorable the Lord Chamberlain.
COsbie, give ear what I say unto thee, and regard my speech, look into thy
self, and behold the just judgments of God upon thee in this action, first
it is most evident, that thou having in a most shameful sort murdered y^
noble Gentleman, for whose death thou art here araigned, thou thoughtest to
save thy self by flight: and having of thy own as good a hunting nag as any is
within this Town, thou did suspect that he would hardly serve thy turn,
and therefore thou did refuse him. Then thou tookest the Lord Boorkes
gelding, and supposing to ride away upon him, he suddenly broke from thee,
and would at no hand be taken by thee, to carry thee from the place where
thou did commit the murder. Secondly, note how thy own nag served thee,
that when thou were upon him, thou could hardly get him to carry thee to
the wood where thou did hide thy self. When thou came into the wood
near Wimbleton, there thou staiedst most part of all the day, there thou
had time, space, and sufficient means to have fled far enough, and to have
staide there long enough, yet thou had not the power to do it, there thou
lingeredst all the day long, and durst neither pass one way or other, the
fact being committed about eight of ye clock in the morning, thou had no
power to depart before evening, and then note the judgments of God upon thee,
whether did thou fly? Thou had no power to pass an^e way, but even to
the place where the man say whom thou murtheredst, and coming on the back
side of the house, thou saw my son, but he saw not thee, and then to hide
thy self, thou fledst behind ye house where the dead corpse lay, at which time
all the wounds in the Lord Boorkes body did bleed afresh, and the better to
shadow thee from the just judgments of God, who compelled thee to come
again to that place where thou committedst murder, thou did demand of a b^ie
which was the way to London, as though thou knew not the way to London,
being an ordinary man and favored in the court, but this was Gods doing to
show his wondrous works upon thee, and a token that God would not suffer
thee to fly, nor thy fact to go unpunished: yea the very beasts did shun,
and seemed unwilling to carry thee from the place where thou committedst the
murder, thy best friends fled from thee when thou had done it, and for
doing it, they did abhor thee. Thou know that thou wast well beloved in
the Court, as well of noble men as other, but this thy foul and odious fact,
makes every one of them to despise thee. Well, now call upon God and be sorry
for thy offenses, for it is some notable and grievous offense which thou have
in time past committed against God, that causes the just judgments of God to
follow thee even at thy heels, and has never left thee till thou came to
this place.

This speech ended, the Iewrie came to give up their verdit, whereupon the
prisoner was set forth to hear the same, but when he saw that he was justly
condemned in the case of wilful murder, he said nothing, nor never changed
countenance thereat, nevertheless before judgment was pronounced against him, he
fearing least he should have some grievous death for his horrible offense, he
humbly craved the favor of the Court, that rather than he should be hanged, he
desired to be shot to death with bullets, but the right worshipful sir
George Carey, knight marshall of England, told him that the law would not
allow it, but of necessity ye fact being odious, it must be punished according
to the laws of the land. Then he made another motion, and desired the
honorable and worshipful of the bench, that he might not be executed that
present day, but that he might have that days respite, and a Preacher
appointed to comfort him to Godward, seeing he was now no man of this world:
which they all granted because it was a Christian motion. Thereuppon master
Attorney proceeded to judgment, and first showed him the odiousnes of the fact
and murder committed, the shortness of his life, and that now he was to look
for nothing but death, and therefore willed him to comfort himself with hope of
the joys in the life to come, willing him to ask God mercy, for (says he)
God has promised that no sin shall be unpardonable with him, but only the
sin against the holy Ghost, which he has said shall never be forgiven. And
therefore trust in the mercies of God, for in him now only rests your
comfort. Wherefore according to the law, the court does award you to go from
this place unto the Marshalsey, and from thence to be conuaied to Wansworth, to
some convenient place nere about where the fact was committed, and there to be
hanged till you be dead, and so the Lord have mercy upon your soul, and
afterward to be hanged in chains, for example sake to al other that shall
attempt to do the like. Then the right honorable the Lord Chamberlain did in
favor of his first motion grant him his life until the wednesdaie morning
following, so that he had one day granted more unto him then he desired.
Whereupon the Court brake up and departed, and the prisoner accordingly was
committed to the Marshalsey.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed for William Wright. 1591.


