AL Ingratitude utterly setting apart / we owe to call to our minds the
manyfolde gifts of grace / with the benefaittis. that our lord of his most
plentiueuse bonte has ymen us wretches in this present transitoire lif. Which
Remem^braunce of right directly should induce us to yuie his godhede therefore
continuale and Immortale louingis and thankis. and in no wise to fall to
thignorance or foryetefulnesse thereof. Among which benefaittis and gifts is
granted us fre arbitrament. And thereby with our good deserts supported and
helped by his most digne mercy and grace we be enabled to be the children of
euerlestyng salvation / and to possess the Joys of heaven. which ar
incomp^hensible and inestimably blisful and good. And by cause we be so frail
and inconstante / prone to fall / feeble and insufficiente of our self to
resist the frawdelente malice and temptacion of our auncien ennemy the fiend.
Therefore he has yiuen us his mercy to be our Relief. Raison to be our
lantern. and Remembrance to order our guiding. Then^e first of this precieux
gift of mercy we may to our greet conforte verily trust to have it at all
times in this w^rld^ when^e we deuely sue and call therefore. But we must know
for certain / that we can have no capacite nor power to receive hit after the
saison of our bodyly lif here. Secundly by Raison we owe in the most extreme
love and dread to know and take him as our creator and Redemptour. and all
our wills to be subget unto his playsir. Thriddely we owe to remember how we
may guide us for to stand in his grace / Considering what we were / what we be
/ and what we shall be. And for as much / as very prudence admonesteth and
techeth us how the conclusion of every thing should be most souerainely taken
head unto. T^^^fore I advise that this traitys here after ensuyng / which is
of four last things / be well ouerred and seen. And not oonly seen and red.
but also well conceived / noted / and often remembered. And if perauenture we
find therein any cause of grouge / or else any mocion to blotte or rust^ the
clernesse of our goostly vndrestanding stirring us to unmeasurable feer / or any
other presumptueux sinistre / or wine concept. Yet late us take hit alweyes to
the best intent having no dispeir in our lords mercy / for it is infenite.
And know for truth / that noon such evil moeuing comes / but of
thinstigacion of our goostly aduersaire / whom we must virtuously resist / and
catholiquely allewayes rest upon the most ferme pillar of our faith which is
the very assured shield and moyen of our goostly ^^^the And to have that grace
in our necessite call we for help unto the holy ghost. that illumineth and
techeth every soul for to keep the ways of salvation to the enheriting of the
eternal Joy and glory. Amen

THis present tretys is divided in four principal parties Of the which every
part conteyneth three other singular parties as in the manner folewyng is showed
The first principal part is of the bodily death. And there unto belongs three
other singular parties. The first of the three is how remembrance of death
causes a man to meke and humble him self The second is how Remembrance of
death makes him to despise all vain wordly thyngis The third is how
Remembrance of death causes a man vnconstrayned to take upon him to do penan^ce
and taccepte it with glad heart The second principal part is of the last day
of Judgment and conteyneth in him self three other singular parties The first of
these three is how accusacion^ that shall be at the day of Judgment is thing to
be dred The second is how the last day of Judgment is terrible and not without
cause / for there must be given a due rekenyng and acompt of every thing The
third is how the terrible abiding of thextreme sentence causes doubters to be
had of the Iugemnt The third principal part is of hell or of thinfernal
Iehenne and conteyneth in it self three other singular parties The first of
thoes iij is how hell after holy scripture is named in diverse and many wyses
The secunde is how they that descend into hell been punyssh^d with many
greet and sundry pains The third is how there be many diverse conditions of
greuances in the pains of hell The fourth principal part is the blilsful
Joys of heaven there unto apperteyne three other singular parties The first of
thoes three is / how the Royalme of heaven is loved preysed and recommended for
his beauty clernes and light The second is how the Royalme of heaven is praised
for the manyfolde goodnesses that be haboundaunt therein The third is how the
celestial Royalme is to be lawded for the perpetuel and infinite Joy and
gladness therein
Here after folowe^ the prologue of the four last things
MEmorare nouissima et ineternum non peccabis. Ecclesiastici. septimo capitulo.
Ecclesiasticus says in his seventh chapter thise words following. Bear well in
thy mind the last thingis. and thou shall never fall in sin. Also. Saint
Austyn. says in his book of meditacions. That man ought rather have in fere
and eschew thabhominacion^ and filthe of sin than any other crueltees of
thinfernal turmentis. Lo then^e how the knowledge of these four last things and
frequentyng the memory and remembrance of them calls us from sin / and
draws us to virtue / and conformeth us to all good werkis. Wherefore by the
help of the deuyne inspiracion I have purposed to rehearse and say a lytyl of
these four thingis As which they be / and what they be. And also to declare
somewhat of every of them singulerly by them self / precyously and dignely by
seyngis and auctoritees of seyntis / and generally by examples and seyngis of
auctorised clerkis. It is to be noted that after the seeing of seyntes men seye
comynly / there be four the last thnigis. And which they be it apperith clerly
by the words of saint Bernard in a sermon Where he seyth in all thy works have
remembrance of thy last thingis. Which be four. That is to wete first. Death
bodily. Second. The day of Judgment. Third. The peynes of hell Fourth The
glory of heaven. O what thing is more horrible than death. What thing is more
dredefull and terrible than the day of Judgment. What thing is more importable
to be suffered / than the gehenne and peynes of hell And what is a more
Ioyefull bliss / than celestial glory Seint Bernard seyde in the same
sermon. These ben the four wheles of the chare / whereof the remembrance
brings man's soul to the everlasting glory of paradys These ben also four
moeuynges / that awake the spirit of man to that end / that he disprayse all
worldly things and return unto his creator and maker. Lo it is then^ both
convenient and profitable that they be had contynuelly in remembrance. And
therefore seyth the. Wise man. in the xxviij chapitre of Ecclesiasticus. Bear in
thy mind the last and final things. And look alweye perfyghtly upon them to
thentent that they may be seurely fixed and printed in thy memory. Now syn all this process principally and soueraynly enforseth him self tenduce every
creature to have an assured mind and an hole Remembrance of these four last
things / and that they may cordyally be enprinted with in your hertes. Therefore
it is consonant and according / if it so may plese / that this present trayttye
may be entitled and bear the name of the. Cordyal.

Thus ends the prologue of this book named. Cordyal. Which treteth of the
four last and final things that been to come. And here begins the first
part of the seide four last things.
The first part of the four last things
THe first part of the four last things / whereof the remembrance withdraws
a man fro sin is death present or temporal. And therefore seith Saint Bernard
in a book called the Myrour of monks. The most souerayn philosophye is to
think alwey on death. And he that berith it in his mind: in what place so ever
he goo / shall never sin. Saint Austyn seyth in his book of exortacions. There
is no thing that so well reuoketh and calls a man from sin / as often
Remembrance of death. Certain it is that thing which causes a man to be
humble to disprayse him self / and to do penance.

How Remembrance of death makes a man to (...) humble and meke The first
chapitre
I Seye that recordyng the Remembrance of death makes a man to be meke and
humble him self And therefore seyth. seint Austyn. in the book that he made of
our lord. A man knowing him self to be mortal / it shall put from him al manner
of pride. In very truth all our other things as well good as had / be
incerteyne. But of death only we may be well ensured. And how be it that the hour
thereof is to us hid and incerteyn^ Yet alwey she is approchyng and shall
surely come without long taryeng. And to this purpose seith. Ecclesiastes. in
his xiijj chapitre. Bear well in remembrance that death shall not tarry It is also
written in Toby that death hastes and that there may no fleyng avail. Also by
the comune law of nature every man must pay his mortal tribute Saint
Bernard. seyth in a sermon^. O wretchid man whi do thou not dispose thy self
to be ready at al hours think that thou art now deed / syns thou know well
that necessarily it behooves the to dye. Remember well how thyn eyes shall torn
in thy head and the veins break in thy body* and thyn heart shall divide in two
partis by the right sharp angwissh and pain of death. Who is he then^e that
ought not to dread and make him self humble. When he knows certainly that he
must return and become earth Now truly there shall be none excepcion of
persons. But al shall pass that weye. For as it is w^eton in the second (...)
of kings. When shall al dye / and the earth shall ^^^low^ us / as it does water
cast thereupon / which never ^^^^^neth. We read also that this word. Mors in
(...) may well so be called. For it is a bitter morsel unto all men in so
much as no creature may escape it. And therefore it is said in the book of
dispraysyng of the world ^eth cutteth down and distroieth all things create
and made in flessh. She both beteth down the hye men and low^^ for she has
dominacion upon wordly living thingis. She regneth Imperially over the nobles
and dredeth no living creature / for her power is common over princes and dukes.
She takes as well the young as the old And when she smytes / she has mercy of
no creature All things create in flessh perissheth under her hand Nor there
be none so strong / but that she beteth them down without rescuse. And there is
no thing beryng life but that she distroyeth and wastes it without any escape
And she neither takes mede Allyaunce ne friendship What shall I more seye /
euydently death spares no body For nether pour ne rich shall mow escape out
of her cheyne. Certeynly I vndrestande now that death is the end of all
worldly living things. And therefore it is writon^ in. Ietha. the poet. That
death takes away and does anyntise all quyk things. Lo is it not seide that
the wise Cathon and the good Socrates been deed. Which geuith example / that
there is neither science ne doctrine that may preserve one fro the ruynous darte
of death. It is written in. Ecclesiastes. in the secunde chapitre. As Well dies
the wise man as the fool. It is writon in Isaye in the xxxiij chapitre. Where
ar noble come the lettred men. Where ben the prechers of the word of god.
Where be they that were wont to teache the children These questions implied as
much as to seye they live not / and begoon and past in the common course whith
other and deed out of this world. Now by cause Ietha named but only the two
before specified. I pray the tell me / where is now Hector of troy / where is
become Julius caesar wh^^ is Alexandre the greet. Where is Judas Machabeus Where
is the mighty Sampson / where is Crassus the rich / Where is the fair Absolon.
where is Galyen the phisifien / and Aincenne his fellow. Where is the wise
Solomon. where is Aristotle the philosopher. and where is Uirgile the right
expert poet. he not al these deed and passed out of this world as pilgryms
and gestes / and departed hens in a right short space: yes certeynly / there is
not one left a live of them / all their joys were but vanitees and ar failed
and their days be consumed and passed And as the psalter seith man passed his
days resembling a shadewe and one time he is hole and strong of al his
members and on the morrow seek / and leyde in the earth. And as. Cathon seith
our life is given unto us to be full of doubt and of fragilite This appears
also clerly by a philosophre named Secundus whom the emperor Adrian^ questioned
with of the being and the state of man^. Which answered as follows. Man is
subgette unto death Oost of the place where he is / a voyager passing /
semblably unto a piece of snow. Also like a read bery and like a new apple by
which thing is evidently shewid / how frail / how sleder. and also how lytil
enduryng is the life of a man And not only the life of pour people. But also the
life of all humayn^ creatures be they never so rich or puyssaunt. For death is
a comyn^ thing and spares no body. And all be it she is cruwel and peruers /
yet she keeps egally one law in taking as well kings and princes as pour
folkis. Thus gives she great cause to weep if it be well red and taken that is
wreton^ of her. And therefore seith Job in the xx chapitre of his book of the
rich fires and orgulous man^. Al though his pride be inhaunsed unto the sky
that his head should touch the clouds / Yet in the end he shall torn to naught
and be like a donghill. And they that have seen him shall axe where is he now and
no thing shall be found of him / no more than of a fleyng dreme passed in the
night. Baruch in his third chapitre demands Where be now the princes of the
people that where wont to have dominacion^ over the beestis / and take
recreacion with hou^des and with hawks of the air. And assembled great
tresurs of gold and silver / wherein men give their affyaunce and trust. What
is the end of them that were besy and diligent here to forge gold and silver
to gadre and keep it. Certeynly their time is eytermyned and they be descended
into hell. and now ben there other enhaunsed and live in their places. And
therefore seyth Prosper in his sentence. where be the orators not surmountable.
where be they that have couenably disposed their feestis. Where ben also the
palfreymen that kept the shynyng palfreyes in their stables. Where ben the
captayns of men of arms. And where ben the lords and tyrants. Ben not they al
consumed and brought to powdre Yes of their days: And so shall be of ours. Is
not theffect of lif altered into worms. Behold and look into to their graves
/ whether thou can know there / which is the lord / which is the servant
/ which was the pour which was the rich. Disceuere if thou can by knowleche
the prisoner from the king / the strong from the weke the fayt from the foul.
Crisostom^. seyth. What has it auayled them that have lived in lechery / and
in the voluptuousness of this present life / til their last days Auise you now
and behold in their sepulcres. and see if thou can aspye therein any sign of
pride. If thou can have any knowleche of their richesse or of their lecherye.
Axe where is become their rich array and their strange disguysed garnementis
with their voluptuous / and nyce lookis. And where be now their great
companyes and nombre of seruauntis / that followed them. Where be their
lawhynges their playnges and their outrageous gladnesses out of mesurable
temperance. Where is all this become. and whither is it passed Behold
diligently first the end of one thing and then of that other and draw the
nere their sepultures. And thou shall find nothing therein but only ashes. and
the remenaunt stynkyng and full of worms. A remember thy self what is the end of
all mortal men / be it so that they have passed the course of their lives in
delectable pleasures or ellis in labor or in contynence of their flessh. Yet
all must dye. Saint Bernard. seyth in his meditacions Tell me now where be the
Amerouse people of this world that late were among us. In truth there is
nothing left of them but ashes and worms. Think then^e and remember often
times. What thing they be / and what they have been hertofore. Parde they have
be men as thou art / they have eten and dronken / lawhed and made great chere
in their times. And after in a moment they descended into hell. And their
flessh delivered for worms mete / and their soul given into hell. There to
be turmented by fire unto that the body shall come and Join ageyn there unto And
to be plunged to gedre in thembracements or peyneful Iehennes sempiternel with
them that have been their felaws in doing sins and committyng vices without
repentance penance and satisfaccion. O what has it prouffyced their vain
glory their short Joy and the puissance of this world the voluptuousnes of
the flessh the disceyuable richesse the great nombre of their servants the
unhappy concupiscens. where be their plays and disportes their plays and
disportes. Where is their bostyng and their worldly pride / The more they had
their delectacion^ and Ioyed therein here / the more shall be their pain and
sorrow there. And so after a greet voluptuous playsir they shall have a miserable
and a perpetuel paynful sorrow And their being shall torn them to Ruin and
hard turmentes. Lo all that is common unto them may happen unto you. Thou art
but a man. and homo de humo. That is to seye a man made of earth. Thou art of
therthe / and thou lyuest of the earth / and to earth shall torn agayn^ Of
these forseyd amerouse people of this world living flesshly and not dredyng death
/ which is their neyghburgh^ / speaks Saint Bernard unto the brethren of the
mount of our lord. O ye miserable sinners that suffer the wretchedness of
this present life to return and led you from the right weye. And the mean time
ye pass your days in making good chere. Ye ar descendyng to hell being on
live. And then^e eueriche of you may seye the anguysshes of sorrowful death have
enuironned me And I have found my self in the peril of hell. These ben the
miserable creatures that this present lif disceyueth Of whom is written in. Job.
the xxj chapitre. These felons whose lif is inhaunsed in pomp and pride and be
comforted by their riches / They think that their seed shall abide always by the
multitude of their friends and of their neighbors / their houses to be always
assured and in pees The rod of god not to come upon them / their s^^en to
conceive and not to be bareyn / thencrece of them to grow and not to be take
from them / they rejoice them self in Iapees and disportes / they love the
harp / the taboryn^ / the organs / and all vanitees. they continue a while in
that myrthe / and suddenly they descend into hell. O how greatly is he
defrawded and begyled. O how folisshly is he mocked / that for the flouryng
vayn beauty of this world shall descend down into hell / and lose the dyademe
of theternal glory. Sothly the rich man that by sin has deserved the
pains of hell had been better to have lived virtuously in great need and
pouerte al his life. than to have great habondau^ce of riches and at last for
his synful life to be dampened. Alas what proufiteth it then^e the great tresurs
and hepes of gold and silver. when sinners shall be sent in to low tenebres of
hell / there to be payned and tormentid euerlastyngly with out seasyng. Mi
right dear brother and friend what seist thou of the rich and mighty people of
this world. Dye they not as well as other. In good faith^ me seems they be
nothing priueleged for as it is wreton in the book of sapience the seuenthe
chapitre / the enter of this life is one and comune to all and semblably so is
the Issue. Job seith in his.xxj. chapitre. This man dies strong lusty and
rich / his bowell is be full of greece and his bones full of mary. And this other
dies lene and feeble full of sorrow and without any richesse. that
notwithstanding they shall sleep both in pouldre and worms shall ete them. Lo
bow the rich and puissaunt men of this world have their death comune and egal
with the pouer people. And therefore it is wreton in. Ecclesiaste in the x
chapitre. The life of of puissant lordship is right brief For this day this man
is a king / and to morrow he is deed / of such akynge is red in the second
chapitre of the first book of Machabees how his glory is a foul donghil and as
vile as a worm he is to day enhaunsed: and to morrow there is no thing to be
found of him. We have an example according of one of the highest and most
excellent prince of this world That is to wete. Alexandre. the great king of.
Macedone. that subdewed unto his obeisance the universal world in such manner.
that he was demed to be only lord of the earth. And it is read that this.
Alexandre. the great sometime king of. Greece. obteigned many uictories in many
strange lands. And in his going by diverse regions subdeued unto his
Jurisdiction all the world And in another place is red of him that he was king
of kings / and that he saw al realms subget unto him whereby the wis of his
renomme and fortune made an hole monarche. That is to sey an hole Empire of all the world For it was ones al bond and subget unto him without disobeissaunce.
And so he was grettest of all the large world. But what thing thereof ensued.
After he had tryumphantly gotten the only empire of the universal world / was
not that the stablenesse of regne / the perpetuite of might the health of his
body / and the long enduryng of his life natural: Certeynly no. But he was
subdewed by the same thing that is comune unto al. That is to wete. Death.
Which is the last recourse after al fortune and destenyes. Than might.
Alexandre. well say at ^ou^ of his death as. Job. seyde in the xvj chapitre of
his book. I am he that sometime was rich and mighty. and suddenly am beten down
/ for he obtained only his Empire. But only by the space of xij years. And
therefore it is written of h^ym in an other place. That he reigned / and was obeyed
xij years. And after that he was subget unto death / of whom lives yet the
renomme and cannot dye. Semblably compleynyng him self of the death he might
seye as is written in Job the xix chapitre. My glory has dispoiled me / and
has taken awey the crown fro my head / she has also utterly destroyed me /
wherthurgh I am lost. Lo how it appears manifestly herby / that death is
the end of all men. And also that how be it. Julius caesar had all the world
under his Empire / Yet his glory failed him and rested lord but of a tomb of
viij foot long. Whereby it seems that the mageste roial al worldly puissance
al prosperous things / and the ordinance of days: pass brefly from man
without tariyng when^ ye hour of death is common* And therefore seith an other
poet If thou be wise thy wisdom^ departs with thy death. If thou be
habou^dant in richesse: it leueth the at thy death. If thou be a prudent man:
thy prudence finissheth with thy death. If thou be honest: by death it is taken
from the. If thou be strong thy might faylleth the by death. Certeynly then^e I
now know that the years that pass / takes from us al things Wherefore then if
thou be rich strong or feyre / what wileth it. If thou be a bishop a priour
or an abbot / what wileth it. If thou be a greet excellent mighty lord / If
thou be a king or a pope / what vayleth it. All passes right hastily without
long tariyng / And here rests but oonly the merits. whereof ye good shall
cause us to be glorified And therefore seide Isidor in an omely. My right
well-beloved brethren^ / we ought to think how breef and short is the worldly
felicite / how little is the glory of this world / and how frail and faylyng
is the temporal might thereof And therefore every man may sey. Where be the kings
where be the princes / where be the emperors. where be the rich and mighty
men of this world: they be al post like a shadewe / and vanyssed like a dreme
of the night. for though one would seek them they will not be found here. what
shall I more sey. the kings be passed and the princes be deed / never thelesse
there be many that wenen to live long and never to dye But alweys to rest in
this present life. Certeynly they be fol^. For it shall not be so. But they shall
dye as other princes and men have done. For as. Senek. seith in his episteles
to Lucyt. The issewe of this present life is death It is wreton by a poet named
Ieta. The death undoes al living thing. and every lif fynysseth by death.
Certain the worldly death concludes all the vayn felicitees of men For if thou
did preche the feith of Abraham. The pite of Joseph The charity of Moses. The
strength of Samson. The swetnesse of David. The miracles of Elizeus The
richesse and prudence of king. Solomon. The beauty of Absolon. And in weeping
occupied thextremytees of all thies in declaring their ends: the hystories
would show that there is but one conclusion^. That is the sey death. Here it
appears right manifestly by the thing aforsayd. that beauty lynage condico^ns
wit richesse nor worship can not keep a man / but that he must stumble and
fall and return to ashes for all thing that is engendered. renneth alwey toward
his death. Ouide seith that al thing that is engendered asks and requires to
come ageyn^ to their universal modre That is to seye the earth. For all that
has been and past before / may be resembled to a rennyng river. Semblably I
feel it by my self wretch, that am brought al most to no thing, and have not
known hit / for my days be past fro me little, and little as a shadow. and I
am dried as the wydered hey. Certeynly we be no thing but powdre. Men's days
be like the flowers in a medewe And them self may be likened to the heye. Now
auise the then^e. for man^ is a thing that endures but short space and is of
resemblance to the flower, that grows in the medowe. It is written in Isaye
the xl chapitre. All humayn^ flesh is heye / and his glory like the flowers
of the field. Verily al people be hey / and all hey dries and wydereth, as the
flower that is fallyn^. But the word of our lord remains and is perdurable.
Wherefore then does a man^ set him self in pomp and pride being like the widered
heye of field. It is writon by Innocent in the book of our miserabill
condicion^. That humayn^ flessh^ is the vessel of filth, and a vessel of
teres, a dry thouht, a stinkyng sakke. The lif of the flesh is labor / The
concepcion^ of the flesh is but filthe / The end thereof is rotynnesse. And
the birthe is but vile. It was first a sparme. That is to seye. The seed of
man^ / and now it is a stinkyng sakke. And after finally shall be worms mete
in the earth. Now wherefore should a man then be proud. Seint Bernard. seith in
his book of Meditacions. Wherefore should a man wexe proud sithen the
concepcion of man is in sin. And of all the birth in pain, the lif in
labor, and necessarily al must dye. And after death turn to worms, And after
worms to filth and stenche. Lo thus finally every man is clearly converted and
turned out of all humanyte. Considre than the beginning of thy life, the mydle,
and also the last end. And thou shall find therein a right greet occasion^ and
cause to meke and humble thy self Now what seyst thou. what thynkest thou. what
rekenyng make thou of thy self. art thou ought but powdre of the earth. It is
wreton in the xij chapitre, but more plainly in the iij chapitre of the same.
Ecclesiastes. The powdre retorneth to the earth that hit come fro. That is to
wete to right a foul rotyn earth full of worms. And therefore writes. Job. in
his xvij chapitre. I have seid to rotennesse thou art my fadre and my moedre.
and I have seid to the worms ye be my brothren and my sustres. It is red in,
Ecclesiasticus in the xvij chapitre that every man is earth and ashes, and
thereof have take their being And also it was seide to a man. Thou art but
powdre / and to powdre shall return And as Aleyn^ amonysseth and warns the /
when thou shall lie in the cold earth, thou shall torn to powdre and worms
mete. and from thensforth there shall no creature be in will to look upon the.
For thy flessh^ shall be more rank in stinche, than the flessh of a rotyn^
hownde To this purpose seith that holy man. Saint Bernard What is a more vile
and stinkyng thing than the careyn^ of man^. And what is a more odeous thing to
be hold than a deed man. the more delectable he has been in his life to the
contrary his look shall be orrible after his death. What shall hit proufite us
richesses: delectacions and worldly worshippis. The richesse defend us not
from death / nor delectacions from the worms / nor the worshippes from foul
stynkynges. O mighty God eternal / in how myserabile chaunse is man enclosed.
Certain my right dear friend: If thou thoughtest diligently of the things
aforeseyde: Thou should thereby find a right greet occasion^ to meke and
humble thy self For the remembrance of death causes humylite in man. It
appears well by the third book of. Kings in the.xxj. Chapitre of. King
Achab. Which when^ he herd by. Hely. the manassyng of death / and that hit
approached him: He meked him self in such wise that our Lord seyde to the
forseyde. Hely. See thou not how. Achab. humbled him self before me. It is
said also that sum time. Whenne men made and created a pope: there was
brought before him a piece of flax and there in set fire: seiyng thies words
following. Right thus passes the vain glory of this world. Like to seye.
That as the fire brennes lightly the flax: and conuerteth hit in to ashes
Semblably the glory of this world fails and passes. Isidore. reports
also. That aunciently it was accustumed at coronacion of the Emperor of
Constantinoble. When he was set in his most glory. A mason should come before
him and show him three or four manner of marbyll stones, seiyng that he should
chese / of which of those he would have his tomb made. It is read of seint
Ioh^n the aumener that was sometime patriarch of. Alexandre. that had
commanded to make his tomb / and would in no wise it should be fully
finysshed And ordained that in great and solemn festes. when^e he was in his
highest honor, one should come unto him and sey that thy tomb is not fully
accomplisshed nor performed. give commandments that hit be finysshed For
thou know not how thou shall dye / nor when that theff will come / which is
to vndrestonde the fend That enforces him self alwey to destroy souls. And
why did the pope the Emperor and the patriark thyes thingis. Which were the
men most excellent in astate of all the world / but only to confess and
knowledge to them self that they were mortal. and that they ought not to
enhaunse them self in pride nor fortefye them in hope of long life. Whereby they
should have the more power in this vain worldly glory. But that they might
have before hem then the remembrance of death to cause them to be the more
humble in all their works And therefore seith a prophet. Know all people that
men be comen and made of earth. And therefore they must necessarely dye. It is
also wreton in. Ecclesiastes. in the one and forty chapitre. All things that
be come of the earth: shall be converted ageyn to the earth. Whereof man^ is
comen as it is well known. And therefore seith Iheremyas the prophet in
the.xxij. chapitre. Earth earth. earth. Now harken my words. He called man^
thryes earth: by cause he may so be named in three manners First he is earth /
for he is made of the earth Secundly his conversation is in the earth / And
finally he retourneth into the earth / So is he earth in his creacion, in his
conversation, and in his death / He is earth by his nature in his life / And in
his Sepulture he has sauoured the earth / he has liked the earth, he has
desired and coueyted the earth / The body of man is taken and doluen in the
earth / And yet he forgeteth the Celestyall things / and pleteth for the
terrestreall And gives batayl for the earth. He gothe / He comyth, and turns
abowte the earth to have the earth And often in angwysshes pain and labor /
now here now there / And all for the earth / and never seasyng till be him
selff / which is come from the earth be returned ageyn^ to his first modre /
That is to seye The earth / It may be seyde, as it is writon in the third^
book of. Kings. in the secunde Chapitre. Lo how I depart and pass the
comune weye of the universal earth / And for asmoche as we be bounden with
slyme of the earth, donge of the earth, and be right vile thing. Wherefore should
we then^e be proud of our self / knowing we be come from the earth / living in
the earth / conuersyng in the earth / and finally shall return into the earth.
as every day it appears euydently unto all people:::::

How Remembrance of death makes a man to despise all things::: The third
chapitre of this first principal part
Remembrance of death causes a man to myslyke all erthely vain things, and
to repute them as no thing. Therefore seyth Saint Iherome. in his prologue of
the Bible. That esely he dispiseth all bad thing: that alweye remembers /
how he must dye. The concupiscens of eyes is dispysed, whenne oon^ remembers
that he shall shortly part and leave all erthely things The concupiscens of
the flesh is despised: whenne one remembers, that his body shall become
worms mete In a moment the pomp and pride of this life is set at noght: Whenne
a man counterpeyseth in his heart, how he that would be above all other: shall
be hastily cast into the earth under the fete of other. For this cause seyth.
Saint Iherome. in a pistle that he sent unto Cypryane. Remember the well of thy
death: and thou shall not sin. He then^ that alweye bears in Remembrance,
how he must dye: disprayseth easily all things present: disposyng him selff
to all good things that be to come. Certeynly. Esau. consyderyng how death
was nyghe unto him: dispraysed lightly all worldly things. It is written in
Genesis. in the five and twenty Chapitre. Lo behold I dye / and what shall
proufite me all thoes things that I am born^ unto. Isidore. also aduertising
him self of the shortenesse of this prrsent lif / which is so sone passed and
that all that men^ seem to have in possession^ here shall be left suddenly by
death: exorted every man to disprayse such things. Sayng if thou will be in
rest and peace desire no thing of this world. and so thou shall be quiet in thy
courage, if thou put from the all desires and corious besynesses of this present
life. Set a part all thing that may distourbe and let thy good purpose be thou
deed to the world. and the world to the. and as though thou were deed: behold
the vain glory of this world. And as a man passed: disseuer and depart the
from the voluptuousness of this world. And as a man fynysshed: have this
world in no cheerte And as a man passed out of this world, purge the of all
manner of filthes. And also whyle^thou art a live disprayse all that thou may
not have when thou art deed. Senek seyth that there may not thing profit the so
much in that temperance and dyspraysyng of all worldly things as shall do to
thenke often of the short enduring / and the incerteynte of this present life.
Then my right dear friend Remember often in thy courage: how thou must dye. It
is read in a book made of the gift of dread. How long a go, there was right a
wise philosophre that hoolly abandoned him to the vanytees of this world /
Which in a time herd red of the long life of Ancient fadres / and of eueriche
of them was seyde in the end he is deed. As is wreton in Genesis. in the fyfth
chapitre. Then he thought in him self / that semblably death should happen
unto him as it did unto those. for he was right old. And hastily he entered
into religyon^: and took thordre of ffrere prechours: and was after made master
of Theologye in Paris. And from that day forth lyved a full holy life. O how
well had this man before his eyes the words of. Ecclesiastes. in the
enleuenth chapitre. Seiyng. That man / which had lived many years alweye
glad and Ioyefull / h^e ought to remember well his last days / and the
coming of the tenebrouse time. For then it shall be but vanyte / to argue of
things past for his remedy. Certeynly at day of death appears vanyte of
vanytees / and how all things shall be then vain and noght For this cause
it is written in. Ecclesiastes. in the third Chapitre. All thingys here be
restyng under vanyte: and true it is all things of this world / and
eueriche of them be vain / For our life / and every worldly creature is but
vanyte. And therefore seyth the Prophet. That universally every living man^ is
vanyte. Thou wenest to live long: and many years to possess delicyously thy
temporal goods. Certain my right dear friend / It shall be all other wise For
man is made semblable unto vanyte and his days pass as a shadow. Behold
now and see how thy days shall be but short / and an other shall come and take
thy possessions. To this purpose seith Chaton. Promitte never to thy self that
thou shall have long space of lyff / For in what place so ever thou enter:
death follows alwey the shadow of thy body And therefore if thou look upon the
words that be seyde. And also conceive dilygently in thy heart that shall be
showed the hereafter: thou should rather sey thyes words than other wise. I
go now to my death / and trust to live after by a long space. Al be it
perauenture this is the last day of my life. The holy and blessed man. Saint
Luke. seith in his xij chapitre. O thou fool / this night thy soul shall be
axed of the and be certain that the disposicion^ of thy tabernacules is but
light. As is wreton in the second epistle of saint Petre. in the first
chapitre. Think then^e that thou art deed: when thou know necessarily that
after a nombre of years thou art certain to dye. Therefore disprayse al
transitory things that must be hastly left / as is to sey without any tariyng
though it to be loathe unto the. The poet tells that wysdom / rentis of
lands possession of richesse / the making of walled towns / the byldyng of
houses / the glorious manner of living at the table as well in pleasant drynkes:
as in delicious metes. the feire soft beds: well hangyd and dressed. the
white table clothes the bright burnyssed cups the rich garmentis contrary to
good manner. the greet flokkes or herdis of beestis The greet contreies of
arable lands. the vyneyerdes plenteuously set with vynes. and the Joy and
the love of his propre childeren. Yet shall all this be relynquysshed pass and
be lost / and no thing be found thereof herafter. By thies things may be seen
that in this present life is no thing stable nor permanent. which ought to
cause dread. Therefore writes. Ecclesiastes. in the secunde Chapitre. I have
greetly exalted my works. I have edified me fair houses. I have planted
vynes. I have made gardynes / Wherein I have graffed of all manner of trees. I
have also cast poondes. and stagnes. and have set trees in the forest. I
have had servants and chamberers and greet company in my household more
than ever had any before me in. Iherusalem. I have had greet flokkes of
sheep / and droues of beestes. I have assembled for me gold and silver / and
gadred the tresure of kings / and of the prouynces / my neighbors. And also
have herd before me syngers / both men and women. and many delectacions of the
children of men. And have doon^ so much / that I have surmounted in richesse
all that have been before me in. Iherusalem. Wisdom also has alweyes
perseuered in me. and all that ever mine eyes have desired I have not denied
them / nor defended / but that they have used all voluptuousness. and they
have had no delectacion But in such things / that I had ordained them.
And when^ that I turned me and beheld well al thies things / and the works
that my hands had wrought / and looked upon the labor that I had many
times swette in / and al for noght I perceived then and knew well / that al my
works were but vainte / and affliction of spirit / And that under the son
in this world was no thing permanent nor sure. Now in trougth al things pass
here like a shadow. Therefore seith Ioh^n de garlandia That all thing of this
world / yt was Is and shall be: perisseth in the moment of an howr. What
proufiteth than to have been. to be now. or to be herafter. Certain thies be
iij thingis blowyng without flowers. for all thnigis that were / be or shall be
have a fynyssyng. The world passes and the concupiscens thereof also. And there
for it is serd. Wherefore takes a wyseman thought forto get tresure which is
sone lost. And Saint Bernard seith in his book of meditacions. wherefore makes
any man tresour here of riches: sethen without delay both that that is
assembled and he that gadereth hit passen and be lost togydre. O thou man what
auayl entendes thou to have in this world: when the fruit is but ruynouse and
the end death. My cordyal and good friend / now would god that thou would
vndrestonde well thise things. and suerly ordeyn^ for thy last things. Petre
de Bloys. seyth in a pistle. that the disceiuable vain glory of this world
begileth al thoes that loves hit. For all that ever it promitteth in time to
come / or pretends in time present fails and comes to naught as water cast
upon the earth. Behold then how frail / how disceiuable / and how vain is
the world and the Joy thereof / that we desire so mekell. O thou fool wherefore
dispisest thou not lightly thoes things that thou see so shortly fayll and
pass. Know thou not how the world is right naught and furious. And that in
languyssyng / it perisseth by the gleyue of the right cruel death hit is
atrouthe that none argument can serve to the contrary. Wherefore. and by thies
things before rehearsed: it appears manifestly how remembrance of death should
cause dispisyng of all wordly things and withdrawyng a man from falling to
sin.:.:.

How Remembrance of death makes a man to take upon him penance.:.:. The
fourth chapitre of the first principal part
Following thordre before set. It is now to enquere dilygently, how
remembrance of death causes a man to do penance and gladly to accept it.
This appears clearly by. Jonas. the prophet in the third chapitre, spekyng
of them of Ninyue. which did penance for fere of death. Wherefore Saint Ioh^n
Baptiste. enduceth men also to do penance. As Saint Luke writes in his third
Chapitre. seiyng. Do ye the digne fruytes of penance. And he seyth afterward.
The axe is set to the rote of the tree. Which signifies the thretenynges of
death. And therefore seyth. Saint Ambrose. upon. Luke. Alas lord if I have not
he wayled my sins. Alas lord if I have not risen at midnyght to confess me
to the / Alas if I have begyled my neigburgh^ / Alas if I have not alwey seyde
trougth. The axe is ready set to the rote. Every man therefore then^e do
penance / and deserve the fruit of grace. For here comyth the lord to ask
the fruit of our lif. For this cause Job considering the shortenesse of this
present lif, had lever and chase to have repentance presently. than
afterward whereby should grow no fruit. The same. Job. said in his tenth
Chapitre. Shall not my short days breefly finysshe. Yes in trougth. The life
present is right short Alas then a little while let me compleyn^ and bewail my
sorrow before my departing into the tenebrous derkenesse of death without
retornyng. And it is also seid in Job the xiiij chapitre. That man's days be
breef. It is wreton in the first pistle ad. Corintheos. in the vij chapitre.
^he time is breef. Were it not better then now breefly to sustene a little
pain: then afterward when it can not profyt to repent without proufyt and
bewail hit infynytely (...) Saint Austyn seyth that better is a little
bitterness (...) the monthe: then eternally to suffer pain in all the hoo^ body
of man. Also he seyth in a sermon. That the life of every man from his youth to
his age is but short / though Adam lived yet. and should this day dye. what
should hit auantaged him to have lived so long. Sothly little or noght. but he
might sey the time of my life is past And also seyth a. Wise man. What should it
proufyt a man to live.CC. years / when at his death / he shall think all his
life is passed as wind. And. Saint Austyn. seyth upon the. psalter. If thou
had lived sens Adam. was chased out of paradys terestre til now / and that
thou should dye this day: thou should think thy life not long, which so
sone should pass. Now how long so ever a man's life be, take that it may be
lengthed as much more to cause many years: Yet it shall fail and vanysshe as
the shynyng of the morrow son. And the same. Saint Austyn. seith in an.
Omely. that we be more frail and brotyll: then though we were made of glass.
For all be it that glass is brotill. Yet if it be well kept, it may endure right
long. But mannys life be it never so well and diligently kept it may not long
endure Therefore it is wreton to the hebrews in the.ix. chapitre It is
establisshed and ordained every creature ones to dye And. Senek. seith in his
book of remedies against fortune. That our lif is but a pilgrimage / and when
one has long walked: he must fynaly return. This necessite to dye, and
shortness of the lif of man^ was well considered by the paynym. Xerses. Of
whom. Saint Iherom. wrote in a pistle to. Eliodorus. seeing that this puissant
king. Xerses. which subverted the monteyns and covered the sees, being ones in
right high place looked upon the infinite multitude of his host and tendrely
wept / by cause he knew that none of thoes whom he beheld should live over
an. C. years. It is a thing right necessary in the world / that man's lif be
not long lastyng. And as. Balam. seith It is likened to a tree having ij worms
fretyng in the rote / the one blak and the other white in the similitude of the
day and the night which incessantely gnauwe the rote of the tree of lif. Saint
Austyn. upon the seeing of. Seint Ioh^n in his third chapitre tretyng upon
this question^. Quid est uita nostra. etc. This lif is a doutful lif, a blind
lif and a nedy lif / humors make hit to bolne / sorrows make hit feeble, hete
dries hit, eyer disposes hit to sickness / mete makes hit to swelle /
fasting makes hit lene Pleyes makes hit to err / wayling destroys hit /
business constrayneth hit / sewerte makes hit rude / rekles richesse
enhaunseth hit / pouerte abateth hit / weeping abassheth hit / youth makes hit
wan tun / age makes hit to yield / sickness makes hit to break. And after
all this comes death / Which destroys and makes an^ end thereof with all
his Joys in such wise / as when^e the Joys be past: all seems as they had
never been Also it is read in the book of Sapience in the secunde Chapitre.
That the days of our lif nys but short / and yet ar they full of greuance. We
be made: and wot not wheerof. And after we shall be: as we had never been.
For our days passen as does a shadow. It is read in the same book of
Sapience in the same chapitre That our lif passes like the trace of a cloud /
and shall fail as the little cloud / that is broken by the might of the son
beams. It is written in. Job. the vij chapitre. Behold how my days be all
passed / and I shall goo forth in the pathe, and shall never return ageyn Also
the same. Job. seyth in the ix chapitre. My days ar pass^d more lightly than a
Currour or a messanger They are goon lightly aweye as ships done / that be
charged with appelles. Or as an egell does fle for his mete. Job seyth also.
My days be passed more lightly than clothe is cut from the lome / and they
be all wasted without any hope of recouerey. O lord god remember then is my lif
ought but wind / and shall not my eyes return ageyn^ to see the good things
to come. To that purpose spketh Petre de Bloys in his book called Aurora My lif
shall be son^er out of this world, than a web of clothe cut from the lome.
Remember the then how thy lif may be resembled to the wind. Lo now my right
dear friend how short, how little, how mutable, how disceyuyng is this our
lif present / for as it seid in. Ecclesiastes in the xviij chapitre. It is
great age in a man to be C year old. But by succession of time it is greetly
aminysshed It is wreton in the. Psalter. The days of our years be lxx. and if
we may come to. four score. year: the surplus is no thing but labor and
sorrow. But what is it of.lx. year: or yet of. C. ought this to be taken for a
long time and a greet space of years: Certeynly nay in regard to ward the
sempiternite. It ought rather be named a moment than a space of time. For to
our lord a. M. year is but as yesterday. which lightly is past Vereily this
lif is short and transitory: payneful and wretched / hit is not only to be
thought nor poysed for the shortenesse. But much more for the nicerteynte
thereof which is doutefull: and full of casuel parell: and we be not sure thereof
day nor hour. And when^e it shows us suwerte and peace: then suddenly comes
death. and with hit perauenture that falls thef. Satan. Therefore seyth to us a
poet. Who is he knowing him self to live many years: sens we know not whether
we shall dye tomorowe or sonner. It is wreton in. Isaye. the xxxviij chapitre
seeing. Dispose thy house: for thou shall dye sone: and not long live. Isaye.
seith also in the same chapitre. That my lif is kit from me as a piece of clothe
from the lome. And whenne I began first the live / then^ began death to
approach toward me. For this cause it is said in the book of. Sapiens in the
fyfth chapitre. We be sone born^. and sone leave our being. To this purpose
seyth. Senek. in his pisteles. Every day we dye / and every day is taken awey
from us part of our lif Than thus what is our lif: ought else but a passage,
or a rennyng toward death. And therefore it is not unreasonable yt she be likened
to an Orylage, which goothe alweye from degree to degree continually mouyng till
it come to a certeyn^ point / and then^e hit strikes suddenly upon the belle,
which constreyneth the sown. Semblably our lif passes alwey and renneth till
hit come to a certain point. That is to wite. The hour of our death which our
lord has prefixed and no man may hit pass / and than our lif falls and
fails without remedy. Awake then^ and entende wisely to the end of thy lif
/ For thyn^ Orylage has but few degrees to run / and every hour she
ouerpasseth many And when^e it comes to the last: thou shall stomble suddenly
into the cauerne or cave of death. Now harken what a Poet seyth. The present
lif is short alw^ey fleyng / and fades as a shadow, and departs and
falls suddenly, when^e on wenes that she be most permanent and abidyng / and
in the mids of our lif: we be often at our death. And therefore have we in
Ecclesiastes in the ix chapitre. That man knows not his end / but as a
fisshe taken with a net, and the bryddes with a trappe. Semblably men be
taken at inconvenient times. thus comes our end and death is ye last thing to
all things bering lif. It is written in a book of ye lif and of the deeds of
greet. Alexandre O how happy should a man be if he had alwey in remembrance of
the eternal Joys. and drad death yt is ordained as well to the nobles as to the
pour people / Which comes to the greet perell and daungyer of the soul
when^e it is vnpurueied Lo here then^e my right dear friend, thou see well
that the life of man is but a thing dyked about, and enuirounde with ruyuous
death, our flessh is but ashes. And such as was the beginning: such shall be
the end Saint Bernard. seyth. Whenne I Remember that I am but ashes / and
that mine end approaches my dread and fere is without end, and I wex cold as
ashes And therefore as. Saint Gregory. seyth. That man sollyciteth well his
good works: that thenketh alwey vppon^ his last end. And we should dread
that every day should be our last day. And alwey have in mind: that
necessarily we must dye. Who may have then a bold courage considering ^he
shortenesse the great incerteynte of our life. the approchyng of our death which
is coming. Who is he also that ought not thenke dilygently that our days and
our years fail and waste as the smoke. And that man^ naturelly born^ lives
but a short space, and fades as a flower, and flees a wey like a shadewe. Who
is he also that calls thiese things to mind, and peises them well in his
heart. and so subdeweth the deuell the flessh^ and the world and repents him
in this short space / To sey you troth there be noon that defer and be
negligent so to do: but oonly thoes that be all blinded in malice and lakke of
grace. O how greet a pain shall ensewe of negligens Thappostel. seyth to the.
Hebrews. in the second chapitre. How shall we flee that despise so greet an
health As to seye. we might have heuen^ if we would. And Saint Effran. seyth.
My right dear brotheren^ and friends: If we be necligent in the little space of
time yt we have now: we shall have no manner of excusacion to allegge for remede
of our sins. Therefore disprayse not the shortness of this time. But do
penance while ye have space here: for after it will be to late and without
fruit. And better is to do penance here / than infenytely and world without
end to repent hit. Now haste ye therefore and tarry not. Lest yt ye finally be
shet out with ye v fatuat and fonned virgyns Saint Mathewe says in his xxv
chapitre. Lo here is ye spouse come, and thoes yt were ready: been entered with
him to the weddyng. Wheruppon seint Gregory seyth. That ye palace of the heart
might well asauoured how wondrefull was that word. Here is the spouse which is
come. How sweet was that word to them: that entered with him to the weddyng.
And how bitter was ye other word. The yates be shitte and closed. My dear
friend If thou did savor and vndrestonde well all this things and beheldest
them well in thyn^ heart Certeynly you would run with all diligence for to do
penance. and would not lose so vnproufitably, and without fruit y^ acceptable
time and days of thy health. for no manner of voluptuous plaisers or other
ydelnesse. And as it is written in the Apocalips in ye secunde chapitre.
Remember the fro whens thou art fall or departed, and do penance. It is red
how in days passed it happened in ye Abbey of Cleruaulx yt an holy man being
in his prayers herd a voys making a peteous lamentacion / And as he asked who
it was: A soul answered seiyng. I am the soul of a dampened man compleynyng
myn^ unhappy cause of condempnacion^. And then^ he demanded him of his pain /
which answered yt of al things that causes most pain to a dampened soul was
loss of time, that god had ordeynd man by his grace that he in a little time
might have done penance. which should deliuere him from the everlasting pains
of the gehenne of hell. To this purpose seide. Hugh of seint Uictour. The
lakkyng of the sight of our lord. and fayllyng of all the goods of grace,
that we might have had should surmounte and be more grievous unto the. than all
the infernal torments. Let us do good works while we have time, lest we seye
in repentance. As is said in. Iheremyas. in the viij chapitre. That is to
wite. Heruest is past, Somer is finyssed, and we be not saved. Wherefore my
friends I require and humbly pray you, That ye will amend your self in short
tym^ and make you ready in this. x. hour. for the euenyng hastes him. And the
Rewardeur shall come to yield every man after his works. Hit may appear by
thies examples. how Remembrance of death should induce a man to do penance.
It is read of a felonous and a cruel knight. which would never accept nor do
any penance enjoined him by pope. Alexandre. And at last the pope gave him
his Ring / that he should bear hit on his finger: by wey of penance. And as
often as he beheld hit to think on his death. And when he had born^ hit a
space of time with that Remembrance on a day he come ageyn to the pope sayng /
he was ready to shrine him / and to fulfill any other manner of penance / that
he would enjoin him. It is red of an other sinner that in like wise would do
no penance / and at last his confessor enjoined him that he should
command his servant to present him every day at his table with the first
mess / a staff the rynde scorched of. seiyng. Sir remember that necessarely
ye must dye. not knowing / where / when^e / in what manner / nor how. And as
this was a good while continued, because of that Remembrance / all that he
ete turned him to greef and trouble. And then he called ageyn for his
confessor. seiyng he was ready to do and obey any penance, that he would
ordeyne. For his heart v^s meruelously brought in greet trouble by the fere of
death, which he was in. Lo by thies things aforhersed appears then^ clerly I
nough^ how Remembrance of death causes a man to humble him self / to despise
all worldly things / and acceptably take upon him to do penance and
consequently to eschew sins. And therefore my right dear brethren and
friends, remember you often / ye and right often, that ye shall dye. And if ye
bear in your minds the death, ye shall well come by that remembryng to the
most happy resort of life. That is to wite The heritage of our Lord Ihesus
Crist

And thus ends the first part of this tretys divided in four::::::
Here begins the prologue of the secunde party of the four last things::::
THe secunde part of the four last things whereof frequentyng the
Remembrance reuoketh and calls us from sin: Is the last and fynall day of
Judgment of which the Remembrance draws us not oonly from the dedely greet
sins. But also from the small venyall. And therefore it is read in. Uias
Patrum. in the lif of fadres. That an Ancient man seeing a young man laugh
dissolutely: seyde sone we must give account of all our life, before heaven and
earth Why laughest thou so fast. As who seyth, If thou knew how strayte a
Rekenyng shall be at the day of dome of all sins as well greet as small:
Certeynly thou would not laughe. But rather sorrow and complain. Now is
here the place to weep and to put a wey sins. And thoes that now weep for
their sins shall laugh^ hereafter. Saint Gregory seyth in his Omely That the
gladness of this time present ought to be but such / as thereby ye bittirnesse
of the day of Judgment be / ^ot put out of remembrance. Therefore it is written
in Ecclesiastes the xxxviij chapitre. Bear my judgment in remembrance. And
also our lord by his prophet in the psalter seith. when^ I shall se or take ye
time, I will deem and do justice to every oon^. And Iohel seyth in his last
chapitre. All men arise and come to gydres into the vale of Iosephath For there
I shall fit and Judge all manner of people about me Iheremyas. in his second
Chapitre seyth that our lord seyth. I shall amownte with you in Judgment. Of
this Judgment is wreton in. Ozee. the iiij chapitre, Ye childe^n of Israhel /
here ye the word of our lord of the final Judgment that perteyneth to our
lord upon thenhabitantes of the earth / Sothely this Judgment is greetly to
be dowted. Therefore seyth the. Prophet. I dred for thy Iugementes. It is wreton
in the book of. Sapience. in the fyfthe Chapitre / They that see the greet Judge
/ shall be horribly troubled / playnyng and waylyng the dread of their sowles /
Certeynly in this day shall all people be troubled, and they that dwell in the
vtterest party of the world shall fere thoes tokens and signs / and they shall
dowte them, and not without cause / For they shall be merueylously horrible.
Saint Luke. seyth in his xxj Chapitre. When^e the sone of man shall show him
self / That is to seye. The chil^e of the virgyn marie coming in a cloud in
mageste with a greet puyssaunce: then^e shall the signs show in the son, in
the moon, and in the sterres / And on the earth shall ^e pressure of people
dredyng to be confused with the sound of the ^^awes of the sea / Men
universally of all the world shall fall down for the dread and fere that they
shall have then. O thou wretched man remember of the terribil coming of this
Judge: that is both god and man / Which before him has a brennyng fire / And a
strong tempest. I seye there shall a fire goo before him Which shall flame hoolly
abowte his enemies. It is writon to the. Hebrews. in the tenth Chapitre. Right
terribyll is the abydyng of this Judgment. And the fere thereof, which shall
destroy his aduersayres. And Malachyas. seyth in his third Chapitre. See here
the day that shall come flaming like a Chemenye. And then hit shall brenne
all proud men: and tho^s that have committed felonye. It is read in. Isaye.
in the. xlvj. Chapitre. Here is our Lord that shall come and Judge by fire. And.
Iohell. in his secunde Chapitre seyth. He shall have a fire before his face
deuouryng and behind him a brennyng flame. For this cause seyth. Malachyas. in
his third Chapitre. who shall he be then that shall mow see our Lord. For he
shall be as a fire glowyng, set to make clean, and purge silver Who is then
he of devout courage that shall not dread with all his heart this Judge and his
coming. And the^for seith Seint Gregory upon Ezechiel. Who may have that
courage / but that shall fere and dread the presens of the eternal Judge / when^
all things shall come then^ to ye sight of every man. and all things doon^
before by delectacion shall be with right greet dread called to remembrance.
Certeyn^ as it is written in the Prouerbys in the xxxviij chapitre The evil men
thinken not of the Judgment. But they ye desiren and dreden god: have in their
hertes all good things. Seint Bernard seyth in a prose Truly I dread ^ore the
visage of ye Judge that shall come to whom no thing can be hid / and shall no
thing rest unpunished. And who shall he be of us that shall not dred when^ ye
judge shall come which shall have fire brennyng before him to the destruction^ of
all sinners. Certeynly this last Judgment ought greetly to be dred and for iij
causes. The first thaccusamentes shall be in many manners. which all sinners
ought grievously to wayle. The second is the right strayte sentence upon our
governance that syngulerly shall be made to every thing. The third is the
horrible feerful abydyng of the Judgment, which then by the Just Judge shall
be terribly given. These things all sinners ought tymerously dread. which by
consequens the Remembrance thereof should withdraw man from doing sin

Here ends the prologe of the second part
How the Accusacion that shall be at the day of do^^e is to be drad The first
chapitre of the second part
THe first thing then. whereby th final Judgment ought specially to be drad:
is the many and diverse accusacions. Which shall be there against all sinners.
Wherefore it is to be known that we find in holy scriptures seven things that
accuse sinners at the greet day of Judgment. The first is our propre
conscience. Which shall argue against the sinner, not secretly: but manyfestly
then before all. It is wreton in. Damele in the seventh chapitr. Thy Judgment
is set. and the books be open. That is to wete. the consciences which then
be opynly uttered. In those books be contained the sciences of lif or of death,
of glory and of confusion, of salvation perpetuell, or dampnacion eternal. It
is read also in the.xx. Chapitre of the Apocalips. That deed men shall be Iuged
of the things written in their own books. That is to seye. in their
consciences. Therefore it is writon in the Pistle to the Romans in the secunde
Chapitre. That their consciences shall bear them wittenesse. For as wittenesse
of the evil conscience is thaccusacion, the pain, and the turment of sinners:
Right so shall the good conscience be help and salvation to the good
creatures. The secunde thing that shall accuse the sinners / shall be the fendes
and the evil spirits. Which falsely and traitorously have procured and
sturred men to sin. And of all that the sinner has done they will accuse
him / as one thef accuses an other of oon felony done by them both

It is written in the. Apocalips. the. xij. Chapitre The fend is called the
accuser of brethren. And Saint Austyn. seyth. They be all before the Judicial
sete of Ihesu Criste / And there the deuels shall be ready. Which shall rehearse
the words of our profession and shall appose to our face that we have done /
and wherein we have sinned / and in what place / and what we ought to have done
/ and left it undone Truly our adversary that same fend shall seye then O
right wise and Just Judge: Deem this man to be mine for his sins: For he will
not be thine by grace. He is thine by nature: He is mine by his mysery. He is
thyn^ by thy passyon^ He is myn^ by persuasions. He has been disobeysaunt unto
the. He has been concentyng unto me. He has resceyued of the, the stole of
Immortalite: and of me this blakke garment that he wereth of perpetuel death he
has left thy liuere and has taken mine, he has left thy Joy and bliss.
and has taken my sorrow and pain. O thou Just Judge. Judge him therefore to be
mine, and that he be condemned with me perpetually. Thies words said our lord
unto. Saint Austyn. The third thing that accuses sinners / shall be angeles,
and the happy good spirits. Certain it is to be believed, that he that has
given them our sowles to keep: shall require to have Reason of that keeping And
as thoes that never lie nor wol take upon them the sin or fault of other:
must nedys seye. they be not to blame. But the gilt is in us sinners. Which
would not obey nor believe them: Semblably it is not the default of the
physycien, which does his cure as it apper^^^neth if he hele not his pacient
which is disobe^s^unt unto him. And therefore it is wreton in. Iheremye. the one
and fyfty chapitre. We have had. Babylon. in Cure, and yet she is not heled.
Thees be the words of the Angeles as they will seye. We have doon^ all that
was necessary to be doon^ to. Babylon. to the end that she should be cured, and
beled. But it is in her defaut that she is not beled. This. Babylon is to be
lykened to man's Soul The fourth thing that shall accuse sinners, shall be
creatures. And if thou ayed me. Which creatures they be. I answer the, all
and eueriche oon^ of them by them self. For and the creator of all things be
offended, all the good creature shall have him in hate: that has displeased him
For as. Job. seyth in his.xx. chapitre. The heuens shall show and lift up
the evil works of the sinners and the earth shall adresse him against them.
For our Lord shall call unto him the heaven above, and the earth be nethe to
discern his people. And therefore seyth Crisostom^. upon the. Gospel of seint
Mathewe. There is no thing that we shall mow remedy by answer that day:
Whenne the heaven and the earth the son and the moon. the night and the day
and all the world shall bear witness ageyns us for our sins. Therefore
seyth. Saint Gregory. If thou axe me. Who shall accuse the. I seye to the, all
the world. And that the creatures shall not oonly accuse the sinners. But also
shall require the Creator of all things to take vengeance on them for their
sins. To this purpose it is written in the book of. Sapience. in the fyfth
Chapitre. He shall arm all creatures to take vengeance on his Enemies And
with him shall fight all the world against thoes: that have been Insensate.
That is to wite Against sinners. All creatures seeing him that is maker of all
things shall chase them to cause turmentes to be given upon thoes that have
not be Just

The five things that shall accuse the Sinners, they shall be myserabyll
persons, that have suffered so many wrongs. For then^ they shall accuse thoes
that have done them wrong pain and turmente. At ye time shall the word of the
profete be verified which seith. I have known well that our lord will give
Judgment. for the pour folks that have suffered wrong. and shall avenge the
quarrel of thoes that be impotent for he that beholds the deep botoms of the
sees, and sits a boue all the Cherubynnes and Seraphyns / and gothe a boue all the wyndes: He is more terrible to be drad in his counselles and wills than is
the sons of men. He shall Judge then^e pour mennys causes that have been
constant. And shall hold ageyns thoes that have done them many angwisshes.
Then^e shall the fadre of Orphans, and the Judge of wydewes benge all wrongs,
the paciens of pour folks shall not then^e perisshe. The subgettes shall also
accuse the felones and negligent prelates and curates. And therefore seith Seint
Bernard. upon the. Canticles. O how cruel our lord shall be upon the sons of
men. Certeyn^ the wretched synnere shall sey then^e all for naught to the
monteynes. Fall ye upon us and to the Rokkes cover ye us. They shall come
then^e before the tribunal sete of Jesus Crist where shall be herd full grievous
accusacions by thoes that have paid their wages, and born^ their dispenses
wrongfully and their sins shall not be defaced, nor hid, of thoes that
fraudelently have blinded their doctors and confessors. The vj thing that
shall accuse sinners, shall be malice and sin. We read in. Iheremye. the
second chapitre. Thy malice shall accuse the, and thy refusyng shall blame the.
For the sins shall then^e be bounden^ unto the nekke of sinners. To this
purpose seith. Ozee in his xiij chapitre. The iniquite of effraym is bound to
gedre and his sins be not hid. We read mine iniquitees be trussed and leyde in
mine nekke, and as the stolen good taken in the nekke of a thef accuses him:
semblably sin shall then accuse the wretched sinner. It is wreton also in the.
Prouerbijs. the fyfthe chapitre. Iniquitees shall take the felon^ sinners and
there eueriche of them shall be taked and strayned with coordys of their sins
And the. Prophet. seith the cordys of my sins have enuirou^de, and goon
round about me. By the which cordys I sey also the wikked folks by deueles
shall be drawn in to hell: Certeynly they fall into their nets: and be taken
by their baytes. We read of the proprete of an^ Irchyn which. that when he
enters into a gardeyn: he lodeth him with apples stikyng on his prikkes, And
when the gardener comes: he would flee, but he is then^e so ladyn: that he can^
not awey. And so he is there taken with all hi^ apples. Semblably falls hit
to the sinner / that is all ^adyn^ with sins, and at the greet day of
Judgment he is with them taken and accused. Wherefore seyth the psalter Our lord
shall be known in making his Iugementes and handweerkes, and the sinner shall be
taken. Upon the which seith. Crissostom^. Our own thoughts, and specially
our works shall be before our eyes, and shall accuse us before god. And therefore
seith. Saint Bernard. Our works and we shall speak to gydre and sey. O
miserable sinner thou have made us / we been^ thy works, we will not leave the,
but go with the to thy Judgment. It is red in. Ezechiell. the.xviij. chapitre.
Like as the Justice of the Rightwys man shall be on and for him Right so the
felony of the felon^ shall rest upon him

The. Psalter. seyth. Here ye all people, here / and reteyne well in your eres
all ye that dwellyn in this world. Wherefore shall I not be dredefull in that
evil day. That is to wit. The day of dome, Which shall not oonly be evil
to me. But it shall be righ^t evil to every sinner. Whereunto he answers him
self saying. I shall dread then: For the Iniquite of my fete shall enuyron me.
The seventh and the last thing that shall accuse sinners: shall be the turmentes
and instruments of the passion of Ihesu Criste. And also Ihesu Criste hy
semlf. Wherefore seyth. Saint Iherome. The cross of Ihesu shall fight against
the Ihesu Crist shall show and allegge his wounds ageyn the And the trace of
the seyde wounds shall speak against the The nails shall compleyn on the. As
Saint Austyn seith in his trete of symboll. Perauenture our lord has kept in
his body ye trace of tokenes of his wou^des, to thentent that at the day of
dome, he will show them against sinners to their reproach. And in venquissyng
them seye Lo here behold the man that ye have ocucified. See here god and man
/ in whom ye would have no believe. Look upon the wounds that ye have made him
/ knowelege the side that ye have wounded and hurt. which has been opened for
you. But ye have not well entered therein. Ihesu Criste also then^ accusyng the
sinners, shall sey as Naum seyde in his third chapitre. I shall show thy
defawtes before thy face, and shall show to the people thy nakedness and to ye
reames thy shame. Ozee in his secunde chapitre seyth I shall manifest and show
thy folly before ye eyen^ of thy lovers. and there is, no man may draw the out of
my hands. O how desolate and how sorrowful that the miserable sinners shall
be in the day of the greet Judgment. For then as it is writon in the first
Chapitre of the. Apocalips. Every eye shall see him / and all the lynages of the
earth shall compleyn on him. Then sinners seeing all this shall be full of
anguissches and sere

How the last Judgment shall be terrible. For then^e shall be given rekenyng of
all thing The secunde chapitre of the secunde part
THe secunde thing that shall cause the extreme and last Judgment to be
dredefull, shall be the strayte Rekenyng and accomptes of our vile dedys in all
thing. Saint Luke. says in his.xvj. Chapitre. Yield Reason of thy dedys, for
after this lif thou shall mow no more work. My Right dear friend if thou
should give a Rekenyng and accomptes of a.M. ll. before a temporal Lord
prudent and wise thou would be full well ware and take good head how thou
should make him a Just and a due Rekenyng Have thou then much more thouh^t
and be more dread full to yield good Rekenyng and accomptes of all thing that
thou have committed and done, and of thy dute left vndoon^. When^e thou shall
come before god, his angeles, and all his seyntes. In whoes presens necessarily
thou must account. And not oonly of the greet things: but also of the small.
Ye unto the leest part of them. And as it is writon in the third Chapitre of.
Isaye. Our Lord shall come to Judge with all his most Ancient people.
Zacharyas. in his fourtenth Chapitre seyth. Our Lord my God shall come, and his
seyntes with him. That is to wit. To the general Judgment. Which shall be
done before all opynly and not in hydelys. And therefore hit is greetly to be
dowted. For it is written in Zophonyas. in the third Chapitre. He shall hold
his Judgment in the morning by day light. and shall not hyde him. There shall be
then^e many diverse Reasons to give Rekenyng of all^ things. First of our
Soul / which has been committed and given us by God. Now truly if a King
had delivered his daughter to oon of his subgettes that he entierly loved /
entendyng to make her a queen in his Reame. And if the seyde subgette had not
kept her well. Who would dowte: but that the King would have a Rekenyng, and
know the cause / how and why, his daughter had be so evil and ne^^ligently
kept. What shall the King of heaven do then^ to him that has taken his daughter
to keep. That is to wite. The soul. Which he loves specially and entendeth
to enhaunse to Roial dignyte in heaven If he have kept her evil, shall not God
therefore axe to have thereof Rekenyng and Reason: Yes hardely It is written in.
Deutronomij. the fourth Chapitre. Keep thoughtfully thy selff and thy soul
also And Saint Austyn says. It is a gretter loss of oon^ soul: then of a.M.
bodies. Seint Bernard seith in the Book of his. Meditacions. That all this
present world may not be esteemed nor valued to so high a prico as oon^ soul.
Also he seyth. Wherefore make thou thy self fat and enournest thy flessh^
with precious stones. Which after a few days worms shall ete within thy
sepulture. And wherefore make thou not thy soul fair with good manners and
virtues. which at the day of dome ought to be presented to God and his
Angeles. Wherefore take thou noon head to make her fayer and clean against that
time. And why applyest thou rather to thy flessh^, than to her. why put
thou the chamberer before the lady as to be governed rather by thy flessh^, than
by thy soul. It is a greet abusion. Saint Bernard seyth h^ym self in the book
of dyspraysyng of the world. Now a days the cure and the charge of the soul
is despised and left, and thaccomplisshement of all their desire is after the
will of the flessh^. they dread not to do sin nor Remember not how they shall
be rigorously punissed. My Right dear friend. wylt thou then love better
things of little valewe. than thoes that be more dygne and of hier price
Enhaunse not thy body / and suffer never the lady to become Chamberer. To this
purpose seyth. Crissostom^. If we disprayse our soul, we may not save our body
Truly the soul is not made for the body, but the body is made for the soul.
Then^e he that disprayseth the highest and first thing. and enhaunseth the
secunde and the lowest: hurts both the oon^ and the other But he that keeps
therein good order, exalts and keeps y^ that is chef / and disprayseth that,
that is secunde. for he heleth that, yt is most digne and first. That is for
to seye the soul. If thou wolt than save thy soul, and yield god a good
rekenyng thereof. Instruct her with seyence, and deuyne virtues. Plato seyth in
his book of Thymeo The soul is Joined with the body, to thentent / that she
may learn science and virtue. If she come with wynnynges she so to be resceyued
of her maker. And if not she then^ to be sent into hell there to remain in
turment and pains perpetuell. Secundly we must yield Reason and Rekenyng of
our body. It is our Castle committed and delivered us by God. Wherefore seyth.
Saint Bernard. He keeps well a good Castle / that keeps (...) his body.
There shall be axed Rekenyng of the ^e^yng of this Castle / As wether the
Enymyes of (...) Lord / which be vices and voluptuosnesse of the ^^esshe /
have be resceyued therein at any time. And if his friends and his servants /
which be virtues and good works / have been shamefully chased out. If we have
done so: it is a greet sign and suspecion of our perdycion. And we shall nedely
yield Reason and Rekenyng. Therefore our body is as a Mare that our Lord has
given us to use for the proufite of our soul / of the which we shall yield
Rekenyng / As in three things / It is written in. Ecclesiastico. the three and
therty chapitre / The mete / the Rod and the burdon is given to the ass /
The bread the discipline and the work is given to the servant / Certeynly our
body signyfyeth as well a mare and an ass / as a servant unto whom is given
the bread for sustentacion of nature The Rod of discipline, for to refrain
vanytees. And the burdon of good works / for the persection^ of penance. Our
lord then shall axe of this his mare his ass or his servant, if we have
mynistred to him his mete discretely not to largely nourisshyng For he that
nourissheth over deliciously his servant, shall find him after the more fires
and proud. It is writon in the. Prouerbys. the nine and twenty Chapitre And
also not to give the body over little of that, that is necessary to hit. For so
we might be homycides of our own flessh^. Against this speaks. Saint Bernard.
in a. Pistle. to the Brethren of the mount of God. seiyng. There be many other
exercises of the body, in the which it is necessary to labor as in wakynges
fastings. Which impecheth not, nor lets spiritual things. For if they
were let other by default of spyrite, or by sickness of the body / he that
so should take a weye from his body theffect of good work The true desire of
his spyrit. The good example to be showed to his neighbor. and the honor to
God his maker. He should do sacrilege, and be culpable of all this things
against God. Yet seyth. Saint Gregory. in his. Moralys. in the one and therty
Chapitre. By abstynense should the vices of the flessh be quenched. Certeynly
yet whenne we put a weye our enemy, we grieve our own flessh^. Secundly our
lord shall ask us, if we have corrected our body with the Rod of discipline
in refraynyng hit from Rebellion and other vain Iolitees. Seint Bernard. says
upon the. Canticles. That the disacustumyng of good works: must be chastised
and helped by the bytte of discipline. He seyth also in a. Pistle. O how well
good disposicion yeldeth discipline to the state of the body, and the
habitacion of the thoughts abateth the sleep of the head / she ordeyneth the
continuance of the visage / she tempereth the tongue / she refrayneth the
throat / she appeseth the Ire / and dresseth the going. Thirdely our Lord shall
ask, if we have labored our body in virtue and in works of penance. Thereof
seyth. Saint Austyn. in his book of. Baptisyng. of children. That. Adam. was
chased out of Paradys terrestre / because that delicious place it should
signifye, that labor which is contrary to delight should be showed unto the
tender flesh of the children. And therefore our bodies may be called a
laboryng best / which our Lord has lent us to do and accomplisshe the werkys
of penance. Hold not the body then in Idelnesse, in as much as thou know
not, how long it shall abide with the. But perform the works of penance.
Lest perauenture he asks hit ageyn that has lent hit the. Crisostom. says
If thou have borrowed an Ox or an Horse, thou will a none set him a work /
leest he be asked ageyn of the on the morrow. Why wilt not thou semblably do
with thy body, as thou wylt do with the Horse or Ox. Thus then norisshe
discretely thy body / which is lent the by Ihesu Criste in such wise as thy
nature may be sustened, and the vices overcome and thy body corrected by the
Rod of discipline / so as it may be obedyent and Resplendisshyng in Chastity.
Instruct hit to good labors, so that it chase aweye all Idelnesse and
finally that thou may yield our Lord a good and a Just Rekenyng thereof at
the day of Judgment. Thirdely we must yield Rekenyng of our next kynnesmen.
First the Fadre of the Sone. As is written in the first book of. Kings. in the
secunde Chapitre and the third of. Hely. that was punysshed for his children
because he knew they did a mysse, and corrected not their defautes. Therefore
is also writon in. Solomon. the Nine and twenty Chapitre. Learn and teache thy
Sone. And to the same purpose seyde A wise man. If thou have a sone, correct
him if he sin, lest by right thou abye not his trespace. Secundly the Prelate
shall give Rekenyng of his subgette or diocesan^. For it is writin in.
Ezechiell. the egh^t and therty Chapitre. My sone I have set the to be a
beholder and ouerseer of men in the House of Irahell Whenne then^ thou herest
any of the words of my mouth show them on my behalf. That is to wit. If I
seye to a felon. O theff thou shall dye an evil death And if thou show not my
seiyng to him to thentent that he may amend him / If he dye in that
wykkednesse I shall ask of thy hand his life ageyn. Item the same. Ezechiel.
seyth in his three and therty Chapitre Behold and see how I am my self a boue
all my other herdemen^. And I shall ask my bestayll of their hands

The Lords or Princes Royal shall yield Rekenyng and accomptes of their
subgettes. As it appears in the. Book of Nombres. in the five and twenty
Chapitre. Where the worldly princes ar commanded to be hanged on the galowes
for the sin of their people be cause the people did fornicacion^ with the
daughters of. Moab. Whithe they called their. Sacrifice. As is read in the
said Chapitre. Such then be the princes and prelates. As is written in.
Iheremyas. the five and twenty Chapitre. Howl ye herd men^ and cry
strongely, and cast upon you ashes / for your days be complete, to thentent
that ye be slain and cast in the earth as precious vessels. Behold then^e
thies Prelates of the Church, and the Princes universal of the Earth, that be
constitute above all other ^oke how they govern by example. How they
instruct by words. How they defend by deed the pour people, that arne
committed to their governance. Certeynly the Prelates owen to teache their people
and defend them wisely from the assawtes of Heretics worse and more cursed
than wolves / and from their cawtellys wylyer than foxes. And the temporal
Princes owen^ to do Justice upon trespassours and defend their good
subgettes, and keep Wedewes, Orphans and wretched persons. And not to grieve
any body by unrightful exactions, or Iniust causes. They may know what is
written in the. Book of Sapiens the Syxthe Chapitre. How there shall be a right
hard Judgment to thoes, that been precellent a boue all other. Certeynly mercy
shall be granted unto the good pour man. But the badde rich man shall suffer
greet turmente. O ye prelates of the Church, and ye Princes of the universal
world / thies words been addressed unto you, to thentent, ye should learn
wysedom^ / and not to fall therefrom / and that ye enstructe govern and
defend your subgettes so well / that ye may be sure at the last day of the
right hard Judgment. where the grettest and strongest pains shall be to
thoffenders, that have been myghtiest here.

Fourthly it behooved to yield Rekenyng of all our wills and works. And.
Anastasye. says upon the Symboll. Quicunque wlt saluns esse. etc. How at
coming of our Lord Ihesus Criste all mankende shall arrise bodily, and yield
Rekenyng of their propre works. That is hit that is written by. Thappostle in
the secunde Pistle ad. Corintheos. the fyfth Chapitre / Where he seyth. It
behooves that we show us all manyfestly before the Judicial sete of Ihesu
Crist to thentent that eueriche resceyue there good or evil according to their
merits and deserts. It is read in Ecclesiastes. in the last Chapitre. Our
lord shall being unto the Judgment all things that be done / And not oonly the
greet and grievous sins / but also thoes yt we think be little or none. The
paas of a man seems but a small thing. Nevertheless it shall be Rekened for
at the fynall day of Judgment. There for seyth. Job. in his thertenth Chapitre.
Sire thou have well marked my weyes and my paths. and have beholdyn the Traces
of my fete. And after he seyth in the Chapitre following. Thou have nombred all
my steps. Item also it is wreton in. Ecclesiasticus. the seuententh Chapitre.
His eyes behold incessauntly all the weyes off men. As to seye he will Reward
all that they doon^ accordyngly thereafter. We Read in. Uitis patrum. an
example of an Angel: that sometime nombred all the paaces of an Heremyte.
Which paas is a less thing than an Idle word. Therefore seyth Saint Mathewe.
in his twelfth Chapitre. That men shall yield Rekenyng and Reason at the day of
dome of every Idle word, that they have seyde. It is wreten in the. Book of
Sapience. in the first Chapitre. He that speaks evil and peruersely, shall not
mow hyde him at the day of Judgment. And correction shall not pass besides
him. Vein thouhtes semeth^ but a little thing. Nevertheless it is written in
the. Book of Sapience. in the first Chapitre. How felonous and evil thouhtes
must be answered unto. For he will search all our thouhtes. I^ is also wreton
in Isaye. in the last Chapitre. I shall search their works and their thoughts.
and shall come and assemble my self with people. That is to sey to deem them as I
shall Judge them. Thereof speaks. Iohell also. in his third Chapitre. I shall
assemble all manner of people in the last days, and shall bring them to the vale
of. Iosaphath. And there I shall dispute with them, techyng my people. and myn^
heritage of. Israhell All our though^tes, our words, and our werkys shall be
then right straytely Iuged. And as Seint Gregory. seyth upon the. Gospel of
Saint Mathewe. the three and twenty Chapitre. All the here is of our hedes be
nombred. Semblably God considers all our goynges and stappes. And will that
all our vain thoughts and our Idelle words shall not rest undiscussed at the
day of Judgment. Certain all our works shall be then as manyfestly showed
unto all people: as though^ they were written in our forhedes. As it is written
in. Ecclesiastico. in the enleuenth Chapitre. At end of man, all his werkys
and dedys shall be uncovered and made opyn^. Fyftely it behooves to yield
Rekenyng and accomptes not oonly of the sins that we have done: but also of
the virtuous and good dedys that we have left undone. Saint Mathewe. seyth in
the five and twenty Chapitre. Then shall the greet King seye to thoes on his
lift hand. Depart fro me ye wykked sinners and go into the fire everlasting.
Which is made ready for the deueles and their angelis. I have been hungered /
and ye have not fed me etc. which oon of the causes / why the false rich
gloton^ fond no water to refresshe him with / was that he ne would suffer the
pouer Lazar to have the cro^mes that fill from his table. Oon shall not Rekynne
oonly of things done and forgetyn. but also of time lost in executyng evil
things / and left that, that was good undone. It is wreton in. Ecclesiastes.
the.xvij. Chapitre. That our lord has given man a nombre of days / and a
season to thentent he should use hit well and holsemly to his pleasyr, and
their own health Whereof many folkys taken noon^ head / and Inprofitably waste
their time. Wheruppon. Saint Bernard. compleyneth him to his Scolers, seiyng.
There is no thing more precious here than time. But alas now a days it is most
vily lost. The days of Salvation passen / and no man hedeth hit / There is noon
compleyneth him of the loss of a day, and yet it can never be recovered. There
shall not be lost an here of an head nor a moment of a time. But all shall come
to a due reken^ng. O what dread had. Saint Ancelme. in his meditacions.
seiyng. O unprofitable and dry tree. What shall be thyn answer the day whenne
thou shall be questioned to give Rekenyng of all thy work and account for the
leest twynkylling of thyn eye and all the time of life that has been^ lent the.
How thou have dispended hit. And therefore seyth. Sapiens. in Ecclesiastes. the
fourth Chapitre. My dear beloved sone, keep and spend well thy time

The syxth and the last thing that behooves to give Rekenyng and accomptes for
is all the yeftes that we have resceyued of our Lord God. Suerly our lord has
given us no thing. but that he will have thereof both Reason and Rekenyng.
Where by hit seems rather that he has but lent hit us then given hit us
absolutely. Certeynly he shall call us to rekene For all his gifts be they
spirituell / as the gifts of grace to the soul / or temporal as strength
deliverance / and beautee of the body. or worldly richesse power / and
worship in this lyff of all thies things

It appears by Example and by a Parabole in the Gospel of Saint Mathewe. in
the five and twenty Chapitre of the five talentes. which be pieces of money And
of. Saint Luke. in the Nynetenth Chapi^tre. How the noble man delivered to his
servants certain richesse. Whereof they were feign to yield Reason and do
account for every thing thereof pertyculerly As it is writon in. Job. the.xix.
Chapitre. Know^ ye that at Judgment all thies things aforseyde shall be
rekened for full streytely. Wherefore seyth Job in his.ix. Chapitre. What shall I
do whenne our Lord shall rise up to Judge all men. And whenne he shall
questyone me: what shall I answer then O how lightly and how sone shall he
come askyng a due Rekenyng and accomptes of all our werkys Our perdicion is
nyghe / and the time hastes fast and is alweye coming. That is to seye.
Whenne our Lord shall come and Judge his people. For as seyth Abdeas. in his
oonly Chapitre. The day of our Lord shall come in the euenyng at mydnyght At
Cokke crow / or in the morning. As is to seye If he come suddenly. That he ne
find you slepyng This that I sey to you: I seye it in like wise to all other
Be ye wakyng then^e and sleep not / For if ye wacche not / I shall come to you
as a thef. and ye shall not know when^e ne what hour. It is read in.
Apocalips. in the last chapitre. Lo see how I come a non and brnig with me
rewards to yield every man after their deserts. Now then^e my right dear
friend / sens thou must nedely of so many things and of eueriche of them yield
due rekenyng and account be not vnpurueied / but wake diligently. Examyn^ thy
self diligently / and purge well thy conscience to the bothom / to thentent /
that when^ our lord shall come to Judge all thing: as well deed as quik. Thou may
couenably and resonably answer / and thereby to have his mercy grace and pardon
of all thy sins. And this is that Ecclesiasticus ammonyssheth us in the xviij
chapitre. seeing. Examyne thy self before the day of Judgment. And that shall be
to thy help in the presens of our lord Ihesu Crist

How thorrible abiding of the last day and extreme day of Judgment is to be
dowted The third chapitre of the secunde part
THe last thnig that renders the final Judgment to be dredeful and doutable:
is the terrible sentence that then^e shall be pronounced by the Judgment of god
the rightful judge. This sentence shall be terrible and fereful / and specially
for in thingys. The first is the doubt and the incerteynte of the sentence. for
there is no man sure whether it shall be youen with him or against him. And as it
is writon in. Ecclesiastes. the ix chapitre. They be Just and wise / and their
works be in the handis of god how be it there is no man here that knows
whether he stand in hate or love. and al things to come / be in nowne
certeyn^. To this purpose it is read in Uitis patrum. how that an abbot
called. Agathon. being in the article of death. And so liyng by the space of iij
days without meuyng or openyng of his eyes. His brethren seeing him so liyng /
pusshed him / seiyng unto him. Fadre abbot where art thou At last he answered
/ I am in the presens of all folks / Wherefore they seide unto him / Then thou
dredest and art aferde. Unto whom he answered. Though I have kept the
commandments of our lord as vertuosly as to me was possible: yet I am a man
/ and wot not whether my works be agreeable unto him for the domes of our lord
be all other then the Iugementes of men / and that is the cause of my dread. I
have neeither hope ne wanhope before god. Seint Austijn. seyth. That / that we
deem to be Justice: well examyned before the divine justice: is often
inuistice. And therefore it is written in the Proverbs of Solomon the xiiij
chapitre. There is oon^ weye / which seems just to a man / but the end thereof
ledeth him to death And forasmoche as this holy fadre Agathon counterpoisyng in
his heart all thies things aforseyd: al be it that he was right diligent to
keep the commandments of our lord / Yet alwey he dead full sore the last day
of Judgment It is also red in Uitis patrum how there was sometime an ancient
fadre / which seide. I dread iij things. that is to seye. First when^ my
soul shall depart out of my body seclide. when^ she shall come before our lord.
The iij when^ she shall abide and here the final sentence of the last day of
judgment. Lo see how many holy faders have dead this last day of judgment for
the nowne certeyn^ of ye doutfull sentences yt there shall be given. Now
certeynly it is a thing which of reason ought timerously to be drad. It is
written in the Gospel of Saint Mathewe in ye vij chapitre and by the words of
our lord Ihesu Crist. Many men shall sey to me Sir sir / have we not prophesied
in thy name / and cast out ye deuels of men and done many virtuous dedis. Then^
he shall seye unto them / I know you not nor ever knew you. depart fro me. If
ye prophets and thoes yt have chased out deuels and thoes that have done
miracles in ye name of our lord be so put a bakke / who shall then mow be sure
/ and who shall conne live here so holily: but at day of dome he ought to
tremble and fere / Certeynly noon^ for upon the earth is there no body purely
clean without filthe not a child of oon day old for it is born^ in original
sin. Therefore it is written in Isay the lxiiij chapitre. We be all made as a
foul cloth / and we ought to dread al our werkis which shall be showed before
us at dome / al though we think them good virtuous and just. Therefore seith
Job in his ix chapitre. I have dead al my werkis. Semblably seint powle which
was a delectable chosyn^ vessel / al be it he was then full clean in conscience
in so much he seide in the xxiij chapitre of Thactes of Apostoles. I have been
conversant wtth our lord with all my might and in good conscience to this day.
And yet it is According whereto the same holy Apostle ferefull wrote in his
first Pistle ad Corintheos the.iiij. chapitre seyde I feel not my self gilty in
any thing / that notwhithstondyng I fere yet / by cause I am not justified.
Seint Gregory seide. The Just men dread in all their works. When^ they wisely
considere how they must come before the high Judge. For as. Thappostel writes
unto the. Romans the xiiij chapitre. We shall come all before the tribunal
sete of Ihesu Crist. Alas / then^e I wretched sinner what shall I seye / or what
shall I do / when^e I shall come before so greet a Judge wtthout good works for
my help

The secunde thing which causes this sentence to be terrible: Is the hard
lamentable and intollerabile utterance of the seide sentence. Whenne our lord
Ihesu Crist shall seye. Go ye fro me ye cursed people. To that purpose is writon
in the. Gospel of seint Mathewe. in the xxv Chapitre. Whenne the sone of man^
shall come in his mageste and al his angeles with him: Then^e he shall sit in
the hygh^ judicial sete. and al manner of people shall assemble before him. And
shall divide the oon^ from the other as the sheparde keeps the sheep from the
wolves. Certeynly he ordeyneth and sets the sheep on his rigbt hand / and
the wolves on the lift hand / And then^ shall the king of glory seye to thoes
that shall be an his right hand. Come ye ^n with me that be blessed of my fadre
/ and possess the royalme of glory / that is enorned for you from the
beginning of the world. I have been houngry / and ye have fed me etc.
Theen^e he shall seye to thoes on his lift hand Depart fro me ye that be
cursed / and go into eternal fire Which is arredied for deueles. And theruppon
seith a wise man. The words of the judge in sentence ar but short as come ye
and go ye. For he shall seye to thoes that be reproved / Go on your weye. And to
thoes yt be just / come ye with me. O how gracious shall ye word of our lord
Ih^u^s Crist be. when^e he shall seye / come ye with me. O how hard bitter and
intolerable shall the pronownsyng of that word be. Depart ye fro me / or go
ye fro me. Suerly Go ye fro me is a full sharp word. And come ye with me is a
full blessed word. Saint Bernard seyth. O hou cruel shall thoes words be. Go
ye fro me / to them on the lift hand / spoken by the king of kyngis geuer of
al lif which shall sey to other. Come ye with me. This is the cuttyng sword
with two edges issewed out of ye mouth of the sone of man / as it is writon in
ye first and the xix chapitre of the Apocalips. Certeynly he shall then^e smite
the earth with the Rod^e of this mouth / and shall slay the felonous sinner by
his werkis. As it is written in Isaye the xj chapitre. O how terrib^^ a thing
shall be to here this voys Therefore seith Saint Austyn upon the Gospel of
Saint Ioh^n. Thoes yt fill bakkewarde by oon word of Ihesus Crist / when^e he
went toward his passion. What shall they do / when^e they here the voys of the
same Ihesus Crist / when^e he shall Judge all the world. for certain he shall
braye like a lion. As Amos seide in his iij chapitre When^e the lion shall braye
/ who is he / that then^e shall not be a ferde. Isaye in his v chapitre seith.
His bra^yng shall be like a lion. Iheremie also seith in his xxv chapitre. Our
lord shall braye from an high / and from his tabernacle shall descend his
voys. Whereof the sown shall extend unto thextremite of the earth / and shall
make his dome and judgment unto the people. The voys of our lord shall be then^e
in greet magnificens. It is the voys of our lord that shall break down the
high Cedres of the mount of Lyban^. That is to vndrestonde. His enemyis proud
people enhaunsed. And yet al be it they have been so raised It shall then fail
and vanysshe as smoke. And at that Judgment they shall be made humble / and
reduced to no being. This voys so coming from our lord shall be like a thundre
betyng the earth. Therefore seyth Job. tremblyng in his five and twenty Chapitre
Who shall mow behold the thundre / or sown of the magnytude of our lord. And
the. Psalter. seyth. Our lord has thundered from heaven / and the most hygh^
has vttred his voys. Job. seyth in his.xxxvij. Chapitre. Our lord shall
thundre meruelously by his voys and he does many greet things / Which ought
not to be enserched nor mused one. And Saint Ancelme. seyth in his.
Meditacions. Wherefore slepest thou slougthfull soul worthy to be cast out of
all light (...) that waketh not nor dredeth not this greet thundre slepeth not
/ but rather is deed. The word of our lord shall be in manner a Right hot
lightenyng. Wherefore. Zachary. in his.ix. Chapitre seyth. His darte shall depart
like a lightenyng / And our lord shall sown the trompe certain as it is
writon in. Isaye. in the xxvij chapitre In that last day shall sown the greet
trompe. And therefore seyth. Crisostom^ upon the. Gospel of seint Mathewe.
the.xxiiij. chapitre. The virtues of heaven shall be moved. now truly that shall
be by a greet voys which is of the terrible trumpe / whereunto all wyndes and
elements obeyen. Which voys renteth stones and opens hell / and breketh
the gates of brass and breketh the ligatures of deed bodies / and restores
the sowles to the bodies ageyn / and constrayneth them to come to the greet
judgment. And all thies things be consumed ageyn more lightly then ye flight
of an arowe passing in ye air. Witenesse of Thappostle yt seyth in his first
pistle ad Corintheos in the xv chapitre. In a moment in ye twynkelyng of an eye
in the sownyng of the last trumpe shall be the Judgment. Of this trumpe speaks
seint Iherom^ upon ye Gospel of seint Mathewe / seiyng. When^e and as often as
I thenke on the last day of Judgment: I tremble for fere / be it when^ I ete
or when^ I drink and in any of my werki^ / me thinks alweyes that terrible
trumpe sownes in mine ere saying. Arise ye arise ye deed folks and come to your
Judgment. All men troubled or grieved / ought by penance to think of tentymes
on this day and it shall be a greet well and ^ase to their sowles. And therefore
seith Saint Gregorye in an Omely. My right dear brethren and friends / let that
day of Judgment be alweye before your eyes. For what grievous thing so euere ye
here: it is but soft in comparyson of that sore day. We ought also to fere
and dread the same day For that is the greet Journey: the Journey of wrath and
of bytternesse. Sophonyas. seyth in his first Chapitre. The weye of our Lords
Journey shall be full bitter. For there shall be no man so strong: but then^ he
shall be troubled / that shall be the verray day of wrath tribulacion angwisshe
chalange myserie and derkenesse of clouds of storms and of the sown of the
trompe Isaye in his xiij chapitre seith. The day of our lord shall come /
which shall be full of Indignacion wrath and of furour. Iohell. also in his iij
chapitre seith. The son shall be converted into derkenesse / and the moon into
blood before the coming of the greet and horrible day of our lord. O how
drad Saint Bernard that same day when^e he seyde. Whiles I that am a mortal
man remember what I shall be after my death: The fere thereof puts me in
terrible doutes. For I am not verrely assured of that / that I long after /
for the day of fere / of wrath of Ire and of furour / the day of waylyng and
the vengyng of sinners / affrayeth me hideously. Of this same day seith he
also in oon of his sermons. They shall be al bare and naked before the tribunal
sete of Ihesu Criste to thentent that they may here the voys of his Judgment Be
cause they have stopped here eres from the weyes of good conseil. Now what
seyth our lord God. Do ye penance / nevertheless there be many that
dissimilingly close their eres and will not here hit / and think it is to hard
to do. O remember ye felons because of your obstinacy / ye shall here therefore
the hard and lamentabile word prominced unto you. That is to seye. Go ye
cursed people into everlasting fire. What shall then thoes pour wretched
perpetuel dampened people seye. Seeing the holy blessed people called up
Ioyefully into the eternal glory and bliss of heaven. And they that be dampened
into the Infenite pains of hell. Certeynly as it is written in the book of
sapience in ye v chapitre. They shall wepyngly seye in them self for the greet
angwysshe of their sowles Let us do penance. for we be thoes that have
blasfemyd hit. And as foles out of all wit and reason had in derision the
living of the penitent follies / thinkyng it was no worshpfull lif. How be it
we see them now taken and accepted with the sone of god / and their werkis
allowed and cherisshed. so that they be accompanied with the happy and blessed
seintes / and we with the dampened fendes of hell We have erred from the wey of
truth / the light of justice has not shyned in us / nor the son of
rightwissnesse risen^ in us. We have left the weyes of our lord Ihesu Criste
and have goon dangerous and evil weyes. that is to seye. The weyes of
Iniquite and perdicion. What has our greet pride proufited or auyaled us. or
what auantage have we had of all our greet richesse / parde al is past as a
byrd fleyng in the sky / or a ship glidyng thurgh^ the water / whereof the
traces can not be apperseyued. Now then to make confession is over late. for
their repentance grows but for the pain they suffer And therefore they can^
obteygne no pardon / also they are past the place of mercy and grace / and be in
the place of equite and Justice. For whenne the Judge / which ought so greetly
to be dowted has pronounced his Judgment and sentence / seiyng. Go fro me ye
wykked / and come to me ye blessed / their Remedy is past. To this purpose
read we in Uitis patrum. How there was sometime an holy man / which was tempted
with the spirit of fornicacion and he besought our lord that his enemy the
fend which tempted him / might appre visibly unto him / and so he did /
Then^e the said holy man seide unto the fend. what avails the thus for to
tempte the people / parde it is a greet folly / for whenne thou have brought any
to sin thy trespass is the gretter / and consequently thou augmentest thyn
own pain. To whom the fend answered. Certeynly all that is true. but I know
well the mo folks that I cause to sin / the more I defer the coming of
the day of dome. I dread that day above all things and the hering then of
that hard sentence. Go ye wykked and cursed into the eternal fire / which is
made ready to the deuell and his angeles. And therefore I do my power to prolonge
the time of coming of that sentence O good lord what cause of dread have
thies fendes and thies unhappy sinners then^e. If thou wylt be assured in this
orrible and dredefull Journey. Sow now in thy lif the works of Mercy Pite
and Justice. O how blessed and how happy shall he be / that now entendeth to
the pour langwysshyng nedy people. For in that hard Journey our Lord will
deliuere them therefore from all daungier. It is writen^ in the Prouerbis of
Solomon in the xj chapitre. The merciful man does greet good unto his soul /
and does also the digne fruits of penance For they that now sow teres and
lamentacions the reward thereof shall come and bring them into the lodgyng of
Joy and of gladness. But there be many that sown now presently thorues and
cokill / wenyng to repe and Inn good whete / but ywys foles it will not be so ^
For as Thappostel seith ad Galathas in ye vj chapitre. Such as a man has
sown here: such shall he repe then^e for him self. And therefore seyth our Lord
by his prophet Ozie in his.x. Chapitre. Ye have sown felony and have reped
Inyquite and he that has sown sin and evil works / he shall be repyn^ and
Inned into the pains of hell. But he that has sown virtues and the good
works of penance: He shall repe and gadre the everlasting glory. And all that
have done well: shall rest in the Joys of heaven. And thoes that have done sin
and wykkednesse shall go and rest in the pains of hell. Certeynly their works
follow them. As it is written in Thappocalips. the.xx. chapttre. After their
works men^ shall be both saved and dampened. It is read in the. Gospel of
saint Ioh^n. the v. chapitre. An hour shall come in the which all that be in
Monumentes or tombs shall here the voys of our Lord. And they that have doon^
well: shall go in the Resurrection^ of life And they that have doon^ wykkedly:
shall go unto the Judgment of death. It is writon in the secunde chapitre of
Thappocalips how the Judge shall sey. I am he that ensercheth the hertes of
persons and shall give to every of you his Reward after his works. And as
seith Abde^s. It shall be done unto the: as thou have done To the same purpose
is writon in Iheromye the.l. chapitre. And thies be the wordees of the eternal
Judge unto the evil angel spekyng of the dampened sinners / yield and do him
after his dedis and works. And therefore if thou will have a good heruest and
habundaunce of fruit sow good works largely in the time of this present lif /
for he yt sows them now largely / shall gadre them then^ habundantly. And he
yt now sows them sparingly: shall then^ gadre them scarsely. And he yt sows
them with blissingis: shall gadre them with greet Joy and gladness. As it is
written in the secu^de Epistle ad Corintheos in the ix chapitre. For he that
sows his sedys in sin and maledi^cions / semblably shall Inn and gadre
them. And as it is written in a Proverb. The sede yt man sowes in this p^sent
lif / shall be his house / when^e the Judge shall seye. Come ye and go ye. The
third thing. why the dome of the Judge shall be terrible: Is to remember how
dampened sowles shall be by the mournyng sentence / full of all sorrow eternally
separated and departed from god and his seintes of paradys / and put on the
lift hand unto the fendes of hell Certeynly incontinent and without tariyng
that this o^rible sentence shall be pronounced by the mouth of Ihesu crist The
perpetul deueles shall be there arredied and ready for (...) take and rauayne the
sowles of the wretched synne^^ Which they shall lightly bring unto the
everlasting turmentis and pains. This may appear unto us by a figure in the
book of. Hester. the vij chapitre of the mynestres of king Assuer. Which were
desirous and ready to take Amon. as it is contained in the same Chapitre. How
the word was not all out of the mouth of the said king. But that the
mynestres had covered the visage of the same Amon. In like wise the deueles
in this hideous Journey shall be more then^ ready to resceiue the sowles of thies
wretched sinners. And this is written in ye lamentacions of Iheremy in ye first
chapitre. All his persecutees have taken him. Ioh^n Crisostom^. seyth in the
book of Repayryng of forfeiturs. Remember thies cruel and terrible turmentours
that never may show mercy on any body and ledeth down the unhappy sinners
unto eue^lastyng torments. And Hugh^ of seint Uictour. seith. That the
horrible minystres of hell shall be appareyled and arre died incontinent as the
sentence is given / to take the condemned unto torments. And then^e the
wretched unhappy caitiffes lamentably shall sey they have caugh^t me like as a
deuoryng lyon^ lurkyngly has taken his pray. O what sorrow and pain / whereof
may not be esteemed in man's mind nor by tellyng pronounced. Wherefore Saint
Bernard seyth in his. Meditacions. What thynkest thou / What weeping / What
waylyng / and what sorrow shall be when^e the sinners shall be expulsed out of
the company of Just men / and put from the sight of God and delivered and cast
unto hands of the deuels to go with them into everlasting fire. and utterly
banysshed from all the Joys of heaven to abide in the derkenesse there
sufferyng pains for their demerites after the quantite of their sins. And
then^e the myserabile sinners being in despeir of the Redempcion^ shall enter
into the lowest parties of the earth in the hands of our lords glayue there
to remayn without seeing of any light. Of this pain of separacion^ or departing
seyth also. Crisostom^. Some foles wene and think to have their wisshyng if
they may escape the ge^^^ne of hell. But as to me I seye that there be other
turmentes much more grievous. That is to seye to be estrau^ged and cast a wey
from the grace of the sovereign glory / and I deem that the banisshyng
therfrom is the most egre and grievous turment. Wheruppon seyth Saint Gregory.
He is greetly tormented that is constrained to be put a part from the presens
of our lord. And I deem that it is the most grievous thing that may be / and
passes all the gehennes of hell. The same Seint Gregorye seyth of this word
of the Gospel of Saint Mathewe the xvj chapitre. He shall be cut and sent into
ye eternal fire. Certeynly the gehenne of hell is a thing in tolerable and
noon^ can^ comprehend how intollera^le it is Nevertheless if there were a M
gehennes in hell: there is noon^ so lamentable pain / as to be exempte from ye
honor of the blessed glory of heaven / and to be hated of our read mour Ihesu
Crist maker of al thingis. For as seint Austyn seith. The wikked reproved shall
lever sustene all the turmentes of hell / then to behold the rightful iuges
face angered with them. Iohel seith in his secunde chapitre The earth has
trembled for his face and meuyng of his eyes / the son and the moon have
derked / the sterres have withdrawn their shynyng / the people have been
turmented beholding his visage. Certeynly sinners shall then^e perisshe before
his face. through the greet sorrow they shall have of them self. And when^e they
shall see him turnyng his visage from them: it shall meue them to myserably. And
then the Judge egrely shall say / as is writon in. Iheremye. the.xviij.
chapitre. In the day of ther^ perdicion I shall show them my bakke / and not
my face. O what shall be that seperacion. O how bitter and sorrowful shall it be
to the sinner to depart fro the face of our lord When^e he shall horribly sey.
I tell you I know you not. And therefore seyth a wise man. The departing of
frendys is right sorrowful. But the seperacion of the body and the soul from
the presens of the deite is the most sorrowful thing. For all this things
aforseyd and many other / which infenitely might be rehearsed / for breefnesse
of time I pass them over. But yet awake ye awake ye my dear friends: and lift
up your hedes / abhorryng and fering that tymerous and dredeful day of
Judgment. For as. Sophomas. in his first chapitre seyth. The day of our lord
approaches nygh and shall not tarry. It is writon in. Isaye. in the xiij
chapitre. Sorrow ye and cry for the day of our lord is nygh^. Sleep not
then^e. For ye know not the day ne the hour. as is writon in the. Gospel of
seint Mathewe. the xxv chapitre. It is also writon unto the Tessalonyes in the
last chapitre of the first epistle. My brethren ye knew well that the day of
our lord shall come by night as a thef. and whenne men^ shall think them self
assuredly in peace. He shall come suddenly and take them in a mortal default.
Wherefore my brethren Rest not in the sin of wretchedness. Leest that day
supprise you not suddenly as a thef / Surely we be all the children of day /
and the sons of light. Then let us not sleep as other do. But let us awake and
be sobre as it is writon in the same chapitre. It is written in the Gospel of
seint Luke. in the one and twenty chapitre Give attendaunce in your self. Lest
perauenture your hertes be fulfilled with gloteny and drunkshippe and in other
vain works of this present lif. And lest that the forseide dangerous day
fall not suddenly unto you / which shall fall universally to all thoes yt shall
be upon the earth Be ye then^e in your prayers / so yt at al times ye may be
the more digne and able to flee all the dangers that be to come when^e ye shall
be before the sone of man. As it is writon in the same chapitre for a trougth.
There shall be then^e tremblyng fere and sorrow intolerable. And therefore seide
Iohell in his secunde chapitre. Our lords day shall be greet and right
terrible. And who shall be he that shall mow sustene or suffix it. Isaye seid
also in his ij chapitre. they shall enter into ye cauernes emonges stones and
hid places of the earth for dread of our lords face and of the glory of his
mageste. When^ he shall arise to smite and punisshe the earth. And as it is
read in Abacuk in ye third chapitre. In his fersnes he shall trede down^ the
earth: and the people shall be abashed of his furour. Isaye in his. x chapitre
seith. What shall ye do in ye day of visitacion and of calamite coming from
far parties / to whom shall ye run to have socour and help. Certeynly ye
sinner shall have then^ no refuge solace nor socours. And therefore seid Ancelme
in his book of meditacions. On ye right hand shall sins be accusing ye
wretched sinner / on ye lift hand infenite nombre of deueles / vndrenethe the
confusion of hell which is greetly to be dowted / and over this ye p^sens of
the wrothfull judge / and without all the world brennyg / and within this the
consciences glowyng. This ought to be remembered. Alas the miserable sinners
taken in that trappe / whyther shall they flee. It shall be then^e impossible to
hide them. It shall be an intolerable dredeful thing to appear in that day.
The said sentence is more fereful and dangerous / be cause it iugeth not oonly
the body. but also it condempneth the soul. To that purpose is there red an
example. how that there was sometime ij brethren^ / whereof the oon^ was a fool
and ignorant / and the other was wise / which went to gedres in a weye / and
as they walked / they come at last to a forked wey: which led to sundry
places Whereof the oon^ was fayer and pleasant / and the other sharp and no
thing inhabited / And when^ the fool saw the faier and delectable weye / he
seid. Brother go we this weye Then^e the wise brother answered. I know well
that this wey which thou will led us is fayer and delectable / but nathele^
in the end it will bring us to right an evil logyng And therefore I counseil
that we take the other wey. For all be hit that it be sharp and not inhabited /
finally it will being us to right a good and honest harberough^ and full of
rest. Whereunto the fool answered. I will rather trust myn^ eye in that I see /
than thyn^ in that thou see not / And so set him ^orthe in the soft and
delectabile weye Which thing the wise brother seeing that he cowde not make him
relinquisshe his purpose: followed him. And when^e they had goon^ to gydre a
little space / they fortuned anon^ to be taken with soldeours. which disseuerd
them and put them into diverse prisones. Now it happened that the king of that
contree commanded on a day / that all prisoners should be brought before him
that he might judge them according to their demerites. And when^e thies two
brethren^ came afor him / and echeon^ knew other. the wise brother seyde. O
sir king and our Judge / I complain me greetly of this man my brother / for as
we went to gydres in a weye he being reputed a fool and I wys / Yet never
theles / he would not believe me nor go after me the good weye that I tough^t
him / but has made me to follow him in the evil weye wherein we were taken /
and so he is gylty of my death. And to the contrary the ignorant fool seide to
the same king. Sir I have gretter cause and strenger Reason to compleyn^ me
against my brother. for where he ought not to have believed me nor followed me
lightly in the weye / which he knew well was evil and dangerous for and he
would not a followed me: I would have returned ageyn and followed him. whereby I
should in no wise have fallen in this daungier. and therefore he is verrey gylty
of my death. When^e thies words were had on either party The king
pronounsed and gaf a sentence / seiyng. Thou fool thou would not trust thy
wise brother / and you wise have followed this fool in his evil weyes. wherefore
ye both shall be hanged and condemned to death. Semblably shall it be at the
day of Judgment in the consummacion of this world when^ by ye almighty power
of god the soul of every man and woman shall return ageyn and be reioyned to
their own bodies appering before the high Judge to resceiue dome and judgment
of al things known and forgotin. for the folissh^ body because it would not
follow ye counseil of ye wise soul And ye wise spirit because it would not
resist but ensieu the folissh^ body / they shall be both dampened to gydre in
the last extremite of judgment. For this cause the sentence of the Judge is
called a sword with two edges. as is written in thapocalips in ye first
chapitre. For it shall strike the wretched sinner both in body and soul. It is
written in the gospel of seint Matthew in the x chapitre. Dread him yt shall mow
lose and put both the body and the foul in the gehen^e of hell. The qualite
of the said judge yeldeth and shows the said sentence to be dredeful and
dangerous. Certainly it shall be pronounced by a circumspect and a right
prudent judge / which shall never fail / for every thing is notarily to him
known. for god knows ye hid thingis of the heart and sercheth the werkis
of men. Wherefore it is written ad hebreos in the iiij chapitre. All things be
opyn^ to his eyes / for he lokith into the hertes / as it is read in ye first
book of Kingis in the xvj chapitre. Also it is read in ecclesiastico the xxiij
chapitre The eyes of our lord be much clerer then the son^e. for they behold
all the ways of man / and the profou^de depnesse and the hertes of men / and
see all the hid thingis of the earth. And as Boece de consolacione says.
Greet curiosite to do well is introducte unto us / because al yt we do is done
before him that sees all thingis. Iheremy seith in his xxij chapitre Thyn eyes
be open upon all the ways of the children of Israhel / and I shall yield to
euerich of them after his ways and after the fruit of his administracions.
Certainly the Judge is greetly to be d^ad / which looks upon all thingis both
opyn^ and shette / and al secreet thingis to him known all derke thingis to
him be clear / all dom^ thingis answer unto him. and all thoughts speak to
him without voys and all silences confess them unto him. This sentence is to
be given by the Just Judge / which w^l not be bowed and he shall Judge all the
circuit of the earth. and the people in equite. He gruggith not at ye might
of any body / nor he excepteth no person what so ever they be / nor he ne well
be appesed then by any gifts. It is written in deutronomij in the x chapitre.
God is greet mighty and terrible / which will favor no person nor he
resceiueth no gifts. Certeynly a pure and a clean conscience then^e shall be
more worth / then the purses full of silver. The habondance of riches shall not
proufite then^e / nor any thing that longs to rich people. But only shall
proufit^ the werkis of Pite and of Justice. It is written in Ezechiel in the vij
chapitre. Their money shall be then^e their donghil / neither their gold nor
their selves shall mow deliuere them in the day of furour of our lord. Then^
shall appear the frawde and the falsh^de of this world / and the vileness of
al richesse. O how sweet a thing and how greet a Joy shall it be then^ to thoes
that have hated this world / and how sorrowful and bitter shall it be unto them
yt have had it in lust and in delectacion. This sentence is also to be given by
the judge yt will not be corrupt then^ by prayers nor appesed by desires. And as
it is written in ye Prouerbis of Solomon in ye vj chapitre. He will not obtempee
then nor bow to any requests what so e^ they be. Crisostom seith the angeles
will not then^ intercede nor pray for the men / for the just judge will show
there no misericorde / but will yield to euerich^ after his merits and
demeritis egally not bowyng justice. And therefore seith he by his prophet
Ezechiel in the vij chapitre. I shall do the right after thy weyes and shall judge
the after thy iugementes and I shall make the know yt I am thy lord. For ye
cause seid Job al dredefully. Irefine al my works knowing yt thou ne wilt
spare any thing the delinque^tes or trespassours Of all thies things speaks
Seint Bernard in a prose which he made / saying. Certainly our lord shall judge
justly and shall except no person / nor shall be corrupt by any prise / nor
gifts. Semblably he shall not bow for any man of prayer O my right dear friend
labor then diligently to bear justice thither as you shall find no misericorde.
For as it is written in the Prouerbis of solomon. The richesse shall not proufite
in the day of vengeance / but justice shall cause then^ deliverance from death.
And if the scolers that can not their lessous dread greetly to be examined of
their master / left they should be egrely punisshed: how much should the
sinner^ dread then^ thextremie examining of the soueraygn^ judge. when^ they
have not studied in the book of justice and of truth. Certainly in ye
apposaile is examined al thingis that now be naught. the unjust sinners shall be
punisshed and the seed of felons shall perish. and to the contrary the just
people shall be then^ in the eternale memory and shall not dread in any wise any
evil accusacion. It is written in Ecclesiastico the xviij chapitre. Make ready
Justice before the Judgment. This final sentence shall be also given by a judge
cruelly moved / which in no wise shall mow be appeased For our lord Ihesus
Crist that naturally is now amyable and meke as a lamb shall appear then^e as a
lion right cruel and greetly moved. And therefore says Ozee in his xiij
chapitre. It may well be the words of our lord by the covetous gletons and
proud people at the day of judgment / saying thus They have fulfillled them
self in their pastures and arreised up their hertes / and forgotyn^ me / I
wole be to them as a lioness and as a leoparde in the weye of assirience. I
shall come against them as a she bear / which has lost her whelps / and shall
break their Iugementes within and shall destroy them like a lion. How might oon
remember a more cruel thing then by thoes beestes. Our lord shall sey to the
felons yt shall be condemned / as is written in Ezechiel in ye vij chapitre. The
conclusion is come / and now comes the end upon the / and I shall send my
furour into the Certeynly sir as the fire brennys the forestis and the mystis
break upon ye mou^teynes. Semblably in ye tempest thou shall then persecute
thy sinners and trouble them in thyn^ Ire And then^e thy wrath shall be chased
like fire and shall abassh^ the people in thyn^ anger. It is written in Isaye in
ye xxx chapitre. The name of our lord shall come from right far his
fersenesse shall be ^rennyng and grievous to bear / his lips shall be fulfilled
with indignacion. and his tongue shall be like a deuoring fire. and his sperit
shall be like a broke renning over the brinkes for to distroy people and to bring
them to no thing. Job took sometime this furoure in a vision when^e he seide.
Who shall be that living man that shall do so mekel with the that thou will
defend me from hell and hide me till thy furour be past. Certeynly the furour
of the Judge shall be so greet then^e / that it can not be expressed by any words
nor thought by any corages. Verily all the iugementes and sentences that have
been against and upon the humyane lynage since the beginning of the world / be
but like a little flame or a spark in regard to the furour of Ihesus Crist.
which he shall exercise in the last day of Judgment. And how straytely shall he
yt is risen deboneir and past up into heaven return to do judgment / and
therefore seith seint gregory in an omely upon the word of seint Ioh^n
evangelist that seint thomas oon of ye xij apostoles called didimus / which is
to say long douting seide thus. My brethren and friends order your lif your
werkis and your condico^ns and puruey. for he that is risen meke and amyable
shall come hard and strayte at the day of Judgment / Certeynly at ye day of
examinacion / which is so greetly to be douted / he shall show him self clearly
among angeles and archangeles and among ye trones and dominacions / among the
principals and potestates / and al ye skies shall be moved / and the earth and
the other ele^me^tes in ye fere and dread of his service. Set then before your
eyes this judge yt is cause of so greet abasshement / and fere and d^ed^ him
both now and herafter. To thentent yt when^ he (...) come / ye shall not see
him in fere / but be well assured he ought to be dred now to the end that he
should not be douted then. Certainly if oon of you had to say or allege a
cause ageyn^ your enemy and s^ulde to morrow p^sent you to my judgment /
perauenture ye wol pass all the night without greet sleep / remembryng your
self in great pain and thought what thingis might be aleged against you / and
what ye would answer to thobiections / and should dread greetly lest I should
be sharp unto you / and would fere lest it should be thought that ye were
culpabill / and would search what I were / and whether I should be come.
Certainly not long after I have be man / I shall become worms / and after
worms powdre. Now then if the Judgment of him that is but powdre is to be drad
and had in so greet fere. By what entencion is it to be thought that fere
must be most dredefull / which is of the Judgment of the most grettest and
higest magestee. All thies things said Seint Gregory in the chapitre
aforsayde. Yet is there some thing more concerning ye said sentence. that is to
wite / that there is no puissau^ce can resist it. And as it is written in the
book of sapience in ye xj chapitre. who shall be he yt shall resist the virtue of
thyn^ arm. Isaye also seide in his xlvij chapitre. I shall take vengeance on
them and no man shall resist me. Verily noon shall mow resist it. but nedely
al must appear there generally will they or not. they shall abide before the
angeles ye sentence of the sovereign Judge / which spoke by Isaye him self in
the said chapitre to the sinners that are to be condemned. and thus thy shame
shall be known and thy vylen^ reproach shall be seen. wheruppon I will take
vengeance and shall no man mow resist hit. Job said in his ix chapitre. God
is he that in his wrath no man may resist. And as it is written in the book of
Hester the xiij chapitre. Fair lord god king omnipotent all thingis be set
under thy Jurisdiction and is non yt may resist thy will. Certeyn^ thou have
made the sky the earth and all that is contained in the circuyt of the world
/ thou art lord of al thingis / and is non that may resist thy will / This is
the greet mighty and puyssau^t lord / of whoes gretnesse and might there is no
nombre nor end and he shall dread non be they never so mighty. It is written in
the book of Sapiens in the vj chapitre. Our lord shall dread no body / what so
ever he be. for he has made both greet and small. It is read in the
Apocalips in the vj chapitre. Our lord shall not d^ede the gretnesse of man
what so ever he be. The kingis of ye earth / the princes of the world / the
tribunes / the rich / the strong and all men as well bond as fre / shall hyde
them in the caves and among stones of the roches / saying to ye mou^teines.
fal^ upon us and hyde us from the face of him yt sits in trone / and the
wrath of the lamb / for the greet day of Ire is come. It is read in ye same
apocalips in ye xviij chapitre. The kingis of the earth shall weep / and they
shall specially compleyn^ that have made fornicacion with Babylon and have lived
in delectacions. when^e they shall see ye smoke of his embrasingis and shall will
them to be far for fere of the torments / Certein^ as says seint matthew in
his xxiiij chapitre. There shall be then^ greet tribulacion / and so greet / ye
sythens the beginning of the world til now wa^ there never none like. Secundly
there is an other thing that agrog^th the said sentence That is to say / yt
there is no place there for si^ners to hide them in. And as seint Ancelme said.
It shall be then^ a thing impossible oon to hyde him / And therefore he says in
his xxiiij chapitre. There shall no tenebres be there nor no shadow of death
that they may hyde thoes that have done iniquite. Seint Benard said in oon of
his sermons That before the judicial cheire of Ihesu crist shall they stand al
naked / that have stopped their eres to the voys of cou^seil. wherefore they shall
here the voys of the Judgment / as it is before alleged. My right dear brother
and friend dread this day and dowte cordyally the said Judge and lord that
shall deem all thingis / to thentent that thou may the more diligently
eschew all sins. And it is read in an other place / That in dredyng our
lord it withdraws every man from evil doing. There is yet an other thing
which agrogith this sentence / there is no place to apele to any other / nor
space for to flee. To that purpose says the Psalter. Whyther shall I goo
bakward from thy spirit / and how shall I fle bakward from thy face / if I mount
up into the sky / thou art there / if I descend into hell thou art present
there besides me. And therefore seith our lord of sinners by Amos in the xix
chapitre. They shall fle / and there shall be noon saved of them. If they descend
into hell my hand shall pul^ them up from thens. and if they hyde them in the
mounteyne of Carmele / I shall seek them til I have put them thens. And if they
hyde them in ye botom^ of the sea / I shall send a dragon which shall devour
them And if they goo into seruage emongis their enemies / I shall send a sword
which shall sle them. and shall cast myn^ eye upon them in wrath and not in love.
Job says in his x chapitre. Our lord ought to Judge all thingis / and is noon
that may escape his hands. Certainly I see clearly the hand of our lord
almighty wyl^ find us ouerall And therefore says the Auctour of the chare of
the soul What will thou rich man do / that never shall live surely whyther
shall thou retraye the / whyther will thou turn thy body / for thou art not
sure here nor ellis where. fore and thou stye up into the sky / or descend
into hell. he that has dominacion is that cruel and mighty king. If thou goo
into the sea / that king has governance there / thou shall not mow then
goo no part surely / for thou shall be found every where. Certeynly thou shall
have no place to flee to. another in thy death / nor in thy lif. O how well
comprehended this Elezearus / that said. I will neither fle qui^ nor deed from
the hands of the almighty. As it is written in ye secunde book of Machabe the
vij chapitre. Lo by thies our lords saiyngis it appears in many manners that
final Judgment is to be redouted of all / and shall be for thaccusacion of
diverse things / which must be violently suffered sustened and born^. and for
the just Reason that must needs be yelden singulerly and generally of al
things. And for the diffinitif sentence that shall be then^ pronounced right
horribly by the Just Judge. The Remembrance then of thies things diligently
continued. that is to seye of the final Judgment and of the sentence that shall
be given there / as it is seide / shall preserve and defend^ and not without
reason every man from falling into sy^^ne / and eschew to do evil to the end
/ to come finally to the glory with the happy seyntes of Paradys*

And thus ends the secunde part of this tretys divided in four parties:::::
Here begins the prologue of the third part of the four last thingis to
come
THe third of ye iiij last thingis whereof the remembrance p^serueth from
sin is hell or thinfernale gehenne. And therefore says Anastasie of seint
anthony ye heremite / when^ the deuell tempted him to any sin / he remembered
the pains of hell due unto sinners which thought was so enprinted in his
heart that finally he thereby venquisshed the devil and was delivered from his
temptacions and rested free from al^ sin. It is to be noted how touching this
matier p^sent iij thingis ar principally to be considered. First the diverse
nominacion of ye peinful^ places of hell. Secundly the manifold afflictions of
thinfernal^ minestres. Thridly the strange and diverse manners of the torments
of hell of the which iij thingis ye remembrance profits greetly and
withdraws a man from falling to sin

How hell is named by holy scripture in diverse wise The first chapitre of the
third part principal
IT is now first to be declared pri^cipally the nominacion of the peinful^
places of hell. Wherefore it is to be known that hell is a place ful^ of fire
and is so called de infero infers / That is to say to bear in / for the sowles
of sinners be born^ into it for to suffer peine there eternally. And therefore
says Job in his vij chapitre. He that shall descend into hell shall not come
ageyn ne ever return unto his house. And also hell is oftentimes called
gehenne of fire. The forsaid Seint Gregory in his fourth book of his dyal^ogis
said. Certeinely it must be beleud yt there is oonly but oon fire in the
gehen^e of hell but it tormenteth not all sinners after oon manner / for every
man shall have pain after the quantite of his gilte and trespace. Isidorus in
the book of souerayn goodness seith that the fire of ye gehenne of hell shall
shine and leight to the dampened folks in encrecyng of their pains to thentent
that they may see their own sorrows / it shall neither light nor shine to their
consolacion nor give them cause of any rejoicing. The payn^ of thoes yt be
dampened is doubled by sorrow and pains that tourmentith the soul and fire
that brenneth ye body. Of this fire of hell speaks the saw^^r saying. The
coals shall fall upon sinners which shall be cast into ye fire having no
conforte in their miseries / our lord shall tourmente them with his Ire and the
fire shall devour them. Wherefore it is written in Isaye in the ix chapitre. The
people shall be as meet unto ye fire / it is also seid to every sinner in
Ezechil in the xxj chapitre. Thou shall be fire^ meet. In Iheremy the xv
chapitre says our lord to the dampened folks. then brasyng fire inferrour
shall broil and brenne upon you all* this fire is of ye nature that ^petually
it s^al bren^ and shall never have need to be renewed It is written in Job the xx
chapitre. The fire which can (...) be quenched shall utterly devour them. O how
sore shall our lord venge him then^ upon the dampened sinners As it is said in
Ec^lesiastico in the vij chapitre. The flesh of sinners shall have vengeance
by fire. This fire of the gehenne of hell is different from the material fire
principally in (...) things. First in fyersnesse and egernesse for ye power of
it in brenning is infenite. wherefore seith seint Sebastian^. When^ the angel of
heaven rowned him in the ere. he seyde that our sensible fire is no more like
the fire of hell then the fire peynted upon a wall is like our materiale fire.
Secundly in enduring. For our materiale fir^ may be quenched / and so may not
that. It is written in Isay in the last chapitre. that the fire for si^ners shall
no^ be quenched. Thridly in wasting. for our sensible materiale fire may
consume and wast al thingis as ye philophre seith but the fire infernal may not
wast nor consume neither the body nor the sowles of sinners by brennyng. Job
says in his xx chapitre of the sinners being in hell. He shall bye full dear
now that he has done and yet he shall not be wasted. Ioh^n Crisostom says also
that our materiale fire consumes al thing that is leyd in hit / but the fire
of hell tourmenteth continuelly thoes that be therein / and yet it preserves
them always in lengthyng their peines. Therefore it is said yt it is not to be
quenched not oonly because it can not be put out but that it shall not sease to
distroy them yt shall come therein. For that cause says the holy scripture that
ye si^ner shall be clothed with corrupcion not oonly of their lif but in
languisshing and tormemendes always com^yng. Certainly no voice could expowne
nor no word could express the greetnes of ye peine / nor the feruentnes of
that fire. Alas what shall we do therefore there / and what shall we answer for in
hell shall be but grinding of tethe / yowling / criyng / and weping in pain /
but then^e penance is to late / and from all parts shall comfort and help
be put away. there shall be no thing but augmentacions of peynes. as that fire
of hell is not of nature to devour. no more is it to give no comfortable light
/ It is an obscure fire / and the flam^ thereof tenebrous. Secundly hell is
called locus inquietus that is to sey / a restles place ever enduring and shall
never have end. wherefore it is seide in this lif yt there is one place which is
alwey still. that is to wite the center of the sky Other be sometime troubled as
mean partis of ye air / semblably it may be proved yt the lowest part is
alweyes in trouble without rest. And therefore it is called tartarus For after
papy tartarus is as mycle to say as troubled and obscure. Certainly ye unrest
and tribulacion comyth there specially of iij thingis. First ye variance of
pains as one seith ye weder is troubled / when^ it is now meddled with reyn^
now with haill / now with snow / or such storms which as it is said / be of
al thoes manners in hell as witnessen^ prophets sayng. It shall rayn^ upon
sinners both fire and brim^^on / and the spiretes of tempest shall give them
part of their ^^urmentes. Secu^dly of ye ministres infernal. As it is written
in Iheremy ye xvj chapitre. Thoes deueles that ye have served. nether night nor
day shall suffer you in rest Thirdely of thentercheau^ged cry. as it is written
in Isay in ye lxv chapitre. ye shall weep for sorrow and by contricion of soul
howl. In troth our lord shall answer to al thoes yt so shall howl and cry. as
it is seid in Iheremy ye xxx chapitre Wherefore criest y^ and howlist thou now
by contricion sith thy sorrow is not to be heled I have punisshed the thus for
thy wikked felonous sins. Thridly hell is called a place right distempred. as
Auernus / that is as mykel to say as a thing without a temperance of delight
for ye pains be no thing moderated there / but continue in great excess / of
troth there is therein without mensure excessesiue tenebres. which be called
exteriores. as seint Mathewe says in his xxij chapitre. We have example of
this in Exode in the x chapitre by the maniable tenebres that were sometime in
Egipte. O how mykel shall the tenebres of hell be more grievous than thoes. It
is written in Job in the xx chapitre. All horrible tenebres shall com^e on him
Ageyn then shall the sinners say / as it is said in the Psalter. They have
cast me into the lowest lake and in the tenebrous place and in the shadow of
death. they have logged me in the obscure place as deed fro this world /
wherefore my soul is angry with me. Semblably it is written in the Lamentacions
of Iheremy. They have logged me with thoes that be sempiternally deed / there
is therein an excessife hete. As Job says in his xiiij chapitre The hete is
greet therein. and the cause is that it breketh not out but is closed in / as
the hete in an oven. The Psalter says. When^e thou art an angered thou shall
put the sinners in an oven full of fire. Also our lord shall tormente them with
his wrath. and fire shall devour them. there is there also a right sharp coolde
/ as is written in Job in the said chapitre. It is said the water of snow is
colder then al other waters / yet ye waters of hell may not be compared with
of chilling nor coolde. And therefore seith Fulgencius in his pistles. There is in
hell ij principale manner of torments that is to wite by intolerable coolde
and by inquencheable hete It is written in ye xxiiij chapitre of seint matthew.
There shall be in hell both weping and coolde. certainly the effluccion of
teeris by weping com^ith of hete / but the inward sorrows is caused by coolde.
To this purpose witnesses Job in the said xxiiij chapitre. the sinner oupassed
with the coold water of snow / goes after into the greet fiery heates. It is
found also in a little book of the dedis of Alexandre the king of Macedon^.
That when^ he was for clomme^ with the Isse and with the cold of ye snow he
would goo to ye fire of colis. O how miserable and paynfull shall this trouble
be to thoes that shall not dye nor have lightnyng in ye prison of hell. but be
tourmented there infenitely. Fourthly hell is called a noyfull wayling place /
and therefore after Papie it is named Acheron / that is as mycle to seye as a
place without Joy lackyng all goodness. For this cause says ye Comentator
Aueroys in the iiij chapitre of poetry. That hell has a continuell sorrow and
weeping with out consolacion. In troth the dampened folks there benethe have no
counfort in the world for ye orisons and prayers that been said in the
church mylitant may profeite them no thing / and from above comyth there no
help to them / there falls on them no misericorde. wherefore they be in
despair of any grace in time coming and know certeynly yt they without Remedy
and not to be qui^ee out of the prison / and so they rest sempiternally in
waylyng in sorrow and in desolacion. It is written in the boook of Sapiens in
the iiii chapitre. That the dampened sowles shall be utterly in desolacion. Also
the dampened soul seith in the first chapitre of the Trenys of Iheremye. I am
cast in desolacion and am conuicte into weeping. It is written in Isaye in the
xxxiiij chapitre. That the wretched sinner shall be in desolacion during ye
world of worlds. Alas alas what pain is yt to be endured. O most cruel
pain. O desolacion full of al turmentes. and therefore o thou man remember the
and printe often in thy heart and mind thies things abouesaid to thentent /
thou may eschew and withdraw the from sin. and there by have the most
precious glory and felicite perdurable.

How thoes that descend into hell be cruelly punysshed The secunde chapitre
of the third part principal
Now to proceed folowyngly by order it rests to be expouned how there be
many and diverse afflictions given by the soldeours of hell. Thoes soldeours
been to vndrestonde the deueles / which been tourmentours and hangemen full
abominable to behold and cruel in their dedis / never weary to tourmente nor
to give pains. I say first that thoes deueles be horrible to be hold And
therefore they be so painted in the church with hideous and orrible figures. To
this purpose it is read that where some time / a religious man was lying in
his dortor among his brethren / It happened in a night that he cried orribly
where through all the brethren of his covent resorted unto him / and they found
him staring and his eyes fixid upon a wall firmly without moeuyng / and would
answer to no question^ that they demanded him. he was so meued with a
marvelous fere. and in the morrow his prior came unto him and asked what him
ayled that night. and he answered / He had se^n the deuell. And then^e it was
questioned him / what shappe he was of. And he answered that his shappe ne
might lightly be descriued. and said. If there were here an ouon full of fire
and yondre the figure of the devil / I had as leef enter into ye ouon / as
long to behold on his most horrible figure. And as seint Bernard says in the
Psalm of Qui habitat in adiutorio. O my right dear brethren what think ye /
if it were a thing sittyng / that oon of thies princes of tenebres / that be of
so many hydeous and marvelous shappes should come and appear emongis you with
his greet cruelte and unformed tenebrous body / what temporale or spirituale
wit might sustain to behold him. It is read in the book de Uitis patrum.
How there was sometime an ancient man that said. I trow there is no living
Creature / but and he saw the devil in the same form that the dampened
Sowles see him / he should no more live after / but shortly should dye. Also
Seint Gregory says of oon callid Crisso^ius / which being full seek saw
beside him a greet multitude of Deueles wherefore he cried full hydeously after
help / he turned him this way and that way / to thentent he should not see
them / but he was so fervently troubled with them in fere / that right sone he
dyed. Certeynely all thoes that see the deueles be in such greet trouble that
all men dread the fight of them. and not without Reason / for there horrible
figure tourmenteth thoes to death that beholds them. It is written in Job the
xx chapitre. Horrible thingis shall goo and come upon them. And that Seint
Bernard shows whenne he said. O my soul what fere shall thou have / whenne
thou shall leave the presens of all thingis wherein thou have Joy / the sight
of that that is agreeable unto the and all thy familiarite / and shall enter
allone ferfully into the regyon / which is to the unknown / when^e the right
terrible and orrible monstres shall come in greet companies against the. O how
great a deformite shall be in thoes orrible deueles that shall appear in figures
of right cruel bestis. And as it is wreten in the xj chapitre of Sapiens.
Because they permitted errors as done serpents and other superflue beestis
thou have sent them a multitude of doum bestes in vengeance to thentent that
they may know wherein they have sinned / they to be tourmented by the same.
Certeyn^ it is not impossible that the most mighty hand that has create and
made all the universal world of thing unseen / should send a multitude
offers beres of hardy lions and other many furious beestis of diverse shappes
casting v^pures of fire geuyng stynkyng smokes puttyng out of their eyes
sparkis brennyng of fire / but al thise things should be to ye hurt of
sinners and also the beholding might slay them / as it is written in the
chapitre aforsaid. Job said in his xvj chapitre Myn^ ennemy has behold me
with terrible eyes. He also says in his xlj chapitre. His look and beholding
is like a glistring of fire out of his mouth stremyng as it were brennyng
lamps / and popilli^h as water boiling out of a pot. Therefore seith a poet
that there be therein serpents vomyshyng out of their mouths bren^yng flames
with the which blastis ye sowles of the miserable sinners ben^ al perisshed.
Secundly the fendes be cruel by effect / where as it is written in Job ye xvj
chapitre. They are assembled against me / they have opened their mouths upon me
as a rauissyng lion / they have tempted me / they have mokked me and grennyngly
and felonesly showed me there teeth Also in Ecclesiastico in the xxj chapitre
is said. Theeir tethe be like the tethe of lions / which devour the sowles To
this purpose is written in the first epistle of seint Petre the v chapitre. That
how the devil is like a brayng lion / which gothe sekyng to devour some
soul. Certein^ the devil shall be appointed at the last day for to devour
sinners. It is written in Isaye in the lvj chapitre. O ye all beestes of the
feldes and wyldrenesse come ye for to devour. Iheremy in his xij chapitre
says. Come ye all beestis and assemble and make you ready for to devour. Seint
Gregory in his Dyalogis talks thereof and says. That there was sometime a monk
not yet verily monk in deed but so named / which was called Theodorus. It was
right displeasant unto him / when^e oon spoke to him for his salvation / he
would not oonly leave to do good / but it lothed him to here speak thereof. and
as Theodorus was at the article of death all his brethren of his covent
assembled about him in prayers and devout orisons that they might help and
defend his soul at departur from his body. then^ he began suddenly to cry
and with a greet voice hade them break of and leave their orisons and prayers
and depart / for he was given unto an orrible dragon for to be devoured /
which he said for their prayers might not devour him / and yet he had
swalowed his head / and prayed them therefore go thens and pray no more / but
let him do that / that he purpos^d to do / sens he was given unto him / and
the forsaid Theodorus seid / why suffer ye me so long to be in this case Then
said his brethren unto him. What is it that thou seyst / make the figure of
the cross upon the. To whom^ the said Theodorus answered with a lamentable
cry. I would feyn bless me / but I can not / for I am to hardly prikked and
oppressed with the vyolence of this dragon. And whenne his brethren herd him
seye so they fill flat to the earth with weeping teeres / and began ageyn
their prayers and orisons devoutly for the help and Redemption of this
Theodorus / which sone after suddenly began to cry with a loud voice saying.
I yield loving thankis and grace to god my creator / for now that dragon /
which should have devoured me is driven and chased away fro me by your good
and devout prayers and orisons. Also Seint Gregory tells an example in the
fourth boook of his Dyalogis that how in the parts of Anchone in a monastery
called Congolathon be fell sometime that there was therein a monk which was taken
for a very holy man meruelously well disposed toward god / But when^e his
brethren went that he had fasted he was accustumed secretly to ete. And
when^e he was at the batayl of death / he called generally for all his
brethren / saying unto them. I am delivered now unto a dragon to be deuoureed
/ which with his taill has knytte to gydre my fete and also my kneys and
puts his head into my mouth / and draws my soul out of my body. and after
he had said thoes words he dyed forth withal. It may seem thies words be
for ye condemned sinners which ben written in Iheremy in the lj chapitre. He
has eten me like a dragon. This dragon is hideous and greet and has vij hedes
and x horns in the same as it is written in the Apocalips in ye xij chapitre.
There has been a greet bataile in the sky so that seint Michiel and his angel
has fought with ye dragon and his angel which might not resist / and since
their rowmes in heaven could not be found but were cast down^ and so ye dragon
ancient serpent / which is called the deuil^ satan enforces him self to
make war upon the uniuersal^ world here. And for that cause is it red in ye
same chapitre That harm come to the earth and to the sea / for the devil is
descended among you with al^ his greet furious anger / This devil has a
marvelous greet hate unto al^ good people / which disposes them to take
possession in the rowme of heaven / from whens he was put out and chased into
theternal pains. and the more yt the day of ^ome approaches the more tempts
he more cursedly and more forseth him self to do evil in distroyng of sowles. O
how greet is the wikkidnesse and the malice of this deuil^ of hell. Whereof
Seint Bernard talks in a prose saying. O how felonows shall then^ this
torme^tours be / which shall pain and tourmente sinners / how terrible shall
their vengeance be in vengyng vices wretchedness and sins. Certainly their
cruel malice is yet augmented in diverse manners. First because they be so
innumerable and of so diverse soortes. The Psalter says Why be thoes so
multiplied that tourmenteth me / and there be many that dress them against me.
And as it is written in Job in the xix Chapitre. They have asseged my Tabernacle
about me. It is written in Uitis patrum. That there was a good Ancient Man that
saw the devil enuyronyng the People and were as thik as beis yt make honey.
Wherefore it is said also in the Psawter. They have compassed me as beis be
cause they be many and of great might / as Thappostle witnessith in his pistle
ad the epheseos in ye vj chapitre. where he calls them princes and potestates
and governors of ye world be cause they be subtle and mighty to noy sowles.
The psalter seith. The strong have sought my soul. this strength is
vndrestonde by the deueles. It is read also of ye strength in Job the xlj
chapitre. There is no might upon ye earth to be compared with yt / that has
done so that it dredeth no man sauf him that seith all thing from above and is
king over all the children of pride ye deueles shall ernstfully exorcise their
might in pride to the pumisson of sinners and them shall cruelly tourmente. It
is written in Ecclesiastico the xxxix chapitre. There be spirits that be
ordained to take vengeance and has confermed the torments in their furour
enduringly till the consummacion of the world. Job seith in his xvj chapitre.
He has compassed me with his fperis and has not spared me / but has hurt my
reins / he has cast my bowell to the earth / and given me wounds upon
wound and this come shuldering against me like a gyand. Thirdely the malice and
cruelte of the deuell is comforted and is more grievous be cause they are never
weary of tormenting. As it is written in the book of Daniel in the iij chapitre.
The mynistres shall not seasse in sturryng the fires of the fourneis to the
causing of pains. Therefore said a wise man that there be tormentours / which
be more to be lothed then serpents / and they be blakke and defourmed and will
not be beten down. And they be never weary to do harm but newly encreasen
their malice al way ready / and boiling desirously to put souls to pain. and
incessantly they excersise their cruelte more and more. And it is said to all
sinners in Deutronomy in the xxviij chapitre. Thou shall serve for thyn^ enemy
whenne our lord shall send the naked unto him in honger and thirste and in all
pouerte / And the^^e shall thy sore wounds enereace perpetuelly O how greet
shall the pains be there to dampened folks which shall last continuelly in
anguish^ and misery without intermission lacking peace or rest. It is red of
the sinners in Ezechiel in the vij chapitre. That when^e they shall feel th^es
anguisshi^us pain / they shall desire and requir^ to have peace / but then^e
they get non^ / for they shall have conturbacion and sorrow upon sorrow. It is
written in Thapocalips the xiiij chapitre. That thoes that have been b^estly
shall therefore have no rest by day nor night Then^ mow the sinners well say /
as it is written in Isay in the xxxviij chapitre. I shall not see our lord god in
the kuyng land / nor I shall no more behold any man. that is inhabitour of
rest. Semblable as it is written in Iheremye the xlv chapitre. Alas I am unhappy
/ for our lord has addid in me sorrow to sorrow / for I can find no rest.
Sorrow shall be then^e cast at his head. and all Iniquite shall descend upon
him. Now by thies thingis above said it manifestly appears how such as
descends into hell be punisshed with many diverse paynee^. and therefore me
thinkith dear brethren how it should be often in your remembrance to defend
you from falling to sin / whereby ye should l^se the company of the ^^^py
and blisshed sein^ee^ and the celestiale glory / which is perourable and shall
dure world withouten end

How there be many conditions of torments encreasyng the peynes of Hell The
third chapitre of the third part principal
NOw rests to declare the third part of this matier / which is in showing
the condition of thinfernale tourmentes / which be full diverse. Certain
there be sondery conditions that specially encreace by occasions the peynes of
hell. The first is / bitterness weeping / grindyng of teeth / compleynyng /
the perpetuell death / peynfull languissing in despair / and the wrath and
blamyng of the creator of all thingis with other many tourmentes and pains
innumerable to be recited / which doubteles shall be well felt and vndrestonde
there by sinners / as it appears in diverse places of holy scripture. and as
it is written in Thapocalips in the xvj chapitre. They have eten their tongues
for greet sorrow and have blasfemed the god of heaven for their anguisshys and
their wounds Seint Gregory says that he that is condemned to the torments
finds more pain there then can be supposed or thought. Seint Iherom^ says
that the force of the sorrow in hell shall be so ^ greet that it can not
address his courage / but as the force of the said sorrow will constrayne.
Certain the sinner shall say then^ as is written in Iheremye in the viij
chapitre. My woo increases in sorrow upon sorrow. The egrenesse of the pains
of hell shall be so greet that sinners shall hate and disprayse ^^f which
universally is delited and with a bren^yng desire wisshe to find death / which
e^y man would flee. As it is written in Thapocalips in the ix chapitre. A day
shall come that men shall desire and wisshe for death / and shall not have it /
they shall require death and it shall flee away fro them. In truth our lord
winesseth y^ egrenes of the peynes of hell in Iheremy in the ix chapitre /
where he seith. I shall feed my people with absinth / comu^ly named worm wode the
which is a bitter herb / and I shall give them to drink galle. Whereby is
signified the bitterness of the torments of hell. It is red yt this egrenes was
well considered by a young man which was deliciously norisshed / Nevertheless
he entered into then^^ of pr^chers / and where he had been in the said order
a while / there cam^ a man from his kynsfolkes to amonissh him to depar^e thens
or he were professed / showing him how deliciously he had been brought up. and
therefore he might not sustain the dures pains and troubles perteinyng to the
said order. The young man answered. I have entered into this order knowing well
that I was voluptuously norisshed and might not well suffer. But I remember
well that ye troubles pains of hell shall be importable. wherefore I had lever
sustain the little peyn^ of this order / then the pains which are incomparable.
For Job seith in his vj chapitre The snow shall fall upon them y^ shall dread
the little mist This consideracion moved an heremite callid piers to enterprise
a meruilous penance / which he accomplisshed. as seint gregory shows in the
iiij book of his dyalogis this heremite dyed by a sickness / and yet after his
death his soul was restored ageyn to his body. Also Seint Gregory says. that
there was sometime a monk borne of Irelond called piers / this monk affermed how
he had seen ye grievous torments of hell / the innumerable peinful places and
flame^ of fire. and told how he had seyn there certain mighty men of this
world honged up in the said flames. And he seide as he was brought for to be
cast in: suddenly appeared an angel clothed al in white / which saved him and
hade him go thens and attentifly to remember how he should live from thens
forthward to keep him out of the danger of the peines. After that he had herd
that voice he revived and came to him self litel and litel / and showed unto
his brethren there all the thingis yt he had feled and seen. and from that day
forthward he used and lived a blessid lif in fasting and doing penance / so yt
by his conusacion after it might well seem the pains of hell ar to be dred. The
secu^d condition increasing the pains of hell is ye multipliyng of the
tourmentes there. In certeyn^ they be innumiable. And as the psalter says. The
pains / which be without nombre have enuiround and be clipped me. It is
written in deutronomy the xxxij chapitre. I shall assemble many diverse pains
upon them / and I shall accomplish or spend the schot of myn^ arowes in them.
and as it is written in Isaye ye v chapitre His arowes be full sharp and all his
bows ar bent. our lord has many arowes in his quiver / which he has not
yet shot forth / but after the Judgment he shall smite all sinners with them.
Thies arowes ar the diverse pains of hell where as sinners shall be then^
tormented in many man's. the Psawter seith. The arowes of the mighty. That is to
say of our lord be sharp among the colis of desolacion Our lord satth in
Deutronomy ye xxij chapitre. I shall embrwe myn^ arowes in their blood / my
swerd shall devour their flesh / they shall perish^ by famyne / and the birds
shall strangle them with a full bitter morsel. I shall send ayens them the teeth
of wild bestis with ye furour of thoes that rampe and devour upon the earth.
Owtward the swerd shall destroy them / and inward fere and dread shall waste
them Off this multitude of pains speaks Seint Gregorye in the viij chapitre
of Seint Mathewe / saying. They shall be cast out into thuttermeste tenebres /
yt is to say hell where shall be an vnsuffrable cold / an unquenchable hete an
inmortale worm^ / an intolerable stinche / a derkenesse mamable / and an
orrible vision of deuels thresshing and beting / a confusion of sinners / a
sepacion of all joys. And therefore said a wise man / that hell is a mortifiyng
pit full and accompl^sshed with all pains and miseries. The psalter seith. It
shall reine brimston upon sinners and the spirits of tempestis which be part
of ye sorrows and tormentis of hell. And that saying is to be noted by cause yt
there be many other parts of torments impossible to be expressed / al yt ever
we have spoken of ye peines of hell is a full little thing in regard of the
great infenite multitude of them. but to thentent that the multiplicacion of
these peines may be y^ more expressly declared. It is also to be noted how
dampened sowles shall be full of all miseres and sorrows / for they shall ^u have
weping eyes grinding of their teeth / stinche in their noses wailling in their
voices fere in their eres / beenning of fire in all their members / and therein
shall be bounden hand and foot. Lo how the wretched sinner descending into
hell shall be fulfild with all torments. It is written in Job the xv chapitre
of the dampened man how tribulacion shall hold him / and anguish^ shall enuyron^e
him. And in y xiij chapitre of Isay How all mennys hertes shall be abashed and
ferd for the sorrows and torcions that shall hold him having the pain ye women
suffer traueling of child. each on shall sorrow vpon^ his neighburgh / and
their broyled faces shall affraye eueriche other. Therefore Baruch said in his
vj chapitre Their faces be blakked with smoke / for the faces of all sinners
shall be brought to the likeness of a rownde pot / as it is writon in Iohel the
ij chapitre. Also it is said in Ecclesiastico the xlviij chapitre. The peines
of a woman traueling shall come unto them. The same also is written in Ozee the
xiij chapitre. So as it appears there be many scorges and fleyles in hell for
to beat sinners there with Certeynely the dampened soul shall mow say with the
Psalter. The sorrows of death have compassed me / and the pains of hell have
fou^den me. It says. It has compassed me for this cause. For it is to him a
vestiment or couring of malediction / which shall be both within him and
without him. O what vestiment shall this be that shall be wouen with so paynfull
thredes / and thoes without nombre / which can never be undone nor taken away
/ For with an inmortale string it shall be inseparabily bounden unto the sinner.
This shall be a sore and a biting vestiment to be suffered. This is the vestiment
that is written of in Isaye in the thertenth Chapitre sayng. Thy vestiment shall
be worms. The consideracion of these manifold pains revoked and callid David
from sin and caused him to do penance. And therefore he said to our lord How
many sore tribulacions have you showed me / and thou converted have revived me.
The consideracions also of these forsaide pains moeued sometime an heremite
forto take upon him a right sharp peinfull lif / which he led in his
heremitage / as is read in Uitis patrum. It was axed of him / why he would so
slay him self. And he answered. All the labor of my lif is not sufficient to
be compared to oon of the days of torments that be ordeigned and reserved for
sinners in time to come. Beda shows us in his writing of England / how that
in the time of young Constantine there dyed a knight about the years of our lord
eght hondeet and vj. which knight revived / and after for the pains that he
had seen / he fled into an heremitage / as it is read in Uitis patrum. and
he made him a little house by a Riuier side. In the which Riuier he would run
often times al clothed in the winter time / and would suffer his clothes to
frese unto his flesh and then after he would ^epe into a bayn as hoot as hit
was possible to him to suffer. And this life he led unto his death. And whenne
folks saw him do so / they blamed him therefore / and he said to them. If ye
had seen that I have seen: ye would do as I do / and rather more. Seint
Gregory says. The visyon of the pains of hell is the most excellent moeuyng
that can be to penance and contricion. The third condition encrescing the
pains of hell / is the euerlestyngnesse thereof It is written in the book of
sapience ye iiij chapitre. Our lord shall mokke them / That is to vndrestande /
sinners after they shall fall from their worship among them that be sempiternally
deed. Seint Matthew says the xxv chapitre. They be thoes / that shall goo into
torments. In Judith the xvj chapitre is read. That our lord shall send
worms of fire ayens their fleish / that they may brenne and yet live and feel
the pains for ever. To that purpose speaks Isaye in his last chapitre thus.
Their worms shall not dye / another their fire quench. And therefore says our
lord in Deutronomy in the xxxij chapitre. The fire is kindeled with my furour
and shall been^e into the lowest part of hell / and that shall be perpetuelly
and endelesly. Isaye in his xxxiij chapitre says. O which of us shall mow
suffer and endure the deuoring fire / who shall mow be among those / that shall
be bren^e sempiternally. In the xxxiij chapitre of the same Isaye is said The
gronde / where they shall dwell shall be converted into bre^nyng piche night and
day / and shall not quench / and the smoke shall be from generation to genacion
upon them during the world of worlds. It is written in thapocalips in the xx
chapitre. The devil shall be sent into the lake of fire and of sulpher and
brymston / where the evil breast and the false prophet shall be tourmented
night and day in the world of worlds. And he / that shall not be fonden in the
book of lif / shall be sent into ye lake of fire there forto dwell in the
shadow of death / where is noon order / but sempiternale horror and sorrow. It
is written in Job the x chapitre. and also seint Gregory says in his moralis a
right horrible word. That is to wite. Then^e shall the miserable sinners suffer
a greet pain with a greet feer / a greet flame with a derkenesse / and deeth
without deeth / an end without finisshyng / for that deeth shall ever live /
and that end shall begin always ageyn and that fault shall never fail. And a
Poet shows how that miserable deeth can not dye nor finisshe. but seems
always that it begins and renews wepnigis and languisshingis. Petre de
bloys said in a pistle. There shall be non order of any manner of torments
another sparing, but endelesly the pains shall renew and begin ageyn / death
can not dye there / for it shall be always permanent and never cessing to
thenten^ that the condemned sowles may miserably always encrece in their pains
and sorrows and be norisshed in eternal deeth The Psawter seyth. They be casten
into hell as shepe^ and death fedeth them. Mow then^e these sinners have
their feding of death: what shall be their drink: Herkene what is written in
deutronomij in the xxxij chapitre. The burging of the grape and ye vine that
they shall have, shall be aisil and galle of dragons / and the venym of the Adder
called aspe / which is incurable. O wherewith shall the sinners be norisshed,
see thou not how they be perpetually tormented with the most cruel death /
they shall live then^ in dying / and shall be deed living. Seint Bernard says in
a book that he sent unto pope Eugeny. The biting worm / and the living death I
grouge and feere greatly. I dread to fall into the hands of the death / that
ever lyuth / and of the lif that never dies. Saint Girgorye seith. That the
felon sinners shall dye of inmortale death. O good lord eternal why have thou
suffered me do contrary thy will and work mine own sorrow, why helpest thou
not me out of sin. whereby I might escape this perpetuel death. O how happy /
o how blissed shall he be yt shall not be fowlid nor smouged with ye filthes of
sin / and that has not reioysshed him in the sensuale voluptacions of this
transitory world / nor in temporale vanitees. Certayn^ I am feerd that we
miserable sinners have erred from the way of lif / and that the light of
Justice has not shined upon us. We have not followed the ways of our lord.
but have taken the unhappy ways of iniquite and perdicion It is written in
Isaye in the xlix chapitre. We have labured in vayn^ and for naught we have
wasted al our strength What has our pride auailed us / what has proufited our
pomp / and the vanite of the richesses of this world / what be we amended by
our Iewelles, or precieux garnementes by our delicious meets and drinks, our
glotomies / our lawhingis and idle disportes. Now what auantageth us all
things, wherein we have vaynely / vnproufitably / and dampnably spent our time.
Alas alas / we have lost and passed our days without fruit, and may be likend
to were then a donghil / and all thoes things be past. but our wretchedness
shall remain to our eternal torments. Our lord shall say to every dampened
soul / as is written in Job in the xx chapitre. He shall suffer torments and
peines after the multitude of his wikked operacions. and in the xviij chapitre
of thappocalips is written. As much as he has glorified him self in delites
and plaisers: as much torment and peine shul be yeuen him therefore to remain
therein eternally. Now is it not a greet folly for the rich or vayn^ pleasir of
this world or any other miserable thing a man to submit him to perpetual
torments both of his body and of his soul. Ioh^n crisostom says in his book
titled of the reparacion^ of defaultes / what continuance of lechery and space
of delectacions will thou compare to ye sempiternal pains. Now take that you
live C year in delectacions set thereto an other C and yet C / and after ye
ten hondert if thou will. yet what comparison is this to theternite. May not
all the time of our bodily lif / though we intended neu so voluptuously be
resembled unto a dreem of the night in regard of the sempiternale lif. Is there
any person that aughte will to have oon playsant and delectable night in dremes
/ and therefore to find the sempiternale pains / and so change for a playsant
dreme so little enduring / to have the pains of hell / which be perpetuel. What
shall we speak of this playsir, or of these pains. The playsirs pass lightly
away / and the pains must remaygne euerlestingly. Now take it / that the time
and the space of the playsirs and of the pains were egale. Is there any that
aught to be so mad or so folysshe / as to chese for to have for oon day of
playsir here a day of dampnacion in hell Remember how that oon hour of bodyly
sickness in this world puts a way all playsir for the sayson. right so
remembrance how the perpetuell pains ought to resist ayens all sins. O how
greet tourment and pain shall be to the dampened sowles / their euerlestyng
dampnacion and perpetuell death is so hard and so sore / that I wore not how /
that I could express hit greuousely I now^ for certainly it can not be
sufficiently spoken / conceived in mind nor comprehended in heart. Now take we
/ that ther^ were a piece of metal as greet as might be comprehended withinne
the concauite of the viij spear. and every M year there should be taken from hit
a little piece like agreyn^. and so consequently til it were all brought to no
thing: should not the eternite be finisshed by that time. and the dampened sowles
delivered out of their pains. I answer and say you nay / for the perpetuite
shall be then^e but at the beginning / there can be no proporcion in a thing
infenite. as Aristotile the philosophre says in his viij book of his phisikes.
Certeynly if dampened sowles mighten know and vndrestande that they should be
delivered out of thin t^llerable pains of hell as soon / as the said piece of
metalle were so wasted and goon, as is above said / yet they might have hope
of their redemption ayens that saison / and have some manner of confort / knowing
that their torments should sometime taken end. yet the years would be
incomprehensible and innumerable. Now surely oon of the grettest pains is the
desolacion and defaulte of hope ever to be redeemed and delivered out of
theternall torments. For as it is written in Isay the xxxiiij chapitre. The
sinner shall be in desolacion time and world withouteen end. It is written in
the boook of Trenis the third chapitre. Myn^ end and myn^ hope in god is
perisshed. Iheremy in his xv chapitre asks. Why is my sorrow made imperpetuel
and my wounds in desperacion. Whereunto is answereed in the x chapitre of the
Prouerbis. That when^e the felon sinner is oones deed / there is then noon
hope to be had. Entende and remember this all ye that be forgeters of our
lord / lest that this most cruel and sorrowful place of hell swalowe you /
from whens ye may never be pulled out. Lo now ye may see clearly / how the
wretched sinner can not be redeemed out of hell. Wherefore my right dear friends
I amoneste and require you / bear that Remembrance well in your minds / and
conceive well they ample of the piece of metal above specified. And now tell me
what thou felist / and what thyn^ own heart demeth and iugeth in this matier.
I wene certainly thy discrecion woe begyue thereunto credence. for true it is /
and to troth by Reason then must nedis apply. Also bethink the of the diverse
provinces of londs and ymagine every Region of them Considere the sees the
Riueres / and the poondes. Enclose in thy mind the circuit of the wild / and
goo every where thereof / Fly up into the air / and then descend into the
lowest part of therthe. and of all this think in thy mind. thou have made an
hool substance and ymagine and extend how greet a thing this should be / and
if hit might not be consumed by (...) of time. and then tell me what thou
thinkist of thinfenite pains of sinners Whether should be long enduring the
consumyng of the same substance / or the relessing of the perdurable pains I
trow thou will agree / that there can no thing be compared to a perpetuite.
wherefore we ought all in our coragis timerousely to tremble and fere it. Now
who is he that dredeth hit not. who to he / that alussheth not thereof. Who is
he / that had not lever abide the consumyng of the forsayde substance / than
the time of eternite Late this said substance and this time of eternite be
cowched upon thyn^ heart / and thou shall find it aproufitable thing and
greetly to thyn^ auantage. For if thou will not correct and revoke thy self
from thy sins by the love that thou owe to bear unto god. Yet the mirour
and Remembrance of thintollerable and infenite pains should reuoque /
sequestre and withdraw the from sins. O lord god that this perdurable pain
is to be eschewed and drad And wepyngly we ought to remember our sins by
great contricion / that we might thereby come to the euerlesting salvation. Lo
here before has be showed thencrecing of thinfernal pains / and how they may
never cesse nor finisshe. which was well considered by oon sometime callid
Fulson of Mercelles. Which was in his days an excellent Iougulier al
abandouned and yuien to the vanitees of the world. In a day he be thought him
of the peines of hell and of theternite thereof / and remembered in his heart.
If he were compelled to lie in a fair and a soft bed well hanged and
plaisantly dressed and for no necessite might depart out of it / Yet al were
it never so delicious / it could not lie in his power continually to endure hit
And theruppon remembered him how he should then^ mow susteigne thintollerable
perpetuell peines of hell / which ar languereuse and from thens none may
depart. This forsaide Fulson considering that / left all his vain worldly
delites and made him self a monque. and sithen was archibsshop of Toulouse /
where he lived and guided him right holily in the service of our lord. The
consideracion of the perpetuell peines of hell should enduce and comfort
every good soul to fight and resist mightily ayens his goostly enemy / for
if the fend venquisshe and overcome him / he may be sure to lie therefore
without greet Repentance and grace in the sempiternale pains of hell And
therefore for Ihesus sake with all your might fight and resist viguorously
ayens the cruel enemy of all mankind / which does naught but lies in a
wait forto bring us all to dampnacion. Egelippus says in his book of the
destruction of Iewys. How that oon^ of the greet capitaynes of King Alexandre
being chief of an host / saw on a time an innumerable armee coming ^^ens him
to sight with him. And whenne his people saw them come / they disposed them to
ete and drink forto make them of the more bodily might and put therein their
trust. This good c^pitayne (...) that they yaff more hope to their bodily
strengthes / than to the power of him / whom all other myghtes can not (...) /
said in this wise. O ye noble and worthy men ^ have us dyne now to gydre / for
we be like to souppe this night in Hell all in a company. This people hering
these words to eschew that heavy soupper / put their affiaunce in our lord
and set on / and fought so viguorousely / that they with Triumph and Honor
overcome their Enemies. Considering that Remembrance of the pains of Hell
should withdraw us from wordly Delytes. Hit is read in Uitis Patrum. How
there was an ancient man / that said. Whenne a woman wole ween her Child and
make hit to loathe the sweetness of hire Milk / she wole put upon her pappys
heed a little mustard or some other bitter thing. When^e the child feleth that
/ it withdraws and puts away his appetit from the sweet milk. So semblably
the sour Remembrance of the perpetuelle torments and pains of hell ought
to reuoque a man from all the vain delectacions of this wretched world. Job
says in his vj chapitre. May not a man taste of a thing / which should cause
him the right bitter death. That is to say / the peynes perpetuell. Prosper
says. In this present lif the temporal delites be full plaisant / and the
tribulacions full bitter. But who is he that should not gladly suffer
tribulacions in this lif for fear of the sempiternal pains of hell. And who
is he that ought not to despise the deliciouse plaisiers of this world for to
have the most happy Joy of euerlesting blys. It is said also in the Legende
of seint John Evangelist That rich and mighty folks were converted by his
perdicacion^ / and relinquisshed all their worldly richessee Yet they saw
after som^e / that were their servants reised in the flatring glory and
fortune of this world. Wherefore they repented them / that they had lost all
their goods so. Which thing Seint John vndrestood by the holy ghost / and
prayed unto our lord for their salvation. and then^e our lord changed
certain reces of timber unto fyn gold / and hard flinte stoones unto
preciouse Ieweles. and so they were restoreed unto gretter tresour and richesse
/ than ever they had lost for our lords sake. Then it happened / that
Seint John revived from deeth a yongly man / which showed unto thoes folks
theternal glory / that they had lost for the richesse of this world / and
how the pains of hell did but abide them / When^e the folks herd and
vndrestood that / they were so abashed and in so greet fere / that forth with
all they mispraysed / despised and refused all worldly richesse and delites /
and wilfully returned unto their pouerte for their salvation. It is red in
Uitis patrum. How there was sometime a young friar that said unto a fader of his
order. I am sloutheful and weary to sit always thus still in my celle. To whom
this good fader answred. thou have not seen nor vndrestande the torments that
be to come in hell / which shall be perpetuelly enduring / and therefore if thou
^^inte that well in thyn^ heart / though thy celle were full of worms / thou
sholdest not grouge / but would abide in hit patiently forto eschew these
perdurable pains. For every sinner must endure theternale torments of hell
or the right sharp pains of purgatory / or else he must do and suffer
suffisant penance in this world. Then^e what unhappy creature is he that is so
blind and so haltred with vngrace and lak of Reason / that had not lever
suffer here suffisante penance than in hell to be tourmented and punisshed
withouten end. Isidore says. Think in thyn^ heart all the sekensses and
pains of this world all the bitternesses and sorrows what so ever they be.
comparyng them distinctely with the gehenne of hell / and thou shall mow well
know that all pains here be in Regard as no thing unto those. Seint Bernard
says in a Pistle. Thou dredest to wake on nyghtes / to fast and to labor
with thyn^ hands. But remembryng the perpetuell flam^es all that ought to be
but light unto the / Certain all solitary lif is to be conforted by that
Remembrance. And if thou knew thextreme discussing of all Idle words /
silence should displease the no thing Seint Austyne in a sermon^ says. How
delectable thoughts cause often humayne nature to be conquered and ouercomen
with the delites and the veluptuouse concupiscence of this world / which
eschew all labors / and axe naught but playsirs / and follow always
delectacions. But whenne that thoughts fall to Remembrance of the necessite
and dangerous last Judgment with theternale Pains. What other for fere of
those torments / or sometime for hope of the most rich Reward hit m^eueth a
man from all the passions of his playsirs and voluntayrely to rise up in
Battle ayens them entendyng to have victory upon his first delectable vain
playsante thoughts. Abacuk says desirousely in his iij chapitre. Rotynnesse
will enter into my boones / and springue under me in my life by cause I should
rest in^ the day of tribulacion^. Behold here my right dear friends how
fructuouse and how hoolsom is the Remembrance of thinfernal pains. The
Psalter says. Sinners they be transported into Hell. Wherefore by good
meditacions every man in his life entende to the resistance of that daungier. Or
ellis they must living dye perpetually. It is read How he is eureusely happy /
that beholds the dyepe tenebres. That is to say. To regystre in his heart the
infernale torments / and that with a continuale remembrance in contemplacion
to frequente that sure memory. Now me thinks I have suffisantly showed you
the manifold maniers of the diverse pains of hell. and how vaillable and to
what proufite grows the memoriale Remembrance thereof. O mortal man with
haerrour / what folly / and what fault is in the / when^e it lies in thy fre
arbitrament to have Joys euerlesting and willyngly castist thy self into the
infernale torments and peynes / from whens noon may return / but brenne there
in fire world without end

And thus ends the third part of this tretys divided in four parties
party of the four last thingis / which be forto come And here begins the
prologue upon the fourth
^His third part of the four last thingis which be forto come. whereof
soueraynely the Remembrance withdrawith a man from sin / Is the mind of the
euerlesting celestiale Glory And if a man refreygne him self from mourdeur or
from any criminale cause for fere of losyng of his honor or temporale goods.
how much more ought he refreygne / dread and eschew all sinful operacions
/ whereby he might lose the most blisful sempiternale Joys. Seint Austyn says
in a book of his confessions. There is a Joy / which is not to be given to
the felon sinners / but to those / that of their fre will love and worship
the lord god / and thou thy self art that Joy. For this cause it is written in
the first Epistle ad Corintheos the vj chapitre. The felon sinners shall not
possess the Kyngdom^ of heaven / but shall confusedly be put therefrom / as the
vile glotons and dishonneste folks be chased out of the emperor his court and
not suffer to sit among kingis and princes at their excellent and solemn
tables. And Callidore seith yt every man is put and cast from the deite after
the quantite of his sins. And certeynly his casting fro / is mesured after
the delectacions that he has had in them. Now should not then every creature
eschew to do sin / and have hit in abhomynacion as a mortale thing / knowing
that thereby is lost the celestiale eternale Glory. O what shall I pour wretch
barein of knowlych say / or how shall I talk of this Glory incomprehensible.
Certeynely their was never Eye / that saw / nor Ere / that herd / nor Heart /
that thought the Joy / that god has ordeygned for those that he loves. As is
written in the first Epistle ad corintheos the secunde chapitre. Therefore what
shall I now more say or write / in this werk I am as oon born^ blind that
disputes in colors having no confidence to myn^ owen propre wit. But
therefore I must refer my self to the testimonies of scriptures / by the
which I wole speak / It is to be noted / how albe it in the heavenly glory
there be innumerable thingis plainly approving the joy and felicite thereof.
Yet I wole specially show how it is to be recomended for three thingis. The
first / for the sovereign and excellent clernesse thereof. Secundly / for the
the most habundance of the goodnesses that be therein And thirdely for the most
blisful Joy thereof perdurably enduring. The beauty thereof / nor the clernesse
can not be mesured. The infenite goodness can not be esteemed Nor the^ernale
Joy can not be compared nor sufficiently prased. Of these iij thinge^ I shall
traite be^^fly by order in this last part:::

Thus ends the prologue of the fourth and the last part of this book::::
How the Royalme and kingdom of heaven is praised for his beauty and clernesse
fIrst the kingdom^ of heaven is to be recom^ended for the sovereign beauty and
clernesse thereof. as it is written in the book of Sapience the v chapitre wherein
it is callid the royame of Beauty. The Psalter says. Lord I have loved the
beauty of thyn^ house. It is also written in Thoby the xiij chapitre. I shall be
happy if the Relics of my seeds may see the clernesse of Irlm whereof the
gates be made of Saphires and emerawdes and other precious stones. The circuit
of the walls with fair brighte stones / and all the places paued with fyn
gold. It is written in the Apocalips the xxj chapitre That cite was made of fyn
gold pure and clean as glass The fondement of walls enourned with all precious
stones. The twelve gates shall have twelve Margarites. and the streets of the
Cite shall be of fyn^ gold shinyng as bryghte as glass. The tempell is not yet
spoken of. Certaynely almighty God is the tempell thereof / and the Lamb is the
light. The forsaide Cite has no need of the Son / nor of the Moon to light
hit with all. For the clerenesse of our Lord shall Illumine hit. and the Lamb
shall be the lantern / and the people shall mow walk by that clerenesse. It is
also read in the xxij Chapitre of Thapocalips. It shall never be night there
Wherefore there needs no candell nor lantern / nor light of the son. For the
bryghtnesse of our lord shall light and illumine them enduringly world
withouten end Which saying may well accord with that. that is written in Isaye
the lx chapitre. Thou shall have thenns no need of the shynyng of the son /
nor resplendisshing of the moon. For our lord shall light and illumme the
sempiternally. In troth he is a glass without any spot and a light illumining
everlastingly. As it is written in the book of Sapiens the vij chapitre. Also
our lord shall be the rsplendisshing of glory. As is written to the Hebreos in
the first chapitre. Which resplendisshing shall be an hooll light. Abacuk in
his third chapitre says of this resplendisshing all the seintes shall take in
the royalme of heaven clernesse and sempiternal light. wherewith all they shall
rejoice them incessantly in greet felicite. It is also written in the boook of
Iugis the v chapitre. Those that love the / shall shine and resplende / as the
son does in his rising. Also is written in the book of Sapiens the third
chapitre. How thoes that be Just shall shine in their s^dees Royalme like the
son^e. O lord sempiternal grond of all virtue / how good and how glorieuse is
thy royalme and how ought thy tabernacles to be beloved. how greet is thy
beauty / how habundante is thy Resplendisshing in thy ci^e / how meruyleuse is
the brighte clernesse thereof / and how sovereign is the sweetness of thy
celestyal contraye For this cause says Seint Austyn in his book of
fre^^^^trement. So greet is the beauty of Justice. so greet is the sweetness
of thyn^ eternal light / That if it were not expedient to delight therein but
oon^ our of a day forto have that Joy oonly. The innumerable days of this
present lif full habundante of all temporal goods ought therefore raisonable
to be mispreised and forborne. Now certeynely it is not vnraisonably spoken /
nor without a a greet gronde / that better is to be oon^ day in that court
than a. M. in this world. O celestial Ihrlm. O shinyng house full of all
brightness I wisshe my pilgrimage to reche unto the / and to be possessed in
the by him that made both the and me. And therefore says Seint Bernard in in
his third book upon the Gospel Millus est angelus Gabriel. O how glorious is
the royalme of heaven. The kingis have assembled them in a mont. that is to
vndrestande / to love praise and glorify him that is king above all kingis and
lord ou all lords. In the resplendisshing contemplacion of whom ye just people
shall shine as the son in the royame of their fader. To this purpose says y^
psalter thou shall replenish^ me with gladness in thy face. Job says also in ye
xxxiij chapitre. his face shall be seen in greet ioyeful gladness. Al^ those shall
behold and have sight of ye most sweet visage / that have trewely served our
lord and saueour Ihesu crist in humilite of heart / in good labors and
virtuous werkis Isay says in his xxxiij chapitre. they shall see the king of
kingis in his greet beauty. O how blisful / o how aggreable o how sweet and how
happy shall be ye beholding of our saueour Ihu crist to those yt have perfaictly
loved him. Certainly they shall mow ioyefully say as is written in abacuk the
iij chapitre. I shall rejoice me in our lord and disporte me in Ihu crist my
god. O how greetly shall those reiose them yt shall be fulfild with ye celestial
joys / and what gladness shall they have yt shall be illumined with ye vision of
ye resple^disshing face of our lord god / The whche joy and gladness shall be
permanent and abiding world without end

How the celestial^ royame is to be com^ended for the goodness that is there in
THe Royalme of heaven is secundly recomended for thabundante goodness thereof.
Seint Austyn says in his book de ciuitate dei. That / that god has ordeigned
for those that he loves / may not be oonly atteigne^ by hope without it be
comprysed with charity and so it may well be atteigned. The rewards of the
happy seintes can not be nombred nor estiemed. thabundance thereof is without
end / and is so precieux / yt it can not be sufficiently preysed. Of the
superhabundante rich goodness of this celestial Royalme is written in
Deutronomii in the viij chapitre thus. Our lord god shall led the in a good
contray / which is indewed with waters / with fontayns / with springes / with
feldes / with montayns. Out of the which shall come flodes and riuires. He shall
led the also into a land / where grows whete / barley / and vynes. and where
grow figues and appeles / grayns and olifs / oyll and honey and there without
any necessite thou shall cete thy br^ed with habu^dance of all goods. Now
certain^ this is a right comodieux contray fulfilled with swetenes / this is
the contray / to the which were sent the sons of Adam. As is written in the
book of Iugis the xviij chapitre / which said at their Return. We have seen
a comodieuse plentiful contray right rich / wole ye not mispreyse it nor
cesse we not / but late us goo take possession thereof. For there is no labor /
and our lord shall give us aroom^ therein Whereby we shall have noon necessite nor
lak. For there is no thing that enoyeth. and all good delectacions be there.
Seint Austyn says that theternale beatitude and well be specially in two
things. That is to wite. In thabsence of all evil and in the presens of al
well. Now if thou will axe me / what thingis be in heaven. I can answer the non
other wise / but all thing that is good / is there / and all thing that is
naught can never come there And therefore seith Seint Gregory There is no good^
thing desired noe lakked there / another there is any thing within^e hit / that
hurts or enoyeth. It is written in the last chapitre of Thappocalips. They
shall no more have honger nor thirst / nor the son^e nor the hetes shall no more
hurt them. For the lamb of god / which sits in the middle of the trone
shall gouuerne and bring them to the fontayne of the water of lif. And more is
following in the same chapitre he seith. Show me the flode the riuier of the
water of lif. Who has thirst / come and drink / who wole have of that water
of lif come and take it. And he that has of that water / shall never be
thirsty. as it is written in the Gospel of seint John in the iij chapitre. O how
happy and how blissed is that country / where god shall b^ al thing in all thing
/ and where is no pouerte / nor la^^ of any thing / that is good. This contray
is the celestial pasture / wherein shall need no thing to be wisshed. For in this
pasture shall our lord bayte and feed his true lovers whom he wole beclippe
perpetually. Therefore seith our lord in Ezechiel the xxxiiij chapitre. I shall
put them into their contreyes and feed them in the montaynes of Israhell Now
certainly the happy seintes of heaven be well fed with knowliche of the
sovereign truth / which is to them aful fructuouse pasture. be it when^e
they enter in contemplacion of the divinity / or in considering the grace of
the humanite And in both these they shall find cause to be saciate and fed
with delectacions. And they shall feel the fruit of souerain^ sweetness. And as
the Psalter says. He has yiuen the thy fill of the fine fatness of ye flour
of the whete. The fatness of ye flour of the whete is delectacion of swetenes
caused by the love of god. Of the which flour of whete by the same love mote
my soul be fulfild / and then^e I shall rest in theternale ioyouse surete
always wexyng grene and neu to dry. Here is now showed how good is this
contray wherein the happy men shall be fed / which is so fruitful and
plentiueuse. Certeynly this is the contray of lif. In the which we must hope
to see the goodness of our lord. The Psalter says. We shall all be fulfild
with the goode^ of thyn^ house. Now what be the goods / that saints shall be
fulfild with. but oonly the grace of thin comprehensible glory. Seint Bernard
says in a sermon of the Dedicacion. The Resonnable Soul made after thymage of
god may well be occupied with all other thingis / but it may not be all fulfild.
Certeynly she comprehending god may not be fulfild with less thing than god.
We shall not oonly be fulfild with this vnrecitable glory. but also we shall be
dronken and assorted thereon. It is read in Iheremye the xxxj chapitre. I shall
make drunk the sowles of the priests of grace. that shall be at the greet
soupper which is ordeigned for good folks / He shall set and administre them
mete of glory / and yiue them drink of meruelouse joy and swetenes. Then^e it
shall be said to those that shall ete there / as is written in the Canticles the
v chapitre My right dear friends. Ete and drink and make you dronken. In Isay
the xxix chapitre also is written Make you dronken / but not with wyn^. and
wherewith then^e shall they make them dronken. with Joy and with gladness and
with felicite / and with many maniers of the celestiale glory. O good lord /
god eternal / how swetely shall thy good and true servants be dronken with
the plentiueusnesse of thyn^ house / and with the voluptuousness of the For in
the is the fontayne of lif / the fontayne of beatitude and of glory permanent
and never failling. Certainly al sweetness belongs to thyn^ house. It is the
house of our lord / the cite of god / which is full of al richesses / and
resplendisshed with all goods. Therefore says Isay in h^s xxiij chapitre.
Thyn^ eyes shall see Iherusalem full habundant of all goods. The greet
multitude of the copi^use habu^dance of the things beforsaide of this cite
should not hoolly satisfy to call us thydre / but also right specially the
restful multitude of this peace. wherein those / that be happy / shall delight them
enheriting that country above specified. The same Isay says in his lv
chapitre. Ye shall pass out in Joy / and shall be brought into peace. O how
great shall the habundance of this peace be in Iherusalem wherein it shall remain
perpetuelly without any werre. Isay yet says in the ix and xxxij chapitres. My
people shall be in the beauty of peace / and in the tabernacles of confidence and
in the rich habundance of Rest. Also Thoby says in the xiij chapitre. O
Iherusalem Cite of god / happily blissed be those that love the / and rejoice
them in thy pess It is in Ezechiel the xiij chapitre. The seintes see in the
vision of peace / there is joy and peace with peace / which is so precious / that
it surmou^teth / and is by yonde all human vndrestanding. Now then he that
wole be participable of so greet a Joy and peace with the saynctis eternally an
high in heaven / he must learn now to suffer humbly and have patience here a
low in earth. For as it is written in a book callid Aurora drawn out of the
Bible. By souffrance is wonnen that most noble rest. and there is noon^ so wise
that can rejoice that peace / but oonly it is had by trauail and suffering of
tribulacions and pains patiently in this mortale world ^^^

How the Royame of heaven is praised and lauded for the Joy and blis that is
therein euerlestingly The third chapitre of the last part
THirdely the Royame and Kingdom^ of god is to be recom^end^d for the greet
Joy and gladness that is therein eternally enduring. And theruppon says Seint
Gregory in an Omelye. Who has that tongue / that can suffisantly declare and
express the Joys of that sovereign Cite. Or who has couuenably the
vndrestandyng to comprehend / how greet those Joys be to the companyes of
Angeles / and to the happy sowles. And how inestimable is that most blisfull
eternale Joy and glory in beholding the visaige of our lord god having no
manier of trouble ne feer of death but live in rejoicing them of that most
preciouse yifte of grace. which shall ever be permanent and without corrupcion^.
Certain that Royame that Cite of our lord must be vndrestande Iherusalem /
which Ihrlm is most bontiueusely plentiueusely and blissedly edified. O cite
of citees / which is so habundantly full of blisful joys to the happy sowles
loved be thou. It is written in Isay the last chapitre. Rejoice you with Ihrlm /
and disporte you in her to the end / yt ye may know and be fulfild and fed
with the pappe of consolacion. and that ye may be habundant in all maniers with
the delectacions of that glory. Of the which inmesurable felicite and glory
of that noble cite speaks Seint austyn in his book of the cite of our lord
saying O how greet shall the felicite b^ there / where shall be another pain /
nor harm / nor well / nor good thing hid / but entending hoolly unto the
louynges and praysingis of our lord. It it is written in Isay in the lxiiij
chapitre. There was never eye / that saw without the that joy / which you have
ordeigned to them that abide the / nor more great gladness can be / than yt
thou will yiue those that thou lou^st which they shall possess perpetuelly. It
is read in the same Isaye the xxxv chapitre. They shall come into syon and all
louinges and sempiternal joys upon their hedes. The Psalter says. Our lord
has known the days of those that be pure and not smouged / and their
heritage shall be perpetuelle. It is written in Thoby the xiij chapitre Lord thou
art right greetly eternal / and thy Royalme is in all worlds. Seint Austyn
says in his book of the cite of our lord. We shall be vndrestanding and shall
see / preyse and love our lord. This shall be in the end / which is withouten
end. Now what should we desire to be our end but to search and seek the ways
to atteigne the ^omyng into ye royame / wherein joys have non^ end / which
royame is the royame of all ye worlds. and certainly thy power and lordship is
upon al^ genacions. Toby says in the xiij chapitre. Blissid be our lord /
which has so high^ reised Irlm to thentent / that his royame be above in the
world of worlds. O how glorious is the Royame / wherein the blissed saints
rejoice them with Ihesu Crist. and they cladde as in white aulbes follow
always the lamb. Now of this world to come speaks seint austyne in his book
of the deb^te bitwix virtues and vices saying. The love of this p^sent world is
departed from me. for there is no creature / but he must nedis finisshe and dye
here. Hit al^ other wise of the love of the world / that is to come. In the
which all be so viuified / that they can never dye after therein And therein is
noon aduersi^e / no trouble / non anguish^ no pain / no disease e^noyng / nor
werynesse / but therein reignen sempiternale Joys. The Psalter says. The Ius^
folks eten and drinken / and reioysen them in the presens of our lord deliting
them in gladness. And all sorrow and waylingis flies from them. It is written
in Thapocalips the xxj chapitre. Our lord shall dry the teeres of their eyes.
More over / there shall be then^e no weeping / criyng / sorrow / nor death. for
all that shall be passed before. Isay says in his xxv chapitre. Our lord shall
take away the teeres of every face / and shall take away the repreuys of his
people in every land. And then^ the folks shall say. Here is our lord god /
whom we have abiden which shall save us / we have susteigned and suffered for
him. And therefore we rejoice us with and by him in salvation. O how greet shall
be that ioyeful gladness to thoes that shall be glorified not oonly in soul /
but also in body. It is written in Isay the lxj chapitre. They shall be dowble
possessed in their land. And in the Prouerbis the last chapitre is written. All
his familiere household ^ servants shall be cladde double. That is to wite
with two aulbes. that oon is the body / which they now possede. the other the
soul / and they shall not have oonly joy of their owen propre good werkis. but
also singulerly of the merits of the happy seintes. Our lord says in Iheremy
the xxxiij chapitre. I shall enhabite them assuredly / and they shall be my
people. I shall be their god / and shall yiue them an heart and a soul / not
oonly by the unite of substance / but by the bond of charity. Behold me right
dear friends / If the soul of a martyr / of a confessor / of a virgyn and
yours be alloons. Consequently it seems that ye shall rejoice you in their
Joys / and that your sowles shall be semblable unto thapostles or any other
saints Seint Gregory seith how charity shall be so plentiueusly there that /
that well / which he has not for him self / he shall rejoice in seeing an other
to have it. Certainly those meruileuse and manifold Joys can never enter
mannis heart here. and there every heart shall be replenisshed and fulfild with
them. For withinne and without / above and benethen / and in every part the
happy sowles shall meruelously rejoice them. In thinwarde part by the pureness
of their consciences. In the outward part by the glorifiyng of their bodies.
In the lower part by the renoueling beautees of the heuens and of the
creatures there. In the higheste part by the clear and visible sight of our
lord god. And in all other parts by the ioyeful and delectable compaignie of
all the saints of heaven. Now trewely there is no man / that can ymagine or
think the greetnes of the Joys that be there. I ne can tell the rejoicing of
thinhabitantes in heaven reignyng there among thangeles of our lord god
perpetuelly. It is written in the Gospel of seint Matthew in the xxv chapitre.
Enter thou into the joy of thy lord. enter thy self into that joy / and with all thyn^ heart enter therein. Of those inmesurable quantitees of the celestiale
joys speaks Seint bernard in his book of meditacions. Their gladness has
all thing in possess on. therein all festinges be possessid / and the men
accompanied with angeles shall remain there perpetuelly without h^uing any
manier fleshly infirmite. There is infenite ioyeusenes. there is sempiternale
beatitude. and after that oon is there to receive it / he shall remain therinpe
rduraby. there is rest without labor / peace and friendship without e^uye /
quietenes and surete without dangier. and the most playsant swetnesse in the
vision of our lord god. Seint bernard says The joys and swetnes of ye contray
is so greet / that if a man were therein but oonly the space of an hour all the
joys and delectacions of this p^sent of might comparabily by reason he
impraysed / and all joys swetenes and beautees that could be thought and had
here / be but pains bitternesses and filthes in regard of those / right as
the might and bou^te of our lord god excedeth and surmou^teth all other worldly
thingis O good lord god what have I wessed to have in this earth when^e in
seven all thingis should be much more desired than any power here / gold /
silver / or any precious stoones Now what shall I more say of this contray and
holy Cite of Iherusalem. where in the streets is songen incessantly Alleluya
with ioyeuse and ^wete melodieuse tunes. as is written in Thoby the xiij
chapitre. It is red also in Isay the lj chapitre. Al joy and gladness shall be
founden in that contray with actions of graces and voices of louingis and all
shall say in his temple / loving honor and glory be to ye lord And therefore
the voys of gladness and health shall sown in the tabernacles of just folks.
In ye cite of our lord sown continuelly thorgons of the sainetis / which have
utterly for yeten the tribulacions / pains / labors / and wretchednesses of
this world using and e^ioying ye celestial blis. O how swetely / how playsantly
/ and how clerly singe those in delasol that before have wept in ga^moth and in
a^e. Of this cite speaks seint Austyn in his book of meditacions saying. O
cite which is a celestiale house and a sure contray conteigning all thing / yt
may cause delectacion. There is thinhabiting of rest The people is there without
murmeur or grouge. O how maany glorious thingis be said of this cite.
thinhabitacion of our lord is in yt as in a thing enjoying all good thingis /
There is peace / pite / bou^te / clernes / light / virtue / honest / glory /
rest / loving / love / good concord / joy / swetenes / blis and perdurable
lif. Of all those and the perdurable lif shall ye happy sowles be certain and
sure without any lesing thereof. Isay says in his xxxij chapitre There shall be
furete for ever. Ezechiel says in his xxxviij chapitre They shall inhabit
fermely in eternite without any manner of feer. It is red in the proverbs of
solomon in the first chapitre. he that has well herkend / shall rest without
fere and enjoy in habundance Seint Austyn says. That theternale surete
enourneth and fulfilleth the beatitudes of all the celestiale goodnesses where
if that sempiternite should faille / all the other celestiale goodnesses be
they never so sweet / should be the less to be praised. Seint Ioh^n says in
his xviij chapitre In assuring us / there is no man / that shall byreue you your
Joy. O house of our lord / Cite of the greet king. how innumerable and how
greet be thyn^ eternale Joys with the mamfolde gladnesses of those happy
sowles / that be enhabited with the. Now surely lord they be well blissed that
be inhabited in thyn^ house in loving the during the world of worlds. who is
he having an hoole Remembeaunce that is so ignorant / that he thinks not /
that all the compaignie of heaven loves the not ^uiinely in heaven. Thassurance
of this perpetuel celestiale Joy and gladness may be vndrestande in that /
that it is compared unto tholifue tree. As Ozee says in his xiiij chapitre.
His glory shall be like an olifue tree / which is and continues grene winter
and somer. Of this eternal glory says also John crisostom in his book of the
Peparacion of the fall of man How greet shall the whiptuosnesse be / how greet
shall the Joy and gladness be to the soul to be with Ihesu Criste returned to
his propre generation and assuredly and vndoubtely to behold and see our lord.
The greetnesse nor the quantite of that ioyeful blys can not be told nor
recited For oon reioyseth him not oonly of that well and playse^ that he uses
and has presently in ocure / but much more by cause he may be sure. Those
Joys playfiers and blys shall never adminish^ nor end. Lo who is he y^ shall be
partiner to that joy / which is endeles. Certain^ it is orde^gned for all
folks / lords and other shall rejoice them in the glory of our lord / yt have
followed his traces in this world, where by they shall regne with him glorified
worshipped and crouned eternally in heaven. O my right well loved brethren /
how greetly shall ye rejoice you / if ye be transported unto that eternale
glory. Certain^ ye shall say then^e in criyng and syngyng as it is written in
Isay the lxj chapitre. I glad and ioyeful shall rejoice me in our lord / and my
soul shall be myry in my god / by cause he has clad me with the vesthment of
salvation. Of truth as it is written in Job ye xxij chapitre.. Thou shall be
habundant then^e in the dele^tacion of the most mighty lord / and shall lift
up thyn^ eyes toward god / and the light shall shine in thy ways. Of this
light is written in Ecclesiastico the xj chapitre. It is a delectable light to
see ye son^e. that is to vndrestande Ihu crist which to know and behold
perdurably passes and surmonteth all the joys of this world. and is no
meruail. for ye knowlich^ and vision is the fode glory and lif sempiternale of
ye happy sainctis. Seint Ioh^n says in his xviij chapitre / eternale lif is
this / to know ye sool very god and Ihu crist / whom thou sendest down^ into
this earth for our redemption. Now then he that may obteygne and come to that
blisful kn^wlich after divine lecture and to see god face to face / that shall be
the most eycellente joy and a springyng of all ioyeful gladnesses. Seint
Bernard says in his sermon. Meraily that is a true and a souerain^ joy /
which is conceived and had not oonly by oon creature. but also by the creator
and maker of all creatures / which joy thou shall have when^ he shall show
the his face. Wherefore the prophet desiringly said. Lord I require the / late
me see thy gracious faceful of all joy and gladness. Alas my delectacion is
prolonged from me til I may have ye greet we will / and til I may be drawn unto
god my saueour / I shall shede teeres night and day. Certainly the vision by
the which our lord is seen face to face is in you third heaven. and if it
might be said / it is the paradise of.M. heuens. wherein ye fontayne of clear
water is seen by the happy lif. Isay says in his lx chapitre. Thou shall see
then^ the face of our lord / and shall be habu^dant in delectacions and joys
sempiternally. O how good art thou lord of Israel to them / that have rightful
hertes / which wole yiue them so great / so rich / and so playsante joys. My
right dear brethren ye here gladly speak of these delectacions and joys / and
take playser therein. Nevertheless ye ought not to be ignorante to vndrestande
that the blessed seintes come never to these joys / but by great peines and
labors. Seint Gregory says in his Omely. The greetnesse of the rewards
yiueth me courage and my labors ought not to feer me. for oon may never
atteigne to the greet rewards but by greet labors. That noble precheur seint
Powl in the secunde epistle to tymothe the secunde chapitre says. How that
there shall be non crouned. but such as have manfully foughten. Verily every
man shall receive his Rewards. which shall be after his labors. There be
diverse that wole not live well / and yet they desire to dye well. They may
know the death of seintes is full preci^^se in the presens of our lord / they
may know also yt when^ our lord has yeuen rest to his sowles they shall
dwell in his heritaige permanently by cause they have be those that always
have followed him in resisting temptacions. Many of you would regne with Ihesu
Crist but ye wole suffer no thing for his sake. Balaam ariolus was such oon /
for in considering the castle of the children of Israhel he intended the having
of theternale beatitude / and said in him self. Die my soul as just folks
die / and be my last thingis semblable unto theirs / he delited greetly their
glorious end / but he grouged to take their labors and pains / whereby they
had deserved the glory eternale. O god lord Ihesu we would gladly regne with
the Neutheles we wol not labor nor be participable to thy suffrances. Thou
chasest misery and pouerte / and we have taken us unto voluptuousenesses and
delectacions / Thou have taken upon the and suffered bitternesses and
sharpenesses to thy body / and we have chosen and followed our sensuale
plaisirs. Seint bernard said. The sone of god is born^ / to whoes will was
granted al yt might please him. He chose to be born^ in the most grieueuse
time / and the blissid little babe born^ of a pour mother vnne thehauing clothes
to wrappe and coure it in the cribbe Certainly Ihu^s crist / which never is
deceived chase that / that most molested and grieved his flesh Lo then^e it is
best / swettest and most profitable to chese the hardest pain in this world.
And who so ever amonesteth or techeth other wise oon ought to beware of him
and yiue him little credence. It was oons promisid by Isaye alitle child / that
could repreue the evil and chese the good The evil was the voluptuose playsir
of the body / and the good was the peine and affliction thereof. A truth this
child is the sone of god / which chose thafflicti ons and repriefued and
forsook the voluptuous plaifiers. As seint Bernard said. O right dear child.
thou have chosen from thy beginning here corporale afflictions. and in
suffrance have entered into thy glory. which was proprely thyn^ owen. and we
living in delectacions would enter into that glory. wherein we be but
strangiers and not digne to come thidre / but by thy grace. There ayens speaks
Seint Austyn / saying If it have behooved Ihesu crist lord and king / whoes name
is above all names to have suffered and thereby has entered into his eternal
glory. what hope or trust shall we have to come thidre without suffrance.
sithen we be stra^giers / and can have none enter there but by him. O how
folish and how hard herted we be to trust in rejoicing us in this world and
after to regne with Ihu^ crist in heaven. he entered therein al naked. yet was he
therein lord. and we would enter therein yt be al charged with supfluous
garnementis with richesse of gold and silver and precious stones. He entered
therein chaste and fasting. and thou will enter th^in full of glotonie and
lechery. He dyed upon ye cross forto redeem the / that deliciously slepist in
thy bed. Should then^ the servant have yt the master had not and wole not
bye it / as he deed. Certainly nay. and me thinks it were a thing to
vnraisonable. Herkene now what a poet says. The lord has swet upon the
cross shall not the servant do the same: Now bear your cross for he has
born^ his. Taste of the vinegre / as he deed. The reverence nor the case of ye
servant should not be more than that of the lord. If you wilt follow him /
thou must ensue his torments / and hold for certain / thou can not come in
heaven by delites and playsirs. And therefore when^e you shall pay unto our lord
thy debt of natural death which thou owe unto him / fle voluptuousenes /
break thy delites / refreigne thy flesh^ / and dye then^e in the love of Ihesu
Crist. Seint Iherom^ says in a pistle yt he sent unto Iulyan how it was a
greet difficulte and a thing as impossible a man to use and have the welthe and
playsier of this world pure / and also of that to come / and yt the filling of
his belly here should feed his soul / and that he should from delites and
playsirs here / go to delites and playsirs there. and yt he should appear
glorified in both worlds. He says also in an other place. that it is
impossible a man to be habu^dant in worldly richesses / and ensue Ihu crist.
For nature wole not that two contraires be meddled to gydre. Certainly we may
not both be servants unto god and to the devil. Other I am deceived / or in
the end they shall be begiled / yt believes it not Think how yt richesses of
this world torn to necessitees in the other world. the dampened dives ete and
drank and lived delicieusly wering p^cious garneme^tes here. but when^ he was
deed / because he would not believe moses / he aperpceiued his defaultes and
felt them well when^e he was in ye torments of hell Seint bernard showed this
also by a speech yt was betwix crist and seint petre. wheer he said thus
abraham said to the false rich gloton / Thou have had many greet welthes in
thy lif / and the lepre has suffered many pains / but now he is in Joy and
consolacion / and thou art in pain and torment euerlesting. what shall we more
say. After that we end so must we beinged / weeping is theytremite of joy and
ye may not have Joy in this world by aduersite / but by aduersite here ye may
have theuerlesting Joy. Certain it is manifest / yt this worldly goods be
not ver^y goods / another they be true / that so accept them. The sentence of
Solomon is just. His sentence is / that it is better to be in ye house of
lamentacion / than in the house of worldly felicite For those that in their lif
here have received worldly prosperitees / shall after therefore be tormented. and
for rejoicing in their consolations here / is ordeigned them a sempiternal
peine. What may be the end of those / that have here so great multitude of
solaces and plaisiers. Doubteles no thing but afflictions and sorrows.
Consequently those / that reteigne the plaisiers and solaces of this world /
that not withstanding / the universal torments and sorrows remaynen unto
them. They have taken unto them the coragis of wretch^s. and all such as
their corages be led by their good angeles / despise and refuse the goods of
this present lif / and chose to suffer penance therein. Whereby they atteigne the
goods of our lord with all solace. Seint Bernard seith. Late thy soul then^e
renonce to be in consolacion here in this valleye of teers miseres and sorrows
for torments and peines shall come unto th^es / that receive here their joys
and solaces. Now then^e disprayse and despise those transitory v^nitees / and
flee the worldly delectacions and Joys. and beware / that thou glorify not
thy self but in the cross of our lord Ihesu Crist. Petre de blois wroot unto
a King of Engelande upon the book of Job Wenist thou / that oon may have Joy
in this present liff and also in that / that is to come: Nay. without his (...)
here be sprengled with bitterness and sorrow. Thou art deceived to presume to
have perfaicte Joy both here and there to use this world and take the delites
thereof / and nevertheless to obteigne the richesse of the glory celestiale /
and to joy with Ihesu crist. Herkene more / what is said in the Gospel by the
rich man. which was tormented in the fire of hell that desired a drope of
water for the refreisshing of his tongue. It was answered him. Thou have
received the welthe of the world / and Lazar the ^eine. therefore he has now
delectacion^ and joy / and thou art in the peine and torment The said Petre de
bloys said. We might well repute and call fools the holy kingis and
prophets / thapostles / the martirs / the confessors / and the delicate and
tender virgyns which all have mispraysed and fled from the worldly richesses /
and have offered and taken them to the tribulacions and shamouse dethes for the
love of Ihesu crist. If they might have obteigned by voluptuouse delectacions
the Joys of heaven / which they have not guoten but by anguys and peine in
this world. Verily friends / what so ever be said believe fermely and hold
for certain. Ye shall never enter heaven / but by the ways / that the disciples
of Ihesu Crist have taught you. That is to wite / by tribulacions by good
words / good works / and good faith. And what have the disciples taught. have
they not showed us to live soberly and justly and to reteygne with all our power
humilite / charity / patience / constance and all other virtues. To misprayse
the world and all the parts thereof / to ffle richesses and delectacions / to
do penance / and vigureusly to rejoice in tribulacions. Now do then semblably
after them and their doctrine / an^d ye shall live for ever eternally. Be ye of
constante coraiges in all your anguisshes and labors having hope in the help
of our lord / and he shall soon hele and relieve you. Labor manfully as good
knights with Ihesu Crist. and weary not in your self saying. Our labors be
greet / and we so feeble / that finally we may not persevere in this purpose.
Recomforte your self / and herkene well the words of Seint Gregory saying.
There ought no time be thought long. nor any labor greet / whereby is gotten
the glory eternale. Ioh^n Crisostom said upon the gospel of seint Matthew. If
one er he have begone his Journey / think the way laborieuse / he ought to
be thought slouthefull / if the perileu^e wawes of the sea be thought easy and
sure to the maroners by the delectacion / that they have to their owen profit
for winning of temporale goods thereupon. Semblably the storms frostes and
reins to the labouriers of therthe for their winning / the wounds and strokes
to the good knights and champyons for their honor and auantaige. If all thies
be thought easy / moch^ more pain ought to be taken without feling any grouge
for the recouure of the celestial blys / which is ordeigned for the Reward
of them that wole deserve hit. Take noon head of thy peynfull life here. but
behold whydre it wole bid the. Take Regard to the playsant life here. but
remember how soon it wole faille the. Trewely / ye may well think / that the
royame of heaven is no thing appertinent unto sluggardes nor theternale
beatitude ordeygned to rechles and yole folks As Pope Lion said in a sermon.
And the Gospel of seint Matthew says the xj chapitre. The Royalme of heaven is
wonnen in suffering of force and violence in this world And it may well be
believed. for Ihesus crist said. that suffering of violence geteth it. A poet
said. Your living must be sharppe / your labor peinful / and your clothing
grieuouse / and so must all your other thingis be here / if ye wole be logged
there above in heaven. This may appear manifestly unto you. Also in thactes of
thapostles the xiiij chapitre is written. How our enter into heaven must be by
many tribulacions. O how well was it vndrestande by Seint Austyn / That oon may
not enter the blys of heaven but by tribulacion and peine in this world. For he
said. A my soul if we should alweyes supporte and sustain tormented and
peines here / and also suffer by a long space the gehenne of hell / to the end
that we might thereby surely see our lord Ihesu crist in his glory and be
accompanied with his seintis Now were it not an excellent digne thing to have
so greet a well / as to be partiners to so perfaicte a glory. Petre de bloys
said. My members faille me by age / and be enfebled by fastingis / and broken
with labors / and I melte with teeres of myn^ eyes. But if al my brayn and the
mary of my boones were converted into teeres / yet were it not suffisant
passion in this present time in comparaison to atteigne thereby the glory to
come. which shall be showed unto us If a man knew what thing he is / and what
it is of him and of god. he would think that suffering of. M. dethes for his
sake were but as no thing. Behold now how good and how proufitable it is to
suffer penance for our lords sake Susteigne it then gladly and endure it
benignely taking an example by mordereurs and theuys conde^pned to death / which
would greetly rejoice them self / if they might by the kitting of of oon of
their eres have their lives saved. Rejoice your self semblably in greet
gladness. for in doing of a little penance here ye may escape and exclude the
death of your sowles and win theternale joy. Then you man that art mortal
suffer forto atteigne the lif that is perpetuell / such pain as you would
endure forto save thy self temporale * which is incertaine and of little
enduring. To this purpose it is written in Ecclesiastico the vj chapitre. Thou
shall a little labor and here in this world is the litlenesse of penance. and
thou shall soon ete and drink the generation thereof. that is to vndrestande /
the fruits of the glory / which be engendered with the labor of penance. It
is written in the book of sapience the iij chapitre. Ye that be weary of a little
yet dispose you well / and your remuneracion and reward shall be right greet.
Seint Effram said. My right dear and beloved brethren / the labor of our
institucion is but little / and the rest is greet. our affliction dureth not
long / but our Retribucion / that is to wite / the delites of Paradyse. The
Joy and gladness there shall endure world withouten end. The wise man said
in Ecclesiastes the last chapitre. Behold how little I have labored / and I
have found for me greet rest. By the reasons above written it appears
manifestly / that though^ our labors here be but little and good / our
rewards in heaven may be greet and many. for the Joys there are impossible to
be comprehended or declared by us. for there was never erthely heart / that
could ymagine the playsirs thereof nor to any comparison eye could see / nor ere
here the delectacions melodyes and swetnesses that be there. and the goodnesses
ywys can not here directly be sauoured nor felt / but it may well be surely
thought / that all that ever is felt delectable or good in this present world
is but as the resplendisshyng and a shadow of the goodness of heaven / which
we ought to take as an allectif desiring to come to the originale and rote
thereof / and to have part of that most preciouse blys / which is our
enheritance. Now in concluding finally it may appear by great evidence and
invincible raisons / that the four last thingis above alleiged. which is to
wite / the bodyly death / the day of Judgment / the gehenne of hell / and the
glory of paradys defenden and withdrawn from sin in many maniers such / as
have the same four last things withouten oblivion in a continuale
remembrance. Whereby they atteygne and edify their sowles to remain eternally
in the most glorieuse blys of heaven. And when^e any fall to sin / it is by
cause they have not the said four thingis cordially enprinted in their minds.
And alas nor the suffrance of our lord. There be to few that considere and
poise the said four last thingis. Many there be that think to live long and to
repent them in their eage / and thereby appeyse the Judge / and flee the
daungier of hell. And in that hope live in delectacions and Idelnesse. And yet
after they think to possede heaven eternally. O what presumptuouse folly is hit
to believe and trust thereto. That argument concludes not. but makes and
deceives all such / as have hope or confidence therein. Therefore do penance
to your salvation / or ye shall perish^ and dye in your sins to your
dampnacion. It is written in Ecclesiastes the ij chapitre If we do no penance /
we shall fall in the hands of our lord / and not into the hands of man. Alas
now who is he / that suffisantly bewayleth his sins / that has good
patience with his enemy / that has compassion upon the pour people / and
relieueth them in their necessitees / that deuly ministers justice / and that
for no vain glory ne lucre of the world wole offend his conscience. Our
generation is so wretchid / and so frail / that our hertes can not address to
the weell / but rather to the harm. we saueure and delight worldly things /
and seek not after Ihesu Crist. We love vices / we flee virtues / and ly^ and
rest in our owen sins as beestes do in their owen dong / and therein rote
miserably. Our lord looks upon the sone of man / and beholds if therbe any
axing grace or in good disposicion. but well away / he sees to few inclined
thereto / and many disposed to the contraire in all s^nne and wretchedness.
whereby is to be drad / that the miserable time of this world is nygh^ comen.
which Micheas prophesied of in his vij chapitre saying. Holiness is perisshed
in therthe / and among the men is there noon that is right wise. O remember well
how every man almoost now a days seeks for his owen particulere cause and
lucre / the sheding of blood and the wrongyng of other What shall I more say.
few there be that wole entende to any good perfection / nor opene their eyes
for their salvation. so be they blinded in their malicious folly. O cursed
malice and unhappy folly / whereby the lif is voluntairely lost / and the death
won / the well despised / and the harm accepted / our lord displeased / and
the fend obeyed. Now then my right dear brethren and frndes strike not of your
hedes with your own swerdes / as to say late not your owen deeds be your
destruction perpetuale. Rise out of sin. look up and remember you what
difference is bitwix eternale dampnacion and perpetuale joy and blys. Forsake
and renounce your sins / and defend you from the fendes power / which ye
may surely do with contricion / and in axing help and grace of our lord. Iwys
it is meruail that man / which above all erthely thing is a creature
raisonnable / ensues not the very originale of raison. but disprayseth and
forsakes that / that is most profitable and eternally good for that / that is
mortale and most harmful. O good lord what unhap causes it and wherefore
should we by out folly lose thoo sowles that thou have bought so dear with thy
most precious blood. Certainly the cause is lak of prudence / good counseil /
grace / and cordiale remembrance of the said four last thingis. O our
redemptour almighty and merciful Ihesu / grant us so thy grace / that we may
yet surely pourueye for our last thingis / and so cordyally frequente the
remembrance of thy godhede that it cause us here after to repelle and reuoque
our sins / resist our goostly enemy / and conform us in all good works
unto thy blissed will / to thobteigning finally with the happy saints of thyn^
eternale glory. To which being us the fader / and the soon / and the holy
ghost reigning in unite sempiternally world withouten end. AMEN

THis book is thus translated out of frenshe into our maternal tongue by the
noble and virtuous lord Anthoine Earl Ryuiers / Lord Scales and of the Isle of
wight. Defenseur and directeur of the c^uses apostolic for our holy fader the
Pope in this Royame of England. Uncle and governor to my lord prince of
wales. which book was delivered to me william Caxton by my said noble lord
Ryuiers on the day of purificacion of our blissid lady / falling the tewsday
the secunde day of the month of feuerer. In the year of our lord. M. CCCC
lxxvijj for to be enprinted / and so multiplied to goo abrood emonge the people
/ that thereby more surely might be remembered the four last thingis vndoubtably
coming. And it is to be noted that sythen the time of the great tribulacion and
aduersite of my said lord / he has been full virtuously occupied / as in going
of pilgremagis to Seint James in Galice. to Rome. to Seint Bartylmew. to Seint
Andrew. to Seint Matthew. in the Royalme of Naples. and to Seint Nicholas de Bar
in Puyle. and other diverse holy places. Also has procured and gotten of our
holy fader the Pope a greet and a large Iudulgence and grace unto the chapel of
our lady of the pielle by seint stephens at west mestre for the relief and
help of christian sowles passed out of this transitory world. which grace is
of like virtue to thindulgence of Scala celi* And not withstonding the great
labors and charges yt he has had in the service of the king and of my said
lord prince / as well in wales as in England. which has be to him no little
thought and besines both in spirit and in body / as the fruit throof
experimently shows. Yet over that tenriche his virtuous disposicion / he has
put him in deuoyr at all times when^ he might have a leyser. which was but
startemele to translate diverse books out of frensh^ into english^. Among
other passid through myn^ hand the book of the wise sayings or dictes of
philosophers. and the wise and holsom^ prouerbis of xpristime of pyse set in
meter. Over that has made diverse balades against the seven dedely sins.
Furthermore it seems that he conceiueth well the mutabilite and the unstableness
of this present life. and that he desires with a greet zele and spirituell love
our goostly help and perpetuel salvation. And that we shall abhor and
vtterely forsake thabhominable and dampnable sins. which comunely be used
now a days / as Pride / periurye / terrible swering theft / murdre / and many
other. Wherefore he took upon him the translating of this present work named
Cordyale / trusting that both the reders and the herers thereof should know
them self herafter the better / and amend their living or they depart and
lose this time of grace to the recouure of their salvation. Which Translating
in my Judgment is a noble and a meritorious deed. Wherefore he is worthy to be
greetly com^ended. and also singulerly remembered with our good prayers. For
certaynely as well the reders as the herers well conceyuyng in their hertes the
foresaid four last things may thereby greetly be prouoqued and called from
sin to the greet and plentiuouse mercy of our blissid saue^ur / which mercy
is above all his werkis. And noman being contrite and confessed needs to fere
thobteyning thereof / as in the preface of my said lords book made by him
more plainly it appears Then^e in obeying and following my said lords
commandment. In which I am bounden so to do. for the manifold benefetes and
large rewards of him had and received of me vndeseruid. I have put me in
deuoyr ^^ccomplisshe his said desire and comau^dement / whom I beseech
almighty god to keep and mayntene in his virtuous and laud^ble acts and wakis.
And send him thaccomplisshement of his noble and joyous desire and playsirs in
this world And after this short dangerous and transitory life ever lasting
permanence in heaven Amen. Which work present I began^ the morn^ after the
said Purificacion of our blissid Lady. Which was the the day of Seint Blase
Bishop and Martyr. And finisshed on the even of thannunciacion of our said
bilissid Lady falling on the wednesday the xxiiij day of March. In the xix
year of King Edward the fourth.


