A Supplication exhibited to the most Mighty Prince Philip king of Spain etc.
VVherin is contained the sum of our Christian Religion, for the profession
whereof the Protestants in the low Countries of Flaunders, etc. do suffer
persecution, with the means to acquiet and appease the troubles in those
parts. THERE IS ANNEXED AN Epistle written to the Ministers of Antwerpe, which
are called of the Confession of Auspurge, concerning the Supper of our Savior
Jesus Christ. WRITTEN IN FRENCH AND Latin, by Anthony Corranus of Civil,
professor of Divinity.

Imprinted at London by Francis Coldocke, and Henry Bynneman. ANNO. 1577.

To the Christian and vnaffectionate Reader.
THE Author was determined to prefixe before these treatises an Apology, wherein
he declares and defends certain places specially challenged in the^: which
his defense, for certain respects he has reserved to be imprinted with the
Latin Copy (which by Gods grace, shall shortly come forth) and in the mean
time refers this, as it is, to the judgment of the learned and impartial
Reader.

To the most mighty and most victorious Philip King of Spain.
Having had certain intelligence as well by common report, as the special
letters of diverse Citizens of Antwerpe (most mig^tie Prince, and my most dread
sovereign) how miraculously, far beyond the exspectatio^ of man, God had
made a way for the free passage and preaching of his holy Gospel in your
Majesty's low countries, I determined with my self at the earnest persuasion
of my friends (setting all my other business aside) to take my journey
thither: both that I might be partaker with many others serving God there
sincerely and truly, of that great joy and consolation which ^hey received and
enjoyed through the ^xceeding mercy and goodness of almighty God, powered upon
your graces subjects: and withal to my simple power further as much as in me
lay this spiritual buylding of Gods house, considering that God had appointed
me to this vocation. For since my departure out of Spain, which is now.xij.
years past, I protest unto your highness truly and sincerely, that there was
nothing in the whole world that I more earnestly desired and prayed for, than
yt which at this present I behold and see before mine eyes, trusting yt this
singular grace and benefit of God shall not always be contained in this so small
a country, but from thence in process of time shall be derived into your M.
whole realm of Spain, so yt the true and sincere knowledge of Jesus Christ
may there likewise shine and be manifested, and therewith al superstition and
all blind and false worshipping of God banished and exiled, which by the
wilful ignorance of men, and for want of the knowledge of Gods word were
crept into our religion, and like weeds had quite ouergrowen it. Finally I
have good hope that this change and alteration of the world shall stir up your
Majesty to hear the pitiful co^playnts and lamentatio^s of your faithful and
obedient subjects, and to have compassion of the calamities of so many
miserable souls, as (being your most faithful and obedient subjects) are
notwithstanding oppressed with diverse kinds of torments, persecutions,
banishment, confiscation of goods and lands, and (that more is to be lamented)
are before their cause lawfully heard, against right and reason condemned, and
executed most horribly by the most extreme and cruel kinds of death that ca^
be devised. The office and duty of Princes and Magistrates, touching the cause
of religion. Iosue. 1. Deuter. 17.
As for the judges which sit in this commission of life and death and in this
wise condemn the poor innocents, they bear your grace in hand that the
determinations of these causes, does not appertain to Kings or Princes,
notwithstanding that the holy Scriptures teach the contrary, and show that it
is the office and duty of Kings, Princes, and all other rulers and
Magistrates, chiefly and before all other things, to set forth good and true
doctrine according to the laws contained in the first table, and the same so
set forth to authorize and cause to be published: and consequently, to govern
their subjects with Justice, and with equity to defend them. The which thing
it is impossible for any ever to perform without ye true knowledge of Gods
divine Majesty, as the very Heathe^s themselves judge, which were only learned
and instructed after the law of nature. Justitia (says Tully) nec in regno nec
in Repub: retineri, Cicero lib. 1. de natura deorum.
aut conseruari potest, nisi iactis ante verae pietatis fundamentis. Uneath can
justice be kept or maintained, either in kingdom or co^mo^wealth, but where
true religion is first of all planted and rooted. And truly this is the very
same true doctrine, and service of God, which I see preached in your Majesty's
low countries, which causes me assuredly to hope that all other things will
have like happy success, and that your Majesty by this occasion will
understand and determine this cause, and purge Christian religion, in
banishing and rooting out all the abuses and errors which have crepte in by
little and little, and corrupted al Christendom. Wherefore (most noble Prince)
upon my coming to Antwerpe many me^ did greatly marvel, thinking it a thing
scarce credible, that one of the Spanish nation, borne and bredde there,
should embrace the Gospel so desirously, and so earnestly maintain it, that
he boldly durst profess himself a public Preacher of the same. And
forasmuch as ye brute of this strange novelty was so common, that it came to
your Majesty's ears (as I conjecture) and perhaps many a false slander and
misreporte added therewith all, I thought it not amiss for me to take
occasion, of this my coming to Antwerpe, to break this long silence which I
have kept these whole.xij. years, to the intent to purge my self unto your
Majesty, and to justify the doctrine which I profess, and that by writing.
Wherefore in most humble manner I beseech your highness (my gracious
sovereign) to take in good part this writing of mine your most humble and
faithful subject, wherein I have declared the causes as well that moved me to
depart out of Spain, as to resort hither into your country of Flanders. For
I take God to witness, my coming to your Majesty's city of Antwerpe was not
for any desire of newfanglenesse, or to disquiet the state, but by the
preaching of the Gospel to pacify them that were offended, to make a quiet
end of quarrels and controversies that were risen among them, and to my power to
caulme and appease the hurlyburly which was now begone, to cause unity, and
peace, where was discord and dissension, and to discharge the duty which I
ought both to God and to your Majesty: as I doubt not, but your highness
shall in time right well perceive. But chiefly my desire was in very deed, to
profess openly and to preach the doctrine of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ according to the measure of his grace, and the knowledge that he had
given me therein. And now concerning the first point, that I have purposed to
entreat of, I will ^eclar^ unto your Majesty the causes that enforced me to
depart out of your most flourishing realm of Spain. For I am not ignorant
that the time of my departing is very well known, and much noted of many men,
as well for the number of us that fled at the same time, as for the color that
was made to our Countrymen, of our necessary departure, but yet without
allegation of any cause certain. Many had good cause to marvel most of all
at me^ that I among the rest so voluntarily departed into exile, considering
there was not only no apparaunt cause of fear for me, of any open accusation
for Religion to be had against me, but not so much as any suspicion at all,
yea rather being in so good credit, with diverse personages both Worshipful
and Honorable, as few men of my cote and calling were, so that this my
necessary departure is not to be termed a constraynt or enforcement, being
not driven thereunto by any Officer or Inquisitour, who liked of my presence
and company very well, and gave me friendly entertayneme^t: but it was my
conscience that urged me thereunto, which by the being lightened by Gods
spirit, did seem to be in continual torment, and felt as it were a hell in
it self, to be miserably ouerlayed with so huge a Mass of superstition and
idolatry as long time and much labor would not suffice to declare. Wherefore
of many things I will show to your Majesty a few in excuse of my self and
for mine own purgation, most humbly beseeching the same to incline your
gracious ears, and with patience to hear this my declaration, to the end,
that your grace may of your self, the better judge of my cause, and descerne
whether this my departure out of your graces Realm of Spain, deserve blame
and condemnation, and not rather pardon and commendation. Secondarily, that I
might show some proof of my Faith and doctrine to your highness, I will
briefly declare unto you certain articles of our religion, and for the residue
will at all times at ^ur Majesty's commandment be ^ost ready to do the like.
And first to ^ppe up unto your grace all things ^^om the very beginning, I
will show you how miraculously, and after how ^^range a manner the Lord did
open ^he eyes of my soul, and made me to ^ee the truth. What time the Empe^our
your Majesty's Father of famous memory, had nominated D. Ae^idio the chief
chanon and preacher in the Cathedral church in Civil, D. Aegidio accused of
the Monks.
to be Bishop of Tortose, the Monks of Civil began so greatly to envy it,
or rather so furiously to rage thereat, that whereas they were not in any wise
able to hinder him of that preferment whereunto the Emperors majesty had
advanced him, they conspired together in what sort they might best accuse
him for a sower of heretical doctrine, after he had obtained the Bishopric:
For until that time D. Aegidio for his preaching was thought to be an Apostle,
and for his godly conversation and life, judged of his very enemies to be a
pattern for all oth^^ Preachers to follow and direct the^selu^^ by. After this
conspiracy was put (...) practice, whole three years were spe^^ in
quarrelling, and entering bills of co^playnts against him, during al which
(...) time (good man) he lay in prison, pacie^^ly, and manfully abiding all
kind o^ affliction and miseries that were laid upon him. At what time for mine
own part, whenever I either behold his estate or heard it spoken of, I
thought in my conscience that he was well and worthily served, and I also
meruellously abhorred to hear him, yea but once named, as one commonly
reported to be a sower of Luthers heresies, and a sworn enemy against the
Pope. In this opinion, or error rather, I remained a long time, till one of the
Inquisitours to whom his cause was specially recommended by private letters
sent from the Emperor, An Inquisitour discovers the secrets of the
Inquisition.
began to make his complaint to me of the injurious dealings and wicked
demeanor of certain of his fellows, that were joined together with him in
commission, as well concerning other matters which pertayned to their of^^ce, as
especially in their proceeding against D. Aegidio, who as (he said) was both a
good man and a true christian, and better learned by a great deal than his
adversaries, for all their glorious tithes of Doctorship, declaring moreover,
that he understood right well out of what forge these quarrels and false
accusatio^s were coined, and that the Monks durst never have been so bold as
to attempt so to set themselves against him, but that they were bolstered and
vpholden by a certain Bishop. Beside this, he made report unto me particularly,
in how many things the holy Inquisitio^ (as they call it) had dealt very
cruelly with such as were accused. The which things it were requisite and
necessary for your Majesty (most rightuous prince) thoroughly to understand,
that your Grace might know the common Proverb in your tongue to be true, No es
todo or^ lo que: reluze, It is not al gold that glistereth: and that this high
consistory and holy house of Inquisition (as the term it) is most wicked and
void (...) all holiness. For which consideration he told me further, that
he had both dispatched himself out of the charg^ of that office, and refused
the fee thereof to the end that he might have his free election to be present
only in special matters at his pleasure, and being now far stricken in age,
he might not be compelled to deal in all affairs. And yet to the end that he
might be an aid and succor to some, whom otherwise his companions would with
tyranny have oppressed, he was content to be named in commission, and reteyne
the authority still. For such was their madness and furor (said he) joined
with frowardness of mind, that they would proceed to condemnation of me^
innocent and guiltless, without hearing and debating their cause. Whereof he
said there was evidence sufficient in the cause of D. Aegidio, wherein
forasmuch as they were ignorant themselves and understood not what was right
and what was wrong, what was in religion true and what false, they did
therefore all the Monks to counsel, that they ^ight weigh the causes, and by
preiu^ice give their verdites, which they ^ommonly call the Qualifications,
being known to be most envious enemies against that good man, and to bear
hot malice toward him still boiling in their breasts. And as for D. Aegidio
truly, (said he) if he be an heretic, as his adversaries do report him, I
confess that I am an Heretic also: For I am fully persuaded in my conscience,
that he teaches no other doctrine than the very word of God, in the which
opinion his good life and conversation agreeing with his doctrine, does the
rather confirm me: neither think I any Preacher of them all within the whole
City, that does more evidently, both in word and deed, express true piety
and godliness than he does. For which of all the Canons in the whole College
bestows his yearly pention more liberally, and to better or more godly uses
than does D. Aegidio, by whose good devotion and alms, poor widows are
helped, fatherless children cherished, a great number of poverty relieu^^
This speech so gravely proceeding fr^ so fatherly a personage, besides one o^
so great credit and authority (to declar^ the truth to your Majesty) did
notwithstanding greatly move me and offend me, when I heard him utter al these
things against such men whom I did both honor in my heart, and esteemed to be ye
very pillars and supporters of ye church and the true and sincere judges of
christianity, howbeit partly the authority of him that spoke it, and partly
ye good will which I know him to bear me, and the credit of his report,
having experience hereof himself, and seeing it with his eyes, wrought not a
little with me on ye other side, the rather to give ear unto it and to enquire
further thereof: whereupon after more talk had of these matters betwixt him and
me, I requested him to help me to the sight in writing of the accusatio^s and
the articles laid against D. Aegidio, with the determinations of the divines or
Qualifications (as they term the^) ye which he granted me very willingly and
therwithal gave me the ^y of ye Apology made by ye same D. ^gidio in his own
defense and purgatio^. (...) ye reading whereof I fell in a marue^s admiration.
The Doctrine of D. Aegidio.
For Aegidio that co^^ly was accounted to be an enemy to christ, referred al
his writings to the ^ly and everlasting honor and glory of Christ, confessing
the singular joy and co^^^rt of christian men and women, only to co^^st in his
death and passion, and in ye continual ^mebrance and meditation thereof. He was
called an infidel, and yet he extolled with highly, and set forth the force and
virtue thereof which is quite contrary to al hipocritical and pharisaical
works, and ye sundry sorts of superstition which me^ had devised to please
God withal. To be short, most mighty prince) the writings and works of ye
man did so greatly inflame my mind, ye me thought I did evidently see ye very
true and lively image of christ crucified expressed therein, since which time I
had a great desire to have some co^fere^ce with ye said D. Aegidio and diligently
to peruse his sermons and expositio^s upon certain books of ye holy scripture,
which when I compared with the S^mons and writings of the popish Pri^^ and
Monks either treating of Pu^gatory, or the Popes Bulls, or rath^ Burles (as
they were well and wo^thily termed) or written in aduaunc^ment of man's merits
and superstit^ous works, i. Scoffs.
I noted so great a diuer^tie betwixt the^, as is betwixt day an^ night, light
and darkness, truth an error: finally, betwixt the doctrine (...) the holy
Ghost and the device of man brain. When I was in this touched (...) so earnest
a zeal of pure religion, I ha^ also other friends whom the Lord use as means
and instruments to inflame my desire of further knowledge, the which was first
kindled in me by ye working of the holy spirit: for by this occasion I came
first acquaynted wc D. Co^stantino, whose learning, gravity, wisdom and
profounde knowledge in Divinity, no man knows better than your Majesty:
surely al Spain had him in great account, and admiration therefore. I came
also acquainted with Gasper Baptista, a very honest and just man: with Garcia
ab Arias: with Maestro Scobar: Iuan Goncales: and diverse other, very learned
and godly preachers. Besides this I did with great diligence inquire for
Luthers works and other writers of the Protestants, which the Inquisitours
themselves did lend me at the first very willingly, as one of whom they had
no manner of suspision. Wherein I did acknowledge the singular providence of
God, who to cure my blindness, made the Inquisitours themselves his
instruments, and by their hands gave me such books for my better
instruction, which they had before taken from others. By means whereof it came
to pass, that in short space I profited greatly in the knowledge of true and
perfect religion. Then began God to open the eyes of my understanding, and to
give me (as it were) certain spectacles, by means whereof I espied many
horrible and abominable things which before time were unknown to me, and no
such things in my judgment. And, to declare to your Majesty by what ways God
did lead me as it were by the hand to a further knowledge of his truth. I
will in the beginning show unto your good grace ye means where by I first
attained to perceive the tyrannous dealing of the Pope and his Inquisitours.
For when I weyed with my self, and pondered in my mind the great darkness
and ignorance that we were in, I considered how necessary a thing it were for
us to be instructed in the holy and sacred Scripture which God had left for the
increase and confirmation of our faith: The Lay people inhibited the reading of
holy scripture.
On the contrary part, when I perceived how the Pope and his Inquisitours with
all the rest of their sect, labored tooth and nail to keep men from the
reading of the word of God: and when I daily heard cruel Edicts and
Proclamations published against such as had either Bible or Testament in their
mother tongue, I straightway bruste out into these words with my self, saying:
Are these the decrees and Edicts of the true Ministers of God? God expressly by
his word commands that all men should read the Scriptures: and these men
directly do countermau^d it. Iosu. ^.
God apointing Joshua to be the ruler and guider of his people, enioyneth him to
take his law as a rule to direct and order all his enterprises by, and the
people would not receive him, but with condition that he should guide and
govern them according to the prescript word of God: whereas the Inquisitours
are grown so bold, that they dare inhibite Princes and Magistrates ye reading
of the Scripture. I read in John that every man ought to search the
scriptures, John. ^.
for as much as they do bear witness of Christ. The Inquisitours bear us in
hand that it is only meant of the learned sort which understand Latin: and
that it is punishable with death for any other man to presume to read the^ in
their mother tongue. Moreover Paul taught me yt the just man lives by his
faith, Romans 4. and 10.
and in another place yt faith is gotten by hearing the word of God. The
Inquisitours teach the contrary, yt the faith and belefe which ye church
holds generally is sufficient for ye behoof of every particular person. The
co^m^ and Popis^ catholic faith.
And if a man had asked the^ the question what manner of faith yt is, and which
is ye true church, they did answer, in effect the same, which the Pope, the
Cardinals, the Bishops and Inquisitours declare by their fruits, and represent
in person, of whose faith and works they would have all other men wholly to
depend. And truly this inhibition of reading the holy Scriptures me thought did
sound much both against all good reason and policy. For what Prince and
potentate is there in the whole world, that would think it an indifferent
matter to command his subjects to observe and keep his laws and ordinances,
which neither his officers will suffer them to read, nor to have in their
custody? For if that were so, then should either the Prince be suspected to
go about to intrappe his people within the danger of law, or the Rulers
under him thought not only not obedient subjects, but rebels against their
Princes will, considering that it is a very hard and a difficulte matter to
keep laws, except a man be skillful and conversant in them, and by means
thereof understand them perfectly. What (thought I with my self) Mahomet was
never so cruel against his sect and followers. The Turks more cunning i^
their Alcorane that Christians are in the Bible.
For he left his Alcorane in writing as a compe^dious and brief Abstract of his
sect and heresy, to the end that every one, both old and young, learned and
unlearned, Lay man or Clergy man, might learn in their own natural language
to know and to follow the doctrine and religion of him whom they had chosen
for their Captain and supreme head. How much more requisite were it then that
the most rightuous law and most sacred word of our God should be read, and
in perpetual meditation with them that profess themselves to be scholars of
his school, and members of his Church? To be short, as I was in this
cogitation, I became fully persuaded in conscience that the Pope and his
Cardinals, the Inquisitoures and their adherents, and all the other their
accomplices and confederates in the like tyranny, were the professed enemies of
Gods kingdom and his glory, sworn traitors against the Majesty of Christ,
and the very means and instruments of Satan, whereby he inueigled many
miserable souls, spoiling them of the food and sustenaunce of their
spiritual life which consists in the word of God, and compelling the poor
flock of Christ to beg the crummes of that heavenly bread at the hands of
Monks and Friars, who tempering the same with their pharisaicall leven, made
it both foystie and unsavory food: and yet not withstanding, made their
merchandise thereof, and sold it to the people at a very high price: And here
began I to conceive a great grief in my conscience, and to feel (as it were)
a corosiue at my heart, beholding the common people and the foolish
superstitious women run by flocks here and there up and down to get them
ghostly Fathers, that might comfort and heal their wounded and guilty
consciences. I considered further that these tyraunts had forcibly entered and
intermedled within other men's jurisdictions and liberties, taking upon them the
interpretation of holy scriptures, and yet in such sort that they never opened
their mouths to preach the word to the common people, but at their own
pleasures and their best leisure at certain times in the year, as most
commonly in Lent, Aduent Sondayes, and a few other festival days. But O good
Lord what kind of Scripture is it they preach? such as they make their
markettes of, and sell for money, profaned with all kind of Idolatry and
superstition, corrupted with the idle devises and co^stitutions of man's brain,
serving only for the advancement and commodity of the Pope and his
champions, without bringyng any quietness to afflicted consciences, or any
perfect knowledge and instruction in the mysteries of Christian religion: for
all there sermons and actions respect no other end.

And now I leave it to the consideration of your Majesty (most mighty
Prince) to weighe and consider what kind of knowledge of God this people can
have engraven in their hearts that have such Pastors and Schoolers to teach
them? What m^ner of knovvleg^ of God is in papaci^
For mine own part I must needs confess, that the same God that by his
holy Spirit has wrought this alteration in me, has been defaced by them, and
spoiled of his greatest and most marvelous works, Mercy and Justice. For
these lying Doctors and teachers made him a cruel and severe God against such
as could not make satisfaction for their sins with money. And if their
doctrine be true which teach us that those me^ are more acceptable in the sight
of God, that make sumptuous and magnificiall foundations of Abbeys and
Monasteries, that make large and ample donations for the maintenance of the
same, that build Chapels and Aultars in Churches, that find lights and give
silver lamps, that give money to the maintenance of the Quyer, that found
perpetual chaunteries and Diriges, that give fair and rich suites of Copes:
woe is me therefore, what shall become of poor laborers and handycraftes men,
of the poor ploughman and others, that get their living hardely by sweat of
their brows, that neither have any money to bestow to such uses, nor scarcely
sufficient to buy bread for their family? with what face or cou^tenau^ce dare
they presume to apeare in presence before such a golden God, and ^ne so
desirous of presents, having nothing to present him withal? Surely the mercy
that such a God will show shall ^xtend but to a few. Again me thought that
that God of whom those Doctors did preach unto us, was not perfectly just and
rightuous, that would pardon the transgressions against his holy will and
commandment, for gold or silver or other presents whatsoever, considering
that it is a great shame for a man of any credit or honesty to be brybed
with rewards, and to pardon a trespass for money. For what can be more vile,
The blasphemous co^seque^ces of the Popish doctrine in their opinions they
hold of the Deity.
or deserve greater reproach, than that a man should make the tra^sgressing of
the law, but a money matter? And yet the God of the Papists according to their
doctrine (as though he were not contented and satisfied with the everlasting
sacrifice and obedience of his son Christ) sells his grace and favor for
money, is content to pardon the greatest and most horrible offenses that can
be, to him that gives most money, and in respect of masses, oblations,
pilgrimages and such like babl^^ content to be reconciled unto us, and to b^
at a perfect unity and atonement wi^^ us. Whereupon I gathered and concluded,
that the conscience of man should (...) the sight of such a God be in a
perpetual and continual fear and terror, always restless, hopeless of
finding any place o^ stay in the mercies of God. But if any b^ the direction of
Gods holy spirit had any assurance and certain affiaunce in such goodness
and mercies of God, he was straightway called arrogant and presumptious
heretic that durst presume to put such a confidence in God, who was so wayward
and dangerous to please, that the most precious presents that can be will
scarce content him. The which things I perceived to tend wholly to this end
and purpose, to keep them in continual awe and despair, and by this means
to compel men to run with quaking and tremblyng consciences to their
confession, Incertenty and weakness of faith bree^eth distrust and despair
of grace.
as to a most safe and holy sanctuary. And to keep them in this perplexity,
they did abuse many places of Scripture framed always to their own ^yne and
profit. For this doctrine ^the stir men to seek to merit the ^race of
God by all means, which these ^edlers make their markets of and retayle (...)
every body. Moreover me thought ^e coules and hoodes of Friars and Monks, the
Vestimentes and Belles ^f the Churches and such like, were (as I may term
them) Mercers signs to direct a man by where he might see ^hoyce of such
wares, and buy the grace and favor of God of what sort or price it pleased
them. And what kind of faith then does your Majesty think that these men
can have, which being blind themselves, follow them that be blind guydes? A
definition of faith after the Romish doctrine.
For their doctrine of faith in effect is, that it is nothing but a certain
persuasion imprinted and settled in the heart of man, by means whereof they
hold for a suertie that what soever the Popes holiness, the Cardinales and
the rest of the Clergy do and believe (for these say they are the Church)
that same is ye very will of God. And this faith they call Fidem implicit^ that
is to say, the common and general fai^ meaning hereby that we may not be
^quisitiue of the Articles and points of religion, but that we must depend
upon ^ther men's faith, and believe as they b^leeue. Moreover if the mind of man
we^ at any time troubled and out of quiet, other by the threatenings of the
law, or b^ the guilte of our own consciences for o^ misdeedes having not
understood the meruellous force of faith in Christ, an^ the free
justification that comes by him I beseech you what plaster did they apply
to our wounded consciences? The Popes playsters and remedies for sin.
For soot^ we must make confession of our sins t^ them, and make a general
rehersall of a our misdeedes, and leave not out one, bu^ shriue our selves
wholly of al. The which thing besides that it is a very hard and a difficulte
thing to do, will sooner drive a man to desperation, than yield to our
afflicted souls any kind of comfort and consolation: except perhaps some
special men of learning and discretion which know the true use of confession,
do qualify the matter some manner of ways. But (...) concerning the matter of
our free iu^fication and reconciliation with God ^rough the blood of our
savior Jesus ^hriste, not a word I warrant you ther^, for it brought them
neither morsel (...) their mouth nor penny to their purse. ^ouching
repentance, how many sub^le points and nice quiddities have they ^uised of
their own brain quite and ^eane against the word of God? to the and to
flatter the rich and wealthy of the world, and to lull them asleep in their
own sins and filthy abominations, Contrition is the deep sorrow of the
heart and dread of conscience springyng from the knowledge of our sins. The
Doctrine of Attrition nourishes sin.

Attrition is a motion in man, moving to the disliking of sin.


teaching them that although they have ^o perfect Contrition of heart for their
sins, that before God it is sufficient to have a little Attrition, that is to
say, a kind of disliking of themselves, for that they had a pleasure in
wickedness and sin, and in continuyng therein. This Attrition ^oyned with a
little shrifte was a mean and an emboldening, as me thought, and a kind of
provocation of thieves to continue in their theft, adulterers in their
adultery, and of other wicked persons to commit sin and to continue in the
sam^ For they bear the people in hand no^withsta^ding all this, that they
might ha^^ a ready and speedy way to heaven, and r^^ post if it pleased them
so they would pa^ for it, and if they could not reach thith^ without a bayte,
they should be sure (...) meet with no worse an hostery by the way than
Purgatory. The which pla^ the Devil and his Ministers have erected (...)
rob Christ of al his gestes, and to defraude the^ of that heavenly banquet
tha^ he has freely prepared upon the Aulta^ of his cross, by offering up his
body ther^ for a sacrifice and sheeding his most innoce^^ blood a propitiation
for our sins. Bu^ as concerning Justification and Sanctification of man, and
the inward affection of the heart, which God specially requires of his
children, these Preachers speak not one word. For so often as they preached of
good works, they named unto us, works meritorious, works that justified, and
of Supererogation, which they said were acceptable before their God, who (as
they feign him) is better pleased when we eat fish than flesh, The
superstitious works of the Papists.
when (...) go woolward than when we wear a ^ne^ shyrt: when we sleep upon a
straw ^dde than upon a bed of down: when ^e go a long pilgrimage, as to S.
James of ^mpostella, or some other such Idol, ^an if we go a short journey to
any other ^e. As for true faith, such as works (...) Charity or sure and
steadfast hope, or ^rfect love, which is more careful for ^e commodities of
other tha^ for his own, (...) mortifying the old man with whom we must keep
a continual conflict and battle, God (say they) was not so greatly careful.
By this bayte (most mighty Prince) is the most part of Christendom ^oth
trained into the Church of Rome and ^etayned therein, for these teachers have
very great care over the body but none at all over the soul, yt is to say,
are very ^arefull in outward ceremonies, wherein ^he more busy the better
Christian, the more Hypocrite the deuouter is he accounted and more religious.

As for the matter of regeneration and new birth in Christ, No regeneration
without faith.
they declare evidently, that they never received benefit the of, nor so much
as conceived the misteri^ For they do only inquire thereof at t^^ tune of
their baptism, when the infa^ has neither sense nor vnderstandyn^ nor will,
nor faith to receive Christ, a^ yet are they as proud and as brag (...) may
be, and by their doctrine make oth^ to grow in like pride, and bring them
(...) belief that they have put upon the^ Christ undoubtedly, because they
ha^ been outwardly washed with the visibl^ Element, and that the kingdom of
he^uen is theyrs of duty, after they have r^ceyued the Sacrament of Baptism
though they never had any sense or perceuerance of the sprinckling of the blou^
of Christ, nor that testimony of a go^ conscience that S. Peter requires of
the^ which be baptized in Christ and sprinkled with the deawe of this grace.
Bu^ how many ways this Sacrament i^ abused and profaned, for brevity sak^
I will omit to speak of at this present. Yet may it please your grace thus
much to consider, to what great boldness an^ impudencye these workers of
iniquity ^re grown with practice, and profess to ^oniure devils out of the
bodies of in^ants (whom God reckneth among his ^wne) and that with the
unsavory breath ^f their corrupt stomach by laying ^pittle upon their faces,
casting salt in their mouths, anointing their forhead and shoulders with
filthy oil, as thou^he Christ our savior had at any time ^nstituted any such
thing.

I saw moreover, that instead of con^^rmation used in time paste in the
pri^itiue Church, to strengthen the noui^es in the faith by some Cathechisme
and exposition of the articles of Chri^tianitie, such as was thought most
^pte and convenient for that purpose, re^pecting their capacities, there came
in ^lace a foolish and an apishe imitation ^f the like, or to term it more
aptly, a ^ery ridiculous counterfayting of the ^ame. The Popish manner of
confirming children.
For the Bishop arrayed with his Rontificalibus does first bind the childs
^orheade that is to be confirmed, or does ^lindfold him rather, and then gives
him a blow on the cheek to put him in mind that he departed from under
his hands, and received of him confirmation, the blind to follow the blind
that way which should lead them to destruction. And this abominable
ceremonye they are not ashamed to call a Sacrament of the new Testament, and
set it in like place and degree with those which Christ himself had
instituted.

Of like presumption and arrogance I perceived likewise that they had delte in
the case of marriage, The solemnization of marriage, a civil matter, and of mere
policy.
the first institution whereof, albeit, it did proceed from God, yet is it a
matter civil and politic. For it may be contracted and solemnized before
the civil Magistrates, as well as in the face of the congregation: forasmuch as
it imports no other thing, but that the people may understand that the
coupling is just and lawful, their faith and truth being plight on both parts
by each of them to the other, and the banes openly asked, before that the whole
Church be sufficiently advertised thereof. Whereas these good schoolmaisters of
ours do affirm that matrimony is a Sacrament: not of any zeal ^hey have of
giving that honor to that ^oly institution (which call married folks worldly
and carnal and imperfect Chri^tians) but because they would raise some
^duantage to themselves of every thing that they might get any profit by, and
therefore they say it is no lawful mari^ge, except the Priest have his share
in ^oney. And who sees not most mani^stly these men's arroga^t and shameless
^^pudency, which contemn, and disprayse that honorable estate of holy
wedlock, (...) the end that they might advance, and bring in estimation
their filthy and ^ncleane single life, and the abhomi^able vows of their
counterfaite cha^tie, verifying in themselves the same ^hyche has been long
a go foretold ^y the holy Apostle: and on the over side do term it by the
name of (...) Sacrament, 1. Tim. 4.
that they may make their ^^ynes the greater. Or is there any ^yng that they
will be afraid and ashamed to attempt, that where Christ has instituted
only two Sacraments, Ceremonies turned into Sacraments.
have presumed to make five more, and of certain holy ceremonies which the
ancient fathers used with great devotion and reverence, and with good
discretion, they have made their gain, and set the sacraments to sale,
promising grace and salvation by such means; having no one word in scripture
for their warrant that the promise of God is joined to any of these their
new invented Sacraments.

Touching the blessed Sacrament of the Lords supper (merciful God) how many
abuses did I manifestly see brought into the holy mystery by the blind
superstition and arrogant presumption of men, in the celebration whereof like
as they use in baptism, al things are said and song in a barbarous and an
unknown language, so that they which had n^ knowledge in latin could understand
nothing, but only see a few gesture like iuggling knackes. The Mass a
sacrifice propitiatorye.
They persuaded the people that the Mass was a sacrifice propiciatory, that is
to say, that ye wrat^ and vengeance of God was appeased, and himself
reconciled therewyth, and by this means, sold the graces and blessings of God
for money to men desperate and vnrepenta^t. Besides this, they made this medicine
serve to satisfye for the sin of all men both for quick and dead, a doctrine
no where to be found in all the holy scriptures. And to the end to perfect
their iniquity, and to accomplish it fully, they taught us further that these
massemongers and sacrificers had such power and ability committed unto the^,
that immediatelye after the words of consecration (as they call them) or
sacramental words, and by the virtue thereof, they were able to fetch Christ
from heaven with a trice both flesh, blood, and bone, and the same Christ
break in pieces with their hands, offer, sacrifice, eat, tear with their
teeth, and devour, whereas he is now immortal, impossible, omnipotent and
everlasting, The council of Tre^^ in the time of Iul. 2. the 2. and. 3. Canon.
and death has henceforth no power over him.

Besides this, in the administration of this Sacrament the people was defrauded
of one part, to wit, of the wine, the Sacrament of his blood, contrary to the
prescript form and institution of Christ: the which albeit the fathers in the
late council of Trent did acknowledge and confess, yet notwithstanding (say
they) for certain special causes, the holy mother Church of Rome has
determined the contrary, that it shall not be lawful for all Christians to
receive the cup which is the Sacrament of Christ's blood.

Moreover I was fore agreeued to behold the abominations committed there in the
adoration of a piece of bread, and that with such kind of worship and honor,
as God by his commandment has specially reserved to himself. This God of
theirs made of bread and dowe was carried I say, about in solemn procession
through town and streates, with candle and torch light, with ioly chaunting
and iangling of bells, it was carried to ye sick and diseased, it was a
preservative against the plague, it was good against all thunder and lightning
by land, against storms and tempest by sea, it was carried about the ^ields to
make the^ yield the more fruit, to drive away caterpillars and other such
venomous worms, which did destroy, and eat up the corn in the ear: to be
short I did see a horrible and a monstrous many of abuses, Idolatries,
superstitions, buying and selling that the Monks and Priests used, and all
for vile lucres sake. And thus briefly out of a number of the like, I have
sorted a few (most noble Prince) wherewyth I was moved (or to say more
truly) enforced to forsake your Realm of Spain, to my great grief, as
being my native country, the soil yt I was borne and bred in, where I had ye
comfortable presence of my friends and kinsfolk, being not in very perfect
health, but having a erased body, disposed to diverse infirmities.
Notwithstanding I shro^k not for all this, but took this travail upon me, and
was content voluntarily to go into exile, to the end that I might bestow the
residue of my life in the declaration and exposition of the causes of this my
departure.

Whereof if I should have chanced t^ have been prevented by death, yet my
dying in a strange Country should be an argument and testimony to them that
should remain behind me, of what affection I was toward true religion, and
so should amounte at the least to a secret profession of my faith,
accompting it better for me to suffer any kind of aduersitye with Gods chosen
people, than to continue among the flesh pottes of Egypt, Heb. 11.
and there to cherish my body, and to hang upon their sleeves, and to be under
their countenance, which delight in nothing so much as in the savor thereof,
seeing such things (as says the Apostle) be brittle and last but a little
season, and vanishe away like smoke.

And what shall it avail any man, I beseech your Majesty, if he win the whole
world, and wallow in all kind of worldly pleasure at will, and lose eternal
life, yea and his own soul. For if the delights and pleasurs of this world be
momentane and short, then surely our miseries and calamities that we suffer
here ^n this world manfully in the defense of ^he glory of God, are less than
the ex^eeding ioys that God has prepared for ^s, whereof he has given us good
assu^aunce.

Among the rest of their abuses and ^eremonies which be infinite,
Worshipping of Images.
if a man ^houlde go about to peruse them al, I had almost unawares
ouerpassed the worshipping of Images and Crosses, a matter very necessary to be
remembered, considering the horrible Idolatrye that they brought in under the
cloak and color of certain blind distinctions of Latria, dulia, hyperdulia,
in worshippyng stocks and stones with honor and reverence, not alonely the
Images of their Saints (as they call them) but the reliks, and the counterfaits
of such Images as have been heretofore at any time, or in any place had in
reputation, as appears manifestlye by the Images of our Lady (as they call
her) of Montserat and Guadaloup, which are not only sought unto with great
devotion and reverence, but also their pictures and portrature drawn to the
likeness and similitud^ of the same Idols. Besides this, the thin^ that I
marvelled at most of all, was t^ see where diverse pictures represente^ all one
Idol, yet one to be had in more piece of the common people than the other,
with more devotion to be sought unto and worshipped, more richly presented
with jewels and ornaments, as it is easy to see throughout your whole Realm of
Spain.

The vovvs of Nuns and Friars
And here it may please your Majesty also to call to mind their doctrine of
Monkery and cloystering, and their vows of perpetual chastitye, obedience and
poverty, the which of what soete and condition they be, and how much they
avail and help a man to the better serving of God, I refer all men to the
consideration of their dissolute and unclean lives, that take these vows
upon them, to judge and to esteem.

But that which is most worth the ^^rking, and ought least to be
forgotten, is that these false and lying do^ures, to the end that their rules
and ^ders of Monkery should be the more ^dde in price and estimation with all
^en, have so far passed the limits and ^undes of modestye and shamefaste^sse,
that they have not been ashamed (...) affirm, and to preach openly, that ^e
profession of Monkerye does purge man as perfectly, and makes him as ^ghteous
before God, as Baptism, Monkery 2 second baptism by the Papists religion.
^d that other Christians are but once ^ly regenerate, but Monks and Nuns
^gyther with their coules and vailes ^e receive (as it were) a second or
double regeneration: O most hor^ble blasphemy, and intolerable in chri^ian
ears, what a deuillishe arrogance and presumption is this, to be so mala^erte
to compare the dreams and fan^asticall rules of Benet, Frauncis, Domi^icke and
such like, with the most sa^red institution of Baptism, yea and ^o place
them in like degree therewyth, ^heras our Lord and savior Jesus Christ has
instituted and ordained Baptis^ for a signification and a seal to us that true
oblation and w^shing by (...) which Christ the immaculate lam^ that was
slain for our sakes, Look in the books of Caiet.
did wa^ and cleanse his Church, by sheeding h^ most precious blood. But if
any m^ would enter straightly into the exam^nation and trial of their lives,
that ha^ been so often washed and regenerate. I fear me he should find it too
hot a ^uour to suffer any time without a spe^ all good perfume. And therefore
to spea^ my fancy briefly, this their filthy a^ unclean life is a great
evidence a^ proof, that by this second regenerati^ they are become the im^s
of the Devil that before peradventure had some marks and tokens of adoption
in Christ The which thing was no small grief^ unto me to see the good and
godly ord^^ and profession of Monks that was (...) time paste to be so fondly
defiled by the^ of our times, and so quite altered from their first
institution. For there is no^ so ignorant, that has bin any thing conuersaunt
in any antiquities and aunti^ histories, The first original of Monkerie. Look
in the tripartite history
but he may see that the per^uted Christians in the first infancy of ^e Church
to avoid the cruelty of the ^thnike Princes, and to the end they ^yght serve
God with more freedom, and with less fear, did accustomablye ^ee into desert
places: whereupon they ^oke their names at the first, and were ^alled Monks,
as men solitary and se^uestred from the company of men, to ^ue aparte from
other in more perfect ^tudy, and meditation of Christ's religion, and in more
safety and security to ^nstruct others in the same. Afterward ^n process of
time the sages of that time ^o^sidering the great use that the Church should
have of learned men to teach and instruct the people in the Principles and
precepts of Christianity, caused certain schools to be erected, and for the
better training up of youth, both in the knowledge of holy scripture, and
under good discipline, they did place such men as lived solitary before
incertaine Colleges or Monasteries, to this end and purpose, Chrysostom in
his book that he vvrote against them that dispraise the solitary life of
Monks.
that out of those places as from storehouse they might alwais choose a^ and
able ministers and pastors for the congregation to preach the gospel a bro^
among the people. But after corruption and ignorance was crepte in, and th^^
Poperye had gotten the upper hand Gods word was laid aside and neglected,
and the youth bestowed all their time in chaunting and howling both day and
night, and in so blind ceremonies full of superstition and Idolatry,
contenting themselves with a coule, the badge, and cognisaunce of their second
regeneration. Is it possible then that there should be any man living either so
far from God, or so careless of his own salvation, that beholding daily
with his eyes so great and so horrible a corruption, and deprauation of all
things, and knowing them to be contrary to the Majesty of God, odious in his
sight and abominable, will notwythstandyng continue therein, and be partaker
with others of their wickedness. I pass ever, that the Gospel was made a
plain marchaundise an open shop thereof kept in Chur^s to buy and sell, and to
exchange (...) other wares, the most precious blood Christ.

For what other thing (I beseech (...)) are their proclamations, and
In^gences, Remission and forgiveness ^ynnes, dispensations, processions, (...)
rogations, bulls and such other ^e, but an open sale of Christ's blood, (...)
it were by the drum and standerd? (...) so much that the dead can not rest
^ietly by them, but they will have ^em in by hook or by crook one way (...)
an other. For as though it were a ^^all matter to devour, and at a mor^ll to
choppe up the quick to gnawe (...) their bones (and as the Prophet ^yth) to
break them in pieces, and ^st them in a pot to make themselves ^oath
wythall, they will also resem^le the Crows, What it is to devour the dead.
and pray upon ^e dead carcasses. For what is to ^ee called a deuouryng of
men a live if ^hys be not?

That no man be he never so pore without present pay might either have his ch^^
christened or bishopped (as they term (...) nor any be priested nor married, nor
^^ceiue the Communion, nor be anoyl^ lastely, (which is a most evident
arg^ment of the insatiable covetousness (...) these greedy cormorants) might
not b^ buried and laid in the earth, which (...) common to al men, except
these fellow had their money paid before hand: b^ specially if a poor man
ought any pe^tithe, first fruit, or any other Church duty, he should not
have Christian b^riall before he had satisfied therefore And then also I
beseech you what chantic did they show to the dead? after a^ this forsoothe
they would make the executours pay for their Masses and D^^ges for their
singing and chaunting, for cross and cross cloth, for bell and candle light,
for soul knells, for sensing, fo^beare and bear cloth, with infinite other
polling recknings, that these shaven Syres, and these pedling Mercers ha^
learned in the school of Satan their Syre^ And this is the cause (most
mighty Prince) why a number have willingly ^parted out of your Majesty's
Realm (...) Spain, sorowing to see before their ^^es, so many and so
horrible abuses in ^e Popish Church, and having no hope (...) redress in so
curelesse a case: for such (...) durst either priuyly or openly make ^eyr
moan to others, or declare their ^dgement in religion ^asted the Inqui^^ours
tyranny therefore: some being exe^^ted by fire quick, some strangled to ^^athe,
some perishing upon the rack, and other their torments inexplicable, ^me by
the filth and corruption of the prison, others most cruelly entreated at ^he
Gaolers hands, and yet of all the ^est, this is most slanderous and grea^^st
dishonor to your Majesty, that all ^^ese tyrannies are countenaunced with ^our
authority, and by virtue of your ^ighnesse commission: as the common ^^ying
is, that your Majesty is the au^hor thereof, and the Inquisitours but ^oure
instruments. For they say that ^our Majesty has straightely charged and
commanded, that all such persons as shall hold opinion that these thinge^
that be above named be abuses, and desire to live in that freedom of
conscienc^ wherein God has placed us by the Gospel of his son Christ,
should suffer imprisonment, tortures, death in most^ cruel sort that can be
devised. And therefore it behooves your Majesty greatly (most gracious Prince)
to take notice of this cause: (which our adversaries, for ye respect of their
own private lucre, seek by all means to keep from your knowledge fearing yt our
cause being known they gains would cease) before your grace authoryze by
Commission such vniust^ Judges, and not to permit that they should sit of
life and death over them, who can best declare to your grace the subtle
practices of this generation, because they know them best. Kings and civil
Magistrates ought to hear and determyne the causes of such as are accused
for religion.


It is reported in histories that Hadrian the Emperor, who knew not Christ, nor
his religion, nevertheless would not reiecte the supplications, and bylles of
petition exhibited unto him by the Christians. Neither did Pontius Pilate that
Jew, enter into judgment of ^ure Savior Christ, before he had ^y orderly
Process, and as it were ^y due form demanded of the par^ye him self, what
his cause was, ^utting apart out of the place of iudge^ente all his accusers.

Festus and Felix two chief Rulers among the Romans, and Lieutenauntes of
the Prouynces, would ^ot condemn S. Paul till they had with patience
heard him plead his own cause.

Neither would your most noble progenitoure and late Emperor Charles the
fyfthe, of most famous memory, be quiet in his mind, before ^ee had
heard Luther speak for ^ymselfe in his Maiestyes own presence. And also (as
it is reported of ^enne of very good credit,) did pri^ately seek to
understand the whole ^ate of his cause at Luthers own ^outhe.

Whereupon Pope Paulus the third of that name, began to have him more than
half in a ielousy, and to conceive some displeasure toward him frowned upon
him foully therefore, in so much that he let not to threaten the Emperor t^
remember him for suffering an heretic to speak in his presence, though in his
own cause. The which is an evident argument of a full weak and an unjust
quarrel, when a man refuses to have his cause referred to the debating and
determinations of indifferent judges. For if the Pope and his Clergy maintain
a righteous quarrel, why dare he not refer it to the judgment of Kings and
Princes? why flees he the trial thereof: why is he afraid to come to
conference, and have his cause freely debated in a general council, where the
controversies of religion might be debated and disputed of, and every man be
heard to speak his opinion according to the truth of the Gospel, without
fear or danger of their tyranny? What impediment was there think you, why the
East churches of Greece, Macedonia, Asia, Africa, Constantinople, and Antioche
would not give their consent to the primacie of the ^pedo me, not give their
consent, nay (...) at moved the^ with might and maine ^withstande that
ambitious nation of (...) Romish Supremacy, by virtue ^^ereof (say they we
may displace kings ^o Emperors from their Kingdoms (...) Empires, we may
spoil them of ^^ir Crowns, we may take the sword ^t of their hands, and
dispose all that ^^me at our own pleasures, and at our ^illes give the spoil
thereof where it ^^easeth us: And yet Princes and Po^^ntates being drunk with
the Babilonicall harlot, do kiss his feet, honor ^im in earth like a God,
and so do term ^im the God of the earth, their most ho^ father and supreme
Bishop, and be^^g falsely persuaded that he can not ^^re, do therefore think
that the poor ^rotestants are justly condemned by his ^ome, because they will
not fall down and worship the enemy of God, thinking that all Princes may with
very good iu^tice, and with a just conscience execute ^ll things that are
commanded by him, and that the inquisitours likewise m^ do the same by virtue
of their commision.

O merciful God, what a blyndne^ is this? O how sharp are thy iudgmen^ (O
Lord) that hang over our heads, the men being worse blinded inwardly, as in
more gross and palpable mists of i^noraunce, than the outward mistes a^
darkness that the people of Egypt we^ in, should notwithstanding think the
did as perfectly see the truth as the Su^ at middaye, and on the other side
iudg^ them to be blind that have the true an perfect light, even the spirit
of Christ* give light to their understanding. Who senses also and
vndersta^dyngs they da^ go about to blind, and to captiuate lea^ happily they
should epsy their iugling and treacheries, nay pluck their ey^ rather out
of their heads, molest, vex, di^quiet, torment, kill and slay those by fin^ and
sword, and by all kind of torments whom God accompteth to be of hy^ flock,
and has been maruellously careful and tender over to bring them up, to
foster and cherishe them, and (...) increase their number, and for whose ^ke
Jesus Christ the everlasting son (...) the almightye father has shed his
^oste precious blood to work their re^^emption and salvation. And then began
(...) thus to think secretly with my self. What meaning have these fellows
with ^^em? If we be heretics (as they ac^ompt us to be) why have they no
com^assion of our souls, forasmuch as they ^eeke not only not to save our
bodies, but work our utter destruction? Why do they put us to death,
perseuering in our opinions and judgments, which they ^all Heretical,
especially being per^waded as they are, that our opinions be damnable? The
Inquisitours labor to destroy both body and soul.
Why labor they not rather to teach us the truth, and to bring us back into
the right pathe again? Why are they not contented to spoil us of our lives,
but imagine how they may do it in most despitefull and cruel sort that
can be devised, to the end, that they might drive men into desperation, whose
salvation they might drive men into desperation whose salvation ought of
Christian charity to be most dear unto them. Now^ surely so it has pleased
God to order it, that these men should bestirre them i^ this sort like furies
and helhounds, that they may declare themselves to be the seed and
generation of Satan their Sire, who has been a murderer from the very
beginning, the brood of Cain subject to the curse, of whom God in the last
day at his coming to judgment, will ask a strayghte account for the
innocent blood of his Saints shed here in earth by them, and revenge all the
whole, from innocent Abel, to the very last of his Prophets and Martyrs. As
our savior Christ does most manifestly declare, speaking to the Pharisees:
Verily I say unto you, it shall come upon this generation from the blood of
just Abel, to the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom you have
slain betwixt the Temple and the Altar. Wherefore in most humble manner, I
pray and beseech your Majesty (most gracious sovereign) not to defile nor
embrewe your ^ndes with the blood of your most in^cent subjects, nor to permit
and suffer ^y longer that these limbs and mini^ers of the Devil, the deadly
enemies (...) God should abuse your gentleness and good inclination any
longer. Let not (...) great and so horrible cruelties be pra^ised and
countenaunced with your au^horitie. Cast not the sheep committed unto you by
God, into the mouths of those most ravening Wolves, leave not ^ehinde you so
lamentable a memorial to your posterity, that your grace should be registered
among them that volunta^ily, and after their own lust and pleasure, have by
all means persecuted the true Christians, the children of God, and put them to
death, let it never be said that good men have been unjustly oppressed
without cause known, but only pretended contrary both to Gods law and man's,
and that in your Majesty's most Princely throne and consistory. For besides
that this corrupt kind of dealyng in the seat of judgment will seem most
monstrous most detestable and most unreasonable to the^ that shall follow:
there is a worse thing greatly to be feared, least God the Lord of hosts the
most mighty and strong defense of Israel, will lay so great and so
horrible Plagues, upon these most cruel and unjust Judges, and upon their
issue, their realms and dominions, that it shall remain as an example for all
posterity that shall come after, and the memory of them shall not be worn out
while the world endures. The miserable ends of them that persecuted the
Church.
No more then is the memory of Pharao that was drouned in the depth of the sea,
or of Nabuchodonozor that was transformed into a brute beast, or at the least
(which is as much in effect) given over to brutish and beastly delyghts and
exercises, or of Holofernes, whose head was stricken from his shoulders by the
hands of a seely woman, or of Herod, that was eaten up with worms, of Nero,
Caligula, Iulianus and other like tyra^ts. It is therefore a good lesson in this
case to beware, and to be wise by other men's examples. For it is a great grace
of God to learn by the mishaps of other men, as it were at the hands of a
scolemaster what is best for our own behoofes. The which your grace may
easily learn (most mighty prince) if it may plese you to cast your eye aside,
and to behold the miserable calamities which in your memory have happened unto
them that have persecuted and vexed the church of god. Nam tua res agitur
paries cu^ proxmus ardet, as the common saying is, When thy neighbors house is
on fire, take heed of thine own.

But to return to my purpose, these are the chief occasions that enforced me
to leave Spain, and to betake my self to the wide world, and to wander as a
Pilgrim and stranger in foreign countries. In the which travail for the
space of ten years, besides great sickness, I have suffered extreme
Poverty, and have been constrained to become as an infant again, and to learn
to speak strange languages to be able to understand others, and to express
mine own mind. The which things notwithstanding, trusting in the mercies of
God, I have both willingly and patiently accepted and suffered, knowing
assuredly that the Disciples and soldiers of Christ cannot be in better
estate and condition than their Master and Captain has bin. And this is the
cause why the world that is naturally inclined to malice and spite, refuses
to be at league with me. For if I were a worldling, then surely would the
world embrace me as one of his brood, would commend and extol me, would
set me alofte in honor and authority, would endue me with riches, and would
yield me at full al other commodities and pleasures, as it is accustomed to do
to his own. But I for my part render unto almighty God most hartye thanks, for
that it has pleased him freely, and of his mere grace without any desert of
mine, to imprinte in my heart true and perfect faith, by the which I do not
only steadfastly believe in his dearly beloved son, and in his Gospel, but
also do manifestly abide and suffer al things for his name sake, and am made
partaker of his Cross. Howbeit in all this my long travail there is nothing
that seems to me so unseemly, as that such as be about your Majesty and
of your Counsel should use such diligence, sparing neither for labor and
cost to apprehend, and to clappe in prison a number of us Spaniards that have
fled your Realm, and one also among the rest. For it is manifest and very
apparent, that by them there have bin diverse spies and searchers sent abroad
to apprehend us, and that there have been no small sums of money spent about
the same. And yet notwithstanding, God has so blinded them, that neither they
knew, ne being present among them, nor wist not well either what to do or
speak, for the which cause the Lords name be praised for ever. For neither
have I hid my self in corners in this time of my absence, nor lurked in
obscure places, but God has given me such spirit, and such boldness of
courage, that neither in Italy, Germany, France, Sauoy nor presently being in
your Majesty's low Country of Flaunders, I have either disguised self or
dissembled my religion. Nay I have openly, freely and boldly, preach^^ the
Gospel in the most famous Cities where I have travailed, and in a great and
wonderful audience, yea before the most noble Princes, and most honorable
personages of all Europe, with the liking and commendation of many, and with
good opinion and credit for my conversation. Albeit I acknowledge right well
mine own weakensse, and confess my self to be subject to many infirmities,
and guilty thereof in the sight of God, knowing that I am defended of that
most corrupt and cursed root of the old Adam, and that al my deeds of
themselves be vile and naughtye, abominable before God, and accursed unless
they be shadowed and covered with righteousness and innocence of our Lord
and savior Jesus Christ. Notwithstanding (most mighty prince) my conscience
pricketh me not for any thing yt I ought to be ashamed to show my face among
men, nor any cause I thank God to make me hide myself and keep in corners.
And when I was in Spain I thank God I did not only live there blameless, but
also void of al suspision of crime. Although I must ^eeds confess yt
fearfulness of my flesh, and natural frailty was some let and hinderaunce
unto me that I did not openly preach and profess the truth of Gods gospel at
the first, after it was revealed unto me: In so much that the Inquisitours
themselves, could not be persuaded of six months after my departure, that I
had changed my Country for religions sake, thinkyng me verily both to have a
good opinion of their proceedings, and to be a perfect Catholic after their
Romish sect. Notwithstanding these pursiuants and searchers made such ernest
pursuit after me, and that by express commandment from the Kings mouth (as
they most falsely pretended,) as they would or should have done against the
greatest thief and cutte-throate, or counterfayter of the Kings coigne or the
rankest traitor to your Majesty that could be, whereas I (god be thanked) was
free from these and all other such like offenses: as I report my self to the
Inquisitours themselves and to their own promoters, or of any of these
matters, thought I know them otherwise, and in other to specte to be my
deadly foes and adversaries. And why is that I beseech you Forsoothe I will
not believe the Pop^ and his Chapleines. And that is such (...) sore matter in
my fancy, that I think I could not ask a greater bowne at Gods hands, than
that it might be m^ chance to testify and to seal up m^ faith with the
sheadyng of my blood. I^ is causeless therefore an mine opinion, that these
furious and raging mad brayns do thirst after my blood so hotly, although
they know assuredlye that my belief and persuasion be quite contrary to
their superstitious devises and Idolatries. Moreover the power and authority
of Rulers and Magistrates seems to have certain bounds and limits within the
which it is contained, so that it reaches not so far as the mind and
conscience of man beyond the rule of Gods law, as appears more plainly by
the express rule and commandment of Christ, where he says: Give unto
Caesar that which is Cesars, and unto God that which is his. And therefore kings
and princes can require no more at their Subjects hands, than that of right
is their duty, to wit, obedience of their subjects toward them, and their
laws, the due payment of tax and tribute, and in their behalf to spare
neither body nor goods. Mary the heart and conscience and religion that rests
therein, is an other manner of matter, and is in the hands of God alone, who
guides and governs the mind of man with his holy word and scriptures,
teaching them both, what opinion we must have of him, and what kind of
worship and honor we ought to yield him. Wherefore in most humble manner, I
pray and beseech your Majesty (most merciful Prince) not to account that to
be a fault that is so far from offense, howsoever your false informers will
bear you in hand the contrary. And this sense and feeling of a pure and
upright conscience, has comforted and confirmed me from time to time, and
has brought me in case that neither I feared any indifferent Judges, nor
doubted to go into other of your Majesty's dominions, to the end that to my
power I might do good both to your Majesty, and to my fellow subjects.
Specially calling to my mind, and considering the great tumultes and
vproares, and the cruel wars that this change and reformation of religion
had caused both in Germany, Scotland and France. The which I think has
fallen upon us partly for our sins, and partly the rash boldness of some
that were in hope belike to bring their purposes to pass by contention and
strife, and being hot and egre sought to plant religion and building up of the
Church of Christ, with force and strength of arms, imagining that the same
were the means of the government and administration of a civil common wealth,
and the buildyng and maintaining of Christian religion: which being spiritual
and heavenly, needs not these contentions and tumultes for planting and
defense thereof. And therefore after my first coming into your Majesty's low
Country, being perhaps not altogether ignorant in these affairs, I did bend
the whole force of my wit in my sermons to calm and pacify the common
people, and to bring them to an unity and atonement together, exhorting them
to give themselves to peace and brotherly charity, to bear one with another,
and to forget all quarrels till it might please God so to work in your
Majesty's heart, that either in your own presence, or before some discrete
and indifferent Judges deputed by your Majesty, or in some general assemblye
of the states in Parliament your Majesty would permit your poor and
miserable subjects, to complain themselves of the tyranny that is practiced
against them, and that heavy yoke of bondage with the which they are
oppressed by the Bishop of Rome.

And truly so far as I can gather both by the talk and behavior of your
Majesty's Subjects of the low countries, they had rather choose to have free
access to make their supplications and complaints to your Majesty, and have
liberty to maintain and retain among them the Gospel of Christ, though it
cost them a great part, yea their whole substance to purchase it, than to
stoop and yield their neck to the heavy yoke of Idolatry and tyranny of the
Papists But at this present, partly for fear of war and persecution, and
partly of your highness displeasure, they are content to be quiet and to
keep silence, waiting a good time when your Majesty would be so gracious
unto them as to permit them to serve God duly, and in that sort that he
himself has in his holy word prescribed and appointed.

Wherefore (most dradde sovereign) at my first coming, my chief desire was
to teach and to persuade the people to refrain from the doing of such like
things, as before my coming had bin rashly and lightly attempted by some, to
wit from the breakyng and plucking down of Images, the ouerturnyng of Altars
and Churches, and Monasteries (as they call them.) For one thought it was very
reasonable and convenient for us, if we will serve and worship God, John. 4.
and call upon him as he has appointed us to do, that is in spirit and in
truth, to permit and suffer other also to live somewhat after their own
liking, and forasmuch as they are persuaded, that they can not without offense
to God reject these superstitious and Jewish ceremonies, to let them alone
there with for a time, and to take their fill thereof, yelding for a season to
their infirmities and ignorance, and praying to god for them, that it would
please him to lighten their understandings with the shining beams of his
glorious Gospel. And after that by the good examples of our modesty and our
conversation of life, to move, to allure, and to inflame them to embrace true
religion, and forsake their old Idolatrye, and false service of God.

And because your Majesty may briefly understand the chief articles of our
religion wherein we dissent from the Pope and his popelings, I will keep the
order well near in declaring my mind concerning true religion, that I have
heretofore observed in the discourse which I have made in detecting their
errors and abuses, the which declaration shall only contain that doctrine
which I have learned and taken out of the word of God and holy Writ, and
endeavored myself accordingly, to preach and set forth to your Majesty's
subjects. And for brevity sake, I will not debate nor amplify the proofs and
reasons that I have for the confirmation of our religion, but will briefly and
summarily, and by the way (as it were) will lightly touch the arguments taken
out of the holy scripture, that make for the proof of our part, and the
disproofe of our adversaries. Whereby it shall remain as a testimony to our
posterity, and appear most manifestly, that the inquisitours of Spain have
used great injustice, and abused their commission in persecuting me for an
heretic, and therewith also your Majesty may well perceive what kind of
doctrine it is that I would have preached unto your subjects.

And because perhaps it would be too ^ong and too tedious to entreat of all
the points particularly that are at this day called into controversy, I will
only handle five or six of the chief articles, and most necessary of the
religion we profess, whereupon all Christ's religion wholly depends, and is
sustained: and that your Majesty may also more easyly judge the odds betwixt
our doctrine and our adversaries: I will as briefly as is possible, lay before
you their proofs and arguments taken out of their own works, and specially
out of that book which one Ruardus Taperus Ruardus Taperus.
a divine of Louane chief inquisitour for the low Country, has in the name
and behalf of all the Divines, and Romish Clergy dedicated unto your
highness, the which seeing it is authorized by your Majesty's privilege, I
trust all men of that part will be contented to take the proofs and
confirmatio^s of the Romish reilgion out of ye book, as out of the storehouse
of their divinity. For at this day, it is a very hard and a difficulte matter
to gather any certain doctrine out of the rest of popish divines,
considering they do in so many points dissent and disagree among themselves,
one condemnyng an other, in so much that certain famous Universities have
especially noted and coted the errors of these men that were accounted the
sure stakes and pillars of the Church of Rome, as for example, Thomas Aquinas,
the Master of the Sentences, Durandus Scotus, and such other whom the Romish
Clergy has in greatest price and estimation.

Of the word of God, the holy scripture, and the authority thereof, and the
reading thereof in the mother tongue.
Seeing that the Church (as says the holy Apostle) is builded upon the
foundation of the apostles and prophets which is Jesus Christ, that heavenly
and everlasting word, it is reasonable and convenient, that we also should
begin the ground of our confession and faith of that word of everlasting
life, whereunto the Church leans, and wherein she reposeth her whole trust
and ^fiaunce. First and formoste, therefore ^e confess that the word of God
which ^e Grecians call (...) was before all ^ings, and from the beginning, Why
Christ was called the word. John. 1. 1. John. 1. Heb. 1. Math 2. Heb. 7.
Luke. 2.
the while both was with God, and was and is ^od it self. The same word we
con^sse was incarnate, and conuersaunt, and continuing here among us a long
^me, to the end to reconcile mankind (...) his father, and to preach unto
them, those name was called Jesus, that ther^y might be signified unto us,
that re^mption and everlasting salvation was ^^rchased for us by the benefit of
him, ^he same surnamed Christ, to signify unto us the anointing of the
everlasting ^riesthood of his kingdom that endures ^r ever, Hebr. 9.
and of his most certain and true ^eaching. And forasmuch as the same ^ernall
and almighty God can neither (...) seen nor comprehended in the com^sse of
ma^s understanding, he determi^ed and perordayned to distribute, and ^stowe
upon men the treasures of his ^isedome and grace by this his Legate and
Ambassador sent from above. Where upon he is worthily termed the word o^ God,
begotten of God from everlasting and before the creation of Heaven an^ earth.
This is the same Jesus, that from the beginning spoke unto the Patria^ches and
Prophets, imparting to them the will of his father, being the very so^ of God,
the shining brightness of his fathers glory, the express Image of hy^
substance, who vpholdeth and may^tayneth all things by this his most mighty
word, and by the which all things were erected, both visibl^ and invisible.
And by this word beyn^ the eternal and lively word, we mean not any such
thing as can be either set^ down in paper, or written with ink. For our
meaning is that that word only m^^ be written with ink, which either
pr^ceeded forth of his own mouth, beyn^ here in Earth, or out of the mouths
(...) some of his ministers at his will an^ appointment. And this word to wit^
that was spoken by his mouth or by hy^ Prophets, and set down in writing, w^
al^o term, and that rightly and worthi^ by the name of the holy scripture:
^yche is the only way and means direct us to true holiness, and ther^e of
right we call it holy, to make a ^ference betwixt it and the word ^t
proceeds from man, which of the ^turall frailty and infirmitye of man,
^commonly joined with corruption ^d error.

We do moreover acknowledge ^d confess, that the same word or de^ration of
the will of God is contay^d in the books of the old and new ^estament or
covenant, which are ^yuered us by hand, to the end we ^ye know and
discern the true God ^m the false and feigned Gods and ^olles, Psalm 19. Romans
1. Hebr. 11.
which man has devised of his ^one brain. And though the contempla^n and view
of things created bring some ^ht to ye understanding of man, to make ^m to
acknowledge and confess the ^yght and power of his creator, yet is not of any
such force, as of it self ^one to be able to imprinte in our hearts the
perfect and absolute knowled^ of him, it was therefore very requi^^ and
necessary for us, both to be lightn^ with his holy spirit, and instructed
(...) his most holy word: for out of this fo^^taine issues all the knowledge
that (...) have of God, and is conveyed into ou^ mind, which otherwise could
in ^o ca^ be comprehended of men, and that is (...) true and the only means
whereby (...) may imprint and engraue in our heart the true and perfect presence
of our G^ and creator.

And that is the order that God hi^ self has appointed and observed from the
very creation of the world, and vi^ in teaching Adam and Abell to repro^ the
sin and offense of Cain, to open a^ declare his will to Noe, and afterwar^ to
his peculiar and chosen people, to who^ he would in more familiar wise and mo^
sencibly reveal and manifest hymsel^

How diversely God has revealed himself.
For God by diverse and sundry mean^ has made his will manifest unto me^ sometime
by word of mouth and speac^ proceeding from his divine substance, (...) when
he spoke to our forfathers in such ^te, as they conceived it with their
out^rde senses: sometime by the secreate ^orking of the holy spirit: sometime
dreams and visions, and yet all these ^dry means wrought one effect, to wit,
^oste sure and certain persuasion to (...) scholars, that each of these were
it ^rde, inspiration, or revelation, did al^aies carry with it an infallible
verity, ^oceeding from the secret heart and will god, who can not deceive men
no more ^an he can lay aside his Godheade from ^m.

Whereby it came to pass, that the ^atriarches and Prophets by force of ^ys
persuasion, were so confirmed and ^engthned, that such times as it pleased ^od,
they shrink not to seal up the ^ne heavenly word with the sheding of ^eir
blood: With the like faith and ^rtaine persuasion, they did likewise ^ue
some of their writyngs and monu^entes to the posterity to the end that ^yng
moved by the study thereof, we ^ght be more conuersaunt in the school by the
study thereof we might be (...) conuersaunt in the school of God, in (...)
which he will no less instruct us by (...) holy spirit, than he did in time
past (...) elders and forefathers, that thereby (...) may understand and
believe, that the has been, is, and always will be, (...) only Church, and
one only truth, tho^ it appear sometime more evident the at another: such is
the marvelous p^uidence of God, to apply himself to (...) capacities.

And that he gives unto his discipl^ and hearers, by this means we confe^
that by the ministry of that heauen^ word, which God commanded to (...)
committed to writing, and to remain (...) the posterity for ever, both in
the ty^ of the law, and of the Prophets, we c^fesse I say, that we do without
all scr^ple sincerely, and from the bottom of o^ hearts, acknowledge him to be
the tr^ God the maker and governor of al things as our forefathers in like sort
have do^ before us. We say moreover and affirm^ that this same word is the most
certain^ rule whereby to direct al our doings, and ^herto we ought to refer all
ye thoughts and imaginations of our hearts, least we ^eing deceived and led
away with the in^abilitie of our own wits do wa^der and (...) astray, through
our own fond fa^tasies imaginations. If the^ the word of God, The authority and
credit of scripture where it proceeds
and holy scripture be none other than the ^octrine proceeding out of the mouth
of God, and from his holy spirit, I beseech ^ou what can be more absurd than
to ^ake it of no greater authority, than ^he Popes and general Counsels will
e^eeme it? whereas we ought on the con^rarye rather to esteem the Counsels
^hemselues, if they represe^t the church of Christ to have al their force,
credit, and ^uthority of the word of God. Further^ore we do affirm (albeit
the spirit of God be tied and bound to no outward thin^es) that
notwithstanding that same spi^ite has both promised and determined ^o teach
the Church no new doctrine ^ther than it has taught our forefa^hers, the
which it has left remaynyng with us as a touch stone to examine and try
the true motions an^ inspirations of the holy spirit, from the false and
heathnish, and such as the lu^ and curiosity of our own fleshly fantasies
does cause and work in us.

And forasmuch as this was the mind and will of our God, that by mean^ of this
word, we should al come to knowledge hereof, we do account it sacriledg^ and
high treason, to withdraw men, either by persuasion or otherwise by authority
to inhibite the^ the reading thereof: where as it ought rather to be wished,
that as well women as me^, the ignorant as the learned (at the least such as
profess themselves to be Christians) should be occupied both day and night
in the meditation thereof, each in their own vulgar tongue, and not these
alonely, but also Turks, Jews and all other of any Country or nation
whatsoever, throughout the whole world.

The holy Scriptures are obscure to that willful and unregenerate.
But if any be so impudently bold as to accuse and blame the wisdom of God,
saying, yt he has delivered unto us his word in great darkness and
difficulty, so that many thereby fall into many great errors, we detest him as
a blasphemer, and a most false flau^derer of the Majesty of God, and one clean
void of Gods spirit, and wanting that most comfortable and shining light
whereby he might be able to behold and see the mysteries of God.

Of the knowledge of God gotten and attained by the word of God.
FRom the very beginning and creation of all things when God first made
mankind, to the end that he might be partaker of the knowledge of him, The
first degree in knowledge of God.
he ordained and appointed, as it were three forms or degrees in his school:
in the first whereof he set before his eyes to behold and take ye full view of
his wonderful work, the huge mass of the whole world, that the variety and
abundaunce, of all things should be as it were an alphabet to induce him to
the knowledge and contemplation of his might, power, Psalm. 1^.
eternity, and divinity, that as the prophet does witness, the Heavens, the
Earth, the Sun, Moon Stars, Sea, and all other things contained therein,
do night and day, and without ceassing, declare the glory and excellencye
of our Lord and God, neither is there any country or nation so brutishe or so
barbarous that is not able to conceive this both with outward eyes, and by
secret imagination, the which thing also makes them inexcusable in the sight
of God, that he may with justice condemn them, for that they having by this
means ye knowledge of God, yet did not worship him accordingly, nor show
themselves thankful for his benefits bestowed upon them, as he has deserved
at their hands.

The second degree.
To the second form or degree in this school do properly apertain those whom
god has specially and peculiarly chose^ to be his people, to whom it has
pleased him to exhibit himself to be known in most familiar wise, in the
which I do also place all dissemblers and hipocrites, which have not only
from time to time been mixed with good, but sometime also have had the chiefest
place of pre-eminence in the same congregation, and abusing their authority
have oftentimes oppressed the better sort, as for example, such were the
Scribes, Pharisees, high Priests of Jerusalem in Christ's time. And in our
days the Popes Cardinals, Popish Prelates, Monks and Priests, and the rest of
the Popish Clergy representing the same, their predecessors which altogether
ascribed themselves into this number, and most commonly frequent the
congregation to read or hear the word of God. Which whereas they ought to use
and exercise or apply to their own salvation, and the peoples, yet
notwithstanding (the more is the pity) they do so abuse, that they seek after
nothing so much as their own advantage, that they may the more easily
satisfye their own lusts, desires, and pleasures. And if any good and godly
man have the zeal and courage to discover this their trecherye, and tell them
their faults, which are cloked under the pretense of virtue, they labor by
all means possible, and practice against him all extremity they can, whose
purposes and imaginations, Sapien 2. The hateful speeches of the ungodly
against the ungodly.
the spirit of God has described in these words: Let us tread the just
men under our feet, and let us privily lay snares for him, forasmuch as he is
against us and our profitte, and casts us in the teeth with our misdeeds,
and brings our conversation to light, to our great reproach and infamy. He
vaunteth and boasts himself to have the knowledge and understanding of God,
and makes as though he were the son of God, and seems to be ordained for
this purpose, to object our faults against us: And how great a corroziue is he
to us I beseech you, having chosen a life quite contrary and diverse from us.
He esteems us no better than he does copper coigne of a counterfaite stamp,
and abhors to do or say as we say, and do as much as a man would abhor a
most filthy sincke, or the very pit of hell. As for the just and righteous
men, he reckneth them most happy even in their end, and braggeth of God to be
his father: let us therefore examine the matter, and try whether the doctrine
he preaches be true or no, and let us see what issue it will grow unto.
For if the just man be the child of God, he will defend him and take him from
amids his adversaries.

Let us seek to persecute him, and to practice all kind of punishments and
injuries upon him to try his patience: let us execute him by some infamous
kind of death, if it be true that he teaches, God will aid and assist him.
These things, and such like, have the wicked imagined in their minds, and
have erred because their own frowardness has blinded them.

These are the words and sayings of hipocrits (most mighty Prince) who
terming themselves ye examiners and inquisitors of other men's belief and faith,
have practiced no less indeed than they have promised before in words. And
to these (no doubt) the reading of holy scripture is turned into bitterness
and poison, and their eyes dazeled with the bright beams thereof do wax daily
more blind than other. For whereas by means of holy scripture the sacred
word of God, they ought to acknowledge the true God to be both just and full
of compassion: they fancy I wotte not what, but a kind of Godhead they do
imagine, that is without both these two chief virtues. And in steed of our
Lord and savior Jesus Christ, do substitute another Christ, whom they
lure from Heaven to flee to their fiste at a beck to earne themselves pence.
Moreover, forgetting that only and everlasting sacrifice of Christ, they
bring in place thereof very arrogantlye their own merits and works of
supererogation, and where they ought to extol the excellency and majesty of
Christ as it becomes them, being the very true son of God, the heavenly
Prophet, the chief and everlasting Priest, the Prince and governor of all
things, the spiritual king of godly minded consciences: yet notwithstanding
they spoil him of all the ornaments of his Princedome, his sacrifice, and his
office of prophecy, in conclusion, these miserable dissemblers, though they
enter into this second degree and order of God with others of Christ's
disciples, to hear and receive the doctrine of our Lord and Savior, yet do
they not acknowledge truly, and as they ought to do their own ignorance and
infirmity, nor that great benefitte of Christ bestowed upon mankind, as for
faith they know no whitto thereof, nor can not give and exact account by what
means we are reconciled to God.

But such as our Lord and Savior Christ has chosen, The third degree
proper only to the elect.
and by adoption made his own, they perceive and know al truth after God has
removed them out of the first and second order and degree, where they had some
small entrance and instruction, and given them more perfect learning and
understanding in the third, for it is not the knowledge it self of things
created that are obiecte to our senses (which be naturallye blind, and
dazeled before they be opened and lightened with the spirit of god) that is
able to bring a perfect, and absolute knowledge of the truth, no nor the
Scriptures themselves without the Spirit of God, can not open to us the gates
of Heaven, and the way to everlasting salvation: because the weakness and
imbecillitie of man's wit, staying it self and resting in the view and
contemplation of the bare and naked Elements or letters, is not able to reach
to the force, efficacy, and sense of the same: for the word of God is like a
sharp two edged sword, which if a man draw out against the old Adam, it
dispatcheth him altogether, and cutteth all his lusts and concupiscences: but
if a man strike with the scabbarde, it hurts not, only the stroke makes a
sound, and wou^deth not. And truly if the course of our life were in this wise,
and thus appointed it were nothing but a shadow, a counterfaite, a vizarde of
hypocrisy, which happens not to the children of God, who being endued with
Gods holy spirit, are able to judge and esteem all things, and are themselves
notwithstanding judged of none. For they have the perfect knowledge of Gods
holy will depely imprinted in their minds, the which the spirit of God has
engraven in their hearts by the reading of his holy and sacred word.

And hereof do arise (most mighty Prince) so sundry sects of religion, The
original cause of the controversies about religion.
hereof grow daily innumerable questions and controversies, and hereupon do
the ^nquisitours bend their force against ^os, as against heretics and
seducers of others, whereas we on the contrary side, are certainly persuaded
that they walk in most horrible darkness, being enemies to the glory of
God, and earnest promoters of their own vain glory, corrupters and deprauers
of the word of God, the which because they understand not aright by the
direction of his holy spirit, they refer to their own commodity and
advantage, and make it serve their own ambition, and most filthye
abominations. What can be then more shameful than to appoint such judges for
the deciding and determination of the causes of Gods children, whom so good a
father has so well instructed in his precepts and commandments, that they
have not learned it according to the dead letter, but in spirit and truth,
that and have after a sort put on Christ, by whose Gospel they are assured
that they are reconciled both to him and to his father? It rests now to
compare the doctrine of the true children of God, that are guided by his
spirit with theirs, who as they are very hipocrites indeed, so do most
falsely affirm, that they wholly depend upon the authority of the holy
scriptures, such is their blindness and ignorance, that having learned of the
wisdom of the flesh, as it were at the hands of a schoolemaister, nothing but
that which is worldly and carnal, yet notwithstanding they brag of themselves
most arrogantlye and impudentlye that they have the true knowledge and
understanding of scriptures, the which they do daily more and more corrupt
and deprave with their sophistical gloses and philosophy, or to speak more
truly with their own dreams and fantasies.

Of the creation of man, and of his estate in innocence, and fall into sin.
THe children of God, and such as are taught by his spirit out of his word do
confess, that God in the beginning ^reated man of nothing to his own Image
and likeness, that he should be ^ufre and upright, and zealous of his
glory. In the which estate of original justice (as they call it) he
continued until he of his own accord abusing that free will which God had
given him, that he might be perfect in his kind and nature, did swerve and
decline from God, and being deceived by the flattery of the Serpent, made
himself thrall to that wicked and tempting spirit.

And this voluntarye transgressing of Gods holy law and will, both brought
man into a most miserable condition, and removed him from the estate he was
in, in honor, and defaced the image of God in him, that is to say, made him
unjust unfaithful, an enemy and a rebel against God, and spoiled him of the
other graces and ornaments he had bestowed upon him in his former estate.

Of original sin, and how it is conveyed throughout the whole posterity of
man.
But this calamity and misery rest^^ not alonely in the first man and woman,
and there stayed, but by reason tha^ they were the seed and stock whence
issued all mankind, the blemishes an^ corruptions of our first parents do
s^ stick in us, and from them are conveyed to al their posterity, that al ye
of spring and issue of Adam is no less defiled with his corruption and
filthiness, than if they had been both parties, and guilty to the offenses
committed by their first parents.

And for this cause also, is that called original sin that is derived and
descended from our first parents to all the posterity, both because it is
our own, and cast upon us as by descent and inheritance from our
ancestors, and is the root and original of all other vices, whether they be
general infirmities common to all men, or proper and peculiar to singular
persons. Romans 5.
The force and strength whereof is such, and so great, ^at it makes a man
rude and ignorant (...) the holy mysteries of God, void of ^e heavenly
light, resty and stiff nec^^d against the will of God, unkind and ^nthankefull
toward a most merci^ll and loving father: and finally in the ^erformaunce
and fulfillyng of his will and commandment, not only weak and feeble, but
as it were unapt and vn^ble.

And to the end we may behold the ^uely image and pattern of that man that
^eing borne of Adam is not regenerate ^n Christ: A description of man's
corruption before his regeneration.
see how Paul describes ^uche a manner of man unto us: Al says he, both
Jews and Grecians are entangled in the snares and bonds of sin, there is not
one just man to be found among them, there is none that understands any
thing, none seeks after God, all are gone astraye, and given to iniquitye,
Romans 3. Psalm. 14. Psalm. 53. Psalm. 5. and. 9 Psalm. 140. Psalm. 12.
there is not one that embraces righteousness: Their throat is like an open
sepulcher that deuoureth men alive, with their mouth they speak leasing, and
flatter with their tongue, Psalm. 39. Psalm. 36. Esaias. 19 Prouer. 1. Psalm. 13.
and. 35. Collos. 2.
the^ lips are anointed with the poison (...) Adders: Their talk is full of
cursing a^^ bitterness: their feet most swifte (...) shead innocent blood:
finally their wh^^ life is most miserable, that care neyth^ for godliness nor
good religion. Lo the is the best description that can be man of man, and
therefore no man may be (...) bold, unless he be altogether shameles^ as once
to whisper a word of man's fr^ will to good, of works preparatiue ((...) they
term them) merits deserved ex congruo and condigno, and such other
sophistical and Dunsical devises, except he wy^ altogether flatter and deceive
himself and seek to draw other into like destruction.

But to speak the same in more plain^ terms without any curiosity, we say^
that in man is the whole body of synn^ (as the very words of the Apostle are)
which like unto a leaf of paper, whervppon if never so little filthye and
stinking oil be dropped by little and little ^preadeth so into al parts that
ye whol^ ^d every part thereof is ouerspreade ^th the filthiness of the same:
even so ^e say that original sin is not a hurt, ^^ime, or grief in any
special part in ^an, but an universal blindness or ^rkenesse in the wit
and vnderstan^ng of man, as touching the knowledge (...) God, and such as
breeds in man a ^aywardne^^e against the will of God, and an imbecilitie and
weakness to per^urme those things which God has ^^mmaunded us to do.

And to define this corruption in few^ ^ordes, we must thus think, that
^here is no part in man from head to ^ote void of this execrable wickedness
and detestable waywardenesse and per^ersenesse, as the Apostle in the place I
^ited before, has noted with great vn^erstanding, quoting together diverse and
^undrye places of holy scripture very ^ptlye and wiselye to the same intent.
Out of this fountain also infynite ^ices issue and spring up in the minds
of the elect.

The infection and contagion where the very best and most godly men, The
first sort of sinners.
y^^ the greatest saints them selves, ha^ sensibly had experience of in
themselu^^ boiling in the minds of men, yea eu^ the most perfect that ever
have bee^ like a burning fire, or a flaming fo^neys. And the infection is
wroughte them three manner of ways especially First and formoste it stirs up
certa^ inward motions, The first imagination o^ wickedness is very sin in
it self.
affections, desires a^ cogitations contrary to the law of G^^ though the will
in all points be not f^ly consenting thereunto, then followe^ immediately a
great tumulte in the mi^des of the elect, so great and so veheme^ as cannot be
uttered in words, hauyn^ a most feruente desire to be released (...) the
length, and set at liberty from thi^ corruption. The which motions a^^
affections of the mind, the holy script^res do testify both to be sins,
and su^^ as provoke the wrath of god, whom w^ ought to worship and reverence,
with al^ our mind, with al our soul, and with al^ our strength:
notwythstanding our doing Doctors to pacify men's minds and qualify their
faults, have coined ^ertaine distinctions, of three kinds of ^otions and
affections of the mind, in the ^^rst, second, and third degree, as though ^hey
might by this means escape the judgment of God, and the horrible threat^ings
denounced against the transgres^ors of the law of God. Secondarily after the
same motions does ensue the con^ent of man's will, the mother of concu^iscence
and lust, equal in nature to the ^ynne itself, as our Lord himself has
^aught us.

And yet these false Doctors valewing ^ll thing by their own weight and
mea^ure, The Popish distinctions of sins by degrees.
have in this behalf likewise inuen^ed certain differences of delectations,
^n quantity and measure, some to be sin^le, some double, some long time, some
^horte, heaping to themselves damnation ^n time to come, for their wilful
error and ignorance.

Of Actual sin as they call it.
Cast of all after the other two, vp^ starteth a third kind of sin, nam^ly
that beside the motion of the mind a^^ the willing inclination of the same is
^ctually committed in deed, of which so be worshipping of Idols, blasphemy
a^^ cursing oaths to the dishonor of God, a^^ profaning of his most holy
name, so persticious adoration, and pilgrimages as also the other trespasses
committed ^gainste the commandments of the s^conde table, the which be so
gross a^^ palpable, that the very heathen philos^phers were moved against
them, and a^waies detested them both in word a^^ deed, yet have our divines
in this part all found out a very fine and a subtle d^stinction betwixt
mortal sins, and v^nial, pretending venial syns to be such (...) a drop or
two of holy water, the sign^ of the Cross, and such other trifling an^
ridiculous ceremonies might purge an^ cleanse us of, and by that means lulli^^
us a sleep, flatter us in our most grievous and horrible sins, wherevppo^
have grown great and more grievous ^ynnes among the Christians. than ever ^id
in any common wealth, that was on^ye governed and guided by philosophers ^eing
mere pagans, and such as had no ^anner of understanding in Gods holy ^isteries.

In sum, the learned sort and well ^isposed will confess, that the Popish
do^toures have erred most shamefully in his doctrine touching original sin
of motions of the mind, and differences of ^ynnes, and have been ignorant
not on^ye of the nature and qualitye thereof, ^ut also how miserable effect it
wrought ^n us, wherein being both deceived themselves, and leading other into
like error, being the cause of all the infirmities that be in man, while they
go about to apply remedies, they have heaped error upon error, as shall
be hereafter declared in his due and convenient place.

Of the miraculous means that God used to repair the fall of man.
Our Lord and God, like a most loving and merciful father perceiving that his
creature and workemanshippe, beautified with so many notable gifts and
graces, provoked by the craft and subtilty of Satan, was voluntarily fallen
from him and his commandment, vouchedsafe to open his justice and mercy
toward us, that as by the one he might punish the sin and transgression
of man, so by the other, heal and close up our wounds again. Whereupon he
put in execution his eternal counsel, to punish the rebelling and
disobedient nature of man, and his fall from him according to his desert, not
in the person of him that became so disobedient, and shranke from God, but in
the new and celestial Adam which might be a fit intercessor and mediator
beetwixte all mankind and God, being both God and man. For it was requisite
and necessary for the reconciling of these two together God and man, that the
other second Adam should be true and very perfect man, subject to all
infirmities of man, yea unto death it self, to the end that he might suffer
the pains appointed by the just judgment of God, for our worldly and
sinful flesh, as also that he should be the very true son of God, to overcome
death, sin, and the world, tread down the gates of hell, overthrow all the
kingdom of Satan, and as Paul says, to be given up for our
transgressions, and rise again for our justification, Roman. 4. Romans 4.


The which mercy and abundaunte goodness of God, was in express words
declared to the first man, when it was told him, that the seed of the woman
should in time to come break the head of the serpente, Genes. 3.
and the same was renewed by often promise made to diverse afterward, but
especially to Abraham.

This celestial Adam I say, has been ^y diverse signs and mysteries
signified unto us of old, that by this means al me^ might comfort them selves
with a most ^ure and certain hope, and an vndoub^able persuasion of Gods
promises.

The description of Christ after the Popish Church beli^fe.
ANd this is our opinion and belief concerning Christ, whereof it is a
world to consider how many infinite questions the Divines of our days or
Sophisters, rather to term them more aptly, have curiously and vainly
handled, which are not only not profitable for the staying and stablishing of
our faith, but foolish and ridiculous, and do withholde many Jews, and other
of foreign nations from the Christian faith, in so much that a man would
rather think they described some fantasy, o^ dream, or vision: than Christ
our Messiah and Savior, by the wonderfu^ power of God, sent from above. W^
spend many years arguing in schools in what terms we must speak o^
Christ. Whether this proposition be true, Christ was from the beeginnyng,
whether it be more aptely^ said, that he is compounded o^ both natures, or
consysteth, or is commixte, or knitte together and combined: or as it were
gellied, or moul^ed, or coupled and conjoined. How much better were it to
omit these moti^ns and vain questions, Romans 2.
and to content ^ur selves with that which the Apostles ^aue taught us, which
affirm unto us (...) plain terms, that Christ according ^o the flesh was
made or begotten of the ^eed of David, and is the true son of God ^lmighty
according to the spirit: and so ^y this means contenting our selves with this
simplicity of speech should en^euour our selves to express Christ him self,
that is to say, practice most perfect ^olynesse and innocence in our lives and
^onuersation. Besides this in how dark and doubtful terms do these blind
Sco^istes dispute and reason of the four in^tants of nature, as also where
they go ^boute to prove that this word person ^oth not signify relatione
Origenis, neither ^he common relation etc. Many more examples of like impious
and wicked dis^utations proceeding from the idle curio^itie of this Scotist,
might here be alleged, but because the matter it self is blasphemous and too
vnreuerent in r^spect of the person of Christ, but also (...) uttered with
such terms, as the common people can in no wise understand for our mother
tongue will not ministe^ words to utter so fond and nice conce^^ withal. I
have thought good to retourn^ to matters more evident, leaving the^ and other
such like toys as the religion is full fraught. For to what purpose is (...)
vainly to spend the time about disputing of Gods greatenesse, and how
infinite he is, of soch motions and mere imaginations as these be, or of the
relation and foundacions of the Trinity, and the unspeakable beginning of the
word whether it took being at an instant, o^ by process of time, by way of
proceeding or generation. These and such other like, what use I beseech you,
can the^ have either to the building or beautifying of the Church of God?
notwithstanding see the mischief how this their philosophy prevails, and
those ioyly divines think us altogether unlearned, because we hold our selves
contented onl^ with the pure and perfect word, rejecting ^homas Aquinas with
his curious questi^ns, Scotus with his subtle and sophistical ^rgumentes,
Durandus with his follies, and diverse others of that sort with their ^oste
impudent vanities.

Of the law of God, and the force thereof.
Afterward when god perceived that mankind was become almost sense^esse, in
so much that he neither was tou^hed with his own misery and calamity, ^or of
himself understood what should become of him, except their minds were
cherished and comforted with the hope of his promises, besides to the end
that he might chose unto himself a people, as it were specially and
peculiarly apart from the rest. After he had delivered the Israelits out of the
captivity and bondage of Pharao, he made a law which he established and
published in mount Sinay.

The force whereof, was to awake such as slept securely in sin, The virtue and
efficacy of the law.
to accuse and reprove them, to prove whole mankind guiltye before the throne
and Majesty of God, that thereby they might learn to seek righteousness
and innocencye (whereof they were altogether destitute) at the only mercies of
God, when every one should acknowledge in his own conscience, and know by his
own experience, the natural corruption and deprauation of his mind by the
judgment and manifestation of the law. Secondarily, to the end that the
faithful and chosen of God should be taught by the law, as by a most excellent
and learned schoolemaister, what exercises and duties God requires at the
hands of his children, because no man should devise of his own fantasy and
imagination any new service of God other than was by the law of God prescribed
and appointed.

The sum and effect of which doctrine, albeit the holy Apostle has plainly
and sufficientlye declared in his Epistles, yet have these unlearned doctors
brought in mere Iudaisme and Paganism into Christian religion. For they
teach us, that the law was given us only to this intent, that we should
^alke in good works, by the which men night not only be acceptable in the
sight ^f God, but justified also before him.

And hereupon they take occasion to ^aunder us, as though we should affirm
^ood works to be needelesse, and should withdraw men from the study and
ex^rcise of virtue, and let them loose to all ^icenciousnesse. Whereas we
study all we can, and use all our endeavor to show ^he people, that such as
be regenerate, ought duly to beee conuersaunte in good works, and in godly
exercises, both to tame the lusts and concupiscences of their minds, and to
engender a mutual love and charity among men: as also confirm and establish
every particular man's conscience in the persuasion of his election, and to
retain Gods spirit the better in their minds by whose good motion and
direction, their wills might the rather be always pliable and conformable
to do all good and godly exercises of true godliness and virtue.

And yet we flattely deny, that these works be the cause of our justification
but rather the effects, the fignes and tokens of true faith settled in our
hearts even as by good fruits it appears tha^ the trees be good where they
do proceed.

Of the Ceremonies and Sacrifices of the old Testament.
Moreover, whereas the corrupt and perverse nature of man was such, that of
himself he could not put his whole affiaunce and trust in God, thinking
it a matter of very great difficulty, almost of impossibility to be
delivered from the bondage and slauerye of Satan, the tyranny of sin, and
the yoke of the law, which required a pay above his power, The figures of
the old testament, shadows of Christ.
to wit, purity, sincerity and holiness both of mind and body: the Lord
did institute Ceremonies, and sacrifices, and burnt offerings, by the which
men should be admonished and put in mind, that he stands in need of some
mediator and redemer, by whose means he might be loosed out of all the bonds
and snares wherein he was entangled, and ^taine true and perfect liberty. And
to ^e intent that he might be led as it were ^y the hand, to the knowledge of
his Mes^as and Savior, Heb. 6.7.8.
he set before his eyes ^sible ceremonies, wherein as in a Ta^le, we might
behold the person, the ^ffice, and the most singular and super^^cellent
effects of the said Savior and ^edemer Christ Jesus, to wit, the sacri^ice and
order of sacrifying, the Sanctu^ry, the propiciation, the veil, the table, ^he
show bread, with other such like.

Of the Popish Ceremonies.
ANd now I beseech you, compare the Popish Ceremonies and these togi^her, and
no doubt ye shall well perceive ^t to be true, that Augustine complained of in
his time, that they are grown to so great a multitude and swarm, that they
are not only equal in number with the Jewish ceremonies, but also do exceed
them far: neither have our churchme^ bin contented to fetch a great part of
their Ceremonies from the Jews, but ro^bed the Pagans, and the idolatrous
Et^nicks, also of theirs to patch up the^ heap, as appears most
euidentlye (...) their sacrifice of the Mass, as there ter^ it, for it is
botched and clowted, parte^ with the superstitious ceremonies of t^^ Jews and
the Gentiles, but chiefly an^ principallye of the rites instituted (...) Numa
Pompilius.

Arnobius a very ancient Doctor wrote an Apollogie in defense of Christian
religion, Arnobius in his third book contra Gent.
wherein he says that the Ethnickes found very great fault with the
Christians, because they neithe^ dedicated their churches to god, nor builded
altars, nor set no incense upon them nor had no vessel of silver and gold t^
serve for holy uses, wherewith they might do service unto God, and beautify
their Temples. But if those that blamed this want of these things among the
Christians in those times were now alive in our days, and should behold the
popish ceremonies in their Sinagogs, they could scarcely believe them to be
Christians, or at the least they could find no such ^aulte with the Romish
religion now, ^s they found with the Christian religi^n then. But forasmuch
as the words of Arnobius contain in them a most no^able and excellent
doctrine against the horrible idolatry and superstition of our times, I will
here annexe a few leaves out of Arnobius, to the intent that your Majesty
might more euidentlye see in what sort they of the most ancient and
perfectest Churches, and that were nighe unto the Primitive church and to the
Apostles times, did serve god, and how much their service differed from the
pomp and multitude of ceremonies used of ye Pope in his church: Now (says he)
that I have generallye declared what wicked and blasphemous opinions you houlde
of your Gods, it follows consequentlye that I speak somewhat of your
Temples and your Sacrifices, and other the consequences that depend here
upon, for this is a matter which you are wont specially to challenge us
for, and to lay to our chardge as a horrible impiety: That we build (...)
churches for divine service, we set up (...) graven nor painted Images of any
(...) the Gods, we rear no altars, nor sprin^kle no blood of fatlings
therevppon, n^ burn no incense, nor bring in no cor^^ nor wine to be poured
into cups, the which things we omit and leave undone, not of any wicked and
godless intent, o^ for any contempt against God, but because we think and
are certaynely persuaded, that if they be Gods indede (and worthy that name)
they do either laugh at these kinds of worshipping and service as follies and
fantasies, or else are grievously offended with them, if there be in them either
of these affections, the one or the other, either disposition to rejoicing, or
motion to indignation and displeasure: for because you shall understand what
opinion we have of the very name of God, and how we judge thereof, we are
persuaded, that if they be Gods in deed, (to repeat the same jointly together
again) they be endued with all kind of virtues most perfectly, and most
abundauntly, as wisdom, justice, gravity, (if we may without blame give
them such terms of praise and commendation, as we use toward men) excelling
in all inward gifts, without needing the help of any external things, forasmuch
as the fullness and perfection of all happiness^ and felicity is absolute in
them that they are free from all affections, void of anger, not moved with
lust or sensuality, harmefull to none, not delighted with the miseries and
calamities of others, not fearing men with strange and rare visions, not
chargyng them with their vows, nor sending signs of threate and anger, to the
intent that men should make sacrifices of expiation, nor plagues or pestilences
or other diseases by the infection of the air, nor making dearthe by
droughtes, nor presenet at the sheading of blood by wars, or vnpeopling of
Cities, not partial, as favorable and inclining to some, and contrariwise
frowning upon others: but rather yelding equally and indifferently to either
part, and affectionated alike in good will toward all, for it is an argument
of a weak and feeble nature, to be subject to contrarieties: and the
determinations of Sages concerning this point has been, that they which are
touched with affections, have sense and feeling of grief, and sorrow, either
more or less: and that it is not possible, but that they which are any ways
subject to affections, are subject also unto mortality. The case then being
thus, how can we justly be thought to contemn God, seeing we deny that any
can be deemed woorthye that name, except he be just and vprighte, and such
as is praise worthy and honorable in the judgment and estimation of them that
be best affected? But ye will object against us perhaps, that we build no
temples for service of them, nor worship their images, nor offer them no
sacrifices, nor burn the^ no incense, and what I pray you can you require more
at our hands? or what greater worship or honor can we yield them, than to
place them in the same degree, in the which we put the chief Lord and
supreme head of all, by whom the very celestial bodies have their being as
well as we?

For do we honor him with building of Churches and Temples, or do we slay
any sacrifices for him, or present him with any other things, whereof there is no
sound reason to be yielded, but only a foolish continuance of a blind
custom. For what follye and madness is it to measure the Majesty of God by
our necessities: and for because such things seem for the use of man, to
yield them therefore unto God, who gave the same unto man, and to be persuaded
that by thus doing thou doste him honor, and not rather greatly dishonor him.

To what what use then I pray you, do we seek so much for Temples and
churches for Gods use? or what need was there say you, why they should either
be built at the first, or now be repaired? do they freese with the cold in
Winter, or broile in the heat of Summer, or can the clouds drown them with
rain, or are they tossed with whirlewindes, or afraid to be invaded, or
overcome with enemies, or rent in pieces with wild beasts, that therefore
there should be cause to keep them in close house and defend them by stone
walls: for what are these Temples I pray you, in respect of men, and in our
feeble judgment very huge and vaste: But in comparison of the might and
Majesty of God, a little small corner, or rather a straighte and a very
narrow hole. The first builder whereof, if ye list to know them, The first
builders of temples.
was either Ph^roneus the Egiptian, or Merops, or as Varro writes in his
treaty of wounders, Aeacus Jupiters son: be they therefore builte with
marble, or beautified with gold, or adorned with Jewels and precious stones,
or shine like the Sun beams? they be all but earth and duste, and made of
very filthe, and the vilest matter that can be, neither is God therefore
delighted with them, because you esteem them of great price, nor for the
vileness and baseness thereof, would therefore refuse to dwell within them.

This is the temple of Mars says some, that of Juno, that of Lady Venus,
here dwells Apollo, here Hercules, there Summanus. Is not this a great and
principal dishonor, to tie God to a house and dwelling place? to make him a
roof to shroude himself under? to divide it into parlors and chambers,
thinkyng them necessary things for him, that serve for man's use, and for the
seely vermin of the earth, as Cats, Antes, Wezels, and the fearful mouse: but
we build them no Temples ye will say for that purpose, to keep them from
rain and storms, or from the heat of the Sun, but that we may have nigher
access unto them, and behold them, and make our petitions and prayers unto
them even face to face. For if we should call upon them in the open air, and
out of covert, save only the cope of Heaven, they are deaf, they hear us
not, and except a man come nigh unto them when he makes his prayers, they
stand still as though no man gave them a word: but we are of a far contrary
opinion, that if they were gods worthy that name, they could and would, yea they
ought to hear us from any place of the whole world, whatsoever a man
should speak unto them, were it never so secretly, as well if he were present
by them? yea to anticipate by their foreknowledge, whatsoever any man should
secretly imagine in his mind. And as the Stars, the Sun, and Moon, when they
mount alofte, or appear upon the face of the earth, are immediately present,
and shine to all alike, even so is it requisite, that the ears of God should
be open to all, nighe to hear the petitions of all, though they come from
diverse countries, yea and those far distant asunder. For this is the nature
and property of God, to fill all places with his power, and to be wholly every
where, not piece meal in any place, not to be absent and present at diverse
times, not to go suppe in Ethiopiae, and after a week or two, to return home
again to his own habitation. The which if it were otherwise, then farewell al
hope of help and relief, when we shall be left in a doubt and uncertainty,
whether that God hears our prayers yea or no, when soever we do make
sacrifice of Prayers, or Thanksgiving unto him.

As for example, let us put the case, that there is a Temple of some one god,
in the Isles of Canare, another dedicated to the same God in the furthest part
of Thyle, likewise another among the Ethiopians, and an other in that part of
the world that is furthest distante from them.

If so be that all these at one self same instaunte, dooyng their sacrifices
and Ceremonies, and making their petitions, ask every one of them some thing
at Gods hands, according to their own necessity, what hope can they have to
the obtaining of their petitions, If God do not hear the prayer that is made
unto him by each of them alike, or if distaunce of place could hinder the
prayers of them that call upon him, that the sound thereof should not perce
his ears? for either must he be present no where, if it be possible for him
to be secluded from all places or else must he be in one only place, because
he cannot give ear indifferently to all in general, and give them the hearing
alike, and so must it consequentlye follow, that either God aideth none at
all, if by reason that he is occupied some other way, he have no leisure to
hear them, or hear the suits of some, and send the rest empty away, and
hear not them. Moreover these goodly Temples that are garnished with gold,
and beautified with high steeples and pinacles, be sepulchers for dead
carcasses and places to lay ashes and bones in, is it not then very plain and
evident, that either you do worship them that be dead in steed of the living
God, or do most horrible and shameful villanye to the Majesty of him, whose
Temples you file with the ashes and bones of the dead?

These are his words most mighty Prince, worthy no doubt to be written in
golden letters, or rather to be imprinted in the tables of our hearts.

Of the coming of Christ and of his gospel.
But to return to our purpose, and to speak of the wonderful misterye of
our redemption: After the fullness of ^ne was come, John. 1. Hebr. 1. Luke. 1.
Math. 1. Gene. 3.15.17.
in the which the proui^^nce of God had determined to help ^ankinde, the
which was both heavy ^aden and oppressed with the burden (...) sin, and
pressed down into the bot^^mlesse pit of hell, assailed on every side ^ith the
tyranny of the Devil, and con^icted by the sharp and severe sentence ^f the
law. Our heavenly father sent ^is only begotten son, the everlasting
^orde, the power and wisdom of the ^ather into the earth, the which word
^hroughe the virtue of his holy spirit, ^y a wonderful and miraculous means
^ee willed to become man in the womb ^f the most holy virgin Mary, that the
^ame Christ which had bin tofore eftsoons promised to the Patriarchs and
prophets of the old Testament, the which also by the faith and hope they had
in him, attained everlasting life, should at the length come into this world
the very true and natural son of God, and of the virgin, conceived first in
her womb, and afterward brought forth by her into this world to be the very
son of G^ and very man, that by this means (...) might take away the sins
of manki^^ and that by the sacrifice of his death, (...) by his obedience, he
might make atto^^ment betwixt God and man, to the into that he should no
longer be accompt^ gods enemy, but be esteemed as his ch^ and become
inheritour of his heauenl^ kingdom, and partaker of his divine ^^ture
everlastingly.

And the whole sum and effect (...) this doctrine concerning the great
ben^fite of our redemption consists speci^^ly in two points. For first we
do a^knowlege the wonderful purpose of God heavenly providence, in yt he
vouchedsa^ to redeem us from the horrible domin^ of the devil, that by the
obedience and by t^^ death of the latter, and the heavenly Adam, the rebellion,
and disobedience (...) the former earthly Adam might be qui^ and discharged,
and that the most filthi^ spots and stains, not only of his misbeliefe and
incredulity, but also of all hyposteritie, might be spu^ged with the mos^
precious blood of that immaculate la^be. Secondarily we are taught by ye
prea^ing of the Gospel, how and by what ^anes we may be partakers of this so
^eat mercy and reconciliation offered vn^ us by Christ, as also how thankful
^e ought to be toward him that has ^uaunced us to so great an honor. In
^umme, what soever our Lord and Saui^^r Jesus Christ has either done or
spo^en, it tends all to the same end and ^ope. The original of sects and
heresies.
From the which many following ^^eir own ways, are carried away into ^iuers
and sundry contrary opinions of reli^ion. For the Jews and Turks, and others
their likes, do not acknowledge Christ ^o be their mediator. Another sort
there ^s, that can not understand by what means they might apply the benefit
of ^he mediator to themselves, that is to say, how to put on Christ, and
arm themselves with his righteousness and innocence, without ye which none
can be accepted with God: and hereupon rises the ground of the great
controversy betwixt us and the Papists.

What is cheifely in controversy betwix^ us and the P^pistes.
ANd thus stands the case (most ^ble Prince) betwixt us and them, n^^ther is
the quarrel about a tale of Rob^ Hoode, as the common proverb is, or (...)
Purgatory only, or the eating of fles^ or fish, or about lighting of wax
tapers (...) noone tide, or Bishops rochets, or Mon^ coules, for we could well
be content (...) permit them these things, so they wou^^ not envy us the
enjoying of Christ, n^ shadow and extinguishe his most clean^ and shining
light, and most pure doctrine with their dark and obscure divinity, and yet I
think well, they would be content we should wholly enjoy Christ, s^ they might
lose nothing thereby from their paunches, nor from their purses, which thing
they stand in fear of exceedingly, if the people should once epsy their
falsehoode, their hypocrisy and dissimulation detected and brought to light.
For whereto else serves the great honor and pomp of the most reverend fathers
my Lords the Cardinals? their great train and guarde about them? how
shall the Bi^ops kitchen be beated, if you quench (...) fire of Purgatory? nay
how shall there (...) in it either flame or smoke, if the fuel (...) Purgatory
fail them? O what a cold ^d frosty Ice will there be among them, this their
yearly revenue go to de^ye? This is it that makes the Monks ^d priests
tremble and quake for fear, ^a to fall to utter desperation. For as ^r the
glory and honor of Christ, they ^t not a straw by it. Seeing therefore ^ere is
no controversy betwixt us, con^^rning the former part of our religion, ^^at
is to say, concerning the person of ^^e mediator, it remains that we ^^eate
of the latter part, to wit, how and ^y what means we may attain unto that
inestimable benefit of almightye God bestowed upon mankind by him, ^hroughe
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. For our adversaries neither can nor will
not (I dare say) affirm the contrary, but confess us to agree in the first
point with the primitive Church, and the most ancient and catholic fathers,
forasmuch as we detest all the erroni^^ opinions, and heresies wickedly and m^
blasphemously invented against the ^uinitie and humanity of Christ, w^^ther
they savor of Iudaisme, Turcis^^ or Paganism.

Of the Popish Baptism.
But if we should demand of ou^ adversaries this question: Wh^ ways a man
should take to become p^^taker of this singular benefit of Chr^^ that he might
be clothed and armed w^ his righteousness and innocence, to b^ able to stand
before the throne of t^^ Majesty of God, the most righteou^ judge: they will
answer hereunto I suppose, that men must be washed with t^^ Sacrament of
Baptism, and have a f^lishe sir John to breath upon them, an^ cross them in
their foreheade with h^^ most filthy spittell, that the Devils b^ these means
might be cast out of the bodies of the babes: they must have sal^^ cast into
their mouths, that so they might he made partakers of the heavenly wisdom:
they must have a wax taper put (...) their hands, that the light of faith
^ght shine upon the^, the which is increa^ in them, and made more forcible, as
the ^^dell exceeds in greatness and quantity. ^r in this the Popes paradise,
faith, and (...) grace of God is sold by weight and ^easure as wax is. Their
head is also, I ^ot nere why, knit round about with a ^ece of a white linen
rag, as who say, ^ey did by that means put on the sincetie and innocence of
Christ, and are ^oreouer greased with oil, and become as ^uldiors, and
captains, and standerdbearers, ^^at should give up their names, and take ^ages,
and fight for Christ: for the co^secra^ion whereof, a sort of bishops must meet
^nce a year, and assemble together to make that holy oil, and close it in a
box, and commit Idolatry unto it, by doing it ^uche reverence, as if God
himself were within it. Last of all, their eyes are an^ointed with ye filthy
and stinking spit^ell of the priest, belike to blind ye seely in^a^ts, or so
to dim their sights, yt they shall not be able to behold the heavenly light.

O what pretty toying and iugling (...) is? what coniurations, what wiche (...)
and inchauntmentes? and yet notw^^standing, when they have done all the their
fond ceremonies, they say plainl^ those infants which be baptized on the sort,
do forthwith receive faith, and (...) come Christ Jesus brethren, Gods
ch^dren, new creatures, Christ's stand^^ bearers, shine with the light of
heau^^ be endued with heavenly wisdom. ^^nally what are they not become, so
the pay liberally: for this is the proclama^on they make, give and it shall
be giu^ unto you.

Of the true use of Baptism.
ANd now I beseech your Majesty of your gracious clemency and go^^nesse, not
to think me to speak the^^ things of any delighte I have in raili^^ or in
slaundering of them. For God i^ my witness, that I am full sorry and he^uy at
my heart, to see them so blind, an^ so obstinat, in defending so many abuse^
and foolish superstitions: notwithstandin^ the people must needs be informed
here^f, that they may understand how shame^ully, how ridiculously, and in how
sundry ^^ints the Sacrament of Baptism has ^ene profaned and defiled, which
our ^auiour Christ did institute to be so ho^ye and sacred even in the
highest degree. That thereby he might notify unto us, and give us assurance,
that his Church and congregation is purged and cleansed from all spots and
stains, by means of ^is most precious and innocent blood: (...) that by
this wonderful expiation, he ^ight take her to himself, to be his wel^eloued
spouse, being void of blemish, or any deformity. And therefore whereas
Christ commands his Apostles to ^aptise in the name of the father, the son,
and the holy ghost: It has no such con^truction or meaning, to ascribe the
bene^ite of our regeneration to the Element: that is to say, the water, but
rather that ^he great and infinite mercy and love of ^ur heavenly father,
might be made manifest and known, who for the clensing of us from our sins,
has not spared the blood, no not of his only begott^^ son: moreover, that
we should perswa^ our selves by this seal and token, the we are most certainly
chosen and received into the society and fellowship of the heavenly covenant,
and so by this me^nes should reap all the fruit and for^ of this sacrament in
our souls. For w^ are not of opinion, nor may not be so persuaded, that this
is brought to pass, (...) opere operato: that is to say, for the w^^thinesse
of the work wrought, (as the schoolmen term it) but put our whi^ trust and
confidence in the only me^ and goodness of almighty God, we ha^^ our faith
more and more confirmed a^ strengthened by baptism, by the which faith we
believe assuredly, that our he^uenly father has adopted us into t^^ number of
his children has pardon^ us all our offenses, has endewed (...) with his
heavenly grace, has clens^ all the filth and corruption of our soule^ that
we from thencefoorth being whol^ dedicate and consecrated to serve hy^ and
delivered from the fear of all o^^ ghostly enemies, should lead a just, an
^neste, and an holy life before him that ^^th bestowed these so many, and so
great ^^nefits upon us. And thus much brief-concerning Baptism, whereof by gods
^ace I may entreat more largely at ^ne other time hereafter.

Of Popish Penance.
IF any after baptism do verily perceive and feel in his conscience, yt these
^eir vain devises and fond ceremonies ^herof we have spoken by occasion, and
(...) opportunity served, have been little or ^thyng available unto them, and
that ^ese, and such like distinctions of theirs ^oad culpam as to the fault,
quoad reatum ^s to the guilte, quoad veniam as to the ^ardon, be mere
frivolous and foolish, and as the prophet says, nothing but soft ^illows for
the people to lean unto and ^ee lulled a sleep on: if any I say being ^hus
affected, find a trouble in his con^cience concerning his salvation, and begin
^o muse upon some means how he may ^scape the judgment of God wherewith his
conscience is stricken and astonished, (...) and by they bid him lean to a rotten
p^^ that is to say, to penance: but good Lord what can be more contrary to
true p^nance, than this which they appoint hy^ unto, which is nothing but a
meere^ d^ceipt and iuggling, and devises imagi^^ by them to pick men's
purses, no (...) this is but a weak plancke to save a (...) from shipwreck,
and help him to la^^ but to sincke rather to the bottom of t^^ Sea.

Of the parts of popish penance, namely of the first part, called contrition.
Penance they teach us, has the parts, Vide compend. theolog. lib. 6. cap.
4. Ruardi Tapart. Pet. Lombar. Sent. 4. Scotus in 4. sentent. Tho. Aquin. in
sent. laus.
contrition of heart, confess^ of mouth, and satisfaction of works, (...) who
so desires to understand the reas^^ of this division, let him resort to Thom^
Aquinas, Durandus, and Scotus: in th^^ books, which they wrote of the
ques^^ons of divinity, but to discende to t^^ particularities, Contrition (say
they) is grief voluntarily conceived, for syn^ committed with a purpose to
confe^ them, and make satisfaction for the same. ^his definition is most like
Autentical (...). They say moreover, such may be the ^eatnesse and force of
contrition, such ^at it is able not only to purge the fault ^^d quiet it
self, but to remove the pu^^shement due for the same, and that two ^ayes.
First for the charity sake, which (...) the very true cause that breeds
sor^w and grief, which charity spreading ^ir branches far in compass,
brings ^orthe contrition, and meriteth partly re^ission of the pain.
Secondarilye, for ^he sense of that grief, provoked and stir^ed up by the will
in the very Contrition. And forasmuch as this sorrow and grief ^s very great
and grievous, it is effectu^ll also and available to take away both ^he
offense and the punishment: likewise they mince the sorrow of contrition into
three parts, one to be deficient, another sufficient, the third preeminent,
whereof the first drives down to the pit of hell, the second raises him up
to purgatory: the third hoiseth him up to Paradise. (...) Moreover,
contrition differs from attrition, as faith framed from that which is
vnframed, and they are al doubtful (...) this point, whether contrition may
ri^^ of attrition, or whether there may be any place in Hell, Purgatory, and
Paradise for contrition, which question is as y^ undecided. And this is
welneere the sum of this doctrine, out of the which I bee^ seech your Majesty
to consider (most gracious Prince) what commodity, comfort or relief can come
to a troubled conscience? how shall a man be able to escape ou^ of so many
difficulte and intricate questions? or how shall a man have any remedies of his
sorrows at his own hands, or stay himself upon the strength o^ man? For
the will of man (whence they say contrition does spring) is more inclining
and yielding to lust and concupiscence, than to any sorrow or pensiveness.
How can it then possibly come to pass, that a man should use the same to the
beating down and mortifying of most horrible and detestable vices? Finally in
all this piece of doctrine, not one word of Christ Jesus, and his holy
spirit, nothing rules, but only the will of man, ^e sorrow and grief of
man, the heaui^sse of the heart, pensiveness, charity and last of all
attrition, which is trans^urmed into contrition, as it were by inbantment and
witchcrafte.

Of true contrition according to the word of God.
How be it Gods word teaches us, that Contrition is the wonderful work of
God, Ezechiel. ^
and that the conuerteth the heart of the sinner according to his ^nfinite
goodness and mercy, breaks ^t, mollifyeth it, which otherwise of it own
nature would become harder than ^flint, stubborn, rebelling, obstinate,
Psalm. 51.
and prone to all mischief: It is he that of a stony heart makes it soft as
flesh, apt to bend, tractable, and pliable to his most holy will. And
therefore David acknowledging his offense prays unto God that he would create
a new heart in him, the which God never despises nor contemns, if it be
humble and lowlye.

Wherefore almighty God, to the ^^^tent that he might abate and pluck^ down
the pride and hautinesse of man^ mind, he does first use the threats and
terrors of his law, and looks with the burning and fiery eyes of his
indignation and displeasure, as those can tell by experience, which do truly
and hartyly repent, that they have so long continued in the service of Satan,
and the palpable darkness of popish error, for they understand right well by
what steps and degrees their heavenly father has advanced them to the
excellency of regeneration, and new birth in Christ, that is to say, to be
partakers of the righteousness and innocence of Christ, which is the only
path to pass to by the Kingdom of heaven.

Of popish confession.
THe second part of Penance they say is, to be shriuen of a Priest by
auriculer confession: ^^de com^nd. theo^g. lib. 6. ep 25. Ru^^d. Tapart. (...)
confess.
and this they affirm to be a Sacrament of Christ's institution in the: 16. and
18. of his Gospel, after Matthew. Albeit it appears by James ^t there was a
far other use thereof. ^hey say moreover, that it is necessary to salvation,
and that we must not onconfesse the sins themselves, but all (...) particular
circumstances of the same, ^d specially those which be said to ag^auate the
sin, which be in number ^teene, and is to be seen in the writings (...)
these archdoctors and masters of this ^eir superstitious faculty.

And this auricular confession say they ^th very great and manifold effects,
The fruits of Popish confession.
delivers us from eternal death and ^mnation, it heals and salueth the
^oundes of our soul, it causes the pre^nce and assistance of Gods holy
spirit ^ithin us, it opens us the gates of pa^dise, it covers and
shadoweth our ^^nes, it obtains the mercy and favor (...) God, it makes the
heart merry and ^yfull, it procures us many friends and ^^tercessors to God
Almighty, it purifi^th our conscience, it dissolueth the league and amity we
were entered into with the ^euill: forasmuch as the sin conspired betwixt the
devil and man, is discovered and reveled, it reconcileth god unto man, it is
the way yt leads unto salvation, (...) takes away sin, and satisfies for
the same, in that a man abides the shame in revealing the same unto a priest:
last of all it preserves a man from falling into sin again, even (as to use
their own similitude and comparison) when the r^^ten tooth is drawn, the
rest that remains continues more fast and sure. O foolish fantasies, O
deuillish inue^tions, O most detestable doctrine, devised to enta^gle and to
destroy seely ignorant souls.

For if it were true that they profess, what need have we I beseech you of
the favor and grace of God? what need w^ to fly so fast to Christ, as to
our chi^^ anchor and stay? whereto shall the hol^ ghost seru^? what force
shall he have, (...) what shall be his office, if one shrift wi^^ serve us in
steed of all, and bring the most wicked and desperate person tha^ is into the
state of grace, and the inher^ting of the kingdom of heaven? Wha^ is to
blaspheme God? what is to abu^^ ^^e world? what is to confound heaven and hell
together, if this be not? And yet ^e blind world more blind than a ^ock,
does condemn those that reveal ^ese abuses and deceiuable leasings, and
^^rseth them to the very death, to endure ^l punishments and the most horrible
^orments that can be devised. They tell (...) we must confess at the least
once by ^ere, Cap. omnia vtriusque sexus etc. de sum. Trinttate and fide Cath.
Extr. de poenitent. and remiss.
upon pain of excommunication to Priest that has two kays in his hand, he one
the kay of knowledge to discern ^etwixte good and evil, the other the po^er
and authority to bind and to loose.

The mystery of this confession is, that ^he Priest represents the presence
of God, which inwardly does cover those ^nnes which the penitent reuealeth to
^he Priest by mouth, the which neither ^he priest dare presume by any means
to ^eclare, nor cannot unless he have learned ^he^ of some other. They make a
difference ^ikewise betwixt sins and the absolution of ^ins. For some only ye
pope ca^ remit, some ^her be yt the archbishops may, some yt the ^ishops and
their suffraga^s as they call the^, some the Curates and Parish priests: m^ther
are the four orders of the Frier^ Mendicantes behind with their part. Sem
potius m^nducantes.
For they have likewise a certain bull and dispensation, which some call the
great se^ or mother of all Indulgences and Pardons, by the which they have a
large Charter and commission to remitte al^ sins both past and to come, if a
man would give credit to that they profess^ and undertake. And now your
grace may see (most mighty Prince) how many ways men's eyes be blinded t^
make them continue in their superstition still. Albeit the true and sincere use
of confession, if it were among us, w^^ (no doubt) turn us to much good: but
Satan has bereft us thereof, and left ^^steede of it, a most dangerous and
p^^stiferous abuse of the same.

Of the christian Confession.
THe great abuse of Confession being declared, it follows now consequently to
treat of the true use of the same: for as much as repentance is the first step^
degree to the atteyning of Christ's righteousness. Let us therefore now
consider ^me sorts of christen confession, that the ^orld may see how
causeless we are ac^used of our adversaries, for misdemea^our in the point of
confession.

And to proceed herein orderly, first ^e declare and teach unto the people,
that ^he law of very right exacteth of us per^ect righteousness and holiness
of life: Romans 7.
which ^erfection the weakness and infirmity of man's frailty, without ye
grace and help of god, is in no wise able to perform. The which being opened
and made manifest unto us by the spirit of God, drives us into a doubt which
way we might best turn us, for neither can we deceive God by our false
glosing and lies, neither hide our offenses and sins from him, being the
searcher of the heart and reins: from whose eyes no darkness, nor covert can
hide us, more than the leaves and branches of trees could shadow our first
parent Adam from his sight in time past, of the which sort most properly, your
superstitious fastes and prayers, watching and other like exercises of the
body, wherewith many a man does foolishly persuade himself, that h^ is
sufficiently armed and defenced: notwithstanding our God like a most loving
and merciful father, will not suffer his children to be swallowed up of
desperation, Genes. 3.
as was Cain and Judas, but cries unto us with a loud voice, Adam where art
thou? the which sound of his breath perceth into the very secret of our hearts,
that he might continue his bountye and goodness toward those whom he has
once vouchsafed the benefit of adoption through Christ, at the which voice
and sound, the godly minded and well affected people of God, startling as it
were at the noise and crack of the thu^derbolte, like men sore dismayed and
disquieted both in body and mind, forgetting both meat and other the
necessaries of this life, and ouerthrown gr^u^ling as it were with the terrible
sound of the brazen trumpe in the mount Sinay, or else by extremity of most
exquisite torments driven perforce to make their confession, Exodus 20.
do freely acknowledge and confess before the father of mercies, both
themselves to be the children of Adam, and ^one to all kind of wickedness and
mis^^iefe like unto their forfathers, who re^cting the commandment of God,
and ^oste presumptuously affecting things ^oper to the majesty and glory of
God, ^ent about most impudently and im^ously to spoil God of his divine
know^dge, to wit, the knoweledge of good and evil, and to take it unto
himself, that (...) to say, to be able to discern by ^he corrupt and
perverse judgment of ^s own foolish brain betwixt good and ^ul, and to
determine what thing is plea^^ng God, and what unpleasant unto him. To be
short, The true order of confession.
man set in the sight of God ^oth plainly confess yt he has followed ye ^teps
of his auncestour Adam, one yt has ^eemed rather to love virtue and
godliness, ^han followed them effectuously, and in ^abouring to cover his
nakedness, and hide his abominations, has used no other couerture, than ye
leaves of fig trees, yt is to say, has shadowed his most monstrous and
horrible offenses against god with no other thing, but only with a pretense of
wisdom, discretion, diligence, hone^^ merits, and mortifications.

And this is (most gracious Princ^ the confession which we learn out of t^^
word of God, namely that which G^ himself does force out of man's my^^ by the
virtue and efficacy of the law^ as it were with certain pricks and st^ges,
when man is compelled by the m^tion of Gods holy spirit, to acknowledg^ and
confess himself to be inwarde^ corrupted, and defiled with sin: A^^ out of
this confession, like as out of (...) spring or head do issue diverse other
sort^ of confession.

Private confession.
First when a man calls to mind with how great and how manifold^ sins he
is defiled, and how sore an adversary the decree and sentence pronounced in
the law is unto him, wherevppo^ he bewaileth his sins unto God daily, Psalm
52.
and brusteth out into these words of the holy Prophet: O Lord, I was
conceived in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me. Creat in me (O
Lord) a new heart, and a right spirit within me, ^^tified in thy sight. And
with the publi^ane humbles himself, saying on this ^ise, Lord be merciful
unto me a sinner, and with the prodigal child: O Lord (...) am not worthy to
be called thy son ^c. And these be the confessions which ^he elect of God
ought to make daily unto God, both with heart and tongue, who ^auing tasted the
singular mercy of God ^owarde them, call upon him without ^eassing, that they
might every day be more and more purged from the filth and ^tayne of sin.

The second kind of confession is very Christianlike, when a man is so sore
touched and stong in his conscience with the sense of sin, that he
perceives his faith to fainte and wax weak by the terroure of the law, as
it were with a continual assault and battery whereby he is compelled for
want of sufficiency in himself to pray aid of another, into whose bosom
he might pour all the secret griefs of his heart, as to his most faithful
and assured friend, to the end, that he might receive some present remedy
for his wounded conscience. The w^^che kind of confessing, God has
commanded to be observed and kept in hi^ Church, to beat down the prou^
and arrogant opinion of learning an^ wisdom in man, that every man might
think humbly of himself, forasmuch as they stand very many times in need of
the aid, comfort, and advice of other. And this confession or conference in
hy^ whose conscience is wounded or troubled, may be very well had and used with
the pastors, doctors, and preachers (...) the Church, having assurance of
they^ faithfulness in their vocation, and likelihoode, Esaias 50.
that they are called to that function and ministry by the holy spirit, tha^
they might comfort and cherish the weaklings, by their discrete language, as
the prophet says. The third sort of confession is when the faithful
disciple of the holy ghost does plainly confess his offenses before men of a
certain earneste and vehement zeal, of humbling himself, considering
therewithal, that God the sercher of man's secrets, does know an^ see the same
already: and in this imagi^ation persuades himself, that all the ^reatures of
the world would conspire ^gainste him, Open confession and voluntary.
if he himself should not ^penly confess and declare to all the world ^n such
sort as the posterity that comes after him, might know them likewise. And
that David used this kind of ^onfession is manifest by the.32. and.51. psalm,
which seem to be committed to writing, to the end that it both might be a
president of public confession unto ^ll men, and that men might likewise
thereby understand, into how great and heinous sins, that beloved of the
Lord, and specially elect to govern his people did fall and yield himself.
Daniel. 9.
In like manner is that notable confession of Daniell, and yt of Paul whereby he
is not ashamed to confess of himself yt he was a blasphemer of god, and a
persecutor of his church. Austine likewise in a certain little treatise, 1.
Timoth. ^.
reckneth up al his offenses eue^ from his very first coming to man's estate:
And this kind of confessing openly of themselves does greatly declare ye great
modesty and lowliness of mind in the confessor, worthy great praise and
commendations, and partly it is a great comfort unto others that are grievously
laden with the heavy burden of sin, to drive them from despair by hope in
the mercies of god, which they see other in like case have atteyned before
them.

There is also a fourth kind, when every one in the face of the congregation
following the minister, Confession in the face of the congregation.
does secretly confess himself before God, to be compassed round about with
manifold sins and offenses, and wrapped in most palpable mists of ignorance
and blindness, beseeching God from the bottom of his heart to lighten his
mind and understanding, by the preaching of his Gospel. For so he persuades
himself, and firmelye believes, that remission of sins is published and
wrought by the preaching of the Gospel, and that only through the sheading
of the most precious blood of the immaculate lamb.

Private reconciliatio^.
There is yet also one other manner of confessing, which we may call
reconciling our selves unto our neighbor, when ^e both confess our selves to
have offen^ed him by word and deed, and pray par^^n and forgiveness of our
trespass com^itted according to the prescripte com^aundement and direction of
our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. Math. and ^ames. 5. but it we commit
any open ^ime, so that ye shame and slander thereof ^oth redounde to the
Church, Public penance for public offenses.
and is of^ence unto others, the godly do not re^use in such a case to make
open confes^on: the which custom, both the old ^athers in time past did
observe them^elues, and delivered over to their posteri^ie, as appears by the
Cannons that ^reate of penance. The observation and execution whereof, the
Church of Rome omitting and neglecting, brought ^n a corrupt custom in place
thereof, that some one Priest or Chaplayne should secretly shrine such as
had offended openly, and hear their confession in corners, for saving of their
honesty, and their good name, whereby did grow two most notorious and
shameful abuses: for by means that private and auriculer confe^sion came in
place of the open declaration of faults, both all good order, a^^ discipline
went to wrack, and most m^serable tyranny began to usurp in the poor
afflicted consciences. Secondari^^ in that there were certain penitent^^ries
appointed at Rome, or rather p^^lers of pardons that retailed their Indulgences
for money to every man that lif^^^ to buy them, whereby our adversaries must
needs be driven to confess, th^^ causeless they call us heretics, and mo^^
falsely, seeing we are so far from abrogating confession, that in place of
one fa^^ and superstitious kind of confession, b^^ teach six kinds, all
allowed by the tru^ word of God.

O Popish satisfaction.
AMong all the residue of the articles of Christian religion, this one
concerning satisfaction, as it has been wonderfullye depraved and profaned
above the rest, so has it caused great controversies to arise now adays in
the Church through the blindness and ignorance of men, and therefore the
matter (...) self requires a longer treatise, than ^e proportion of this
volume will well ^eare. Notwithstanding, forasmuch as (...) is a matter of no
small importance, (...) beseech your grace (most renowned Prince) to hear
with patience before ^ou give credit to the false and untrue ^ccusations of
our adversaries.

There be ancient reports, that in the ^ime of the primitive church, which was
most full of holiness and purity: there were most severe decrees and
constitutions made, and a very sharp and bitter kind of penance, appointed
for such as committed any heinous or grievous crime, whereby offenses did
grow to the congregation, besides the open confession of their faults, and a
certain satisfaction to be made for the same, which was a long time in
perfourming to their great shame and reproach. The which kind of discipline
being a long time exercised and confirmed with great diligence against notorious
offe^ders, came to ruin at ye length through covetous bishops, ye brought in
place thereof these solemn sorts of satisfaction with gold and silver.
Howbeit the turning of it into a money matter, was n^^ received into the
Church, Good intentes the cause of errors.
but under a pretense of devotion and charity: for the revenues were bestowed
upon the building of Churches, the redeeming of Captives, the foundation of
schools, for training up of ye youth in Christianity, an^ certain other good
and charitable uses, as seemed to them. In like manner, after their example do
the Spanishe inquisitors gather together sums of money under the counterfaite
cloak of religion, which they levy of those whom they call the reconciled
penitents, to release them the Sambenite, a kind of garment with two red
crosses, which they had before (as parcel of their penance) enjoined them to
wear.

And this custom has prevailed ever since the Bishops first spoiled the
Church of this authority, and chalenging it unto themselves, began to keep
a consistory, whether they summoned al open and notorious offenders to appear
before them, enforcing them to sue for ^ardon, or to speak more according to
^e very truth of the matter, to purchase ^eir charters of pardon by money: the
which thing if either they omitted, or re^^sed to do, they were forthwith
exclu^ed from the company and fellowshippe ^f the congregation, and pronounced
ex^ommunicate persons.

But Gods people and his flock, de^esting this so slanderous and shameful
^aines, began by little and little to con^emne this pelting pedlarie of
penance, (...) so much that no man would confess any thing of himself, but
by constraint, ^ea and that not til such time as he were well nighe convicted
manifestlye of the ^acte. Whereupon the Bishops and Clergy perceiving that
a great piece of their gains began daily to decay, made a solemn Cano^,
that once by year, every one should confess himself to the bishop. This
decree is ascribed to Innocentius the first, for the more credit and
estimation whereof, they bare the people in hand in their sermons (but
falsely) that it was taken out of the holy scripture, and so at the length by
the preaching of greedye Priests this goodly auricular confession by little
and little gathered heart, Cap. omnis vtriusque sexus etc.
and was commonly received of al, under the danger of incurring deadly sin, and
upon pain of excommunication (as they call it) to all such as should conte^n^
the same.

Then within a while after the Bishops obtaining thus much, and usurping
thus tirannicallye upon Christian consciences, they brought in a doctrine for
their own advantage, whereunto they gave a false name of satisfaction, the
first branche thereof had a fair show, and in apparaunce liked every body,
to wit, that they should abstain thencefoorthe from such sins as
eftsoons they had committed before. The second was, that restitution should
be made of goods evil gotten, whereby a large gappe was opened for the
covetous Clergy: for if either the parties died, or they absent, to whom
these goods wrongfullye gotten did of right appertain, the matter was left
sothe ordering and will of the Bi^hop, even as the Pope does nowadays with his
charters of pardons and indul^ences, or rather with the very bulls ^he^selues
of composition, or reconciliation, ^s be terms them: for whatsoever has ^ene
filched, robbed, or gotten by extor^ion or usury, or by any other unjust
means taken or wythholden from any persons that be either dead, or if they
be alive and unknown, so that the parties ^sing such unjust and extreme
dealing, will pay six rialls of plate to the Pope, they shall not only be
free from all danger of law, but also from all fault and blame. The third
branch is so much the worse, as it is more perilous and dangerous for the
soul, wherein consists not alone the loss of a little silver, but of our
soul, when as me^ are taught yt they may make satisfaction for their sins, by
fasting, watching, alms, pilgrimage, building of Chappells, and singing of
masses, all which notwithstanding they must be at a price with their co^fessor,
for every of these, whereunto they do annexe ye works of superer^gation, as the
chief groundsells and fou^dations of the building, as for example: I^ any
enter into religion and become a N^^ or a Friar, and vow perpetual chast^tie,
poverty, and obedience.

Compend. Theolog. lib. 6. cap. 29 Ruard. Tapart. art. 6. de satisfactione.
But to knitte up the knotte of thi^ their doctrine of satisfaction, it
consists specially upon three points: The crucifying of our bodies, alms,
and prayers whether we perform them in proper person, or redeem them with
present pa^ for it is a mart and a portsale of al thi^^ges, yea of the very
grace and favor o^ God.

And hereof forsooth come these great commodities, if it be worth credit that
they say, first alms does easyly obtain the favor of God: fasting and
mortification of the flesh, the release of the pain and last of al, prayer
does quite extinguishe the relics of the crime, which Christ had left
remaining in our conscience, being imperfectly purged. But whereas some of the
richer sort, and more tender and delicate than the rest, neither could nor
would away with fasting, scourging, and other means of taming the flesh, and
besides, had very little ley^^e to spare from their other affairs, The
appl^cation of Monks merits.
to ^stowe in prayer, one part of these three ^rued in steed of all the rest,
that is to ^ye, alms or rather a superstitious kind (...) liberality, by the
which, they might ^alenge and apply unto themselves, the ^erits and good
works of Monks, the which in their great store and abundance, (...) nedelesse
and superfluous for themselves and supererogatorie (as they term them) ^ut for
other men wondrous necessary ^or they salvation.

But some will men say, what shall be^de these of dainty and delicate persons,
The occasion of establishing Purgatory.
that are soddainly swapte up with death, ^re they can have these merits of
Monks ^applied unto them, and enjoy them in their full perfection: for it
seems their souls should be in present peril of eternal damnation, as who
say, they may in good time take up their Inn in Purgatory, whence they may
easyly escape, when it shall please the Popes holiness to open the treasures
of Christ's blood, and apply unto them the merrites of Saints, and the monks
to commun^^^ (...) unto them largely and liberally part (...) their good
works, and play with the giffe gaffe like good fellows. And the is welneere
the sum of the Popish doctrine concerning satisfaction, to pa^^ over a
thousand dreams and blasph^mous lies, which these men have de^sed against
the redemption of Christ^ perfected most absolutely by the shedi^ of his most
precious blood.

Of the satisfaction for sins, according to the word of God.
IF your majesty (most mighty prince) have with any diligence considered (...)
observed, that which has bin said lately before: your highness understands
right well, that there was no mention made at all of the benefit bestowed by
Christ our savior, whereas the scriptures do minister us no other comfort to
our afflicted consciences, than the redemption of our lord and savior Jesus
Christ, Hebr. 7. Psalm 110.
that everlasting priest after the order of Melchizedeck, which offered up
himself to the justice of god a propitiatio^ for all the sins (...) mankind,
the burden whereof, Esaias. 53.
he laid ^d carried upon his own shoulders, as ye ^ophet Isay says, and
therefore gave up his ^dy to be broken, to be sacrifized, and ^fered to God
his father.

And to the intent the matter might be ^ade more plain and evident, because
(...) is of so great and singular commodity, ^e must repeat a little of that
is said before concerning the estate of man in sin, ^^oued with repentance
and sorrow for ^he same. For when he is sommoned to ^ppere before the
judgment seat of god, and ^ath put in bail to answer unto the law and justice
of god, for his forth coming and apperance, and has no cloak to cover his
sins, not so much as a poor fig leaf, he is enforced at the length,
Confession of our own misdeedes.
as it were one yt were tormented grievously on ye rack to confess his
manifold and great offenses, and to acknowledge his nakedness and misery,
being astonished with the judgment of god, not that a man should fall into
despair, (considering God wills not the death of a sinner, but his life and
salvation) but to the end only that he might as^ the knowledge of his sin
and transgr^sion, bring him unto repentance.

Then after a man's mind i^ the prepared, the spirit of God begins (...) to
possess him, that he accompteth him (...) be wholly his, pardons all his
offenses makes him one of Gods household, The beginning of the fear of God.
a^^ electeth him into the number of his ch^dren. And yet notwithstanding he
remoueth not from the eyes of his soul, the lively Image of God in anger and
di^pleasure, whose voice and countenaun^ was wont to amaze him, and make hi^
whole body tremble thereat, because (...) often as the mind shall be overcome
with the prouocations and allurementes (...) sin, the terrible sound of his
thundering voice and the sight of his stern countenance should so appall
him, that he should shun and avoid sin by al^^ means.

The gifts and graces of the holy ghost.
Again the same holy spirit of God, to the intent that man should remove, from
him and quite abandone all fear, does set as it were before the eyes of man,
Jesus Christ and him crucified, that he might be fullye persuaded that all
his sins be purged by his death and passion. But forasmuch as man being
miserable both by his own nature, and by the sense of his sin and conscience
thereof, does judge himself to be very far from God, and can hardly be
persuaded that the benefit of Christ does appertain unto him, therefore the
holy ghost labors to persuade him, that almighty God is reconciled unto
man, and does tender him with singular love and affection, and afterward
opens the eyes of man, being in this blindness, that he may behold, and
see by faith Christ Jesus the earnest of his salvation, last of al breaks the
perverse frowardness and obstinacy of the mind, that the same being somewhat
instructed and comforted with the hope of Gods promises, may wholly submit
his will unto Christ, and embrace him most willingly, as the only physician
of al his diseases and maladies.

And this work of the holy Ghost, Degres of regenera^^ on.
whereby the reason, understanding, mind, and will of man is instructed in true
piety and godliness, we may well term by the name of Faith, not any weak
opinion or vain imagination of the word of God, but a firm and constant
persuasion, by the which we are assured, that we are beloved of god, and
adopted to be his sons, and inheritours of his heavenly kingdom, that by
the benefit of this latter Adam, we may be as it were remitted into our
former estate of our ancient inheritance, namely innocen^ie, righteousness,
and everlasting felicity, the which was lost by the mischeuous act of the
first Adam, Christian ^aith.
the same faith does teach us, that after we be reconciled and at one with God,
there is nothing more grievous or offensive unto God than iniquity and sin,
and that we be delivered from the yoke and bondage of the Devil, Luke. 1.
^itus. 2.
only upon condition that we should thencefoorth lead a godly, righteous
and sober life.

The which faith being thus planted in men's minds by the holy spirit, is
like an instrument or hand, whereby we apprehe^d Jesus Christ, or as our mouth
to receive and eat Christ, that most sweet food of our souls: and whosoeue
is endued with this repentance, is not now to be ascribed and thought one of
old Ada^s offspring, but by means of this faith, is so linked and coupled with
Christ, How v^ be couple with Christ.
that he is reputed and taken as a brother unto him, so that Christ and a
Christian man do make as it were one spiritual body. For we may not call it
in question, but verily believe that what Christ prayed for unto his heavenly
father in the.17. John. 17.
of John, he obtained the same at his hands.

But after this great and nighe affinity is brought to pass and fast knitte
with the bond of faith, Regener^tion and inward baptism
and of the holy ghost, then does the heavenly father look upon man, being
otherwise a sinner, with ye eyes of mercy and grace, and perceiving man to be
clothed and garnished with the most beutifull and precious garment of Christ,
that is to say, the innocence and holiness of Christ's flesh, and taking
delight in the most fragrant smell thereof, does both perfect his
felicity, and rewards him with the inheritance of his heavenly kingdom,
even as in time past the Patriarche Isaac dealt with his younger son Jacob, ^es.
27.
when he felt him arrayed in the garments of his brother Esau.

Therefore when man has obtained this honor, now stands he no more in
fear of Gods terrible examples against sinners, and his severe and straight
judgments, but perceives Christ to be appointed by God a judge of all me^,
who is joined unto man by a strong faith: for what sentence may we think in
reason, that the redemer of the whole body will give against his own members,
when as this authority of life and death is not committed unto him of our
merciful father, not to destroy and condemn those that put their trust in
him, but to save and preserve them rather, and to enriche them with the
benefit of everlasting life.

^hryste Judge to ^itte the ^ythfull.
He therefore taking upon him the parts both of an advocate and a judge unto
man, does easyly absolve us of all our offenses, and pronounces them just, for
whose sake he offered himself unto death, John. 5.
that he might satisfye the justice of man: notwithstanding this pardon
proceeds not of any man's merits or good works, (for all that be borne of
the old Adam are guilty of disobedience and rebelling against God) nor of
any fastings, or watchings, or pilgrimages, or satisfactions, or offerings, or
masses, or merits of holy men or holy women, much less of Monks or
Nuns, Free Justification through faith.
(for what are any of all these able to perform, that is not of his own
nature damnable, and simply to be abhorred) but it is that alonly sweet and
comfortable voice, Thy faith has saved thee, Luke. 7.
depart in peace and security, Christ's chardge which he gives to the
sinner that is converted an^ believes.
and beware henceforthe and sin no more, least a worse thing fall to thee:
which is as much to say, that after thou have received grace from heaven,
and doste believe that thou art partaker of my redemption, be thou far from
al guilte and crime, and from the pain due for the same, and that of free
grace and mercy without all respect of deserte, and yet in such sort that
thou have earnest consideration how dearly thou ought to esteem that
bond whereby thou art fast joined unto me, in which respect thou art adopted
unto the number of the children of my father, to be an inheritour of the
kingdom of heaven, a member of my body, and a partaker of my righteousness,
and therefore see thou bring forth the fruits of innocence, and of
repentance, such as shall be agreeable unto the root of lively faith, and
return not to thy old naughtiness, least some worse thing happen unto thee.

Lo, this is the sentence of Christ (most gracious sovereign) which the
faithful here pronounced, and do receive by faith, whereupon they receive
such solace and comfort in their minds, that if they happen to be troubled in
conscience with remorse of their sins, they seek none other remedy than out
of the word of God, whence perfect health is only to be sought and found.
The which doctrine so necessary and comfortable (most mighty Prince) has so
inflamed the hearts of your Majesty's subjects in the low countries, with
such a fervent zeal of piety and godliness, that understanding how
shamefully they have been abused in a matter of so great importance, they make
this humble petition unto your Majesty, that it would please the same to
permit unto them only the liberty of their consciences, and the preaching of
the Gospel, whereby they might without pillage or tyranny, be conducted the
safe and ready way to eternal salvation. And surely it seems a very
unreasonable matter, that so honest and godly a zeal should be persecuted
with so grievous exactions and penalties, and not rather be both favored and
furthered with his due praise and co^mendatio^. And therefore your majesty has
earnestly to consider, how almighty God w^ll deal with those persons, which
do so cruelly torment and murder me^ that are both created after his own
likeness, and redeemed with the most precious blood of his only son, for none
other cause, but only for yt they profess this heavenly doctrine.

Of the doctrine of Justification, as the Popish Church does teach it.
^ompend. ^heolo. ve^itatis. lib. 6. ^ap. 32. ^igh. co^tr. 2. hom. 2.2.^.12.
Ru^r. ^ap. act. 8. ^onc. Tride^t. ^ap. 7.
FOr the better understanding of this whole matter, and the cause of the great
diuersitye of opinions hereabout, I will with as much brevity as I can,
declare the determinations of the Papists concerning Justification. First
they define it in this wise: that Justification is the passage of a sinner from
unrighteousness unto righteousness, whereof they say there be four parts,
that is to say, motion of freewill, contrition, infusion of grace, remission
of sin. The two first to proceed from him that is to be Justified: The
latter two from the Iustifier: and those two first, to be as it were the causes
preparing the heart of man to receive the grace of God. Moreover, they say that
there be three principal causes, which concur in the Justification of
sinners, namely God, the sinner, and the Church, God which pours out his
mercies, whereby the sin is forgiven, and shows his justice exacting a
satisfaction, either in this life or after, that is to say, in Purgatory,
Luke. 10^
the which ^oo virtues (as they gloss) are signified (...) those two disciples,
which Christ sent before him into every City and place, ^hether he himself
should come, Luke 10. ^or that (say they) which then was done ^rporally, is now
performed spiritual^. Also on the behalf of the sinner, there ^^e two
things required, love and sor^we, the which (say they) are like the ^ones of
the Mill wherewith sin i^ ^ound, as was figured in Deutero. 24. Deuteronomy. 24.
^ikewise there be two things that come ^^om the Church. The merits of Christ
and of the Saints, holy men, and holy ^omen, who forasmuch as they had
^ore store of good works, than they stood (...) need of themselves, left the
surplusage (...) the custodye of the Church, that they ^ight be distributed
among such as wa^^ed. Seco^darily, the church by the hands ^f the Pope, and of
Bishops, grants ^ardons and indulgences unto sinners, ^uaileable so far as
the words of the ^ame do purporte. And yet among these ^octours, there have
been some which have affirmed faith to be the foundation of our
Justification, and yet serving us in stead of a preparatiue, to apprehende and
receive the favor and love of God, whereof righteousness does proceed, the
which he gives us in consideration of our love toward him. Here I omit an
infinite number of curious questions, Vide summa^ Theolog. Alexand. de Ates.
art. de Justify.
which rather make the doctrine of our justification obscure, than bring any
light to ye understanding thereof, specially to such as being endued with the
spirit of god seek after true righteousness, with ye whole affection of their
heart as may appear most evidently, as well by the council of Trent as also by
the Interim, offered unto the Protestants. It shall be sufficient to touch
only by name the palpable mists wherewithal the schoolmen blind the eyes of
the simple people. As when they dispute whether a man be justified in a
moment, or it require a long process of time? whether Christ after his
resurrection could do any merit to make us righteous before God yea or no?
whether this word Justification is to be construed largely or strictely in the
fifth to ^he Romans, where the Apostle says, Romans 5.
^hus being justified by faith, we have ^eace toward God through our Lord
jesus Christ? whether Justification be (...) motion to the atteynment of
perfect ^ighteousnesse, or of imperfect? with such ^ther like foolish stuff,
wherein they spend their time idelly and vnprofitablye. For in ^l this, there is
not one word I warrant ^ou of Christ the son of God, the true and only
Iustifier of mankind, whose Gospel ought to be spread every where, and ^ound in
all places, but specially in their ^ares, which are almost pressed down ^o
the ground, with the weight of their ^ins, and by the law cited and sommoned
to appear before ye majesty of god in his co^sistory and seat of judgment.
For whereto serve al these subtle points and quiddities, if we be not instructed
by what means we may be delivered from ye tyranny of sin, the threatenings of ye
law, ye dominion of Satan, ye fear of death, nor the pit of hell: for this I
say is the true and sound doctrine which we ought both to learn our
selves, and to teach others.

Of Justification according as we are taught out of the word of God.
WHerefore that the matter grow (...) more obscure, What Iustific^tion is
and be amplified (...) arguments, let us content our selu^ with the simple
word of God, and them learn the true fruit and profit of the doctrine,
rather than vain ostentation* For Justification is nothing else but certain
divine work, whereby God r^ceiueth us to grace and favor, (thoug^ we be the
offspring of old Adam and pa^takers of his corruption) and does free^ make us
his children, brethren unto Christ by adoption: And we are not ignorau^^ that
a man cannot be justified, unless h^ be present in person: so that none man
execute the matter by an attorney or a^signe to receive righteousness in his
behalf. Neither do we esteem a man t^ be a block or a stone, senseless
and with out wit or understanding, but to be (...) creature endued with
with, will, and reason, whereby he may be able by knowledge to discern and
have will to receiu^ what soever good thing God of his goodness and fatherly
kindness does bestow ^^on him.

And therefore they that in this matter unto the question of free will, The
renouation of our will and understanding.
do be^^ye their own unskillfulness, seeing (...) every man knows right
well in (...) own conscience, how blind he is bee^^ he be engrafted into
Christ, and ^e wilful and obstinate in withstan^^^g the will of God, till he
be reclaimed (...) the merciful goodness of our God. (...) in this respect
we say we have great ^^de of the motion of Gods holy spirit open the eyes of
our hearts, both to knowledge our malady, and to crave (...) help of the
heavenly physician to mol^ye our hearts, minds and wills, ^at we might
embrace the plaster ^ouided for us by that heavenly phisiti^^ to be a perfect
salve for all men. The ^hiche work of the holy ghost, we call (...) the name
of Faith, by only means ^d help whereof man is engrafted in^^ Christ and
made partaker of his ^ghteousnesse, and by the benefit there^ is provoked,
with a free and ready heart wholly to be inflamed with the love (...) zeal of
god, understanding that throu^ his grace, he has obtained that hoe
w^vnnethable to do by his own nature

And then does almighty god besto^ two especial benefits upon man, the (...)
in assuring him that all his sins are cle^sed with the blood of his son, the
other beautifying him with his own righte^nesse and innoce^cie. The which the
Apos^ does in most manifest words decla^ unto us, and citing the t^stimony
of D^uid, Psalm. 32.
where he says: Blessed is the (...) whose iniquities are remitted, and h^
sins covered. Blessed is the man to who^ the Lord imputes not his sin, and
forth, as follows consequently in t^ same psalm. 3^.

The first sentence may be resemb^ to the common form used of course places
of judgment, when as Princ^ and Magistrates of their singular gra^ and favor
do pardon persons attaynt^ of fellonye.

The second seems to be borow^ of the clothyng of a naked body, in the
cure heavenly father does in like sort ^uer our filthiness and abhominati^s
with his heavenly innocence.

The third has a kind of similitude (...) likeness unto the dealing of
credi^^s, which having books of their ac^mptes, and the names of their
det^rs, do cross the sum, and make it ^^scharged. In like manner does the
^nly Apostle teach us, that the note book four sins is to be blotted forth,
and ye obli^ation yt was to be showed against us, is ^aced and ca^celled by the
blood of Christ unto all those that with a lively faith ac^nowlege so great a
benefit, and with true ^bedience apply our selves to perform ^is will. But
forasmuch as man throu^he this wonderful work of God, The doctrine of
free will as the Papists teach it.
does ^onfesse the acknowledging of his sin, and his hearty repentance and
sorrow ^n being so bold and careless to of^ende against the Majesty of
God, ^othe in word and deed, therefore the ^ate writers in Divinity do
feign that these works, and this zeal has his original of man's industrye,
wisdom, and freewill only, by the w^che he receives faith, as it were by h^
own preparation, and so by means the of makes himself a member of Chri^ And
because we preach and teach t^ people, that this agnisyng, confessi^^
sorowing, and repenting of sin, are (...) to be esteemed and called the works
of man that they be notwithstanding reputed (...) proceed from the force and
power of go^ holy spirit, who prepares the heart an^ will of man to conceive
them first, an^ after to put ye same in practice: Therefore do they lay
heresy to our chardge mos^ unjustly and impudently, as they do (...) untruly,
slaundering us most falsely, tha^ we reiecte good works, and move me^ to
sloth and contempt of their duty t^wards God. Howbeit, your Majesty, (...) it
please you to enter into your own conscience with the earneste consideration
hereof may easily be judge herein, whither it be a matter that consists in
the freewill of man to offer himself in the Court of almighty God, and
before hi^ Majesty to confess his sin, a thing (...) odious and abominable
in the sight of God, or to sorrow heartily for his sins, and to fall to
amendment with due repentance, or to be vexed and tormented in conscience for
the horriblenesse of sin, or to embrace Jesus Christ with such faith,
humility, and reverence as we ought to do, that is to say, as our only
sacrifice and propitiation of our sins once offered for us: for who so is able
to perform ye things of what value or estimation so ever they be, him do I
account rather like unto God, than unto man.

Surely I am of opinion, that they which be enemies and impugn this doctrine,
and (for that we maintain the same) do persecute us with fire and faggot, have
either had small sense of Justification, or else are some new found people
descended into the Earth, I wotte nere whence. For if they have not had some
sensible perseueraunce and feeling of the principles of Christian religion in
themselves by experience, I council them for a time to be quiet and refrain
to speak, and advise them rather to pray unto almighty God that he would
instruct^ them by his holy spirit in such things as they are ignorant of,
and yet will be prating rashely and babbling either after their own conceit
and imagination, or as they have heard other men talk, will most impudently
affirm the same: but if they will derive their pedigree from God, let them
permit us to be (as we are) men contenting our selves with such knowledge as
is convenient for us. For we do willingly confess, that we are the children of
Adam by nature, disobedient unto the will of God, senseless in our own
corrupt nature, so perverse and obstinate, that uneath we will be brought to
repentance, so hardened in heart, that we can not be broken with the sense of
sin, finally of such pride and arrogancy, that we can scarcely be drawn
to confess our sins: to be short, enemies to our own salvation, unless God
of his fatherly favor and grace vouchsafe to correct and amend the malice of
our froward nature, and to enable and make us apt to do such works. Why
do they then envy us this humility and lowliness of heart, in that we
think we ^oe greatly honor our God, when we refer all things to his
gracious goodness and mercy? But if they think this ^ure humility be
exceeding, and more ^han needful, is this so horrible an offense, that we
should therefore be thought worthy of all punishments and torments that can
be devised be ac ompted infamous, banished, imprisoned, hanged and burned?
Surely this their fierce and barbarous cruelty, may be a sufficient
declaration unto your majesty, that this is no godly zeal in the Papists (as
they call it) but rather an exceeding choler and heat of stomak, boiling in
their envious and malicious breasts. The other benefit of our justification is
our co^iunctio^ with Christ: Our communion and fellowship with Christ.
for it is not enough for a man to be only absolved of his sin, but it is
also requisite and necessary that he be marueilously renuee, and show a new
obedience, the which nothing can work in the^, save only ye power of god
through our L. and savior Jesus Christ: and this is ye second effect of
faith, which the holy ghost has poured into our hearts by the which a man being
made free from the fear of all enemies and danger of damnation, does wholly
possess Jesus Christ, Luke. 1. Roma. 8.
the very son of God and man, to the intent he might live in him, not in
walking after the flesh, but in holiness of spirit, and that he should
thenceforth work righteousness in the sight of God, and of his son Christ,
through whose blood shed, and sacrifice offered he is purged and cleansed
from all his offenses and filthiness. Last of all, that to declare himself
both mindful and also thankful, for so great mercifulness, and loving
kindness showed toward him, he should on the other side return love back
again toward God, and be zealous in serving and honoring him.

The which doctrine the Apostle does plainly set forth in his epistle to
the Romans, in these words: There remains now no condemnation (says he)
unto such as be engrafted into Christ Jesus, that is to say, those that walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit: for the lively law of the
spirit, which is in Christ has loosed me from the bondage of sin and
death. For that which was impossible to the law through the infirmity of the
flesh, Romans 8.
God by sending his own son into flesh, of likeness and similitude unto
our sinful flesh, has after a sort destroyed sin by sin in the same
flesh, that the justice of the law might be accomplished in us which walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit, for those that be addicted unto
the flesh, have their minds bent upon fleshly desires, but they that be
renewed in spirit do follow the motion and direction of the spirit, and the
desire of the flesh, is death and destruction: contrariwise the desire of the
spirit is peace, joy, and life everlasting: For the desire or affection of
the flesh is against God, neither is it nor can not be obedient unto the
law of God. Therefore such as are given to the flesh can not please God,
howbeit you walk not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be the spirit
of God be within you. And who so has not the spirit of Christ, is none of his,
but if Christ be within you, then is the body dead as concerning sin, but
the spirit alive or rather life it self for righteousness sake. Wherefore if
the spirit of him that raised Christ's from death abide in you, the same also
will restore you and your mortal bodies unto life, because of the spirit that
dwells in you: wherefore brethren we are now no more subject unto the
flesh, to live after the lust thereof: For if ye live after the desires and
concupiscentes of the flesh, ye shall dye the death, but if contrariwise by
the power of the spirit, you conquer and subdue the lusts thereof, you shall
live in most perfect felicity: for all whosoever is directed by ye spirit of
god are numbered among the sons of God.

Here does Paul most notably and largely declare the second part of our
Justification, and the end also of our conjunction with Christ Jesus, namely
that we should lead our life, not after the motion of the flesh, and the
voluptuousness thereof, but according to the direction of the holy spirit,
the which most profitable and comfortable conjunction and fellowship with him,
if we had and did enjoy, we would not fall to such vayn and needelesse
questions as we do. 2. Timoth. 9.
For what profit is in the subtle questions and difputations, whether the
righteousness of a Christian man be a substance or an accident, a quality
inherent, or only in us by imputation? Thom. Aqui. 1.2. q. 113.
whether the justification of the wicked and ungodly, be only the forgiveness
of the sin or no? whether infusion of grace be requisite in the remission of the
fault? or whether the motion of freewill be not also requisite thereunto?
whether the wicked be justified in an instant, or in process of time? whether
justification of grace do go before in order of nature and such like quiddities
and subtle niceties? except we have ye virtue and efficacy of Christ Jesus
imprinted in our hearts, Ephesians. 3.
which we trust is in ye hearts of ye faithful beleuers as Paul prayed for ye
congregation of Ephesus, and who loves his church dearly, as ye same apostle
says in another place, and yt we be ye members of his mystical body. The same
Paul does likewise testify in the epistle to the Corinths, that Christ does
speak in him, whose power and virtue the Corinthians also did 2. Cor. 13.
perceive in his speech, and warns the^ that they should give ear unto
Christ dwelling within the^, for otherwise (says he) Christ will reiecte
and refuse you Moreover, John. 17.
our Lord and savior Jesus Christ did likewise make his earnest request
unto his father, and no doubt but he obtained it, that those which were his
might be so coupled together in so sure and fast a band, that as he and his
father were one, so they might also be one. The manner and order of which
society, Cyrill a very ancient doctor, does very largely entreat of, in
his treatise upon the.17. Chapter of the Gospel after John, whether I refer
the reader concerning the same.

And now I cannot otherwise think but that these phrases of speech usual in
Paul and diverse ancient writers in the Church, shall in these our days be
thought somewhat absurd and unapt, forasmuch as all labor now adays not to
profit religion with the true and perfect exercises of the mind, but with
ceremonies and such like trashe, devised rather for vain show and
ostentation, tha^ upon any godly purpose. Whereupon it grows, ye our
adversaries acknowledge no other communion of the body of Christ, save only
that which they say is exhibited in the holy supper unto us al. As they
likewise know no other regeneration, than that which they think is given in
baptism, nor any other righteousness or justification, than that which is hid
in Christ, who is so far distant from us, as heaven from earth: whereas
notwithstanding he that has not put on Christ, is void of all justice and
innocence, the only paths that lead us unto God, neither is it marvel,
that these sayings of the Apostles and other the faithful have been unknown
unto diverse. For it is as easy a matter to teach the blind to conceive the
brightness of the shining Sun beams, Man blind vvithout^ the right o^ the
spirit.
by the comparison of other creatures, which he has never seen, as to teach
men these things, and persuade them therein which are only addicte to the
natural diseases of the flesh, and therefore I do most heartily pray and
beseech those that move and provoke your Majesty to persecute us by all kind
of torments and cruelties, that they would first learn the reason and cause
of our Justification in the school of our savior Christ, before they
proceed to condemn us to be heretics, unworthy this life, or the society and
fellowship of men.

Of good works after the doctrine of the Papists.
AFter they have thus fowly and shamefully erred in this chief foundation of
our faith, touching satisfaction and justification, they cannot possibly
deliver unto us any true and certain doctrine of good works: and yet
notwithstanding, we have better cause to bewail their blindness and
unmercifulness, tha^ to ieste thereat, who falsely slaundering us with the
rejecting of good works, have taught a doctrine of their own devise
concerning the same most pernicious and hurtefull unto man.

Therefore this they lay for the ground work of this their doctrine, that a man
^ustified, may safely and lawfullye per^ourme that which is riquired in the
law ^f God after their own fantasy, and according to the power and strength
of their own will, that they by the aid and assistaunce of Gods grace are
able to do works meritorious de condigno (as they call it). In the mean while
not one word of Christ Jesus, The ^^rc^ degrees of merits. Merita d^gna.
and the presence of his holy Spirit in the hearts of the faithful,
whereupon proceeds all our power and strength whatsoever, the fruits of
which freewill they call merits digna, De Congr^^o
and thereof do make three sorts. The first sort they term to be of
congruence, De Condig^o.
whereby we prepare our selves to receive the grace of God: The second of
c^ndigniti^, (as they call it) or of deserte, for because that the doer and
worker thereof is worthy the grace of God, and the increase therein. The
third kind comprehends both the other two sorts of merits, the which being
compared with the rewards propounded for the same, do easyly match the^ in
worthiness and excellency.

Concerning the first sort they teach v^ that a man of his ownefree motion and
will may without the grace of God prepar^ and able himself to receive the
grace o^ God, so that a man only do his endeavor and good will. Again, this
preparation contains three parts: The first^ that a man should cease to
committ^ sin. Secondly to abate his lust and w^^ to sin. Thirdely to
endeavor hymself^ to embrace righteousness: likewise (the^ say) that three
things are requisite in a man to the doing of a meritorious act: the mind
that works it, the free will that moves the mind: the intention and purpose
respecting a good end: but of God and of his holy spirit, not one word I
warrant you.

And the works that issue out of this root deserve three things, remission of
sin, increase of grace, and possession of life everlasting, the which we merit
by mean of charity, and the excellency of the work: likewise of good works
there be two sorts either of commandments, or but only of counsel or
supererogation (as they term them) because a man is not bound (...) do them,
but that Gods will is that (...) should merit so much the more. And ^ese be
the works (say they) which ^hriste taught his disciples in the.5. Math. 5.
Works of supererogation.
of ^athew in this wise: Blessed be the poor (...) spirit, for theirs is the
Kingdom of ^eauen: Blessed are they that mourn, or they shall receive
comfort: Blessed ^re the meek in heart, for they shall in^erite the earth:
Blessed are they that ^unger and thirst for righteousness sake, ^or they shall
be satisfied. Blessed are the ^leane in heart, for they shall see God: Blessed
are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God: Bles^ed are
they that suffer persecution, for ^heirs is the kingdom of heaven: Blessed are
ye when men persecute and revile you, and speak all evil upon you,
slaundering you most falsely for my sake: rejoice and be glad, for great is
your reward in heave: for so haven they persecuted the Prophets in old time.
But by these and other like places of holy scripture vnco^strued, they gather
the order and life of Monkerie, the vows of chastity, ob^dience, poverty
full of all superstition, (...) this kind of life (say they) is perfect an^
most acceptable unto God, insomuche (...) they contemn al other things in
respect, and call al other Christians, worldlings and secular and lay people.

Works of man's device and invention.
The residue of their good works ar^ to fast in the holy time of Lent, to
abstein from the eating of flesh at certain times in the weke, which they call
the ho^^ week, to whip and scourge themselves, to build Chapels, found
Chauntries, give lamps and candle-lights to set before saints in mid day, to
go on pilgremage^sing Masses, and such execrable works of superstition. Of
which things this saying of Esai may well and aptly be verified against them
that use the^: Esaias. 1.
Who has required these things at your hands, and that not without a cause:
for this kind of service is so far from being acceptable unto him, yt they are
most odious and hateful unto him, as may appear by the many fold plagues and
punishments, which he lays daily upon us, and that most worthily. Therefore if
our adversaries find fault ^ith us, because we teach not the people (...) do
such works, we are very well con^nt to sustein that accusation of theirs. ^or
let the^ denounce against us co^dem^tion never so great nor so often, our god ^ne
doubt not) will absolve us: let them ^rsecute us never so extremely, he will
(...) our defense and buckler: let them put (...) to most cruel deaths,
almighty God ^il restore us unto life again thorough ^hriste Jesus, who is our
only life. Fi^ally though they burn us to ashes, he that raised Jesus Christ
from death, ^ill likewise raise up again our bodies ^ute of duste and ashes,
for the spirits ^ake that dwells in us. Romans 8. Roma. 8.


Of the good works of a man that is justified.
First we protest and affirm, that our adversaries do most falsely slander us,
where they say of us that we contemn the doing of good works, and that we
persuade ye people that they are made holy and righteous in Christ, and the it
skilleth not how they live. For we pr^teste the contrary, that that doctrine
(...) neither the doctrine of the Gospel, (...) our doctrine, forasmuch as it
appears manifestlye in scripture, that a good t^^ must bring forth good
fruit, whereby (...) may appear that the root thereof is god* And the Apostle
does plainly teach (...) the cause, why Christ has deliuere^ us from the
tyranny of sin, and by h^^ righteousness made us righteous, when he says on
this wise. For we also some time were mad, stubberne, wandering out of the
way, serving diverse lusts an^ vanities, living in malice and envy, hateful,
one at deadly hatred with another^ but after that the goodness and abundan^
love of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was manifested toward men, he
saved us not for the good works that we our selves had done, but of his ow^
free grace and mercy, by the fountain of regeneration, and by the renouation
of the holy Spirit, the which he poured upon us abunda^tly by his son
Christ, that being justified through his grace, we should be made heirs of
everlasting life according to hope. Also in an other place he says, that ye
grace of Almighty God our savior was declared, that men laying aparte all
worldly pleasures should wholly bend themselves to true and perfect
goodlinesse, righteousness and soberness, looking for the happy hope, and the
glorious coming of our lord God. If these things then be true (as we believe
them to be most true) what impudency were it to affirm, that a man should
live idelly in the household of God? truly we affirm, that a man not endued
with the spirit of regeneration, or berefte of that grace, is altogether unable
to do or speak any thing that can please God, yea so much as to acknowledge
Jesus Christ in his heart, unless he have in him Gods holy spirit, and
therefore we deem those things that have been declared by us, as touching
merits of congruence, and of condignitie, and such other like fond and
foolish distinctions, to be mere devises of man's vain head, to make sinners
become hipocrites and counterfaiters of holiness, whiles they understand not
the dark mistes of their ignorance, and be senseless, as touching their own
misery and destruction, which they cannot escape, neither by these works
preparatorie, nor by any diligence or worldly wisdom, but by the only
goodness and mercy of God, whiles he moves our minds with forcible
motions, and opens our eyes that we should see the most miserable estate
and condition we be in, and wade out of this most filthy puddell and sink of
all sin, where we are almost drewned, and be washed with the most precious
blood of the immaculate lamb, that we may our selves be new creatures, the
which thing we call properly regeneration and new birth, or sanctification
rather if ye list so to term it.

The conjunction of Christ and his members is spiritual.
And after we be justified and thus renewed, we are so united and knitte in
Christ with the band of his holy spirit, yt our works that we do afterward
ought to be accounted Christ's works, and in that respect are most acceptable
in the sight of God, but least any should fondly and vainly imagine and dream
hereof with himself, when he hears us speak of this conjunction and
fellowship with Christ, we do not hereby mean any kind of transformation or
transsubstantiation of ye body of Christ, into our bodies, as if it were
needful, that the true humility of Christ, should be laid aside and vanish
away: God forbid.

But for the true and right understanding of this misterye, we require a
spiritual man, such one as has been instructed by the holy spirit to
discern and judge of things rightely, Math. 28.
and as they ought to be in due place and order, so that he may be able to
conceive and comprehend in ye understanding of his mind Jesus Christ, our
redemer ye son of god very God and very man, glorified and sitting at the right
hand of his heavenly father, having all power committed unto him both in
heaven and in earth, the which through faith, has his continual abode and
dwelling in the hearts of his elect and chosen people. And who so is justified
on this sort, occupy not themselves in buildyng of Chappells, in saying of
Masses, in wandering on pilgrimage, nor spend their whole life in such like
superstitious exercises, but refer all their actions and enterprises and
cogitations to that service, which they know God requires at our hands:
specially they endeavor themselves firmly to retain in their minds the
perpetual and continual meditation of the wonderful conjunction they have
with Christ, The badge and token of our regeneration.
whose spirit witnesses unto our spirit, Romans 8. The holy spirit in the
minds of the regenerate. Esaias. 59.
that we are the children of God, brethren and heirs annexed with Christ, the
which testimony is a strong assurance, and most certain earneste and seal of
our election, and of Gods gracious goodness, as Esaias does teach us of the
couenaunte which God has entered with us. Neither is there any other means to
retain this affiance and adoption, than the continual calling upon the name
of God, The increase of faith. The mortification of the flesh.
joined with the reading and meditation of holy scriptures, and the mortifying
of our old Adam, and extending charitable alms toward our neighbor.
Brotherly charity.
And to the intent we may orderly learn which be the good works of him that
is regenerate and borne again in Christ, they may be referred to these three
principal points, the increase of faith, the desire of mortification of the
flesh, and the society of man, consisting in the duties of love and charity
of one toward an other: to the which places al ye works, and studies of the
elect and faithful be referred and aptely applied, as Paul does teach Romans
12. Romans 12.
Galath. 5. Galath. 5.
Colos. 3. Coloss 3.
where he says: If therefore ye be risen again with Christ, seek after
those things which be above, where Christ sits at ye right hand of God,
set your affection on things above, and not on things on the earth, for you
are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God: whenever Christ which is
our life shall appear, then shall you also appear with him in glory. Mortify
therefore your earthly members, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, evil
concupiscence, and covetousness, which is the worshypping of Images, for the
which things sake the vengeance of God is come upon the children of
disobedience. In which vices ye also walked sometime when ye lived in them: but
now put ye all wrath, envy, malice, blasphemy, filthy communication out of
your mouthlye not one to another, after ye have put of that old manne and his
works, and put over the new man, which is renewed into the knowledge,
according to the Image of him that made him, where is neither Jew, nor
Grecian, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scithian, bond nor free,
but Christ is all are all: put ye on therefore (as it becomes the elect of
God, holy and beloved bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind,
longsuffering, forbearing one another, forgiving one another, if any have a
quarrel against another, even as Christ has forgiven you, so also do ye, and
above a^ things put on love, which is ye bo^d of perfectness, let the defense
of god have victory in your hearts, to the which we are also called to be one
body: and see that ye be thankful, let the word of Christ dwell in you
abundauntly with all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your own selves with
psalms and himnes and spiritual songs, singing and giving thanks and praises
unto god in your hearts, and whatsoever ye shall do or say, do it in the name
of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks unto God the father through him. And these
say I, are the good works of the faithful, not the superstitious ceremonies
of hypocrites. Behold (most gracious sovereign) summarily and briefly the
righteousness of a Christian man, from whom all these controversies, almost
throughout al Christendom, have gone as out of a head or spring, and
specially in your majesty's low Countries, whereby your highenesse may well
perceive (if it may please you to make comparison of our doctrine and theyrs)
that it is no trifle that is in question beetwixte us, neither do we contend
of pleasure or will in a matter, wherein we hazard both life and goods, nor
it is no small or peltyng quarrel for riches or any possessions. For they
that follow this profession, and are zealous in this religion are disinherited
of their ancient and rightefull inheritaunces: But herein consists the
knotte of all our controversies, in that we affirm all our whole study and
endeavor to tend to this end, that we might perfectely and absolutelye
enjoy, that most perfect and absolute benefit of Christ bestowed upon us,
and wholly possess and enjoy him, in such wise as our heavenly father has
given him unto us: and that we should most diligently, and above all things
take heed that we be not brought in opinion to purchase our salvation by
gold or silver, by the vain and superstitious doctrine of men. And now I
refer it to your Majesty's good judgment and consideration, whether this our
most just defense and well meaning, and our earneste zeal of godliness have
deserved thus sundry ways to be persecuted, by imprisonment, exile, rackes,
tortures, fire and sword, to rid us out of the way, which have no other care
of our lives, but that we may first and principallye give God his due
honor, that is, to worship him in spirit and truth, and next thereto,
sub^itte themselves with all humility vn^ your Majesty, be obedient unto you,
John. 4.
and do to your highness all loyal and ^utifull service with most willing
minds, and hearty good will, as faithful subjects (...) their natural Prince.
It may therefor please your Majesty of your grati^us goodness to consider
whether it b^e a matter incident, and apperteining to your ^ffice and princely
vocation with equity and favor, to hear and to dete^mine ^his so weighty a
matter, where^n consists the life and safety of your Subjects, or to
permit them to be taken (as it were) perforce, out of your Majesty's hands
and jurisdiction, and without declaration of any just cause, to be tormented
with all kind of tortures and exquisite devises of tirannye, whose only
request ^s to have the controversy, for the waightinesse thereof, decided by
your majesty's determination and defi^^tiue sentence. The wise sentence of
Solomon upon the two harlottes.
It is written of Solomon that puisaunt and wise Prince, unto whom many men
resorted out of far Countries only to see him, for the report was made of
him, and the admiration that all men ha^ him in for his passing and excellent
wisdom, when the two poor women were in strife for the live child, to
which o^ them two it should appertain, that h^ disdained not to call them
before him into his chamber of presence and estate, to end the controversy by
his most wise (...) notable sentence and judgment. Whos^ example herein ought
to be a president^ to direct your majesty in this our case^ and to move your
grace to the division (...) determination of al quarrels and controversies now
depending betwixt your majesty's Subjects. For as yt most wise King did easily
discern betwixt the true mother and the false, after he understood that the
harlot forced not, The Romish church is no mother but a stepdame.
if the King should award that the live child should be divided into two
parts: even so may your majesty easly perceive yt the church of Rome (which
falsely challenges unto her self the name of the Catholic Church) is not
the true mother that brings forth Gods children, because she does not
only not show some loving affection, and pitiful compassion toward those,
being not contented (notwithstan^ing she make account of them as of her ^un)
to see them dailye condemned and exe^uted most cruelly, but also moves and
stirs up Princes and Potentates, ^o practice all tyranny upon them,
ar^eth and entertayneth men of war to ^estroy them, blows the coals, and
kindles the flame hirselfe like a most cruel stepdame, to consume the
children that belong not to her. If then the Pope be our holy father, if he be
the shepherd of Gods flock, why does he rather desire to kill them, than
with most loving and gentle persuasio^ labor to allure them home to the fold
of Chr^ste. And therefore we make our humble request and petition to your
majesty (most gracious and our most dread sovereign, to imitate this example
of Salomo^, and to take upon you ye hearing and deciding of our cause: and
forasmuch as this mother Church of Rome, or to term her more aptly and truly,
this stepdame, is proceeded so far in crueltye and furour, that she
tormenteth, ma^gleth, destroieth, hangs, draws and burns those whom it
has pleased almight^ God to send into the world, and of hy^ goodness and
fatherly providence to grau^ the fruition of this life, we most humbl^ pray
and beseech your grace not to commit the matter over to her to be
determined, do not put the sword into h^^ hands, nor give her no such
countenance or authority, whereby she man utter her spite and malice, and
wreak^ hirselfe upon your Majesty's poor subjects. For the judgments which
she uses and desires to put in execution, are such as all laws both of
god and of man do abhor: let any man who (...) list peruse all ancient
monuments, and I believe he shall not find any Record wherein has been used
any such proceeding in judgment, that the party accused, should be made
judge and have power to condemn his accuser, as we see by experience is used
and practiced by the Romish Church in these affairs: For we protestants (as
we be called) have just cause to complain of the popedom, with all his
appurtenaunces, which has bere^te us of our life, and the salvation of all
the ^ithfull, that is to say of Christ Jesus, ^hiche has made (as it were)
port sale (...) him, and changed him into infinite ^tes of sundry shapes and
forms. Not^ithstanding all the Kings and Princes the world almost did put in
commissi^^ and authority to judge of this cause, ^em which both be accused
by us and ^r greatest adversaries: we reprove the ^ste councels, and convince
them of er^r and untruths, and yet are we posted ^er to be judged by them: we
blame the ^ardinals most worthily, for that they ^ue their hands and mouths
embru^, and their clothes stained with the ^oud of Martirs, and they are
appoin^d judges over us, to determine the mat^r depending in controversy
betwixt us and them: we accuse the Bishops of sa^ilege, that whereas they ought
of duty (...) feed the flock of Christ, they do feed ^emselues and their
own bellies, and yet ^ey fit in judgment hereof, and are not ^shamed to
pronounce sentence of us, to ^e tormented and oppressed by all means and for the
furtheraunce and speedy ex^cution thereof, they stick not to entertai^ an
army, and to make pay with our spoils nor shame not to justify the same to be
agreeable to equity and conscience. In which case I wot not which way to turn
m^ what to do or say, or devise in such a cas^ Is this according to ye justice,
equity, i^ differency, yt should be in such a prince, a^ your majesty is, yt
justice and equity should be so long perverted without redress and du^
correction, and be countenanced with your commandment (as these men affirm)
which they abuse to the spoiling of men of the^ lives, liberty and goods. And
whereas other princes were let, either by sedition or c^uil war and other
troblesom affairs, yt the^ have no leisure to atte^d to our co^plainte^ against
ye papists, with such patience and indifferency, as they ought to do in such
(...) case, it seems yt god has reserved and co^mi^ ^ed ye same unto your
majesty, yt you shul^ lay aside al other your affairs and diligently be
occupied herein. And in this behalf I beseech your majesty to take heed lest
if i^ be great to your dishonor, to stand in ned^ o^ the repetitio^ of ye
example of foreign and ^^nike Princes in this case: The care that the heathen
princes had in deciding their subjects causes
We read ^ithridates sometime K. of Pontus did ^rne. 22. sundry la^guages, to
ye end that might be able to read and understand the ^^plications exhibited
unto him, by any his subjects, of what nation or country ^euer they were, and
do justice to each of ^e accordingly. Phillip the king of Ma^onie thought it
the chiefest thing that ^pertained to the majesty of a king, to (...) daily in
his chair of estate at certain ^ures to minister justice to all his sub^cts
according to equity: whose son Alex ^^^er following his fathers steps, did
be^ow certain hours of ye day, to hear and ^termine the complaints and
quarrels of ^s subjects, using to stop the one ear, bi^use (as be said) he
reserved it for ye defen^^nt. The^ if those heathen princes ye knew ^t Christ,
nor Christian religion, did (...) greatly endeavor themselves to ap^ease the
controversies that arose among their subjects. How much the rather ^ight
your majesty, being a Chrstia^ K. (...) incline your ears, and use al
diligence to decide this quarrel of so great impo^taunce, that it concerns
the salvation of all. But I most humbly beseech you^ majesty diligently to
peruse the precept that Moses wrote by Gods express commandment, concerning
the institution and duty of a Prince, Deuteronomy. 17. Deuteronomy. 17.
speakin^ to the Israelites in this wise: When tho^ art come into the land
which the Lord your God gives you, and enioyest (...) and dwell therein,
if thou shall say I will set a King over me like as a^ the nations that are
about me, then tho^ shall make him King whom the Lord thy God shall choose,
even one from amo^^ thy brethren shall thou make King ou^ thee, and thou may
not set one which i^ not of thy brethren: but he shall not mu^tiplye horses to
himself, nor bring the people again to Egypt, to increase the number of
horses, forasmuch as the lord has said unto you: Ye shall hencefort^ go no
more that way, also he ought no^ to multiply wives to himself, least hy^
heart turn away, neither shall he gather him silver and gold too much, an^
when he is set upon the seat of his kingdom, he shall write him out a copy
of this law in a book before the priests, and it shall be with him and he ought
to read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the
Lord, and obey all the words of this law and these ordinances, for to do
them, and that his heart arise not against his brethren, and that he turn
from the commandment to the right hand nor to the left, but that he may
prolong his days in his kingdom, he and his children in the throne of Israel.
Whereby your majesty may easily p^rceiue what is the proper and peculiar
office of Kings and Princes, and what affection they ought to bear toward
the study of holy scripture, wherein is contained the express will of God,
that all men alike should give themselves to the earneste s^^dy and care of
religion, piety, justice and equity, against which law of God they
offend, which deny the reading of holy scripture, and the decidyng of
controversies in religion to appertain unto Kings and Princes? It is your
office (most mighty Prince) to take away from these unjust judges of the
Romish Courts, if a man may call them judges, that are manifestly
deprehended in sacrilege.) It is your office I say, to take from them this
authority of judgment, as due to your self, and other princes in their
dominions of auntie^t right, that your majesty might with indifferencye
determine all these controversies, bring home again peace and tra^quilitie unto
your countries, relieve and succor poor men that are most cruelly
persecuted, racked, spoiled, wounded, and condemned to the stake, break the
furye and outrageous tyranny of these Termagants, which under the color and
pretense of Christian religion, do persecute those that account nothing so
dear or precious unto them as Christian religion. Otherwise unless your
Majesty provide some present remedy for these calamities, what other issue
can your Majesty look for of these things, but that in steed of most
faithful subjects to obey you, and such as will be pressed and ready to spend
both life and goods in yours Majesty's quarrel: you shall in the end be no
king of men, but only of corses, some hanging on the gibbet or gallows, some
murdered in corners, some burned unto ashes. For this one thing have the
inquisitours and their accomplices been devising and practicing continually, and
(no doubt of it) will (as they have begun long since) bring to pass that these
spoils of men's goods, whereby your Majesty, and your Kingdom should have
reaped great commodity shall be transported into foreign Countries to the
great decay of you and your realm of Spain. And what does your Majesty
think to be the destruction of your people, the decay of your realm, the
empairing of your Majesty, and damage to your most royal person? if this
be not the very confusion of all, they that preferred the Monarchy, that is
to say, that kind of government, and that state wherein one rules, were
moved so to do by the similitude and likeness of ma^s body. For the king or
chief ruler in a common wealth may aptely be resembled to the head in the
natural body, the Subjects likewise to the inferior members. And this
similitude besides the resemblaunce of preeminence, and of subjection, does
sufficiently declare unto us how great concord, and what affection ought to
be betwixt ye rulers and the subjects: how unreasonable a thing is it the^, and
how unseemly that the King should with his own hands deliver his own sword
into the hands of a mad man, with the which, he may cut in sunder the
members of the Princes own body, mangle them, disseuer them one piece from an
other, and yet he as one without sense behold it with his eyes and permit it?
who would not justly marvel at so great folly and madness? or can your
Majesty be ignorant hereof, that you are the person that plays the same part
in committing to the inquisitors your authority and power, as it were a naked
sword into their hands, wherewith they may cut and hew in pieces your
Subjects, the very members of that body, whereof your Majesty is the head,
to the great decay of your people, and weakening of your estate? For example
whereof, it may please your majesty to consider the kingdoms next about,
whose power and strength, being by these means empaired and decayed, both by
land and sea, have fallen into most miserable calamities, and have been
constrained to pray aid of their enemies to succoure them in their
extremities. I omit here to declare how far this disagreeth from the good
and just kind of government, described by the wise and best learned in those
affairs, for subjects to be not only not defended, preserved, and under the
protection of their sovereigns, nor advanced by them, but spoiled, oppressed,
and most cruelly put to death and murdered.

Aristotle in the books which he wrote of the state of commonweals records
(not without great detestation of so horrible a fact) that certain Barbarians
in time paste used this manner, that whosoever entered into any place of
regiment, before all things should take a solemn oath, that he should do,
nor say nothing in favor and behalf of the people, nor seek to keep
concord and love among the people, as though love and fellowship would rather
cause breach of laws, than hatred and enmity. What would Aristotle say then,
if he were alive among us again? Is it not like he would say that the
Princes of Christendom are of the same mind, affection and purpose, and that
they had determined, conspired, and vowed the same with a solemn oath, that
the people should have none more deadly foe and enemy unto them, than the
prince and ruler, by whose sufferance, commandment or negligence or
dissembling, or authority, every good man should either be hanged, or banished,
or imprisoned causelese, and without desert or crime either of fellonie, or
murder or adultery, or any such like offenses, but only because he is
contented (with hazard of life and goods) rather to obey the commandment of
God, than in leaving them to follow the vain fantasies and devises of man's
brain and the doctrine of false hipocrites, the which thing should be more
manifest than the light of the ^aye even to Princes themselves, if before
they were haled so violentlye to most horrible execution, they might be herein
ye defense of their cause and innocence.

Beesydes, what pleasure can a prince take which fears not to incur the
hatred of his Subjects, and whose conscience pricketh him, that his people
love or regard him not as their father or Captain, but hate him as their
ennimye: how can it be, that that woman should bear any good affection
toward him, whose tyranny has been the cause that their beeloued husbands
have been haled out of their arms, and put to most cruel death? how can
children honor him that have seen their parents most cruelly persecuted and
slain before their faces, and al by his unmercifulness. Will not all the
whole people be loath to put their life and goods in ieopardye for him, who
has wronged and iniuried the^ most spitefully? The consideration whereof, if
it be but of small force to move your Majesty though they be very weighty
and worthy the marking of all sorts of people: yet let the name of Christian
religion, of Christian belief, yea the name of Christ move you, wherewith we
flatter and please our selves, and vaunt our selves above other. This barbarous
tyranny leave it to infidells, the very name of Christ should be of force
sufficient to move your Majesty believing in Christ, and thereof bearing the
name of a Christian, to have an earneste zeal, and ardent affection to embrace
mercy, charity, and meekness of heart^ What was meant by the ceremony of
the old law, when it was commanded that Princes, For what purpose kings
were anointed.
ere they took upon them the government of the state, should be anointed
with oil? any other thing but in following the quality of the oil, they
shall deserve the good will of the people, by lenity, mildness, and
gentleness and consider that the virtue of the oil is to supple the old
sores, not to make any green wounds. And doubtless Christian Princes ought
to be so much the more of gentleness, mildness, and cherefulnesse, because
they have in chardge the people of God, the flock of Christ, and ^is beloved
spouse the Church, which ^^ey ought with their power and might ^oth to
defend and advance. And here ^t is worthy the noting, to show the diffe^ence
which Christ puts betwixt Christian and Ethnicke Princes in these ^ordes:
The Kings of forrayn nations says he) do bear rule over them, in so much
that they be both gracious with ^he people for their great authority, and ^y
an honorable title are called (...), that is to say, beneficial. Howbeit I
would have you bend another way, that the more one of you shall excel
another, he beehaue himself so much the more lowely, and persuade himself,
that ^he rather occupyeth the place of a minister unto other, than a ruler of
others: and this lesson did Christ teach his apostles, how much more
reasonable is it than to apply this to al Princes and magistrates? For they are
not set beside their chair by this commandment, but are called to the
consideration of the^^ own weal, and to moderation and bou^tifulnesse, that
calling often to their remembrance, and duly considering tha^ they have
obtained this preeminence above others by the only grace and f^^ of God: and
that they over whom the^ bear rule, are not brute beasts, but (...) created
of God, of the self same nature that they themselves be of, and that the^ shall
be herafter partakers al of one kingdom, and are the brethren of Christ,
which did as well shead his most precious blood for the most base and simple
soul, as for the most mighty King an^ Prince of the world: Finallye that
they are the members of one Church, as i^ they were the parts of a natural
body, whereof none ought proudlye to advance it self above the rest, but
with all modesty of mind, temperaunce, mildness and gentleness guide and
govern their common wealth, to the common weal of their subjects, and yet in
such wise, yt they do or enterprise nothing contrary to the commandment of
god, who is king, and Lord Param^unt above al other kings, and prin^^ of the
earth. It is reported by the hi^riagraphers, that when Octauius Au^stus heard
a flatterer on a time, call (...) lord, he refused ye title, desiring rather be
accounted a fellow citizen and ma^strate among his subjects, than to be ^ffed
up with pride of so hautie a name. ^owbeit we without flattery desire to give ^to
our princes the most honorable and ^rincely style that we can devise,
foras^uche as we know that their power ^d authority is established by Gods
^orde, The authority of the Magistrate proceeds from God. Romans 13.
so that they in like sort would take ^tie and compassion upon their poor
sub^^ctes, making their humble supplicati^^s, and in most lamentable wise
com^^ayning themselves unto them, and not ^^ffer them before the cause be
heard, ^r that they have pleaded in their own ^efence, to be so wrongfully
and shame^ull put to execution. And if this reason ^ught to move al Christian
princes to en^line to mercy, how much more ought your Majesty be persuaded
to exte^d mercy and favor toward your poor afflicted subjects. For with
how many notabl^ and princelye gifts and ornaments ha^^ God blessed and
endewed your Maiestie^ to the end that being so furnished y^^ should employ
them to the defense of hy^ Church, either in part or in whole wit^ such
feruente zeal, as appertains (...) that behalf.

I omit here the occasion I ha^^ offered to speak of the excellency, and
antiquity of your majesty's house and family: I will not enter into the
discour^^ of ye most notable and famous victorie^ and triumphs of your most
noble progenitors, namely and especially of the most redoubted Emperor
father vnt^ your majesty, whose famous memori^ will be conveyed to al ye
posterity and continued for ever: one only virtue will I speak of, which I
think praise worthy among ye residue of your most noble qualities and
ornaments namely your majesty's most honorable inclination to gentleness,
courtesy and bountifulness, which ye hipocrits and pharisees under ye cloak
and shadow of religion go about to extinguishe i^ your grace, and rob your
majesty of ye due ^erued renown and commendation for the ^ne, and by taking
the sword out of your ^iesties hand abuse the same, to ye great ^rogation of
your majesty's honor, to (...) sheding of much blood in your domi^ons both
far and near, boasting that ^ey do it by lawful commission, and (...) your
Majesty's authority and war^t. If they that be your majesty's mor^ll enemies
durst enterprise thus much, ^n would in no wise suffer it, and can your
^aiestie abide that these so shameful ^ings should be not only attempted, but
^t in execution by, and against your own ^aturall subjects, under your
majesty's ^ountenaunce, and under color of your ^ucthoritie? And now that
your majesty ^ath intelligence hereof, it behooves you to ^e vigilant, and be
ready and willing to with^tande these injuries in this wise offered ^o your
subjects, to the performaunce whereof, your Majesty has no need of ^nye
provision in warlike sort, nor no ^rmed men, nor great barbed horses to ^erue
in field, to the endomaging of your realm and spoil of your towns and p^ple,
neither yet to entertain any stran^ and foreign soldiers. For your real^ is
full of many faithful and most obe^ent subjects. Neither is it any forrai^
Country appertaining to your swor^ enemies, that you shall invade hereby,
(...) about the banishement of Turks a^ Infidells out of your Realm and t^
confines thereof, but to remove and aba^don out of all Christian congregation
all idolatry, and doting superstition, a^ the vain fantasies and devises of
man idle brain. And therefore our quarrel ^ing not against bodylye ennimies,
b^ ghostly and spiritual, we shall have (...) use either of brazen pieces or
pikes, (...) steel armoure, Armor and weapons unnecessary instruments to
remove abuses.
one only sword w^^ suffice us, to wit, the sword of t^ Spirit, even the
word, by the whyc^ we may easilye bridle Satan, a^ break his jaws, quench
his fiery dart^ deface all Idolatrye and superstition and pluck it up by the
roots. T^ which sword both beautiful and to t^ eye, and serviceable to be
used, if it plea^ your majesty to take about you, I hope and (...) it will
shortly come to pass, that you ^^l bring all your subjects of your low
^u^treys without the loss of any one man (...) sheading one drop of blood to
be most ^edient to ye law and word of God, as they ^me bin heretofore most
loyal, with all ^^etifull submission unto your Maie^es edicts and ordinances,
whose daily ^ayers unto God are only that it would ^ease your Majesty to
entermedle in ^ese matters that are in controversy, and (...) determinine them
with equity as it ^all seem best to your wisdom, using ^fficient judges on
either part, that by ^iendely and indifferent comparison of ^^th the doctrines
of the Papists, and of ^e Protestants, the evil part may yield (...) the good,
and your Majesty sit an in^ifferent arbitratour betwixt them.

But perhaps our adversaries will ^ake answer, that there is henceforth
(...) cause of trial by disputation, for as much as our religion has been long
ago ^^ndemned by many general Councels, and by all universities namely and
principally at the council of Constance, at which time by the sentence and
awa^ of that Council, John Husse, and Hiero^ of Prage, were burned for
maynteyn^ that error which Luther of late ren^ likewise at the counsel of
Trent was ^^thers heresy condemned, so that there ^^maineth nothing, but
present death (...) them that shall show themselves diso^dient to the decrees
and determination of councels, forasmuch as they are ^^come rebels, and have
fallen from t^ faith of their holy mother Church: the which it is not
unknown, how the all this their tyranny they show to war^ us, has taken his
original and beg^ning, which if a man would enter m^ narrowly into the
consideration of, a^ diligently weighe the words thereof, t^ should easily
perceive there is no suc^ matter of importance, why princes shu^ not be
forward and willing to defen^ their subjects from those lions mouth which
bear themselves so bold, and boa^ of the name of the Church, touchin^ the
prejudice of the Universities, which account our doctrine heretical, and so
condemn it. They do al know rig^t well, and their consciences may bear them
sufficient record, that they speak not what they think, but for fear of
punishment, or loss of their prefermentes and dignities, or confiscation of
goods, or for shame, or loss of life, are enforced against their conscience,
as might appear most manifestlye in the condemnation of that most learned and
godly Doctor John Egidio of Arragon, chief Cannon preacher in the Cathedral
Church in Siuil, where certain that were judges and arbritratours in the
matter (whom the Inquisitours do call Qualifiers of the cause) repenting
themselves of the injury offered to that good and godly man, did afterward
make protestation according to the truth: which was also the cause that a
certain divine called Maestro Blanco was burned, and Doctor Constantino de la
Fuente after he had bin long time tossed to and fro, and vexed by the
inquisitours, and caught a great sickness by reason of the continual filth
and stench of his prison, at the length took his death of the same. And for
the self same cause likewise were Ieronymo de Caro, and Luys de Metina, both
Monks of the order of Saint Dominick, executed with diverse other learned and
godly persons, whose names your Majesty is right well acquainted withal. It
may therefore please your highenesse to consider thus much, that if these men
had indifferent justice ministered unto them, and free pardon of speech, to
speak frankclye what they thought, they would have spoken most notably in
defense of the truth. For the divines and clergy of Spain, had sufficient
trial as well of their excellent learning as of their singular virtue. And here
I omit to speak of the great residue, who agreeing in the same profession of
faith, which the Protestants of Germany do profess, did with great
constancye of heart, and stoutnesse of courage end their miserable life by a
far more joyful and glorious death amiddes the flames of fire. And among
these divines there, and university, you shall perhaps find some good men, and
yet some so simple and rude ^diots (God wot) that they think it against Gods
forbod, to be but one dram wiser than their masters, (which like sheep that
follow the belwether) depend wholly either of the Deane or rector (as they
call him) of the Vniuiuersitie, or of ^he Abbot or prior of the covent, or some
famous and notable doctor or graduat. And who knows not, that these be the
Popes own tender dearlings, which besturre them on al sides to keep the coals
of Purgatory always alive? What judgment then can they give on the other
side: for the other party, which acknowledges no other Purgatory, than the
blood of Jesus Christ, by the which all men of all times and ages were
purged from the filthe of their sins, and delivered from eternal death and
damnation. Concerning the council of Consta^ce, all the world knows of what
disposition Pope John was, and what earnest suitors and Antipopes against him
for ye popedom, and what decrees and constitutions were made at the same
assembly, as also how all they that were at ye same counsel were affected in
religion, it is evident to all the world, in that they condemned those men to
be burned, who labored earnestly to have enormities of the church reformed,
and came not thither another of themselves without sendyng for, but under
promise of their safeconducte, safely to return again. In so much that that
counsel is termed of many men in their writings a petie counsel, declaring
thereby that it was not an asse^bly of the pastors and ministers of the Gospel,
for the reformation and amendment of the decayed estate of the Church, but
rather of furious and diuellishe persons to overthrow the poor remanent of
the church, forasmuch as at the same most troublesome time, three Popes were
at great varia^ce and dissension among the^ selves, proclaimed open war one
against an other, were all of them removed, and in their places was Martine
the fifte substituted Pope.

But to speak somewhat in a generality concerning counsels, it is a plain
matter, that he that is guilty will never give sentence against himself. And
therefore the Counsel of Trent, which was purposely summoned and assembled
against them that impugn the authority of the Pope may aptely be resembled
to a confederacy of thieves and murderers, which assemble themselves together
in wods and deserte places, and there condemn also the inhabitants both of
the Town and Country about them, for that they lie in wait for them, and
seek to bring them before the Magistrate to examination. For what other thing
do the Popes in all their counsels they call? First and formoste they appoint
some strong City for the purpose, they provide garrisons of Soldiers to
guarde, and to defend them from foreign force, they banishe al out of that
assemblye, that would any ways disagree from them, or if they admit them, it
goes near to cost them their lives. And when they be met together, and
mounted into their seats, thence they send their threats and curses like
shunder boltes thick and threefolde, to the great disturbaunce and anoy of
all the world, threatening excommunication, war, destruction, banisheme^t,
murder, and lastly fire and fagots. But to whom I beseech you, do they send
these their fiery darts? Forsooth even unto such a^ with hearty sorrow and
grief do complain against them, and accuse them o^ most horrible
sacrilege, whereby they have berefte the poor Christian people of their only
health and comfort Christ Jesus, for their own commodity and advantage, that
they might with more security satisfye their filthy minds with riote,
ambition, and all kind of abominable lust. Wherefore I refer the matter to
your most gracious consideration and judgment, whether any such^ counsels
and determinations ought t^ be of such force and power, wherein they claim
unto themselves, as it were by a special prerogative, an authority and
jurisdiction above al Christian princes and Emperors, by virtue whereof they
might command Princes, and rob and spoil their subjects both of life and
living at their pleasure: how much more convenient were it to follow the
example of Constantine, who having intelligence of the great quarrels and
controversies that were betwixt the Arrians and the Christians, did not refer
the matter to the authority of the Pope, but by his own authority called a
council, free for every man to resort unto, and sat himself mean betwixt
two parts, as an equal and indifferent judge and arbitratour betwixt them: and
when he had cast all the voices and sentences of every particular man into one
barrel, he set the^ on fire, declaring himself to be chief and head of ye
counsel: and when ye matter had bin long time debated on both sides, he found
a means to bring al to an unity, til Satan began to stur in ye same matter,
and so set the^ at variance, and raised new troubles again. But if it be a
matter of impossibility, or of great difficulty to call a general counsel
together, yet surely it is ye office and duty of every christian prince by some
convenient and sufficient asse^bly of his own subjects to procure peace and
tra^quilitie unto ye church, by taking away al superstition and idolatry, which
corrupt the purity and simplicity of Christian religion, and are cause of
much vexation and unquietness in the same. An^ therefore now it behooves all
our king^ and Princes to follow the good exampl^ of their predecessors, in
employing their care and study about preserving and restoring the true
worship and service o^ God, as did diverse Christian Emperors namely
Theodosius, Iustinianus, Charles the great, and sundry others, whose diligenc^
is singulerly and highlye commended o^ the ancient Fathers, specially of
Augustine in the book of the reproof of the Donatistes. Epist. 73.
Pope Leo in his.73. epistle does earnestly advise the Emperor so to esteem of
his princely estate, and dignity, as committed unto him, not only for the
governance of Cities by civil policy, but also for the defense and
advancement of the Church by ecclesiastical discipline. Gregorye the first
did maruellouslye commend the diligence used by Ricaredus king of the
Gotthes, in rooting out the heresy of the Arrians. Isidore sometime Bishop
of Civil (as Gratian reports) said that princes shall be plagued in time to
come, for suffering the Church to go ^o ruin, which god committed unto them
^o foster and cherishe (as says the spirit ^f God by the mouth of his holy
prophet Esaias.) And there is no man that doubts ^ut that the Pope will do
all that lies ^n him to hinder the assemble of prouinci^ll counsels. Whereby
he does manifestly bewray both the weakness of his ^wne cause, the vanity
and corruption of his doctrine, and the despair he has in ^che of both. For
who knows not, or has not heard tell of the great comminations which Paul
the third sometime thundered partly by letters, and partly by his Legates
against the Emperor your Majesty's father of famous memory, only because
he determined to call a National council of the states of Germany, to the
intent to reconcile and bring to unity the Princes of Germany, whose religion
and profession we teach and maintain in your Majesty's low countries: but if
the Pope do trust to the equity and right of his cause, why is he so loath
to have it bearde and debated, and so fearful to put it to comprimise and
arbitr^ment of Princes? Why trauaileth he t^ have their books burned of whom
he (...) accused. For if our accusations be^ vain, be false and fained, what
caus^ has he to fear them? Doubtless the^ would fall of themselves
without any force. Forsooth the Pope and his clergy and the Inquisitors
perceive right well that the people, which in time to for^ have bin blind and
ignorant, have now^ their eyes and understandings opened, t^ see and perceive
their iuggling tricks and most horrible abuses: and therefore they have no
care, nor zeal at all of promoting true religion, but only laboure^ to
suppress our writings, and to stop the passage unto Princes ears, that the
people cannot have free access to make their complaint to the sovereign
prince, practicing all means they can devise to entangle the consciences of
men in their most durtie dregs of superstitious ceremonies, and treading
under their feet the most comfortable Gospel of our savior Christ. It
may please your Majesty therefore, to consider and weighe that great profit
can arise to your ^ealme by these their cruel and horrible ^dictes and
proclamations. For admit that your graces Subjects do embrace ^he Romish
religion by force and coertio^, ^urely those that love true Religion sin^erely,
The inco^ueniences that ensue where religion is forced.
and from their hearts will suffer all extremity before they will submit
themselves under that yoke of Tyranny again. But if you do still license the
inquisitors to use their accustomed cruelty toward them, how deeply shall
your grace heap vengeance upon your own head, in suffering so many of
your Subjects to perish, for whose cause Almightye God does so bountifully
bless all nations, and multiplye the fruits thereof infinitelye, for their
sustentation and nourishement: as for their souls they are free,
notwythstanding from sense of any of these torments which the body endures,
as may appear most manifestly by that notable saying written in the book of
wisdom. The souls of the righteous be in ye hands of ye L. and there is no
torment yt touches the^. Verily in the judgment of the foolish (...) they
seem to dye, and their end is thought to be evil, and their departure from
among us to be miserable, where as (...) very deed they are in safety. For
thoug^ they be tormented in the sight of men, ye^ great is their hope of
immortality, an^ for a little punishment suffered here, the^ attain to
merueilous great benefits (...) for God does try them, like as gold i^
tried in the furnace, and finding them fi^ for him, accepts them as a pure
and (...) perfect sacrifice. And therefore at such (...) time as god shall
take care of them, they (...) shall shine and shall run like sparks of fire in
dry reeds, they shall judge ye nations, (...) govern the people, and be under
the perpetual protection and safegarde of God, upon whom, whosoever repose
their trust, they shall understand the truth, and of loving affection cleave
unto him with all faythfulnesse: for grace and peace shall happen unto his holy
ones, and his Elect shall be had in regard, but the wicked and ungodly
shall be punished according to their own de^tes, for neglecting the truth and
god^^nesse, and forsaking the Lord. For they ^at despise wisdom and
learning, are ^iserable, and their hope is vain, their ^^oure lost, and their
works fruitless and unprofitable. Thus far that wise man ^ste wisely.
Moreover, if your majesty's ^ubiectes of the low Countries, either ^r
weakness of mind, or frailty of bo^ye, fearing the extremity of torments,
shall rather fall from the known truth, and renounce Christ and his
religion, ^han patientlye and manfullye to suffer ^eath, your grace shall
increase the fact ^nfinitely in greatness of mischief (forasmuch as your
grace thereby shall not only destroy their bodies, but also their souls, to
everlasting death and damnation. In which respect a far more perilous
judgment depends over your head by the hand of God, who has spoken by
his son Christ in this wise: Look with what measure ye measure unto other, by
the like it shall also be measured unto you. O most terrible and fearful
judgment, if that most severe a^ just Judge, do purpose to execute the same
upon our bodies, and souls, an^ in his wrath draw out his sword (...) show
vengeance upon us. Besides this who sees not how great a blotte an^ stayne
it is to the name of a christian, t^ practice so great tyranny which maket^
forreyne nations, as the Turks, Jews and Indians to abhor christianity, a^
the cause of so great troubles, wars and persecutions. What shall I need^
here to rehearse that hence as out of a hea^ and spring infinite quarrels,
dissentions and mortal enmities have issued an^ proceeded. Forasmuch as no
continuanc^ of time can be able hereafter to wear^ out of the memory of the
posterity, the horrible cruelty and tyranny that has been practiced by
confiscation of goods and lands, rasing of houses to the ground, destroying
of families, and lastly in burning their corses, after long and loathsome
imprisonment.

Likewise who would not deem those Princes to be most unhappy whom, their
subjects have in hatred and disdayn, ^^se persons although they be strongly
^arded, can not for all yt be quiet in their and. For the most sure and safest
defense (...) Prince, consists in the love and good (...) of the people, and
they are thought to (...) strengthened accordignly as they be ^nded: And to have
so many soldiers defend them as they have trusty friends ^illing subjects to
obey and serve them. ^st of al, The armor of Christians against persecution by
silence and hope.
whereas all the professors of (...) Gospel are not all alyke taught and
^structed in true piety and godliness, (...) so much that many are without
^at Christian patience which GOD (...) earnestely requires in times of
ad^ersitie and persecution, in commanding (...) rather to pray for our
ennimyes (...) persecutoures, than to revenge in^rie with doing the like
again: they (...) say, either for impacience of mind, (...) for the hatred
they bear unto such ^fences, do put on their Armoure ^gaynste their own
fellows and com^anyons, and dare presume to commit ^he trial of the
quarrel to the sword.

Albeit in my opinion this is a thing fa^ unsitting the godly zeal, mildness
p^ence and forbearyng that should be i^ Christian man. But yet forasmuch it
does come to pass many times, I seech your Majesty (most gracious so^
rain) to weigh and consider how man great mischiefs and inconveniences ensue
of this civil dissension and disco^ robbing, spoiling, and murdering wi^ out
measure, honest matrons are corr^ted, chaste virgins defloured, men's goo^ and
substauece taken perforce, all kin^ of murder and manquelling put in pr^ctise
and exercise, some by the sword some by fire even in their own house some
shall be slain with the sword, so^ burned with their houses over their head^
sow drowned in the rivers, whereby t^ air infected with the filthy corruption
(...) the dead carcasses, bredeth a plague, wh^che is always incident unto
wars, an^ commonly accompanied with great dearth, because where tumultes and
v^ rores be raised, there can be no tillage husbandry maintained. And what then
when the country and common weal^ ^ath been so sore shaken and wasted, it is
^ot possible within twenty years or mo, (...) recover the loss, and to be in
as perfect light again, as it was before: for after that weapons have put
laws to si^ence, and men acquaynted themselves with spoil and rapine, and the
sheding ^f blood, it is a very hard matter to ^ring the people to order, and
agreement, and utterly to break them of their old ^aunte, that they learned
in war. Forced religion hardly takes deep root In the hear^
Moreo^er, what should it avail either your ma^estie or us your subjects? or
what estimation would Christ have of it, if men should by violence, and by
tyranny be brought to allow of the Popish doctrine (admitting it to be
true.) For whosoever profess any religion against their own consciences as we
see by daily experience, do never embrace the same sincerely, and from their
hearts, but contrariwise become more froward and waiward, or to what purpose
is it to overcome a man by extremity of torments, and by fear of death and
to make him recant, and say that the Romish religion is consonante with the
Gospel of Christ, or rather to be the very Gospel it self, if the party
notwithstanding be contrarily affected in his h^arte, and think with himself
secretly and in his own conscience, that he is to be detested as the very and
undoubted Antichriste, and that all his adherents, which seek to drive simple
men to their most filthy doctrine by terrors and by torments, be the Popes
feed hangmen and executors. As for example, your majesty knows full well,
and can testifye, that those which have continued in your majesty's realm of
Spain to this day, both Jews and Turks, could never be brought by
compulsion, or by any violence to allow of our religion. And albeit they
were baptized, that is to say, outwardely washed with the element, yet
notwithstanding they never forsook their old heresies, but embrace them tooth
and nail, in so much that the Inquisitours have work enough with the^, and
are plentifully enriched with the eschetes that grow unto them by the Jews
and Turks: and therefore it is a plain matter, yt there is no true religion
except it be freely and sincerely received and believed. For the outward show
and behauior of the body, be it never so Saintlyke in appearaunce, is
altogyther both unprofitable to the party, and displeasa^t and odious unto
god, The way to vvinn^ men to Christian religion.
except the sincere affection of ye heart and conscience of man be joined with
yt outward profession: yt which we cannot attain unto, but only by leni^ie,
grace, and mercy, ge^tlenesse, and by friendly conference and persuasio^, by ye
imitatio^ of honesty, and integrity of life, by pouring out prayers unto god
without ceassing, ye (...) would please him of his infinite goodness and mercy to
incline and mollify their hard hearts to ye study of true religion, and to
take away al threats of torments, al fear of ^ire and murdering one of
another: And I dare auowe it to your Majesty (most gracious sovereign) that
they which go about so to move you unto ^rueltie, bearyng you in hand, that
to ^ee the only way to make peace in your low country, those I say I dare
auowe, and do openly proteste, do gy^ you such council, as is much against^
the weal of your Country, and most derogatorye to your honor and princely
Majesty, seeking only to enriche an^ advance themselves by your
incommodities, and to set other men together b^ the ears, that they may in
the mean^ while fall a rifling and scambling, and obtain a great pray. And
why can we not learn to beware by other men's examples? has not experience
proved i^ true even in our next neighbors adjoining, that whereas some proud
and ambitious counselors, that sought their own private lucre under pretense
of religion, did most cruellye entreat man^ good and godly persons: they
themselue^ have seen, that the mo they persecute^ and put to death, the mo
did arise an^ spring up again daily, as it were of the ashes of the other. For
it is most true that was sometime said of a wise and godly person, that the
blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Gospel. Where Stephen was stoned to
death, Act. 8.
the blind^ Pharisees thought that the Church was ^tterlye destroyed:
notwithstanding it came otherwise to pass, that it increased wonderfully
thereby, Hereto may in a sort be applied that of the Poet. Nitimur in vetitum
semper cupimusque negat^^d est. We strive for that we most are forbid.
as testifyeth saint Luke in his book that he wrote of the ^ctes of the
Apostles. Whereupon that perverse and wicked council began to ^e condemned,
as a thing that had done much harm, and no good at all, not only to the
Church, but to the common weal. And therefore after that Princes had granted
liberty to every one freely to say their opinion of religion, and that was
determined and resolved upon, that was most consonant unto the word of God,
peace was foorthwyth restored again, and had continued, if it had not turned
all things topsie turuie again, by unruly Popes.

But forasmuch as I know mine own weakness and my poor estate, I can
hardely hope that my advice can have any credit with your Majesty: howbeit I
most humbly beseech you to vouchesafe in this one point to follow the
example of them that be sick and diseased, who perceiving by proof that the
prescr^ptions of the expert Physicians doet^ them no good, will sometime use
the advice also of the empirikes, as they cal^ them, and those that be merely
Practic^oners, because it happens sometym^ that chance is better than
cunning, an^ that these shall do more good by their experience, than the other
by method an^ book learning. As did likewise Pharao i^ my opinion, who when
he could not lern^ the interpretation of his dream at the hands of his
witches and soothsayers, wa^ not ashamed to ask counsel of poor Joseph, that
was in prison and bands, b^ whose divine wisdom and foretellyng he provided
for the dearth that was t^ come in Egypt. Wherefore considering my poor estate,
being brought almost to penury in these most miserable days, and that I am
not greatly fauourous with your highenesse, I doubt not but those that be of
your majesty's counsel will deride my travail bestowed herein, and disdain
thereat, that I should be so bold as to presume to persuade your majesty to
things clean contrary to ye advise is given you by them: but time (I trust)
shall declare which of the two is the better counsel. For whereto go they
about to persuade you? forsoothe that your Majesty would establish a law,
whereby your subjects of the low countries (who^ they falsely charge with ye
crime of heresy) should be most cruelly entreated and put to death: but I to
the contrary rather, and that you should rather give ear unto Christ, who
wills you and all men to use mercy, gentleness, and compassion even
toward those that shall err out of the way. Besides, your majesty ought to
consider yt this crown and scepter is not given you to ye intent you should
kill and destroy your subjects, but to defend and preserve the^, so that both
pure religion and civil government may be maintained among your subjects:
neither is there any thing yt I more earnestly desire and pray for, than yt
your Majesty according to your honorable inclination to gentleness and mercy
engrafted in you by nature, and the duty of a christian magistrate, should be a
mean to pacify al these civil wars and cruel persecutions in your low
countries, till you might in your own person, make final end of all
controversies, and determine all matters of religion by some lawful parliament
of your Princes and estates. By which pacification, as it were by a kind of
truce, there shall not only nothing happen derogatory to your highness, but al
they that dissent from us and from our wholesome advise and council, shall
easilye see, and perceive, that they will not only undo the common wealth,
but also carry many souls with them into utter destruction: and then shall the
sequel of the matter plainly declare, which of us has given your Majesty
more honest and profitable advice. Albeit we ought to pray unto God most
hartilye, that he suffer not their most pestilent and pernicious council to
take that effect, that they mean and seek for.

But to draw toward an end (most excellent Prince) I beseech your Majesty
for our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake, the redemer of mankind, that
you would in so weighty a cause as this, call upon God for the aid and
assistance of his holy spirit, who (I trust) will not fail you, if you
commit your self wholly unto him in all your doings and enterprises, and do
not follow the rude multitude, nor the importunate exclamatio^s of these
doctors, be they never so many in number, that can cry nothing, but crucifige,
crucifige, war, war, fire, fire, even as it is reported of Achab, who rather
following the judgment of.400. prophets, than the will of God, rashely and
unadvisedly entering into battle perished in the field: Micheas alone
preaches the truth against 400. false Prophets. 1. Reg. 22: Psalm. 34.
Whereas if he had rather leaned unto the council of poor Micheas: albeit in
the eyes of the world simple and abiecte, it had been far better with him. For
God oftentimes reueleth his secrets and hidden mysteries, to base and obscure
persons, and hides them from the wise and noble in this world, neither ought
we to judge of council by the wisdom, or multitude, or nobility of men, but
by the only fear of God, who communicates his secret mysteries to them that
fear and reverence him, and that saying of an old writer, is very true, yt
those which will well guide and govern the common wealth, must not so much
have regard to ye multitude of voices, as to examine and try them by the
waighte and truth, whether they lean thereto, or be grounded of covetousness,
hatred and ambition. And undoubtedly if there be any nation and country under
your majesty's dominions, that deserves to have your favor and clemency
extended toward it, it is this your majesty's country of Flaunders, which
has brought up ye most famous and noble Emperor your majesty's father, and
nourished your majesty almost from your tender infancy, and borne so faithful
allegeaunce toward you, that she may worthily think hirselfe to be preferred
before al other: how can your majesty then, but show pity and compassion
toward your faithful and obedient subjects, the inhabitants thereof, how
can you suffer the bloudthirsty over them, and not deliver the^, how can you
but give ear unto their pitiful complaints, which they do dailye make unto
you, crying out in most pitious sort, that they are most cruelly entreated,
tormented and murdered by your ministers and officers. What shall it need me to
rehearse their most courteous usage and entertainme^t toward strangers of al
nations and countries wherein they do far exceed al other, Flaunderrs a place
of good entertainment.
and do allure and draw thereby great resort unto them, in so much yt there is
none more worthy to enjoy perfect peace and tra^quilitie tha^ this? For where
have ye Italians ye best entertainme^t? verily in Flanders: where do the
Frenchmen soiorne most to their contentatio^ and pleasure? forsooth in
Flaunders: where is the most famous and ple^tifull mart for ye Almains the
englismen, ye Scots, ye Turks? where but in Flanders? I report me to your
self al ye yt be of the Spanish nation, what good cause you have to esteem
Flaunders, as your most dear and tender nourse, which has advanced you
to high preferments and dignities, and provided you wealth to enriche you
abundauntlye.

For in what place of the world have ye been better advanced by marriage than
here in Flaunders, whether your respect, honesty, or pleasure of society?
where have ever any such virgins so beautiful and amiable in countenance,
and so well borne, been so freely bestowed in marriage, even unto such as had
nothing to take unto, by means whereof they have afterward attained unto
great wealth, and been advanced to places of dignity and honor. And
therefore I may well exclame against unthankfulness, forgettyng so great
benefits, permit such most pestilent and cruel enterprises, to bring
those men in danger both of life and lands, that have deserved so well at
your hands. And for the other, with whom ye deal so unthankfully, what
opinion can they have hereafter of such unthankful people, causeless, yea
contrary to their deserte, to enter into their country, invade, spoil, waste
it: and whereas they ought by all means to procure the Prince to extend mercy
and clemency toward the subjects, do incense the Prince against them: and
with the breath of their malicious breaste puffed into his ears, do kindle
his wrath and indignation, to use cruelty and tyranny toward them, whose
most just cause (being a quarrel of religion) could never obtain to come to
hearing, as right and reason is it should, least they might be thought to give
sentence of the cause before they heard it debated.

But of a number of most horrible facts to remember unto your majesty one, I
beseech you to give ear to a thing that happened at Antwarp in mine own sight
and presence, but to my great grief and sorrow, the twelfth of March anno.
1567. When as certain Cities of Henhault were sacked and spoiled, by desperate
and furious persons, and all the Citizens in great danger and distress, the
inhabitants thought to flee and to leave to their ennimies both houses and
goods, rather than (...) yield to their fury and rage. And therefore escaping
through the fields is the number of.1000. persons, and hearing that the
horsemen would set upon them, they determined to draw as nighe to Antwarpe
as they could, thinking thereby either to save themselves, or to obtain some
reasonable conditions of peace: but if the enemy should make any assault upon
them and offer any violence, they determined rather manfully to resist, than
cowardely to yield.

Albeit this determination of their^ in mine opinion does much differ from
the patience that is commanded us in the Gospel: but indeed all that
profess the Gospel, do not follow the precepts of the Gospel. When as the
poor souls had fled unto the walls of Antwarpe, as it had been to a
Sanctuarye, hoping that by means of the Lords of the Town, there might some
order be taken for their safetye, and the avoiding of their present peril, a
great number of horsemen and footmen fell upon them on a sudden, being
without armoure and weapon, and having more confidence of their safety in
flighte, than in fight, showed us a most lamentable spectacle of a most
bloody and cruel slaughter, neither using mercy toward them that prayed
mercy: nor pitying th^^ complayntes and lamentations that fell prostrate at
their feet, and cast away their weapons: nor regarding them that fled, and
hid themselves in caves and corners (which things are wont to assuage the
furor of the most fierce enemy in the world) but ran some of them through with
their swords, others they fiered in the barnes and outhouses where they fiedde
to hide themselves: other they shot at with pistolets and barque busiers:
others they drowned in the river, others they hanged upon gibbets, other they
cast into most filthye dongons, where they dyed in most miserable torments.

The Citizens of Antwarp beholding this sorrowful sight from the walls of
their City, bewailed their case, and this most piteous sight, with such
shrikes up to Heaven, and such signs of sorrow and compassion, as was
possible to be uttered. For the women beheld their own husbands slain most
miserably before their faces, the children saw the throats cut of their
own fathers al other their kinseme^, or allies, or friend and acquaintance
most cruelly slain and murdered, in so much that it seems to be rather a
ravening of brute beast^^ than a skirmishe of men, and conflicte of Christian
people. The which most horrible examples of cruelty and brutishe butcherie,
if your Majesty had beheld and seen, it could not be, but you should have been preuoked to sheading of tears, and inwardly moved with pity and
compassion toward them. For men by nature will have compassion one of another,
and how much then ought your highenesse sincerely and unfeignedly to use the
like toward your natural and Christian subjects.

In the mean while, they of Antwarp pretending to help and succoure these
poor afflicted, so beset on every side with their enemies, some broke the
bridges, some locked the gates of the City, other that would be thought to be
more faithful and loyal to your majesty, than the rest, sent certain spies,
who under the pretense of friendly talk, should betray the poor and miserable
wretches, others gatte them into cockbotes and whirries, to compass them by
water, that were already beset on every side by land, and so stop their
passage all ways, pretending that they did all this, least they should be
worse thought of, as being scarcely your majesty's dut full and faithful
subjects.

What opinion think you, would the Turks and Jews, and other foreign and
vnchristned nations have of Christian religion, if they should either have
seen these things, or at the least, if it come but to their ears, what
affection could they bear toward the name of a Christian? what way would
serve to bring them to embrace, and to profess the Gospel, when they
themselves deal more indifferently with us in the like cases? For those whom
they have overcome, they either permit to depart paying their raunsom, or
keep them in prison untouched. But we false hearted and Pharisaicall
Christians, leave no barbarous and deuillishe tyranny unpracticed toward
our bret^ren and even Christians, only because they will not embrace the
Romish religion, but cleave fast to the commandments, and doctrine of
almighty god. And what more? Forsooth the whole City of Antwarpe rich in
treasure, beautiful in buildings, very populous, and of great resort was in
great danger and peril of utter subversion, if almighty God of his goodness
had not put to his helping hand at that instant, and preserved the city. For
the protestants being touched with that unworthy fight of the miserable
slaughter of their parents, brethren, kinsemen, allies, and friends, put
themselves in armor to the number of fifteen thousand: and to help them in
this distress, some practiced to open the gates of the City, and to issue
out and rescue them, some placed men in array in the streates, other filled
the houses with armoure and armed me^ to be in a readiness for defense, that
they might save themselves, and the City from the ennimy, if they should
offer any violence, yea some of the^ were in such a furye and rage, that they
most desperately broke into ye common armory and store house of the city, and
into those places where were certain pieces, specially mounted to keep off the
ennimye. In which great confusion and hurlye hurly of the whole city, what
fear think you the whole Citizens were in? for mine own part I wot, what I
then thought, and think yet, that I never saw a more horrible and lamentable
sight in all my life, than to see every man ready to run another through
without respect or choice. In the which tumultuous sedition, what profitte
could your majesty hope should grow unto you? or what would the overthrow
and destruction of the City have auailed you, being either the chief City
under your Majesty's dominion, or at the least not inferior to the best and
chiefest whatsoever?

But to let these things pass, and to consider diligently with our selves,
what is the judgment of God in these our affairs? for we must doubtless one
day al appear before his dreadefull seat of Judgment, and give an account of
our deeds be they good or bad. And what shall it avail us, if we flatter our
selves in our own deeds, or plead not guilty to the fact, and the Judge
find us guilty, and pronounce sentence upon us of everlasting pain and woe.

Neither do I speak these things, as allowing the rash and unadvised
attempts of these Protestants, which go about to resist force by force, and
as it were to drive back one nail with another. For I know, (I thank God of
his grace therefore) how great patience, lowliness, and humility the Gospel
requires of them that will be professors thereof: but I bring it in rather to
this end and purpose, A perilous matter to ^riue a multitude unto de^paire.
to give your Majesty to understand how perilous and dangerous a matter it
is for Princes, that their subjects should be driven to extreme desperation. It
is an old said saw: The multitude is a monster with many heads, which
being distressed and in despair of life, forgets both himself and his duty
toward God, and rayseth many times great tumultes and vproares. And
therefore many mighty Princes and Monarchs have oftentimes either pardoned or
winked at those matters, wherein the whole multitude has been faulty,
because (as says the Poet) They have no other hope, but boldly give the
adventure and try extremities, when all extremities are feared. So that a
common error seems as it were of good right to challenge a general pardon,
although the prince were very well able to revenge and punish the same. As we
acknowledge your Majesty to be: but that god of his infinite goodness and
providence has endued your grace with such meekness and mercifulness, that
if there were any that were obstinate and rebelling against you, you were not
only able to subdue them with your majesty's might and power, but also to win
them by your most gracious virtues and bounties.

Albeit in this case here is neither fear nor suspicion of any rebellion, when
as your Majesty's subjects for the avoiding of present peril do flee their
country, desiring nothing more heartily than that they might have access to
your majesty, and plead their cause before you, and profess the Christian
religion, and show their dutiful and obedient hearts to your majesty, as unto
their most dread and redoubted sovereign.

But what thing should be of greater force to move your majesty, The clemency
of Charles the ^ifte toward the Spaniards that rebelled.
than the example of the Emperor your father, who perceiving civil war to
be a breeding, al Spain in a tumulte, not much after he was crowned king,
would neither be avenged of the injuries of the people, nor chastise them by
his law, but established the Law (...) and made open proclamation, that al
should be both forgiven and forgotten: whereby he gatte such good will, and
so obtained the hearts of his people, that the remembrance of his exceeding
love and clemency toward his subjects, will endure while the world lasts.
As I doubt not but your Majesty's subjects of the low countries would in
like case do, if they might have experience of like clemencye and pardon at
your graces hands.

But perhaps some of your counselors about you, hearing me speak so
much in commendation of a general pardon, will suspecte that I go about
craftylye to insinuate my self into your graces favor, and think that I
plead not so much the common cause of my Countreymenne, as mine own private
case, for the satisfying of whom, and to the intent that they may plainelye
understand my very heart and conscience, I answer in this wise, without
all dissimulation: That I have a great desire and an earnest affection
toward my dear country, and my dearly beloved parents and friends. and
feel the lack of them, by being absente from them, and wish with all my
heart that almighty God would vouchsafe so to shine upon your Realm of
Spain with the beams and brightness of his gospel, that al Idolatry and
superstition might be removed thence, and quite abandoned, so that al we which
are banished, and live in exile from our natural country, might return
thither in safety again: for otherwise (as the case is at this present) we
ought rather choose to remain: in poverty, penury, need persecution,
banishement, and to suffer al other extremities that shall betide us patiently;
than to defile our souls with wicked and superstitious Idolatry.

And for mine own part, I have much to give God thanks for, and by his grace
will be always mindful of his great Graces and bountyes toward me, that
has of his providence so aided and assisted me in all this my pilgrimage, that
such as had never seen me, nor known me before, have been very beneficial
toward me, as if they had been fathers unto me, or some special friends.
And therefore I have no cause to think my self a stranger or pilgrim in
those places, whether the Lord himself has brought me, and so provided for
me, that he has stirred me up many friends and well willers, in places where I
do become, who like so well of me and my company, that they both visit many
times very courteously, and entertain me less friendly, when I resort unto
them. The which thing was a special occasion that moved me to go to Antwarp:
for I went not thither of any inconstancy or flitting brain, neither came I
before I was welcome upon any purpose to trouble the state of the common
wealth with novelties and innouations, or to help forward the tumultes that
then were raised and to make them worse. For I protest unto your Majesty upon
mine oath, and will besides prove by evident testimony, that I was earnestly
required by many men's letters and entreaties to come to this City above four
months ere I came thither, and therefore if your majesty have conceived any
sinister opinion of my coming thither, by mean of some false and untrue
reports, I beseech your majesty to remove the same. For this is, and ever
has been, and shall be my mind and will, to serve and obey your majesty,
and especially to preach the Gospel of peace. As for tumultes, sedition,
rebellion, and discord, I abhor them from my heart, and detest them worse
than a tode, or present plague: neither was I ever of that mind, that any good
could arise to the increase and setting forward of the Gospel, by sedition
and discord: but that it was a great hindraunce rather to many weak
consciences, and an utter undoing to the whole estate of the common weal, as
I have always thought and taught both privately and openly, as often as
opportunity served me thereto. Mary true it is, that I am at this present
purposed to depart again: for though the great good will and courtesy which
the Citizens and others of this Country do show me, as also the earneste
zeal and affection they bear toward me, does joy me maruelously: yet
notwithstanding seeing such preparation on each side of men for war: and
hearing nothing but the sound of armoure, and that there is nothing in every
man's mouth, but horse and armoure, and Soldiers, shot, and pellet, and
preparation to besiege, and to batter holds and castles, to make ^poile and
havoc of all, to kill and slaye ^n all sides, I thought it better for me to
want my dear friends, than to be tossed in this sort, and overwhelmed with
these tempestuous troubles.

Finallye he that is faultlesse and giltlesse in his own conscience, has no
need to crave any pardon. And I take God to my judge and record, that I have
pretermitted no part of my duty (as I trust) that appertayned to me to show
toward my Prince and Sovereign. Neither will I at any time when occasion
shall be offered, be afraid or ashamed to show my face in your presence, or
before any whom it shall please your Majesty to appoint to enquire of my
faith and conscience: because I sustain my self with assurance of an
vprighte conscience: the which if it shall in any points disagree from the
determinations of the late council of Trent, or from the Romish doctrine, I
force no greatly thereof, since they are aduersarie^ to the doctrine of the
Gospel: Neither rests it in the power of man to be abl^ to believe every
thing, what hymself^ wills or lists. For the spirit of God ingrafteth and
imprinteth in our hearts and minds, whatsoever is requisite and necessary
for us to believe, whose suggestion I earnestlye wythstoode above twentye
months before I departed ou^ of Spain, when as by my poor worldly wisdom
and policy, such as it was, I foresawe long before what great perils both
of life and goods hung over my head, if I should forsake the Popes religion,
and flee to Christ's fold. For as the Apostle warns us: Such as will purelye
and sincerely worship Christ all their life, shall incur the hatred and
displeasure of many. Howbeit there is a singular comfort remaining unto those
that are faithful in Jesus Christ, which reuealeth their consciences, when
they are assured, that these things happen not unto them through their own
deserte.

Neither is there any man I think, most mighty prince) which in his own
^orrupte sense and judgment would not ^ishe to follow some pleasing and
plau^ble religion, such as should fancy the people, and offend none. But
forasmuch ^s it has so pleased Almighty God by ^ys divine providence, to
save mankind and to preserve him from everlasting pe^ill through Jesus
Christ crucified, so that they be partakers of his death and ^assion, to the
end they might be lyke^ise partakers of his resurrection: it re^teth not in
the power of the elect, and those that are adopted into the inheritance of ^he
everlasting Kingdom, to suppress ^he force of the spirit, and to hinder his
work, or break his purpose and course, which uses his force and efficacy in
their minds that be thus elected and chosen, forasmuch as calling and
adoption of God is frank and free, without respect ^f favor or desert of
any: for God whom ^e will, does lighten, and whom he will ^e blinds: and who
is then able to resist him?

And does not your highenesse thin^ that your subjects of the low country
are heartily sorry and inwardely grieve to see your Majesty abhor their
relig^on, which is built of so sure and certai^ a ground, would they not be
conten^ with all their hearts to purchase your favor and good will, with the
loss of a that ever they be worth, that it might be lawful for them with
safe conscienc^ to serve God sincerely, according to hy^ prescript worde^?
suppose you it not (...) marvelous grief unto them to want their own
natural Country, their parents, children, and wives, and to wander they wotte
not whether, without an^ certain place of abode and resia^ce, and to hau^ their
life in hazard every hour? Howbei^ they are miserably tormented in their
conscience, and do feel terrible threats o^ gods spirit, yt set before their
eyes ye everlasting torments prepared for them, tha^ for favor and pleasing of
men, forsake the known truth, or defile the service and honor they owe unto
God, by intermedling it with Idolatry and superstition.

Wherefore in most humble manner, I ^eseeche your Majesty (most gracious
Prince) to have compassion upon your ^oore afflicted subjects of the low
coun^ry, which seek to live with a free con^cience, who if they could be
persuaded that the doctrine of the Romish Church were pure and holy, or
wholesome for their souls, I am very well persuaded, and ^are affirm unto your
Majesty in their behalf, they would never give you, nor any of your
officers, any occasion at all to be displeased with the^, much less have a
will to trouble and overthrow the estate of your common wealth, by tumultes
and civil wars, the which notwythstanding are laid to our chardge, and
that by the just judgment of God.

But to conclude this matter now at the length, and cease from troublyng
your Majesty any longer with my long speech, I think, and am verily persuaded,
that if it might stand with your good pleasure to undertake the hearing of
this cause, you should easilye judge of it your self, that this holy and
godly zeal of your subjects is not only to be acquit and discharged of al
punishment, but rather worthy to be greatly esteemed and highly commended.
And i^ you have regard to your own honour^ and kingly Majesty (which as the
Philosophers teach, should be far from tyranny) if you consider those
most excellent gifts and graces of your Maiestie^ most royal heart, among the
which your clemency, lenity, and gentleness, i^ surpassing all the rest:
(which are many tunes wanting in men of high estate, and such as are placed in
authority) you^ ought rather to employe the same to the safegarde of all
your Subjects universally, than to the hurt or destruction of any one. For
consider, that you are not to deal with brutishe and savage beasts, but with
those, which by the handy work of almighty god, are made like unto your self
in shape, are endued with natural reason, as your self, and be even as you,
Christians in profession and name, and your very brethren in Christ, having
the same redemer and savior that you have, being endued with the self same
spirit, and they professing obedience to the commandments of God, as your
majesty does, being also your natural subjects. and submitting themselves
like true and dutiful subjects to your Majesty's laws and ordinances, and
have not bin unfaithful at any time, or in any point hitherto, but seem
naturally to be inclined to all lowliness, loyalty, sincerity, simplicity,
truth, and courtesy, but especially to a singular kind of obedience and
dutifulness, which has appeared so abundantly in them toward the
magistrates and rulers, that they have rather chosen to endaunger themselves,
and to hazard all, and suffer great extremity, than to resist your
highness, or your highness officers. For it is evident, and to be proved,
that within these.30. years, there have been executed for religion to the
number of thirtye thousand and above, who in all their torments and anguishes,
were never heard to utter any one word that sounded to sedition and tumult, or
to the reuiling of any of their tormentors and persecutors, but contrariwise
did heartily forgive them the wrongs and injuries they had done them, and
prayed mos^ earnestly to almighty God, at the very^ last instante of their
life, for their conversion and salvation.

Who then can be so hard or stony^ hearted, as not to pity these me^, and
they^ cases? but weighe with your self diligently, and consider further what
they would have, where aboutes they go, and what they desire. Is it for the
maintainaunce of any heresies against the word of God and holy scripture? no
forsooth: what is it then? forsooth a most just quarrel that your majesty,
who are placed of god, their supreme head and governor over the^, might have
the hearing, debating and determination of their cause, the which thing, if you
have no convenient leisure presently to do, by reason of your Majesty's
manifold and weighty affairs: The petition of those of the lovv countries.
yet that it would please you to permit them in the mean while to enjoy
the liberty of their consciences, the preaching of the Gospel, and exercising
of true virtue and godliness, received by tradition from the Apostles and
Bishops of the primitive Church, and that they might have your Majesty's
protection and warrant for the same, for the better safety and surety in this
case, and if it please your majesty, further to enter into the search hereof,
and to see how great and horrible abuses and superstitious ceremonies, the
pope would intermedle with our religion: you shall easily perceive how
unreasonable a matter it is. For it is very unfit and inconvenient, that in
the pure church of Christ, the most filthy and abominable rites and customs of
worshipping their idolles and false gods, should be retained, which thing he
laboreth earnestly to bring to pass.

And in the mean season, while the matter is referred and wholly reserved, till
your Majesty may conveniently have the ordering thereof, they of the
religion, of the reformed Church and congregation in the low Countries,
proteste, that they will do nothing in case of religion, to the offense of the
consciences of the other sort, which either of ignorance or for fear of
afterclappes, stick still to their popish ceremonies, and have determined with
themselves not to gainesaye nor withstand it: but will rather in way of
charity and brotherly love, esteem of them, as of their brethe^, or dear
friends, and pray unto God for them continually, that he would vouchsafe
hereafter, when his good pleasure shall be, to lighten their hearts and
understandings with the light and shining beams of his gospel. And they do
also greatly mislike the bold attempts of children, and foolish women, and
other abject persons, that have presumed, contrary to the wills of the wiser
sort, of their own heads without authority or commission to pluck down and
to break Images that stood in the Popish Churches, the which rashness and
headiness, they do in no wise allow, but think it a matter very
inco^venient, and far unmeet for them to do which desire to favor and
further common peace and tranquillity among the people.

But perhaps some will object against me, Whether men of diverse religion may
be at peace one with another.
that where as be me^ of diverse religions, there ca^ in no case unity and
concord be maintained. But this question is not proper to this time and place,
but requires some especial discourse at large, whereof I purpose godwilling to
entreat, at some other convenient leisure, and to dedicate it in like case to
your Majesty. And yet thus much will I say by the way, yt those men, which be
of that opinion, do great iniurye and wrong to Christian Princes, in
derogating from them that wisdom, and worldly policy, which we may plainly
see to be in the adversaries of our religion. For who is ignorant, that the
Turk does not only permit three several sorts of religion in the City
of Constantinople, but does seek to maintain them? and yet there is as
great diversity beetwixte them as is beetwixte chalk and chief. For how
much trow you does the Turks Alkoran differ from Moses law? Or what
affinity and likeness has either of these two with Christian religion,
seeing that both those sects detest and abhor Jesus Christ our redemer and
high priest? notwithstanding it is a marvelous matter to consider what great
love, what peace, what amity and friendship is among them in these common and
civil affairs. How much more likelye is it then, that they which are
partakers of one self redemer and savior, the same Gospel, the very same
spirit, and belief and profession, should live and dwell together in amity
and concord, considering they differ not so much in the grounds and chief
articles of religion, as in the constitutions of man, the worship of idolles
and false gods, and certain foolish and vain superstitions and ceremonies.

The Pope gives entertainmet to Jews and levvishe ceremonies
What should I need here to rehearse, that the pope himself is not ashamed not
only to entertayne in his own City and country, the Jews, who be the very
professed enemies of Christ, to favor them, to cherishe, to take them into his
profession, but which is most shameful and abominable above al other, to
appoint the certain churches, streats and dwelling places apart from the
Christians, in which they may freely and without controlement or interruption
of any, renew the old ceremonies and sacrifices of the Mosaicall law, the
which are wholly abrogated and dissanulled, by the coming of Messiah and
savior Jesus Christ, by which exercises, who is there of so simple
consideration, but he may easilye perceive how foul a spotte of impiety
and ignominy it is to the blemishing of the name of Christ. For if those
things be of any virtue and efficacy now in these days: then was it in vain
that Christ took this flesh upon him and came into this world, and that
his most comfortable and wholesome sacrifice, which he did upon the altar of
his cross, is to be esteemed, but of little price. O notable lying and
blasphemy, O most horrible mischief and villanye uneath to be satisfied with
all the most terrible torments and punishments, that man can devise or endure.

Wherefore, if this holy man may for his private lucres sake, and only for
hope of a little peltyng commoditye to bring so hateful and detestable a kind
of religion into his countries and seignories, and into the society and
fellowship of Christian people. How much more reason is it, that your Majesty
should embrace and receive two manner of religions within your Majesty's
Realms and dominions, which have some likeness and agreement together,
forasmuch as they do both acknowledge and confess al one redeemer and savior
of mankind, differing in effect only herin, that the one sort affirms that
we be freely and of mere grace and favor reconciled to God the father, by
the redemption of our Savior Jesus Christ, without any respect of our
merits, or paimentes of money? the other adds to the perfect and absolute
work of Christ, many other ceremonies and circumstances of their own good
deeds and merits. The which controversy might very easily by compounded
betwixt the^, if it would please your majesty to entermedle in this matter,
and to use that authority which of right you man, the which good work and
enterprise of reconciling these two Churches toguther that are at this jar
betwixt themselves, I am verily persuaded, would be most profitable to your
country and subjects, most acceptable unto God, m^ste glorious to your
highenesse, and sound most to the continuance of your honor and renown, to
all the posterity, that ever your Majesty could or may take in hand. The
fame and memory whereof will for ever be recorded in the writings and
remembra^ces of al men and the sound of your praises therefore mount alofte and
ascend above the skies. By occasion whereof, your subjects of the low
countries, in all things most dutiful toward your Majesty, and mindful of
so great a benefit bestowed by your highenesse upon them, your poor
vassalles will be more and more inflamed in heart and mind to pray unto God
continuallye for your Majesty's most happy, prosperous and flourishing estate
in abundaunce of honor and felicity. But forasmuch as the hearts of Kings
and Princes be not in their own power and wills, but in the hand of God to
dispose and tur^ them as it seems best to his holy wi^ and pleasure, as well
says Solomon. Omitting many other reasons with the which your Majesty might
be drawn t^ have compassion upon your poor subiect^ miserably oppressed and
complaining the^ selves most lamentably, I will conuert^^ and direct my self
and my whole spech^ to Almighty God, our most mercyful^ and gentle Father, in
most humble wise beseechyng his fatherly goodness, that he would vouchesafe
to look upon us most miserable caytifes with his merciful eyes of
compassion and pity, not as upon the offspring of our old parent Adam, but
rather as upon his dearly beloved children engrafted and implanted into the
body and stock of his beeloued son Jesus Christ, through whose only
mediation, intercession, and benefit our heavenly father puts all our
offenses out of his remembrance, by the which we have provoked his wrath
and indignation against us, for the which we are daily plagued, while Kings
and Princes, who ought most carefullye and tenderlye to tender the weal of
Christ's Church, forgetting their duetye in that behalf, do offer the same
to the spoil and rauine of most deadlye ennimies and desperate
cutte-throates: even him I say, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I
most har^ily and humbly beseech to stir up your Majesty's mind with some
sharp ^ricke and touch of heart, to undertake the hearing and debating of
this quarrel, that he would inflame your mind with some fervent zeal and
affection of his holy Spirit, that your Majesty by means thereof being
excited and provoked to seek the honor, and glory, and increase of his
sons Kingdom, beseeching him in like manner, that his holy Spirit abidyng
always and remainyng with you, he would grant unto your Majesty a most
happy and long life upon Earth: And as he himself was raised up from
death most gloriouslye, so likewise he would exchange this your mortal and
corruptible ly^ with the fruition of his heavenly an^ ^ternall life, and make
you partaker that everlasting joy and blessedness which he has prepared for
all those, which with a sure and an undoubted faith, embrace his Heavenly
promises.

FINIS.
AN EPIstle or Godly Admoniton, sent to the Pastors of the Flemish Church in
Antwerp, who name themselves of the confession of Auspurgh: exhorting them to
concord with the other Ministers of the Gospel.

engraved compartment CONFIDI EGO VICI MVNDVM. IO. XVI.


A prayer to Jesus Christ, for peace and unity in the Church.
O Sovereign Lord, who being the eternal word and true God with God thy
father, did take our nature to visit in form of man the poor children ^f
Adam, lost by their infidelity, distrust and perverse opinion against their
Crea^^r: and also by thy mean and remedy, ^ast eftsoons restablished the
confederati^n between God and us, approving the ^^ne most painfully in the
mortal mar^irdom of thy most innocent body bleding ^n the cross for the
expiation of our sins: ^e beseech thee (O Savior of the world) that even as
thou art come to co^su^mate and confirm our reco^ciliation, thou wol^est also
reco^cile our hearts, knit our wil^s, and send thy spirit of truth amongst ^s,
to the end, that we all concurring in ^ne judgment and opinion, may remem^er
that we are called to be members of ^ne body, whereof Lord, we acknowledge he
to be the chief and supreme head, and so detesting in civil partialities, we
man be of one opinion, agree in one mind, an^ use one mutual and charitable
direction touching the matter of our religion.

Thou have left unto us (O Lord) the cel^bration of thy holy supper, as a
memora^^ of our communion and spiritual vniti^ with thee, and also to
instruct us in suc^ laws of charity, as ought to be of fam^liar conversation
amongst us all. And ye we (such is the nature of our fragilitie (...) condition
of our unworthiness) as we abuse the excellent benefit of that most hig^
favor, seeing that in place to tie and co^ioyne our selves with thee, we do
more estrange us from thee, and that by reason o^ our quarrels and questions
of contention. In place to consider that we are one body, one church, and one
bread made of sundry grains, we show our selves proud, and give sundry proves
of our ambition in seeking to establishe a special estimation o^ our peculiar
and private opinions: in handling very often thy presence in thy holy supper
by subtle disputation, we become far from thy true and lively presence: in
contending whether the sinners and vn^^ithfull may communicate thy body, we
^ake our selves sinners, and incapable to ^eceyue and enjoy thy benefits:
lastly, and in effect, oh Lord, our zeal is so ^^discrete, that in stryuing
to entertain ^he purity of the doctrine of faith, we ^reake the league and
law of charity, yea, and in persecuting with rebuke such as ^e account to be
heretics in the doctrine ^f faith: our malice, with want of dis^retio^ makes
us seem transnatured into heretics of charity, corrupting ye mea^es of
communication and brotherly unity.

I beseech thee therefore (oh son of God) ^et thy gracious pity fall upon us,
and so open the eyes of our understanding, as we may discern ye true fruit of
thy holy in^titution and ordinance, take from amongst us all sects and
varieties of opinions, and reduce us at last to ye obedience of thy holy and
only word: reveal unto us thy holy spirit with this privilege of grace, yt
by his virtue he may draw us all into one corporation and body, whereof thou
(O Lord) may be head, and let him breath into us strength and power to
persevere in works of true Justice, innocence and holiness, during our course
i^ this tragical and miserable pilgrimage, and in the end, let (we beseech
thee) the same holy spirit translate us into the eternal life, (purchased to
our uses by the sacrifice and oblation of thy most precious death) wherein thou
raignest now gloriously with the father and holy Ghost, and there shall
remain infinitely. Amen.

To my most dearly beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ, the only redeemer and
advocate of men toward the heavenly Father, my brother Ministers and
Pastors in the Church of ^ntvvarpe, naming themselves of the Church of
Au^urge, Grace and peace from God and his son Jesus Christ, to the end, that
by the bond of his holy spirit, we may all be knit in the unity and
Confession of the Gospel of Christ.
AT my first coming to this town of Antwarpe (right honorable in Christ) and
that at the request of certain the Faithful there, I found cause of singular
comfort in the vewe of the wonderful work raised up by the Lord, by mean
of his servants, and that in so short time, as saving to such as have
assisted it, it may seem no less impossible than incredible. For if we
wonder in certain Trees and Fruits, who sometimes yield increase above custom,
or against ye common course of Nature, when as the Lord were of purpose to
releue and restore some country afflicted with hunger: what may w^ say of
these spiritual plants which the father of mercy so suddenly and agayn^ all
hope of man, has set and planted (...) these Low countries, and specially in
the city of Antwerpe? Truly we are boun^ to acknowledge it as a work of
strang^ marvel of our God, and to say with t^ prophet, this incredible
increase has b^ made by the Lord, who^ we find worth^ of admiration in our
eyes: it is the rig^ hand of God which has revealed h^ virtue: it is the
right hand of God the has exalted us: it is the right hand (...) God that
has manifested his power, (...) shall not die at all, but we shall live (...)
declare the doings of the Lord: whereas as I entered more deeply into the vie^
and consideration of these things, so (...) thought it also an office and duty
in (...) to cry with the said Prophet: Confir^ Lord, and advance the work
thou h^ begone in us: build up again the wall of thy holy temple: restore the
ruins thy heavenly Jerusalem, to the end the the Kings and Princes of the
earth may come to do thee homage and offer presents: gather together again O
God, the dispersed of Israel.

This was the cause wherein I reioy^ed for certain days with glad
conti^uance, till upon further view of the matters of estate within the City,
I ^ounde occasion to mix some sorrow with this my joy, as seeing on every
^ide with what diligence Satan labou^ed to hinder the advancement of this
Church, not only by means of open ^nimies, but also by the indiscretion and
^ant of regard in such as name themselves master Masons in the house of God:
for such as feared God and wished a publication of his glory, cried out and
exclamed that the chair of truth was become the chair of dissension, ser^ing
no more as a Pulpit to preach Ie^us Christ, the appeaser of troubled
consciences, to pronounce an unity, a brotherly charity, nor ye mortificatio^
of ye old Adam with the wicked motions of concupiscence, but rather it was used
as a place of inuectiues, and injuries, In the Pulpit ought not be preched
other words tha^ of God, to know and serve Christ
with words of malice tending to a mutual hate of one toward another, and
dissension of doctrine, wherein upon inquiry of such fault, with the
circumstance and authors of the same, I find your side not least guiltye, as
being such amongst you, who in open assemblye, with words and libels of
malice, are not ashamed to call the other Ministers of the Gospel, Heretics,
Sacramentaries, rebels against the state, and people unworthy of place in the
common wealth, with other words improper and unfit for the majesty of such
a place, which is consecrated purposely to teach the word and will of our God.

Now (brethren) if such or such like matter of reproach should be pronounced
in the Pulpit, of certain Monks or monstrous Friars, the very organs of the
Roman Antichriste, sent of their suppostes to trouble the Church of Christ, to
darke^ his glory, and resist the advancement of his kingdom, we would endure
them with patience, as knowing well enough yt such sort of Prophets be the
disciples of Balaam, who sell their toungs to curse the people of God, yea
sometimes against the sense of their proper conscience: we assure our selves
that the mouth of such hypocrites cannot bring forth other than words of
infection and full of taste of all evil: Description of the false Prophets
and preachers of the Papists.
for they as they are painted sepulchers, so can they not vomit up other
matter than such as is covertly couched within, that is to say, all infection
and filthiness. And we are most certain, that those kind of people addicted
to Baall and contentment of their belly, seeing the fall of their Marmit by
little and little, will enforce themselves to exclayme against them that
discover their abuses, hypocrisies, and villainous trumperies: we believe also
that such supporters of Satan, who from the beginning has been the Author of
dissension, a lover of murder (with desire of effusion of blud) will labor in
the imitation of their father and master, and that (under the pretense of the
Gospel) they will proclaim sedition and trouble, and as the Prophet says,
vomit furious matter against such as stuff not their bellies according to
their fancies and fashions of custom: Of such sort of raylers we receive no
great care, seeing we are not ignorant with what judgment and punishment,
God will visit them though he be long: for they be of that sort of whom the
Apostle Jude speaks in his Epistle Catholic, Read the Epistle of S. Judas
the Apostle.
as upon whom evil shall happen, for they follow the train of Cain: they
abandon the^ selves into the error of the hyer of Balaam, they shall perish
according to the contradiction of Core: they are spots at the Banquet of the
charitable and Faithful, feeding themselves without fear: they are clouds
without water, carried away with every wind: trees whose fruit is rotten, and
of no commodity, pulled up by the roots, and already dead: they be raging
waves of the sea, giving up their villainies: errant stars for whom is
prepared the shadows of the everlasting darkness: they are murmurers,
quarrellers, walking according to their covetousness, their mouths
pronouncing words of venomous substance, and loving men ^uly for their
profit: they incense di^isions, and are people of sensuality, ^^parting
nothing with the spirit: they ^re the very painter and portrait which ^he
Apostle speaks of in such sort of ^reachers. And therefore we do esteem ^f
them as they deserve, not fearing any ^arme they can do to the troop or
fe^owship elect of God, for they discover ^^fficientlye their poison and the
leven ^f the Phariseys.

But touching you (dear and honou^able brethren) one word proceeding from
your mouth, pearceth the heart, and gives us cause of singular sorrow, ^ith
fear least the same stir up slaun^er to the flock of Jesus Christ: And ^^o
be to him that shall be the cause of ^uch slander against one of the least, ^t
were better that such a one had fastened ^o his neck a great Millstone, and
cast unto the bottom of the sea, than to be ^uffered to offend and put
dissension in the church, which the Lord begins to norish ^n this town, and who
now being in her cradle, is in more necessity to be fed with the true word of
God, releued in her afflictions, and comforted in her persecutions, than to be
disquieted with subtle and curious questions, divisions and debates upon the
matter of our confession: wherein as we both feel and see the wonderful
benefits which the Lord has laid both upon you and us, having drawn us ou^
of the miserable quagmier and marish o^ superstition and idolatry amongst the
Papists, so let us wish (that as true ministers of God) we may employ our
selves with one accord to set forth the glory of him, A mean to accord
questions concerning the doctrine.
who of prisoners of darkness, has made us happy members of his most clear
light. If there be any thing which you judge not well understood of us, were
it not better to come to conference with us, or use brotherly admonition and
conference, than to exclayme in the Pulpitte, and fill the Bookesellers shoppes
with Inuectiues and Apologies of spite? were it not better (with invocation of
the name of the Lord) to compounde and order quietly the affairs of the
advancement of his glory, than to ^uie war against our selves with the ^^t
of the pen, whose wounds are far ^ore dangerous and incurable, War of
learned me^ most slanderous.
tha^ the ^aylings either of the bow or Cros^we: because the one offendes but
the ^odye and flesh, and the other peerceth ^th deeply and bloudily the
renoume of ^e person, which every one holds in ^lue more dear and precious
than ey^er gold or silver, with all the riches in ^e world.

Alas miserable and wretched that we ^re, what condemnation, what judgment ^e
we heap upon our heads when ^e preach to the Soldiers to lay away their
arms, and forbear to offend com^on wealths, and we, even we our sel^es, do
carry in our Inkhornes weapons ^ost sharp, with arrows of poison to ^hunder
upon such as do not offer them^elues wholly to our advise and opinions, and
refuse to hazard their faith in the ^nterpretations which we make of Gods
^orde?

This arrogant ouerweening is the cause why the Lord suffers that the fruit
of our preachings is either none at all, Whereof it comes, that the audience
in the reformed church to be deformed in living.
or at least of so little effect, that our Audience in their life and
conversation, do declare what slender knowledge and fear of GOD they learn
by our exhortations. God suffers also to fall upon us Inquisitours and
persecutors in the very same sort, that we presume to be the Censors of the
faith of others. And because we will rule all the world by the touch of the
Sentence and advise of this or that man, the Lord incenseth the very children
themselves to call us Parciall Sectatoures, and Admiratours of the opinions of
men, namyng some Martinistes, some Caluinistes, some Ozeandrines, some
Melancthonistes, and some Brentiens, with diverse other like names, and that
with good right: because we have not our eyes fixed on the only advancement
of the glory of Jesus Christ and his Church, which is Catholic and
universal: But every one will deal aparte, every one entyce and draw his
audience aparte, every one maintain the renoume of his institutour, and that
which worse is, every one as supreme Judge, gives sentence of condemnation
without appeal against others.

Of this miserable cause it comes to pass, that this Church being at this
day delivered from the insupportable inquisition and tyranny of the Papists,
and that by the grace of GOD, and goodness of our King and Sovereign
Magistrate, we have notwithstanding amongst our selves supreme inquisitors,
who with an arrogancy above the Phariseys, call the other dogs, and
worldlings, not considering belike, (such is their arrogancy) that this word
worldling, or of the world, signifies a division and partition from the body
of Christ, according to that he himself does say, that the world is his
enemy, and that he will not pray for it: Al which condemnation is founded upon
that that the worldlings (as they call them) will not conform themselves to
the administration of the Sacraments in their fashion, nor give over themselves
to imaginations and questions of subtlety, but are contented in the
simplicity o^ the word of God, with direction of the holy Spirit to
instruct their consciences.

Other there be who of their Confessions, Catechismes, Commentaries, and
traditions, make as it were a fifth gospel, giving no less authority to their
particular interpretations, than if they were of the Articles of Faith, not
refusing to call al the^ Heretics, who point by poyn^ do not follow their
imaginations, which although were good and substantial to edify, yet are they
none other than the breath of men, and therefore unworthy of comparison with
the eternal word.

These things (Brethren) with the consideration of the^ moving no small sorrow
in my mind, foreseeing (as it were) the breach which Satan might make in the
house and troop of God by such a mean, procured me to attempt familiarly one
o^ your brethren and companions in the work of God, who as he seemed of some
superintendence and authority amongst you, M. Yllyrye
so I imparted with him the great ^^aunder growing to the Churches therabout,
and else where, by such differences and dissentions manifestly published, not
only by books of infamy, but also in injurious inuectiues, in open
assemblies, whom I requested in the name of the Lord, to exhort his
companions to forbear their further proceedings in such sort, with
discontinuaunce of their slanderous order of doings, altogether unworthy of
the ministry of Christ.

His answer hereunto argued his sufficient forwardenesse, complaining albeit
against others, and saying that the best mean for accord, were to bring in
disputation, and to handle chiefly the question upon the Lords Supper, upon
the diverse and sundry construction whereof, sprung both the disorder and
dissension: I said there was slender hope of present accord this way, if both
the one and other would not disclaim their stout and strange order in
proponing their opinions and interpretations: For (said I) if they observe no
more modesty in their words, than they have used temperanc^ in their books and
wrytings, neythe^ can the cause be determined, nor the error reduced: for
which respect I account it not out of purpose to take a confession of Faith,
and imparte with the people those Articles wherein we all agree, leaving the
rest that may bring likelyhoode of dissension, or slander t^ the Church.

Herein he seemed to approve my advise, with persuasion that to take the
Confession of Auspurge were most necessary to enforce this accord, subsigning
such Articles, as with good conscience we might receive, and interpret the
other according to our understanding, which we have already done with meaning
to bring them to light t^ the edification of the Church, to the en^ every one
may see that the controuersi^ is not so great as is given out to the people,
who being both troubled and amazed with such diversities, knows no^ what path
to tread, hearing some preach that Christ is here, and other say he is not
there, but here: The church of Christ is not such one, but ours is the right
Church: we are of Paul, and they be of Cephas, and others of Apollo. Alas
are we baptized either in the name of Paul, John or Martin? Is not only Jesus
Christ our Redeemer? Is it not in his name that we are baptized and brought
into the Church? Is not he the sovereign Doctor, graduated not at Paris, but in
Paradyse, whom our Heavenly father has ordained for our chief schoolemaister
with express commandment to hear him?

Why then do we seek so many masters and forgers of doctrine? To conclude, I
desired the said minister to abstain from injurious inuectiues and words of
quarrel in books, with exhortation to his companions to modesty and seemly
temperaunce in their preachings: also to persuade the people to faith,
mortification and brotherly charity: which albeit, they have not observed, but
rather in the contrary have used words of slander in the very Pulpit, teaching
by that mean their audience to imitate their disorders: And which worse is,
you other my brethren, even of late have caused to be imprinted certain Libels
wherein you have reuersed the names of persons, and by conversion and change of
letters have most injuriously handled a certain minister of the gospel,
calling him a brand of hell, or such like name of reproach, a sutletie far
unworthy your vocation. If these matters continue I fear me (good brethren)
that ye judgment of god will thunder upon our heads, when (believe me) the
living god will know how and where to find us, though we be under ye protection
of great princes, for the Lord will not leave unpunished such insolences and
mistakings of his dear Church, the which he has bought with his blood and
delivered from the tyranny of Antichrist, so now such men would ef^soones
reign and overrule her, under color of piety and instruction of certain
persons, whom the Lord has stirred up to minister and serve in his temple. And
to speak more clearly in this matter, know ye (good brethren) that touching
Martin Luther, Philip Melancthon, with other like me^, The authority of Luther
and other Doctors of the Gospel.
we esteem the^ true servants of god, to whom as the holy spirit has
plentifully imparted his gifts and graces, so have they labored with an earnest
care both to weed up ye abuses crept into our Christian religion, and also to
manifest the truth of the Gospel of Christ: albeit we must and do acknowledge
the^ to be no more than men, and so by consequence subject to be ignorant in
many things: for so god uses to bestow his gifts and graces upon me^, as the
condition of their ignorant nature may show yt they be not gods upon earth.
Besides that, it happens many times, that the servants of God do observe a
certain special wisdom, as not willng to reveal al they do understand,
fearing their audience not to be as yet capable of such doctrine, the same
happening even to saint Peter the Apostle of Christ, The vvisdome of S. Peter.
who albeeit had received visyblye the holy Spirit, yet he esteemed the
time not yet convenient to manifest to the Jews the abolition of the Law,
fearing least by such a mean the preaching of the Gospel should be brought
in hatred, and the publication of the same hindered. On the contrary, Saint
Paul was of opinion, The zeal of S. Paul.
that in a matter of so great importance ought to be no dread of danger,
but to make open and publyke manifestation of the lybertye, Galath. 2.
which the Lord had brought unto his Church. In like sort we have
reason to presume, that these good servants of GOD, Luther and Melancthon,
seeing the great resystaunce of the world against the preaching of the pure
doctrine, and the abolition of the Papists abuses, judged it an act of
wisdom to give a little place to such surie of the time, and to gain the
hearts of the people gently, not to alienate them untimely by the teaching of
the true doctrine of the Sacraments, Read the ^^utles of Melanctho^ to
Luther, but chiefly the second.
expecting from day to day more proper and fit occasion to restors and
bring in wholly the true exercise and understanding of the holy ceremonies,
wherein we may be confirmed by the proceedings and degrees of the doctrine
which we do see in the books of the said holy men. Read th beginning of
Sleidan history.
For who can deny that Martine Luther was ignoraunte in many things at his
beginning to preach, which the Lord revealed unto him after, affyrmyng in the
words of his own mouth, that GOD had sent him, not so much to edifye and
reestablishe the Church of Christ, as to ruinate and batter the kingdom of
Antichrist, wherein he found daily such change of abuses unworthy to be
supported in the Christian Religion, that in the end he protested that the
Mass deserved to be abolished, which Melancthon in the end of the confession
of Auspurge, maintained contrarilye, professing the Mass to be yet retained
in their Churches. All this notwithstanding, you (my brethren) of this time,
will not as far as I find, agree that the Mass is yet retained in your
churches, no not in the sort that the confession of Auspurge propounds it:
The words of Melancthon be these: Falso accusantur ecclesiae nostrae, quod
Missam aboleant: Retinetur enim Missa apud nos, and summa Reuerentia
celebratur, seruantur ei vsitatae Ceremoniae fere omnes, preter quam quod
latinis concionibus admiscentur alicubi Germanicae, quae additae sunt ad
docendum populu^, that is to say: Our Churches be falsely accused in that they
abolishe the Mass, for the Mass is retained with us, What supper the
Protestants had in the beginning.
and is celebrated with great reverence, with an use and observation of almost
all the accustomed ceremonies, saving that in some places there be certain
Canticles in the Dutche, intermedled with those that are so^g in the Latin,
and that to teach the people.

See (brethren) how you would now aduow so goodly a reformation of Mass,
being assured that such institution is the true heap of vanities invented by
men, and tending to the profanation and abolition of the holy Supper of the
Lord: but if others in the very time of Luther and Melancthon, have been
moved with the spirit of God, and with a zeal of S. Paul have resisted such
simulation (well affected notwithstanding to the glory of God) proves it
therefore in us any duty of observation of such Ceremonies, having regard only
to the authority of Peter? God defend. No, let Peter remain still as Peter,
and Martine as Martine, that is to say, as a man that may fail, and let the
spirit of God be increased by the organs and instruments which he shall
stir up to manifest the truth of his gospel, whether he be Paul or
Zwinglius, or Oecolampadius, or any other of less authority than they. And
for our parts, such organs and instruments of God, let us receive, honor,
and have in singular respect, without persuasion or belief that they be
innocent, or that they can not err, or that they be not ignoraunte of some
things. Let us beeleeue, that from day to day our Lord will stir up such
like organs and instruments to advance his glory, and to augment the light of
his holy Truth, if our own unthankfulness be not a bar to such liberality
begone by our GOD.

Beesides (brethren) I consider the lamentable time, wherein those holy men
did live, as being employed rather to purge and cleanse the filthiness of
Papistrye, than to study or consider of the introduction of the pure Truth:
they were rather used in the resistaunce of the furye of Antichriste and his
supposts, to flee from one coaste to an other, to make Apologies and defenses,
to answer the falsehoodes that were laid upon them by diverse, and to dispute
with the Monks of their Purgatory and Bulls, than that they had leisure
and quiet liberty to search by meditation the truth of the Christian doctrine
manifested in the divine word. By which occasion it came to pass, that their
writings were stuffed with so many opprobrious and spiteful words unworthy of
the true servants of God, and perfect pronouncers of the Gospel of peace,
which notwithstanding as we supporte such infirmities, as having regard to so
wicked a time: So now that god has sent us so many beams of his light, let us
leave to live and remain so blind, as in times paste, when we had but a
glimmering, as it were by sudden lightning.

My meaning (dear brethren) in all this discourse, has not ben to other
purpose than to declare the small occasion we have as well one as another, to
make Gods or (to say more truly) idols of our doctors, and for their occasions
to maintain parrialities, dissentions and debates upon the matter of our
doctrine, to the great slander of the poor and weak consciences, and
notable hinderaunce of the propagation of the church: wherein if the
Corinthians have been rebuked because they made Partialities to maintain the
renoume of Saint Paul, the chosen vessel of GOD, Apostle of Jesus Christ,
doctor of the Gentiles, and to speak in one word, a man endued with most
singular and excellent gifts, how may God lay it against us, who contend,
quarrel, make continual war, and (as a man would say) devour one another
as Dogs and Cattes, breaking always the bond of charity, which Jesus Christ
has left of such estimation.

When the Lord would mark his disciples and children of his father, he
willed them not to follow the confession of Auspurge, nor the Catechism of
Martine, or of John, The mark of the Christians. Io^n. 13.
but he says: In this me^ shall know you are my disciples, if ye lou^ one
another: Alas most blind and miserable that we are, whilst we dispute of the
true and false interpretation of the word^ of the Sacrament of unity, we
break^ the very unity it self: in contendyng whether the wicked, infidel,
and unworthy receive as well the body of Christ, in the Supper, as the
children of GOD we rob our selves of the very Christ and make our selves of
the number o^ them that receive him not at all: in searchyng whether Christ
come in flesh, i^ Spirit, or in Sacrament, we do deprive our selves of
the true communion of Christ: for he that hates his brother, Christ dwells
not in him: in siftyng curiously whether the body of Christ b^ given to us in
the bread, vndere ye bread, or with the bread, we cut our selves of^ from the
true body of Christ, and make us members of satan, the father of dissentions,
quarells, contentions and debates.

And for my opinion upon the matter of the holy Supper, I will say in few^
words (good brethren) what I understand, leaving to every one his liberty to
follow that which God shall teach him. We ^now right well, that the meaning of
our redeemer Jesus coming into this world, was to manifest to men the good
will of his heavenly Father toward them: and ^ow his divine Majesty had
provided to remedy the fault, transgression, and disobedience of the first
Adam, Doctrine of the holy Supper of Christ.
by the innoce^cie, most pure justice, and obedience satisfactory of the second
and heavenly Adam. And that men might be delivered of the ire and judgment of
God, putting themselves under the wings and couerture of this Sovereign and
eternal Sacrificatour. And forasmuch as the divine word does show unto us the
malediction of me^ and transgression against the will of GOD, by words taken
of our corporal nouriture, saying, that as man has eaten the fruit of a
tree forbidden him by his Creatoure, and that by mean of the same eating, The
sum of the Doctrine (...) Christ.
he has made himself mimy of the Lord: In like manner Jesus Christ our
Redeemer declares to us by similitude of eating and drinking the
Reconciliation toward GOD that his obedience has brought us, as he would
clearly say, that Man hauyn^ eaten of a forbidden Fruit, has pu^chased
malediction, whereas in eatin^ now of a fruit given him by the hand of GOD,
he has won benedictio^ The fruit and Tree of life which w^ ought to
eat, Christ is the Fruit of the Tree of life.
is even very he which brings us such happy news, wh^ with his virtue
and power unspeakable, i^ so tied and joined with us by the mean^ of Faith and
bond of his holy spirit^ that he maintains our souls in spiritual and
Heavenly life, even as the brea^ and wine nourishes our bodies in co^porall
life.

Vsyng this similitude the Lord sayet^ in the sixth of Saint John, that he
him self is the bread of life, and gyuin^ life, which is descended from
heaven, an^ that who eats of this bread shall lyu^^ eternallye: That is to
say, he shall escap^ the Curse procured by eating of the frui^ defended. He
says also that his flesh is the true meat, and his blood the true drink: and
he that eats his flesh, and drin^eth his blood, dwells in Christ, The
true understanding of the words of Christ. John. 6.
and Christ in him, who is our second and ^eauenlye Adam, within whose body
(...) is necessary that we be incorporated, (...) that he incorporate
himself in us, to ^e end that we may be able to ap^eare before GOD,
covered with the ^antell of his most innocente flesh full ^f all Justice.

And because our nature is most dull ^n^ far from the true understanding ^f
these mysteries, Cause of the celebration and institution of the Supper
our Redeemer Jesus ^s not only content to propounde unto us ^^e conjunction
which we ought to have ^ith him, by these similitudes and com^arisons of
eating and drinking, but also ^^th sought to show us by some visible
^eremonie, the very same thing that he ^^the taught us by word, to the end
that ^^t only our ears might receive the in^truction of his preaching, but
also our ^^es feed of some visible representation ^f that which we ought to
be in Christ, and Christ in us, that is to say, that we be members of him,
nourished with h^^ proper virtue, and that he hemselfe (...) our food. To
this end (I believe) the our sovereign doctor Jesus Christ, aft^^ he had
supped with his Disciples, and c^lebrated the ceremony of the Pascal la^^
according to the law, to show unto ye people and all the Church to come, a
liue^ representation of the conjunction which he took with his members by
mean (...) the sacrifice of his death, resurrection an^ glorification: He
took bread, and hauyn^ given thanks to God his father, he bra^^ it, and
distributed it to his Disciples, saying: Take, eat, this is my body which
(...) delivered for you: And after he took the cup and said: This is the
cup of the new Testament, take and drink you all and do this in memory of
me: that is a^ much as if he should say, to the end yo^ understand what I am
to you, wha^ remedy I bring unto you, Interpretation of the words of Christ
in the Supper.
what conjunction it is necessary you have with me and I with you: know ye
that I am bread broken, offered, and sacrifised for the satisfaction of your
sins, which bread as I (...) my self, so it is needful yt it be in you, ^^d
give you heavenly nouriture even as ^^e material bread gives you corporal
re^^ef. And touching the Cup, understand (...), that the same does show you
the new ^estament and confederation which I ^actise with you, the which
Testament ^albe ratified with my blood, and do this (...) memory of me: that is
to say, when you ^all break the bread, as I do, have re^embraunce that you
certify and assure our selves that you be mine, and I am ^ures, yea youres in
such sort, as the ^eade is youres which you break, eat, ^^d digeste, and
the Wine which gives (...) nouriture.

Now (brethren) I beseech you in ^^e name of our redeemer Jesus, consider
without affection, if the interpretation of ^is hole Ceremony and of these
words ^e true or not: If it be true, to what pur^ue do we search so many
questions, so ^anye subtilties, so many vbiquities, ^ith other like inventions
to entertayne ^^e world in blyndenesse? To what pur^^se do we trouble the
people with visible ceremonies, with persuasion that (...) ye mean they may
receive Jesus Christ* We leave behind us, alas and (as it we altogether buried,
the doctrine of penanc^ Justification, regeneration, Sanctifica^on, The Spirit
of God is not lincked to outvvarde ceremonies.
mortification of the old Adam, a^^ charity of one to an other, things m^^
important and necessary, and in the me^^ while we employ and bestow our selu^
and time in the interpretation of certa^ ceremonies, without the which, god is
(...) power to show us that which they d^^ teach us. We know also that many
h^ly me^ be deceassed very devoutly, hauin^ received Christ, without receiving
the eternal signs and visible Elements (...) the supper. The receiving of the
sacraments serve nothing to such as vvil not receive Christ.
And to what end would it seru^ me to eat all the bread which is in A^maine,
given by the hands of the Minsters with the words of the Supper (...) Christ,
if I have not experienced my r^nuing, if I have not tasted my regeneration, if
I be not certified that God has reconciled me with him, and received m^ to his
mercy, and that by such feeling o^ taste I do not assure my self to have
received Christ?

This is the doctrine, this (say I) is the ^^eaching which we ought to preach
and repreach, repeat, and remember al^ayes to the people, restore to the
^yndes of the ignorant, and propounde (...) those that come to learn of us,
not by ^e subtilties of the right hand of God, ^biquities, and such like
imaginations. This is a thing very miserable in our ^^me, that those which
speak of the com^unication of Jesus Christ, be such as ^^ast prove such a
communication in them^^lues, a thing to be seen by their wry^^ngs: for they
speak of Jesus Christ, ^yther shut within an armorie, or enclo^d in past
within bread, under the bread, (...) with the bread, or from us by xiiij. or
^v. thousand iourneys, as though the true Temple of Jesus Christ, is any other
thing than the heart of a faithful man, and he that sercheth it without, shall
both ^se his pains and remain frustrate of ^is hope.

Let us speak (my brethren) of Jesus Christ and his communication, as people
proving and feeling in our selue^ what is to be nourished in our consciences
and souls, with the presence and virtue of ye same, otherwise to what use w^
serve us our subtle interpretations an^ particular declarations which we brin^
forth? In the end, the world is not s^ blind, but they can and will
vnderstan^ and find, that we are rather led by (...) spirit of stomach,
than of the true zeal^ of Gods glory, in the end every one will see that those
preachers search no other thing than to maintain themselves i^ the friendship
of the world.

The understanding of the words of the holy supper.
But now to return to the confirmation of the interpretation that we^ have
given to this place of the holy supper, let us consider, that if in all things
that Christ our Lord has propounde^ to manifest the necessity that we hau^
to be in him and be in us, we should searc^ a presence corporal and fleshly,
it should be (as who say) never to come to end (...) for in the old Testament
Christ hat^ bin propounded to us in diverse creatures as a lamb, Manna, Water,
Stone, Table, meat, bread, feasts, and other things, as may be seen by such
as read the holy Scripture. He himself in his preachings does call him a way,
a door, bread of children, a vine, Note the absurdity of the false
interpretation of the words of the supper.
with other like things. Now, if in place where Christ said: I am the door,
who enters not by me shall not be saved: he had said this, I am he, showing
with his finger a door, shall we say for all that ye Christ has transformed or
transubstantiate himself into the matter of a door: if our redemer in place
where he said, I am the vine, and you are the branches, had said, this am I,
Note the interpretation of these words.
showing the vine, and that are you, handling the branches, could we say for
all that, that Jesus Christ would communicate his substance into a grape, and
that the Apostles should be transnatured into branches? sure who were of such
opinion, discovered sufficiently his ignorance and infirmity.

Notwithstanding, (you others my brethren) make your principal pillar upon
such manner of speakings, and all to make the poor ignorant people believe that
Christ has made promise to give himself with the bread, because that having
taken bread, and breaking it, he said this is my body: which words (simplye
understood) are as much as to say, my body which is broken, offered,
delivered, and sacrificed for you, is bread, or like to this bread which you
break, eat and digest for the nouriture of your body: In like sort, I being
the heavenly bread, shall be broken for you, to the end you may have spiritual
and eternal life: therefore do and celebrate this, that is to say, this
breaking and receyte of bread in remembrance of me.

Comparion betvveene the first and second Adam.
To make conclusion of this matter, I understand that our redeemer Jesus is the
fruit of life, who having put himself on the tree of the Cross, has defaced
the sin and transgression, which the fruit of the tree forbidden brought to
us: And even as Adam, having eaten of such a fruit, did make himself enemy
of God: in contrary manner, when we participate with Jesus Christ crucified,
we are received into the good favor and love of our heavenly Father, and
that by the only bounty, merit, and intercession of the self he, who on the
tree of the cross did constitute himself the fruit of life for us, being
assured that the participation of that precious Fruit is not done either by
water, wine, bread, or any other creature whatsoever, but by the unspeakable
work and operation of the holy spirit, who having called the chosen and
predestinate of God, does teach them their sins and abominable
transgressions by mean of the presentation of the holy Law, Mean to receive
Christ. Election. Vocation. Penance.
he shows unto them their damnation and sentence of eternal death, the
which they feel so in their hearts, that by experience they may well assure
themselves, that the ire and wrath of God has been so manifested to them that
they have swallowed pangs of death, The true preparation to know Christ, is
to know the necessity we have of him.
and have seen before their eyes the throat of hell confound and devour them:
there they find the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil: they
sorrow and weep with a penance most bitter the miserable bankets or repastes
which they have taken of such a meat and fruit, not only in the person of
their father Adam, but also with their proper mouth.

After that by such means, the holy spirit has abased the arogancie of man,
his pride and presumption, and showed him by experience the definitive sentence
and arest irreuocable of the eternal against sinners, he begins to comfort
and give him good hope, The faithful feel the presence of Christ in their
heart.
showing him (as a far off) the Tree of life, and the viuifying fruit hanging
upon it, the which by little and little, degree and degree, faith and faith,
and virtue and virtue, makes him eat, swallow and digest the heavenly bread
Jesus Christ, yea with such experience and feeling, that no meat in the world
of how great nouriture soever it be, is so se^sible in the body, as the fruit
of life (Jesus Christ) is in the souls of the faithful, with such
manifestation by good works outwardly, that others may see and know with what
meat they be fed.

For when we eat of every other meat, the body of him that eats proves
only the presence of the meat. But in such as eat Christ, the true fruit of
the tree of life, is discerned such an example in their persons, such joy and
patience in afflictions, such care to mortify the old Adam, such a renunciation
of the things of the world, with affection to the life eternal, that their
neighbors and friends accompanying them, may see that they eat other meat
than the deuourers of ceremonies do.

When they have truly, essentiallye, The life of a Christian shows that he
has Christ in him.
and really participated of the body and blood of Christ (by faith as is
said) of Jesus Christ, all entier, true God, and true man, they assure
themselves of such a conjunction with him, that they have no need to go to
search him, either in the armorie of Priests, or between the hands of me^, to
receive him either with the bread, or with the water, as being fully assured
that Jesus Christ dwells in them, and that they be flesh of his flesh, and
bones of his bones.

And yet for all this, they forbear not to approach the holy table of the
Lord, to celebrate the holy supper with their brethren and children of the
same heavenly father: Neither go they thither to receive Christ of new in
bread or in wine, neither his favor or merit: but their first cause of
going thither is, to certify to all the Church that they are of the number of
those that receive Jesus Christ for their only redeemer and savior, for their
eternal sacrificator, their Captain, their King, Lord, Sovereign Prophet and
Doctor to teach them in all truth.

Secondly, they take the holy supper as a gage and assurance of the good will
of the heavenly father toward them, the same being so constant and firm, that
it will never change. For even as GOD has promised by oath, that the
sacrificator shall be eternal, even so shall be the sacrificature and
sacrifice for expiation of our sins.

Thirdly, they receive in the Supper, the seal of ratification and
confirmation of grace, with reconciliation pronounced by the preaching of the
Gospel, to the end, that by such mean, faith might be augmented in them,
seeing that God is ^^t ^nelye contented to give them the ^orde of
reconciliation, to assign his ^^omise^ with the blood of his proper ^^nne,
but has also signed and sealed his Gospel of re^onciliation with seals,
de^laring in a wonderful manner, the very things contained in the letters
patentes and promise of the Gospel and happy ^ewes.

Fourthly, the faithful see in the holy ^upper, as in a table and lively
portrait, ^he communion and participation which ^hey have inwardly in their
hearts with jesus Christ, knowing also that all the ^uriture and spiritual
vigor which they ^e in them, commes of the presence of ^^m whom they consider
and behold fi^ured and represented in the holy and sa^red ceremony of the
Supper: by mean ^f which consideration, Sacrifice of thanks gyuing in the holy
supper.
they render than^es to the Lord for the faith, hope, ^ortification and
constancy which they ^eele to be communicated to them by the ^ower and
benignity of him that dwel^eth in them. And by this mean, their faith being
augmented, they particip^t^ more and more with Jesus Christ ^nc^ received.

Confirmation and augmentation of Christ received in the supper.
Finally they learn in the holy Supper, the unity and charity which w^ ought
to have one with another: And seeing we protest in the receyte of the holy
Sacrament to be one body and one church members of one sovereign head Jesus
Christ, it is good reason also yt we learn^ to imitate the Sympathia and mutual
compassion which we dailye see in our human bodies, whereof if one of our
arms be hurt, the other serves and comfort it, The holy supper
representes unto us a brotherly charity of one to an other.
the feet refusing their prope^ office to march and go, are content (...)
keep themselves in bed, to the end the arm being hurt, may be in rest, the
st^macke is satisfied with a slender repas^ to the end to ease that part that
is distresed: in effect, every one of the outward inward members, do so
acco^modate the office and function to the ease and comfort of the hurt place,
that in them may be noted a wonderful harmony and leag^^ of one part with
another, the same al^ being lively represented and expressly re^o^mended unto us
in the celebration of ^he holy Supper of the Lord, to the end that every one
of us, may with most di^^gent care, labor to preserve the unity ^f the body
of Christ, and supporting one another, may learn to cover the faults ^f our
brethren, pardon their wrongs, not (...) rebuke and exaggerate too much their
^^norances, but rather to interpret them (...) the best, and to teach them
with cha^itie. Let us learn in the celebration of ^he holy sacrament, to make
us partakers ^f the afflictions and persecutions of our ^rethren, whom we
confess in the re^eife of the supper, to be the members of Christ with us.

Behold here (in effect my dear bre^hren) one part of the spiritual fruits
that the children of God receive in the ^eceite of the Supper of our Lord truly
administered and simplye understood, ^nowing right well that Christ had no
other meaning in the institution of those ^acraments, than to manifest by
visible words (as Saint Augustine says) the good will of God toward them,
that is, purge, wash, and make them clean (...) the water of his grace, and
by the blou^ of his proper son, to conioyne, knit^ and incorporate them with
him, even (...) the meat is made one thing with ou^ flesh, in such sort, that
eue^ as by the ex^rior preaching of the Gospel, the Lord does offer and
present to all the worl^ the benefit of reconciliation by Christ, like manner
the sacraments be as a tab^ or open shop, wherein the benignity, me^cie and
charity of our God, be exposed (...) every one, offered and represented liu^ly
in the tables: And miserable shall the be, who not searching the life and
liuel^ refection and true washing within, d^ embrace the corruptible and
deceyuab^ elements, and double miserable shall the be, who naming themselves
Doctors (...) the truth, and pastors of the troop (...) GOD, would feed the
souls of the^ sheep with meats that will perish a^^ corrupt.

The occasion of the vvriting of this Epistle
But now to return to our purpo^ begone, I took occasion (my dear belou^^
brethren) to write you these few lines, as ^eing the small fruit of my request
on ^our behalf, when I spoke to Monsieur Mathias Yllyricus, who was said to be
the ^uperintendent of your Church, with ^home I persuaded very modestlye to
^^ew unto you, and consider himself the ^^fancie of this Church, persecuted
and ^^reatened on every side, assailed with ^any enemies, and battred with
diuersi^^e of opinions, with advise besides, that ^^e time was more proper to
preach and ^eache to the people the faith and hope which we ought to use to
mortify our ^icked affections, with a regard of care (...) intertaine the
league of charity one ^ith another, than to imparte with the ^^mple and
ignorant sort such debates and ^uestions, as we have raised upon the ^atter of
our confessions: Seeing with^ll, that such dissentions are rather pro^ounced of
a iollitie of the heart to pre^erre eloquence, and procure to our sel^es a
peculiar estimation amongst men, ^han of purpose necessary for the edifi^ation
of our piety: which albeit he seemed to like of, with a disposition to admit
and perform my requests, yet contrarilye, I see he is either the author or
instigator of a confession of faith which you have set abroache in this Church
of Antwerpe: in which confession, I can not only find any one point of the
three mentioned in my conference with him, but also it semes to certain, that
you have raised this confession expressly to trouble this poor afflictted
Church. The Lord of his goodness give you true knowledge and repentance of that
which you do: for touching the chief point of our religion, that is to say,
Faith, I find not in your confession many texts nor places which kindle the
heart of man to embrace the doctrine of Jesus Christ. A thing which I could
easily appointe with my finger, if I would as vainly employe my time in
confutation, as I see a number do at this day in disputation: only I thank GOD
that by other means he has taught me the doctrine of his truth* for if at my
first arrival, I had encountered your confession of faith, to learn m^ to be a
christian, I could not have much profited in a lesson of faith so full of
questions, debates, and dissentions.

Dear brethren, if you will with judgment read over that, which your author
has written in your name, you shall find, that neither Scotus, nor any other
Sophisters of the Papists, have so much ^ndarkned the doctrine of Jesus Christ,
nor cladde it with so many questions, as certain of you have done: whereof
(for example) let us survey briefly four certain points, and that more to
reveal the slender edification that their readers may hope for of such
lessons, than to encumber our selves with the confutation of such vanities.

Touching that which you say of our inheritance of the original sin, Read the
Articles of the confession of faith of Yllyric, the better to understand the
Articles following.
and free will lost, the world it self does declare well enough at this day,
that every one has gotten a good lump of the inheritance of the corruption of
Adam, and the original sin, as they call it, and your writings show that
you have had your part thereof. And I believe (as you say) that men now a
days have not any Free will, seeing it may be further believed, that there be
a great many that have slender sense, and well worse understanding, as being
altogether ruled and carried over by their affections.

Touching the matter of the incarnation of the son of God, and redemption of
man, I could well have pardoned you the obmission of the subtle questions you
use therein, searching curiously the house wherein Christ dwells. Item, what
make we of ascension? or the signification of this word heaven? or the right
hand of God? so that you would teach us the true mean to receive Jesus
Christ into our selves, seeing it pleases him, in respect of his goodness,
to make his dwelling in the hearts of the faithful and regenerate. Otherways,
of what use is Jesus Christ to us, being so far from the heart of man, as you
make him? B. 4.

Touching your place of justifying faith, I understand not your language,
where you say that only faith, by mean whereof we take (as of a hand) the
benefit of Jesus Christ to obtain justification, regeneration and health:
the which indeed is true: but immediately after you say, that by the
Sacraments, are imputed and applied to us the justice and merit of Jesus
Christ: B. 4.

Item, in the same doctrine of Justification, you say it is a most hard
question to know what is that true Justice which makes us just and agreeable to
god, with atteinment of eternal life: but I had rather that without so many
arguments, confutations, and subtilties, you had showed to the poor and
ignorant people, what is the christian justice, and by what mean she is given
to us. B. 5.

In the tractate of good works you say, that the works which men ought to
call good, are those which God demaundes in his word, and that those which be
regenerate and guided by ye spirit of God, are they which show the fruits
of a good Tree: I believe it well, and conclude upon your saying, that who has
not zeal, love, charity, who suffers not all things with patience, takes
every thing in the best part, covers the faults of his neighbor, and
labors not to put peace in place of dissension, can not have regeneration.
And touching the rest of your questions, whether good works concur in
justification, as a cause formal or efficient, the simple people have not to
do, contenting themselves with this belief, that regeneration and faith
without good works is a mere hypocrisy and thing dead, and that it is
necessary, that our new obedience serve as witness of our reconciliation and
justification.

Now (dear brethren) as I am void of intent herein either to examine or
exaggerate the newness of your confession, and much less to confute it by
arguments, so I will leave to the consideration of the Reader, your excuse in
cutting off the commandment of the living God, under pretext of certain
gloses and distinctions unworthy to be uttered: for here we do not dispute
whether the commandment not to make any images of veneration, be a
commandment particular, or an appendix of an other, whether it be ceremonial
or moral: but we will here mayntaine that it is an audacitie most cursed to
cut off from the law of our God any one word, seeing specially that that
sum and content of commandment is so short and compe^dious, that it
contains but ten commandeme^tes, the which if god would have abridged, he
knew better how to do it, than we and therefore such as undertake to correct
his style and accuse him of prolixitie, give sufficient proof of their
abominable temeritie.

But let us now come to the principal point of your debate and ancient
question, the which upon a bravery you seem to renew upon every purpose and
place, without having respect to the great slander of those that be weak.
First you utter the sum of your confession of the Supper in these words:
The opinion of Math. Y^ lyricus and his companions touching the Supper.
Credimus igitur Christo affirmante, quod corpus and sanguis eius vere ac
realiter in sacra Coena adsit, deturque externo modo accipiendum cum Pane and
vino, non fide tantum, aut spiritualiter, idque tam ab indignis, quam a dignis
sumantur, and contraria docentes, cum Augustana confessione consentiendo,
damnamus. That is to say: We believe in Christ who assures us that his body
and blood be truly and really in the sacred Supper, and that it is given us in
taking it outwardly with the bread and wine, not only with faith and
spirituallye: the which body is eaten as well of the unworthy as of those that
be worthy: And those that shall teach the contrary, we (sticking to the
confession of Auspurge) do condemn them.

See here (my brethren) your goodlye entry of the article of your supper,
which we may, not improperly, liken to that of the new inquisitors, who
condemn, anathematize, excommunicate, and call Heretics, and cut off from the
communion of the Church, all those which receive not their confession, which
me think you do also as of purpose to maintain yours of Auspurge, as though
it were a fifth Gospel, or new article of the Creed. What shall we say
(brethren) to these matters? have you no shame that men of good judgment and
understanding, should read such arrogant and rash words? Who are they that
have se^ the author of the confession of Auspurge, or that of yours in such
authority or degree of the Church, that they may pronounce sentence of
damnation against such as will not admit their interpretation upon a place
or Text of the Scripture? What is he of any judgment at all, who will not
fear to forsake the tyranny of the Papists, to ever into an nther, almost
of like condition? We call the Pope Antichriste, tyrant and butcher of men's
consciences, because that without liberty to hear men speak, he condemns
and excommunicateth them: and yet your doings are nothing inferior to his
cruelty, in pronouncing condemnation, not only against your enemies, but
also against such as you receive for your brethren and companions in the
work of the Lord, and w^o no less for the duty of Christians, than to take
away the slander from the Church of Christ, do search by all their
possible means to live in love and friendship with you.

I could willingly say to the author of your confession, as the Apostle
says: my brother, my friend, what art thou that condemns the servants of
another? Who has given thee such power? Art thou his redeemer? Art thou his
judge? Art thou he in the name of whom he has bin baptized? Has he not a
master, who, if he fall will raise him again, and has the power to do it? But
of what purpose are these words, when we find our hearts so hardened that we
feel not at all the very chastiseme^ts, which God lets fall upon our heads

Let us mark and consider what miserable issues our preachings, confessions,
writings, and commentaries, bring forth: Let us also behold what fruits are
brought to our audience by our words, what reformation of life in our
churches, wherein reign still wantonness, lubricities, gluttonies,
drunkenness, usury, deceites, with a thousand such like vices, which we
let pass, making our selves many times (by winking) companions to those that
commit them, swallowing (as our Savior Christ says) the Camels, and
streigning the little Gnats, which means that we pronounce condemnation
against such who pierce not the subtilties of our interpretations in Christ's
Supper, making small reckning of the crimes and dissolutions which are
committed daily before our eyes. I pray you what may mean so many sorts of
communications of Christ, the one physical, and the other mystical, an other
spiritual, and an other sacramental, together also with those which you put
in your confession, the one common both to the good and to the evil, when they
say, This is my body, and the other when they say: Do this in remembrance of
me. Those with such like communications of Christ, we never learned in the
word of God, but of the contrary, we know for truth that there is but one
mean to receive Jesus Christ, and have communication with him, that is to
say, lively faith, and that accompanied with repentance and penance for our
sins passed and newness of life to come, I would to God we were well taught
and exercised in this manner of excommunication of Christ: for touching the
rest, what assurance may we take of the doctrine of your article, which is not
drawn out of the word of god, but rather of the interpretations of men? I
pray you show me where it is that Christ affyrmeth, that his body and blood
be truly and really in the bread, under the bread, or within ye bread of the
Supper, and that he gives himself to be eaten exteriorly with the bread and
Wine, the same being done not only by faith, or spiritually, but that he is
eaten as well of the unworthy as those that be worthy.

Me think (dear brethren) that, seeing you will be esteemed so diligent in
the observation of the words of the scripture, as preferring nothing which is
not drawn out of the same, it is necessary you know, ^Vhat ^niunction
^etvvene christ and ^eliall. (...). Cor. 6.
that in all your article there is not one word of the words of Christ: but we
know that both he himself and his Apostle teaches us the contrary, saying,
that the unbelieving and unworthy can not possess Christ, nor be members of
him, seeing they have not a mouth of faith to receive him.

Besides, I see that your very confession does not accord at all, with that of
Auspurge, whereof you make so great a buckler, no less to maintain you in the
good opinion of the world, than to bring your selves in, under the prote^tion
of Princes and potentates, who at the beginning, used very wisely and
christianlye the presentation of this Confession. For the words of the Author
be these, Article, 10. De Coena Domini docent, quod cum pane and vino vere
exhibeantur corpus and sanguis Christi, vescentibus in coenae domini, that is
to say: Touching the Supper of the Lord, they teach, that with the bread and
wine be exhibited the body and blood of Christ, to those that eat the Supper
of the Lord.

In these words the Confession of Auspurge, make no mention to receive the
body of Christ really and exteriorly, as you say in youres, neither make they
mention at all that the worthy and unworthy do receive it.

But hereunto you say, that we hau^ not the true and incorrupte confession o^
Auspurge, but that you have certain Copies and exemplaries thereof best
corrected, which you follow in your doctrine: is it possible (brethren) you
should be so negligent in the correction of your confession whereof you make
so great value* I am not of opinion that the princes protestants would suffer to
be printed in their towns, Articles of their confession, contaminated and
imperfect: truly you trouble greatly the world: for if those which follow not
your confession, be condemne^ by your sentence, and you only have the true
copy of this confession, we must (...) the^ necessarily come to you as to a
spring or fountatne of truth and health: some man say (as in derision of those
things,) tha^ we must come on pilgrimage to searc^ your Registers and
Libraries, as in times past they went to Jerusalem, Rome, o^ S. James. Oh good
God, what mockery what presumption of people? But, to prevent you of cause of
complainte against us, and that your inconsideratio^ be more manifestly
discovered, we will receive the article of your incorrupt confession, which as
you say to be reserved with you, so you shall find it bears not a word of
that which you have uttered.

Your words be these: Sequimur igitur in hac controuersia sententiam decimi
articuli Augustanae confessionis: po^ro articulus ille decimus ita habet in
incorruptae confessione, quam sequimur: De Coena domini docent, quod corpus and
sanguis Christi vere adsint, and distribuantur vescentibus in Coenae domini:
and improbant secus docentes. That is to say: We follow in this question and
debate the advice and sentence of the tenth Article of the Confession of
Auspurge, which tenth article is written in this sort, in the confession
which we follow, which is not corrupted: It is taught, touching the supper
of the Lord, that the body and blood of Christ be truly present, and be
distributed to such as eat in the Supper of the Lord, neither are they
approved which teach other ways.

Now (brethren) I pray you shew^ me where it is that you find here you^
realities, and vbiquities, or that the unworthy do eat the body of Christ,
wit^ other sorts of doctrines which you hau^ preferred, and would authorize
them wit^ the confession of Auspurge, which notwithstanding, we will not
receive as (...) rule of our Christianity, and much less^ the Confession of
any other man that i^ upon earth.

We will be Christians, and so be called, we will follow the confession of
faith which our GOD the father, and Jesus Christ his Son have left vnt^
us: that is to say, the dyuyne word^ in the old and new Testamente the sum
of our Religion: We receyu^ the simbols of faith received of old tim^ in the
Church: we have not bin baptized in the names of Martine, Zwinglius or Calvin,
but in the name of the Father the Son and the holy Ghost: by which means
we detest and abhorr^ all those names and surnames of Partialities, that is to
say, Martinistes, Zwinglians and, Caluinists, with other ^ke, knowing very
well that GOD is ^reately displeased with such separati^ns and partialities in
the doctrine of re^gion. And I wish with all my heart, that ^he doctors which
have taught here be^re, and such as at this day do preach ^e Gospel, were
of more modesty and ^isedom, and purely consecrated to search ^he glory of
the Lord, and not their ^wne proper praise: then should the people be in more
lybertye of conscience, and the worshippers of one only God, and not of
mortal men, ignoraunte and ^ynde, who, making themselves as Idolles, do
desire to be followed and ^olden in great admiration: I would (...) God that
every one would say with Saint John the Baptist, it is meet that Jesus
Christ be exalted and magnified, and that I be diminished and unknown: ^t is
to Jesus Christ, to whom we ought ^o send the poor souls, desirous to find
^nowledge and justice, and not to your confessions, institutions, catechismes,
or commentaries.

For the rest (brethren) you seem^ to complain of the great diversity (...)
interpretations that many have pronounced upon the words of the Supper, wh^che
partly I can not deny, because man desirous to make their church apart, do
raise their value or estimation of them selves among their audience, with
pr^tence to celebrate their own names: fr^ whence it procedes, that having but
on^ truth, and one simple intelligence in the words of Christ, all such as
digref^ from the same, to use some strange an new order, do every one bring
into the Church his innovation.

But I beseech you consider, whether amongst those that receive the tenth
Art^cle of the Confession of Auspurge, there b^ any diversity of
interpretation, to the en^ that if you will have all the world (for (...)
eschuing of the comdemnation of your sentence) to follow your confession: you
fir^ labor to establish an accord amongst you^ selves, and then every one will
deliberat^ upon that he has to do. For you being divided amongst your selves,
They of the confession of Auspurge, agree not amongst themselves upon the
words of the supper. Read the book named Antithese of the true and fal^
exposition of the tenth Article of the Confession of Auspurge, the Author of
the same is Sybran Andreas. Touching the dissension of M. Ylliricus, with
Philip Melancthon, and those of the confession of Auspurge, read the epistles
of Melanctho^ in many places, but chiefly the Page 452. Also the Acts Synodals
imprinted in the year, a thousand, five hundred fifty and nine. Also the
answer given to the legate of Saxon by Philip Melancthon.
and of diverse ^pinions, we are ignorant in the part we ^ught to follow to
escape your co^de^natio^.

First you know well that Mathias Yl^^ricus, whom I think to be the author ^f
your confession, is not of opinion with those that have composed and presented
^he confession of Auspurge, and you and ^e are not ignorant of the conte^tions,
de^ates, and dissentions, which be even till ^his day between him and others:
Al which I will not here repeat, because my in^ente is not, to kindle the
coals of dissen^ion, but rather to quench them, I will ^ot bring to light
the faults of others, ^ut rather cover and hide them, albeit it is ^asie for
every man to see, both how things have passed, and how they are now v^ed, and
that by Books that are printed.

Touching the breaking and brusing of bread, you see I am sure, that in this
^owne of Antwerpe, the Ministers be not of accord. I leave aparte the truth
of the Question, which you call indifferent, notwithstanding that the
institution (...) the Lord bears by manifest words the breaking of the
bread. S. Paul ca^leth yt holy Supper the breking of bread which also all the
ancient church do approve. And for my part, I am of opinion that in the
ceremony of the holy Supper, the breaking of bread ought to b^ observed, as
signifying and assuring t^ us that Jesus Christ was offered and broken for us:
for the rest, as when Christ celebrated the supper, whether the bread he had
then between his hands, Seek the confession. K. 10. and. 11.
was great or little, I leave the decision of that question to Monsieur Mathias
Yllyricus, wh^ says that Jesus Christ in the Supper brake the bread, because
the cakes were too great, and he had not made provision of little waffernes as
we use, so that necessitye forced him to break the bread without having
intent to teach us any^ thing by the breaking of the bread.

The Churches of the most noble Prince elector and County Palatine, receive
the confession of A^spurge, and yet in your Catechism you teach that the
unfaithful and unworthy do not eat^ the body of Christ in the Sacrament,
the which is against your article, and co^se^^^tly against the confession of
Auspurge.

The Divines of the renoumed prince of Hess^ have received the confession of
Auspurge, and yet Andreas Hyperius doctor of the university of Marpurge^
belonging to the said Prince, rece^yued the Confession presented by the
Strangers out of the town of VVesell, against which confession Heshussius his
companions and yours, have raised many debates, to banish from the country
such as followed the said confession, the same arguing manifestly, that you and
your companions be not of accord with the churches of the said Prince.

Ioannes Pimeerus; a man learned, and no less devout, as you know, albeit be
received the confession of Auspurge, writ notwithstanding, a book against the
said Heshussius, refuting the opinions of the Supper, and other things, the
which Heshussius names himself to be of the confession of Auspurge, and your
adherent and confederate to maintain this dissension.

In the year 1565. the right noble Prince elect of Saxon, presented to the
university of VVittemberge, the writings of Ireneius and James Andreas, as
upon meaning to examine the^ touching their opinion of the supper, where unto
the university answered, that the sai^ ^enrius and Andreas, used in this
matter di^^^s and sundry orders of speech, both now, dangerous and altogether
unknown to the ancient Church, that is to say, that the humanity of Christ
was dispersed into every place* that the humanity of Christ was Creator of
all things, that James Andreas confounded the communication of languages or
properties in the person of Christ, and that they shared that the university
of Tubinga and the church of VVitte^bergh were troubled with these innouatio^s
of doctrine, exhorting them to cease from such disputations, with contentment
only to believe that the words of Christ be true, when he says, this is my
body. Now my brethren, what part I pray you should we follow, seeing both the
one and the other be of the confession of Auspurge?

Paul Eberus denies expressly, that the unworthy eat the flesh of Christ,
who being of the confession of Auspurge, does neither agree with you, nor yet
with Brentius, who maintains, that Judas (in the Supper) did as well receive
the body of Christ, as S. John, or S. Peter.

The eight article of the confession of Auspurge does teach, that the
unfaithful are not members of the church, and therefore receive not but the
outward signs of the Supper. So that when you lay that the unworthy receive
the body of Christ, you are there contrary to your own proper confession. I
pray you what conjunction is there between light and darkness? What
acquaintance between Jesus Christ and Beliall? No, let us rather remember and
retain that which the Prophet says, that God loves not the wicked nor their
wickedness, neither shall the ungodly dwell with him.

Philip Melancthon, author of the confession of Auspurge, in the Apology of
the same confession does teach, that the participation of the body of Christ
is received of the faithful by the meditation of his benefits: then to receive
Christ, it is not needful to gnawe him or break him with our teeth. Besides,
the wicked which have no meditation, nor godly recordation of the benefits of
Christ, although they chaw the bread, yet can they not receive Christ by the
saying of the same Author, to whom your doctrine is contrary in this point.

Martine Luther has been esteemed a good interpreter and understander of the
confession of Auspurge, and yet he faith that the very juice and mary of the
holy Supper, is to receive an assurance of the remission of our sins by the
sacrifice of Christ. Those then that say, that the unfaithful and unworthy
receive the body of Christ, which is the juice and marow of the sacrament, be
contrary to the said doctor: and by consequent, to the confession of Auspurge,
the which you do in you^ Article.

The Duke of VVittembergh, wills and means that his confession agree with
that of Auspurge, and yet the article of the Supper in his confession is
interpreted by the words of Ezechiell, saying this Quarey or tyle is the town
of Jerusalem. etc. That is to say, does signify or mean the town of
Jerusalem. etc. Who then will not receive this place in the interpretation of
the Supper, disagreeth with the confession of the said Prince, and by
consequent, with that of Auspurge, amongst whom is Kemnitius, who reiects wholly
this place in the matter of the Sacraments.

Touching this word (unworthy) and who ought to be called so, you be not of
accord: for Heshussius your companion, with large arguments goes about to
prove that the faithful cannot any way be called unworthy. Kemmitius (in the
contrary) maintayneth that the place of S. Paul treating of the unworthiness
of such as receive the Supper, ought to be ^^^erstanded and interpreted by the
other place of the Gospel, where the Cer^^urio^ says that he is not worthy
that Jesus Christ enter into his house, as the a^cient doctors have interpreted
it. Which of these shall we believe, seeing they be (...) contrary opinion,
and yet both the o^ and other followers of the confession o^ Auspurge?

The xiij. Article of the Confession o^ Auspurge, teaches that the lawful vs^
of the Sacrament demands necessar^ly Faith, without which use, the Sacrament
is no Sacrament. Those then which have not faith in the administration o^ your
Supper, have not also, neither Sacrament nor body of Christ, and therefore the
Communion that the unworthy do^ make, resistes your own confession.

The xxj. Article of the confession (...) Auspurge says, that for the
difference (...) ceremonies and traditions of men, a m^ ought not to accuse the
other Churches and much less condemn them of erro^ nor call them adversaries,
who are of contrary opinion: And yet you (my br^thren) call the other
Ministers of thy Church, adversaries, enemies, and people cut off from your
company, because they do not bless at the altar the bread before they do
distribute it, with observation of other ceremonies that are of ^ustome in your
Supper.

Touching this word (with) when you say the body of Christ is received with
the bread, you are not of accord: for certain of your confession affirm that
Christ is enclosed within ye bred, others, upon the bread, others, as the fire
within the hot water, others, as ye fire within the burning iron, others, as
the gra^ge or house within the letters or words of contract: in effect, who
would recite all the similitudes and interpretations which they of the
confession of Auspurge, have made upon the words of the supper, and all to
maintain the doctrine of the presence of Christ, linked with the exterior
^lements, should find the discourse long, and the matter of small purpose. In
the end, John Alasco, superintendent of the Church of London, being in the
Church o^ Frankefort, and seeing such dissentions tending rather to dissolve
the unity (...) the Church, than to redress it, is of opi^nion, that, that
word of the Confession of Auspurge, where Christ is received with the bread,
signifies, that when the faithful eat the bread in the Supper with their
corporal mouth, their spirit with the mouth of Faith receyues Jesus Christ,
which is on the right hand^ of GOD. And such interpretation o^ this word
(with) was received of the Senate of the town of Frankefort, as a declaration
agreeing with the confession of Auspurge, whereby the poor strangers which
are withdrawn thither, liue^ in peace and quiet, until by reason of other
quarelles, this Question was eftsoons renewed, by which mean they became in
effect the cause of the dissipatio^ of so flourishing a Church. There be also
amongst you that say, that the body o^ Christ is present in the Supper, as
Jesus crucified, was present to the eyes of the Galathians, and as the day of
Christ wa^ present to Abraham: and yet are they received into the company of
these which maintain the Confession of Auspurge. And because Heshussius, being
at the university of Hidelbergh, made himself enemy to this interpretation,
and troubled the Church with debates and questions: it is said he was banished
from the said university, like as diverse have already put in writing many
things belonging to this dissension, and others which we have mentioned.

Behold (brethren) one chief occasion much hindering many men to embrace the
true religion, and to bring themselves into your assemblye, as seeing amongst
you so great diversity of opinions. And for your parts, touching the matter
of the Sacraments, you pursue them so egerly, so sharply, and with such
bitterness and stomach, yt the very blind themselves discern in you, more
desire to obteyn victory, than zeal of God to instruct your ignorant
brother. For when we have a direct will toward our neighbor, with a liuelye
touch of compassion of his ignorance, and have a Christian desire to
manifest unto him the truth, we do not proceed by injuries, exco^munications,
nor condemnations, the same being in deed the very effects and motions of a
contentious and arrogant spirit, with a mind full of felony. But of the
contrary, we use sweet and soft words of inducement, with persuasions of
modesty, as knowing assuredly, that man is a kind of creature so fierce of
stomach, as he is not to be qualified otherwise than by gentle admonishment,
and specially in the case and question of his religion, which having her true
foundation in the bottom of his heart, it is impossible to plant persuasions of
religion before we have overcome and gained that place with gentle allurements,
and then with fruit, to plant there the doctrine of faith. Besides also, you
labor us greatly to enter into disputation in this Church upon the point of the
supper, which we will not refuse, so that it may be done in good order, and
with the consent of the state: we would also that you agree first amongst your
selves, to the end we might know what part to maintain: Wherein albeit I
cannot but fear, that your intent was rather to search matter of triumph
without victory, with occasion to send of your books to the next fair of
Frankefort, than of a zeal and pur^ affection to pacify this afflicted
Church: toward which God grant us the zeal of his glory. And I pray you, of
what purpose would it be to us upon the disputation to agree with you: seeing that
by such means, we should fall into ye evil will of a great part of the Princes
Protestants of Germany, who abhor already the opinions you have uttered of
the person of Christ to be in the presence of the Supper? by the same mean
also, we should make our selves companions and adherents to Yllyricus, your
Superintendent, or author of your confession, who is hated of the most noble
Churches and universities of Germany, and chieflye in VVittenberge, who has
bin ye mother nurse of the first Protestants. These things considered, I see
neither order to dispute, nor reason to come to accord with him and his
adhere^ts.

The second point, wherein I requested Mathias Illyricus and you, to take some
pains, was, in the doctrine of mortification, a thing most necessary for this
lamentable time, wherein we see so many Epicures, so many Libertines, so many
Atheists, and people abandoned to all filthiness and dissolution: of which so
principal a matter you touch not one word in all your confession, but rather
with your unbridled order of proceeding, show to ye people great example of
immortification. By the which, those that have judgment in spiritual things,
may see that your doctrine and Scripture is not a doctrine taught by the
spirit of God, and received in his school: but rather certain textes and
propositions gathered out of the papers and Books of others, who
(peradventure) have proved better than we, that which they have taught and
left in writing.

The last part of my request to M. Illiricus, was, to exhort you to intertaine
a charitable and loving unity, to the end all the church might be edified, as
well by the one as the other, which he has done quite contrary in your
confession, as witnesses the words of ye xvij. article in this sort: Quod
aduersariorum coena impie celebetur. Si quis hactenus dubitauit, vtra sen^entia
sit verior in sacramentaria co^trouersia, ^lli sane vel ex solis ipsorum
agendis ac formuli^ sacra communionis, and ipsa praxi coena statue^e haud
difficulter poterit. Tantis enim corru^ptelis, sacrilegijs, in tam sacrosanctis
mysterijs ^assantur, vt citra horrorem ac tremorem eas ^ophanationes, pia men's
cognoscere non possit. ^as igitur vastationes ac violationes tanti mysterij hic
breuiter exponemus, vt sibi pusilli Christi cauere a tantis piaculis and ira
Dei poss^nt. Multis ergo modis eorum liturgia impie ^^ragitur. That is to say:
If any by the things aforesaid, be yet in doubt, not knowing which is the
truest opinion in the matter of the Sacraments, he may easily be certified of
a truth in beholding their actions and ceremonies in the celebration of the
Communion: A sharp point of M. Yllyricus in his confession.
for there be so many corruptions and sacrileges in so holy mysteries, that a
Christian mind cannot behold such prophanations without horror and fear. We
will then declare briefly in this Epistle, the destructions and violations that
are committed in so great a mystery, to the end the little ones of Christ
may stand upon their guard against such execrable crimes, but specially
against the ire of God. Their ceremony of the Supper (that is to say, The
preachers of the confession of Auspurge accuse the other ministers.
of the sacramentaries as you call them) is celebrated with impiety in many
sorts. First you say, that we make no benediction upon the bread. Secondly, in
that, that when we give the bread, we exhort those that receive it, to have
remembrance of Jesus Christ broken, offered, and sacrificed for our
reconciliation to the heavenly father, and satisfaction of our sins with the
divine justice. Thirdly, because that in this, we seek to be folowers of Jesus
Christ, who celebrating the supper, said to his disciples: Take and eat. etc.
Fourthly, you accuse us in that we forget in the Supper the words of
consecration. Fifthly, for that we pronounce not the words of consecration, to
the end the bread may perceive our voice, and so understand the word of God,
and so be converted into the body of Christ. Sixtlye, you accuse us, because
we persuade the assistantes, not to settle their eyes upon the consideration of
the visible and exterior elements, but rather raise our minds and consideration
to Jesus Christ, the true heavenly bread for the nouriture of our souls, who
being already immortal, is glorified upon the right hand of the Father. The
seventh impiety which you say we commit, is, That we tell the assistantes
that they take the bread and wine in remembrance of Jesus Christ. In the
eight, you say we fail, in that we use the words of Christ, saying: Take
and eat, and have remembrance of Jesus Christ employed for you, wherein
according to your scoffs of custom and poetical sleightes, you make us like
to the Beguiars and Beguines, when they feed in their repastes. The Lord
pardon you such orders of teaching to your neighbors, and reveal unto you
the modest gravity which he demaundes in those that profess themselves
pastors of the sheep, and pronouncers of the Gospel. Ninthlye, you blame us
in that we do not counterfeite Jesus Christ as the Priests of the Papists do,
as observing not point by point, and word by word, the ceremonies that he
made, and speak not in the same order the words which he pronounced. Your
tenth and last accusation is, in that (as you say) we rob deceitfully the
supper of the words of consecration, by mean whereof the body of Christ ought
to come thither, and yet we say to the assistants that they receive the body
of Christ.

Behold (dear brethren) one part of the accusatio^s wherewith you have charged
us touching the matter of ye Supper, whereunto I will not answer, as being
things so vain and of so small importance, that there is none participating
with either piety or godliness, which account not the time lost, or at least
evil employed in the debate of such things, for as the Lord has made us once
to understand (by his grace) what it is to receive Christ, and that we have
felt the fruits of his presence, so all your accusations and Arguments of
persuasions to the contrary, are but superfluous. And therefore in place to
make you answer, and fall into the fault which I see in many, who do
nothing in all the time of their life, but dispute and debate, I will pray to
that good God, to give us all a grace of participation with his light, which
chaseth away all darkness of error and ignorance.

I pray you what fruit can proceed in writing a new book of the questions
and differences, that these.xxx. years have bin so sharply argued, and yet
without profit. Would it be any other thing than in causing to be reprinted
sundry repetitions, to fill the faires of Frankeforte and set the bookeprinters
on work? A vanity most great, and yet followed of many men of knowledge,
who, desirous by these means to borrowe themselves an estimation, wish that
the world knew that they have such a facility to compose books, that in one
evening after supper, they can write as many quaires, as may suffice a speedy
Printer to imprint in a week. Considering (alas) not at all, that the devotion
of a christian consists not in words, nor in the multitude of papers and
books, but in the true fear of God, accompanied with lively faith and
careful mortification, with study, by all our possible means to preserve the
bond and league of charity one to another, giving the world to know, by our
life and examples, that our confession is the better.

I could have wished (dear brethren) that where in your confession, you have
disgorged so many injuries at your pleasure, against such as desire your
wealth and honor, at the least that you had given a show of a christian
modesty. But it seems that you would make this your uncharitable dealing
an evident witness and proof of the hate and evil will you bear against your
neighbors, and that without any just occasion in them, calling them
adversaries and ennimies, prophaners of the Supper of the Lord, and darkening
with corruption the words of S. Paul. You call them sacramentaries, people
that know not what means the ascension of Christ, what is his right hand,
nor what is glorification of the humanity of the Lord, with other like
things.

Let us leave, let us leave (good brethren) such manner of disputation, and let
us forget to maintain our own interpretation: yea let us search the
edification of the church of Christ, and not our own glory. Let us study to
lead men by our preachings to Jesus Christ our Sovereign doctor, and not to
follow neither the confession of Auspurge, the Catechism of Martine, nor the
interpretatio^s of John nor Peter. Let us make it known to all the princes
and potentates of Germany, that al those questions be banished, and we desire
to live in reconciliation and friendship: And let not the weak have occasion
to say, that we serve most as matches and bellows, to kindle the hearts of such
personages, to make them show themselves enemies of those who confess one
self Gospel of Christ with them.

Truly the Doctors, Pastors, and Ministers of the Gospel, ought to be such
now, as by word and writing, to become suitors to the Princes Protestants, to
take into their protection, and under their wings, the churches which the Lord
has stirred up in these low Countries, and that they may become humble
intercessoures to the king of Spain, our sovereign Magistrate, for pity over
his poor and most loyal subjects, who without any offense unto the Majesty
of their Prince be persecuted, murdered, afflicted as seditious and rebels,
and handled with more cruelty than may be believed but of such as have seen
it.

In the mean while, we triumph in the Pulpit with beestowing here and there,
captious Inuectiues, calling some Caluinists, some Sacramentaries, some
seditious and rebels, breakers of Images with other like. We send our
Confessyons stuffed with Injurious matters, debates, and quarrels, to the
Princes of Almayne, to the end they may see what valiant champions we are on
this side. And how (at the least) the Confession of Auspurge triumphs in the
town of Antwerpe by our means. In the which mean while, the glory of Jesus
Christ is buried, or altogether forgotten, and we have so hardened our hearts,
that the afflictions of our brethren and neighbors do not touch us at all,
but we hear them reckened, and reckon them our selves with scoffs and
mockery, thinking to escape better cheap, because we are covered with the
confession of Auspurge.

No no (brethren) it can not be so, for God knows how and where to find us,
though it be in the bottom of the sea: he has his arms so long, that he is
able to draw us from the lap of the greatest Monarchs of the earth. And
therefore let us not put our trust in the strength of the flesh, but rather
let us march with all fear before GOD, and search only his glory. And in place
to make factions and separations of the Church, let us go with one courage and
heart to batter the kingdom of Satan, with the superstitions and Idolatries
brought into our Christian religion by him and his suppostes. We ought so to
preach and write against the abuse of the Papists with a Christian modesty.
Let us make war against vices, and not against men, which be the creatures
of God (be they Papists or other) discovering so the abuses, as neither the
abusers nor they that be abused think, that we cry out against them rather by
injurious malice, than for a zeal we have to draw them to one estate.

Of what purpose is it to us to fill our Books and writings with injuries
against the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, and Monks, and to study for
exquisite words and infamous epithetes to breath upon them in the pulpit? Are
we so forgetful that we remember not what we have been our selves? Let us
bear in mind, that there have not passed many years since we were in the
same pit and quagmier plunged up to the chinne, yea even to the top of our
heads, from whence, if the Lord of his goodness have drawn us, bestowing the
tresures of his mercy upon us, follows it therefore that we should either
exclame or cry out against such as unhappily remain yet in the place, from
whence we are come? Were it not better to offer the^ our hand to help to pull
them out of the pit, and to exhort them gently to acknowledge the miserable
estate, wherein they are? for it is impossible ever to gayn their hearts by the
way we take, because man will be in liberty touching his belief and religion:
and the more he shall be resisted, the more eigre will he be found in the
pursuit of that that is defended unto him: employing his body and goods, with
life and all (if n^ede be) to preserve his liberty in these points, and lastly
will esteem those as his sworn ennimies, who by any other means (than
gentleness) will seek to spoil him of this liberty.

To this (brethren) you may answer me, that the tirannye of the papists is so
abominable, that there is no heart possessed with any Religion, The tira^ny
of the Papists upon the spirituality and te^poralitie.
whose patience may endure so intolerable a yoke into the church of God,
seeing they are not contented to bury the benefits of Jesus Christ, to rob and
usurp his dignity, to make themselves mercha^ts of his blood and redemption,
to beguile and seduce the poor people and their consciences sending souls to
hell, in place to draw them out of purgatory, and lastly as a full of their
tira^ny have subdued and put under their feet the Monarchs, Emperors, Kings,
Princes, and Magistrates of the earth, forcing them to an humility upon their
feet: they have usurped Seigniories and principalities by violence and
effusion of man's blood, to t^^ end to make themselves princes and great Lords
and their children, neuews, and allies, having attyred themselves gorgiously
with stolen feathers, like to Esops crow: and where before they were so simple,
that they had scarcely wherewith to fill their bellies, now some of them are
beecome Princes, some Dukes, Earls, Marquesses: others triumph at their
pleasure, devouring the goods of other men: all which is tolerable with them,
because that the Pope their father has put them in possession of such wealth
iniustly usurped.

And if any one (kindled with the grace of our Lord) be privy to such
abuses, and goes about to discover them to the people, incontinent the Popes,
their Parents and Allies, with open mouth do call such Preachers Heretics,
Apostates, banished Strangers, and people unworthy of relief in a Common
state, and will enter forthwyth into devise and travail, and that with all
diligence, to commit them either to the fire and fagottes, or otherwise to
extirpe them quite from the earth: because they fear that the preachers of
truth, discovering their pot of roses (as the proverb says) and that the
world understanding their tirannies, every one will withdraw and take away his
fether rightely belongyng to him: and so in the end, the Crow will eftsoons
become a crow, and this ioily fellow does return to his first beggerlye
estate.

Hereunto I answer and say, (good brethren) that you have great reason, and
I would in GOD the stones had mouths to manifest such abuses. But yet there
is necessary to our side a sober observation of modesty in ye words we use to
speak: The cause why the papists and their allies ^ake war against the
Gospel.
for my part, I dout not at all, that the diligence of the Popes, Cardinals,
with their parents and Allies, is not rather to maintain their usurped
estates, than the glory and zeal of God: for if they had any religion, they
would show it in their life and conversation. But (alas) all the world sees
that the greatest zealors and defendors of the Papists, show almost no fear
of God: and the Popes themselves, deride with open throat our savior Christ,
according to the example of one that died not long since, who having left
behind him many lordships to his children and nephews, usurped by tyranny,
said (in sort of railing or mad scoffing) that this fable of Jesus Christ,
had greatly profited many houses, who of shifting roysters and disordered
people were become possessoures of large revenues. Mark this blasphemy,
consider what religion this holy S. Peter and vicar of Christ had in his
heart, who notwithstanding used his times and occcasions so conuenie^tly, as he
forgot nothing that concerned his profit. But my hope is in God, that he will
destroy that Babylon, and the tyrant Nemroth, that defends her, his parents
and Allies, who to preserve their usurpations, raise war against the children
of GOD, and murder them.

Expecting (dear brethren) this horrible judgment and most assured
punishment that will fall upon them, let us use patience in the wrong they
offer us: If they call us heretics, because we will not follow the faith of
their Popes, but embrace that which Christ has taught us. Let us esteem our
selves happy, if they call us Apostates, because we be come forth, or rather
the Lord has wonderfully delivered us from the Idolatries and superstitions of
the Papists. Let us account our selves nevertheless happy: for my part, I
protest before the Lord, that it is to me a title and surname of glory and
dignity, to be called Apostate of the Pope and the Antichriste of Rome. If
they call us banished from our country, let us rather rejoice than discomfort,
knowing that God has not banished us from his grace, neither is it Christ
that has thrown us out of his spiritual kingdom: but it is the
inquisitours, who would either have banished or burned us per effigiem, in
spending their rage upon the straw and papers, because they could not
execute it upon the flesh and bones of the members of Jesus Christ. Let us give
thanks to god in that such banishments and persecutions proceed not to us as
being guilty either of theft, murder, or treason to our Prince and
magistrate, nor attainted of any other offense worthy of punishment, but
because we search the health of our souls in the simple and pure word of God.

If they call us strangers, let us remember that the heavenly father, The
children pf God are never out of their own country.
which has aduowed us for his children, is lord of Heaven and Earth. And into
what part so ever we shall go, we be in the country of our father, we be his
proper inheritance, as the Prophet says in the Psalm. 7. That the righteous
shall dwell in the Earth, and be lawful possessors of the same. Let us comfort
our selves in this, that neither our running out of the country, nor our
absence from the land of our birth, has been moved by any usurpation of the
possessions or goods of other: but only to give place to persecutions. Such
fleeing away is not shameful, but rather honorable, seeing we are companions
of our head and redeemer Jesus Christ, who from his childhood was a stranger
in the countries of the Egiptians, showing the persecutions of Herod.

If our persecutours do curse us, let us bless them, if they search or seek
our death, let us pray for their life: And when there shall come question to
discover their abuses, tyrannies, and extortions, let us use it with sobriety,
modesty, and gravity, that it may appear even to themselves, that we are not
led by any malice against their persons, but of a spiritual zeal to the
glory of God, the advancement of the kingdom of Christ, chief of the
church, and to the health of the souls of the poor and simple people
beguyled, and seduced even until now, by the preachers of dreams and fables,
who under the color of Jesus Christ, have martired his church: and being in
deed very ravening Wolves, do name themselves pastors and sheepherdes, of the
troop of God. Lastely, let us endeavor to live in peace one with an other,
whether they be of ye Romish religion, or reformed church, praying always to
the Lord that he will lighten us in our ignoraunces, which we ought to show
to every one with all modesty and gentleness, according to the example of our
master and Redeemer Jesus, John. 3.
who has not disdayned to receive gently, and teach myldly his very enimyes
persecutyng him daily, Luke. 7.
and making coniurations to take from him his life. Let us remember that being
eue^ upon the cross, pinched with the extreme pangs of death, not mynding his
own pains, he had remembrance of his enemies, with prayer to his heavenly
Father, to pardon their offenses: let us imitate the Lord our creator, whose
mercy and goodness are so plentiful, that he makes his Sun shine both upon
the good and the evil. Let us not use regard, that this man has such an
ignorance, nor that man will receive any article of our confession. Let us
love all, help all, embrace all, and support the ignorances and infirmities of
all. For better were it that we failed in this point (if it be a fault at all)
than to make us judges of the conscience of an other, and give out sentence of
condemnation against those that agree not with us.

For end (dear brethren) I beseech you take in good part this my Epistle or
Letter, moving no otherwise than of an affectioned heart toward you, whereof the
Lord is my witness, and I assure it in mine own conscience: and let it not
(I pray you) be an occasion to you to write Books nor Pamphlets, ^eing I have
no meaning to enter into defiance, or war with the pen, neither does the time
serve for it, but rather of need to us all to apply our selves to better
things, and let us labor to increase our knowledge in that which we want to
be doctors of the Gospel: for the acknowledging of our ignorance ought rather
to incense us to a will to learn, than to make our selves inquisitours and
censors of the Faith of others, with employing the time to fill books and
papers, with questions altogether impertinent to edification.

I humbly beseech the sovereign majesty of our good God and heavenly father,
that it will please him to furnishe your judgments and understandings with
the knowledge of his holy wor^^, to the end that by the mean of your
preachings, your audience may learn a true faith, an assured hope in Jesus
Christ, and a careful mortification of the old Adam, and that the same
Lord, so renew your hearts and inflame your wills in the affection of charity
toward your neighbors, that from henceforth, we, being joined with you, and
you with us, in we live in peace, and tranquillity of body and spirit in the
assembly of our Lord Jesus sovereign pastor of our souls, who, having bought
us by the inestimable price of his obedience, and blood most precious, it may
also please him to guard us against all dissentions, and make us live in the
unity of himself, until, that being spoiled of this corruption, we may
perfectly rejoice in the conjunction of him and the eternal glory promised us
by his mean, of the which in his own person, ye rather to make us inheritors
thereof, he has already taken possession, sitting on the right hand of God with
all power in heaven and earth. To whom be all glory and empire for ever. Amen.

In the town of Antvverpe.ij. of January, 1567. Your affectioned brother in
Jesus Christ, and humble companion in the work of God, Anthony de Corro, of
Civil.

To the Church of Antwerpe.
THis only (dear brethren) was intended by this Epistle, to imparte it by
conference with the Preachers of the Church, naming themselves of the
confession of Auspurge, without meaning to communicate it by publication,
albeit because diverse written copies are common into the hands of sundry and
several persons, I thought it to better purpose to spread abroad and deliver it
in print, tha^ to suffer it to be argued in secret, least the same might move
cause of sinister judgment against the simple and sincere integrity of my
meaning, wherein as the labor was peculiar in my self, without the enterviewe
or counsel of any, so if it include any matter to edify or confirm your
consciences, it may please you to be tha^kfull to the Lord, as author of all
goodness. And for the errors, I beseech you let them he laid wholye upon me,
as upon a man, who living yet in the peregrination to our heavenly country,
where (we shall have perfect knowledge) may err and fail in many things. For
we know that we are trauailers and iorneymen in this body, 2. Cor. 4.
we are absent from the Lord, and walk by faith, and not by vewe. For end, I
wipe my hands before God and you all, of any intent either to redarguate or
confute the articles presented by those that call themselves of the Confession
of Auspurge, but rather to let the^ see upon what small causes they have formed
great quarrels, maintaining dissension for a thing of small importance, and
forbear to deal in matters more necessary. Seeing also (good brethren) that
upon the impression there remained certain leaves void and unfurnished of
matter, I thought it not out of purpose to fill them with certain places of
holy Scripture, persuading the faithful to acts of Charity, with brotherly
unity one to another, yea not to forbear to love our proper enemies, and such
as pursue us with persecution: a virtue at this day most important and
necessary, the rather for that Satan employeth a wonderful diligence to sow
seeds of dissension and quarrels with special endeavor and strange means to
corrupt the league of charity left unto us by Christ of such commendation: and
all this under a pretense of diversity in religion, wherein as we ought to
stand upon our guard against the subtilties and policies of ye devil, so
assuredly, God has not left us either license or liberty once to think that
it is lawful for us to hate any man, in respect to maintain our religion,
seeing we are expressly enjoined by the words of the same, to love such as
despise us, and pray for those that persecute our bodies and doings. But alas,
we are slipped into a time so miserable, and infected with such corruption and
blindness, that in the maintaining of the integrity of our faith, we become
prejudicial to the league of charity, with a negligent care of the virtue of
the same. For my part I allow justly such diligence as is used in the purgation
of abuses and errors, to the end our holy faith and Religion may the rather
be purified, and remain without spot: albeit I wish a precise observation of
Christian charity, least in making war against the heretics of our faith, we
become not heretics against charity. For which cause, and to the end that
every one be privy to the bond and obligation which God in this purpose,
demaundes at our hands, I have here collected out of the divine word certain
special texts importing our charitable duties and office unto our neighbor,
desiring you (dear brethren) to construe in the best my intent, tending simply
and altogether to refute those Fables, dreams, and errors, which I see
sundry with no small diligence, labor to support and maintain in the Church
of Christ, wishing they participated rather with a spirit of humility and
myldenesse in the correction of the opinions of others, than to strive to
become inquisitors of other men's faith, and much less to enter into sentence
of judgment against such as refuse their interpretations, until they be
assured by the spirit of god, that such opinions are directly against the
heavenly word, and that we have witness in our conscience, that God calls us
to do it, for the^ he himself will cloth us with the affection of his Apostle,
who to gain and reduce his brethren, would not stick almost to abandon his
proper health: Romans 9.
even so when we feel such a zeal move in us, even then also shall we prove
in our selves, that God will bless our enterprises. Let us the^ embrace peace,
and entertain mutual accord, seeing that as there is nothing that leuyeth a
more sharp war within us, than our own discordes, disdaines, and
partialities: so, of the contrary, if we march under ye ensign of charity,
supporting one another in our infirmities, it shall be most hard either to
break our array, or put us to flight: Eccle. 4.
For as Solomon says: the accord of three strings is very hard to break. My
little children I am yet for a little time with you, John. 13.
you shall search me, but as I said to the Jews, yt whither I go, they could not
come, I say also the same unto you now giving you this new commandment, that
you love one another (as I say) I have loved you, to the end also that you
love one another. By this all men shall know, that you are my disciples, if you
love one another. That is the principal mark of our christianity, all others
that we may invent, may be followed of ye hipocrites, but this is inimitable,
because it is peculiar only to the regenerate, and those that be renewed by the
spirit of god.

Be you desirous of the most excellent gifts, Cor. 12. and 13.
and I will show you a way yet more excellent. If I speak ye languages of me^
and Angels, and have not charity, I am as the metal that soundes, or Cimball
that tinks. And if I have the gift of prophecy, and know all secrets, and
every science, and if I had such faith as I might transport the mountains and
have not charity, I am nothing: if I distribute al my goods to the relief of
the poor, and deliver my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits
me nothing: Charity is not easily incenied to anger, but she is mylde. Charity
is not envious. Charity is not insolent, she swells not with anger, she does
not use hirselfe dishonestly, she searches not her profit, she is not
despitefull, she thinks no evil: She takes no pleasure in injustice, but
rejoices in the truth: she endures all, believes all, hops for all, and
suffers all: Charity never falls. And a little after he says: These three
things remain, Faith, hope, and charity: whereof the greatest is charity.
Those be the effects of Christian charity, which is neither vain opinion nor
courtesy in outward show, but rather a virtue bringing forth wonderful
fruits.

1. Tessa. 4.
Touching brotherly Charity, there is no great need I write to you thereof,
seeing you are taught of God to love one another, for even so you do toward all
your brethren which be in Macedonie. Brethren, we exhort you to surmount more
and more with diligence to live peaceably: If the unction of the spirit of God
have not yet taught you to love your neighbors, let us fear that our doctrine
is not rather learned of men, than in the school of God.

^. John. 2. and 3.
He that says he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness to
this hour: who loves his brother, remains in the light, and falls not:
but he that hates his brother, walks in darkness, and knows not whither
he goes, for the darkness has blinded his eyes. By this are manifested the
children of God, and the children of the devil. Who soever does not justice,
and loves not his brother is not of God: for this is it you have heard
preached from the beginning, that we love one another, not as Caine, which was
called wicked, and killed his brother: and for what cause did he kill him? for
that his works were wicked: and his brothers were just: Brethren marvel not if
your brother hate you: in that we love our brethren, we know we are transferred
from death to life: who loves not his brother, dwells in death: who hates
his brother, is a murderer. And you know that no murderer has eternal life
remaining within him: by this we know his charity, that he has given his
life for us, we ought also to hazard our lives for our brethren. And this is a
most certain and ample explication of the mark of our christianity which may
serve as a touchstone to assure us of our adoption.

^^^uer. 10. Verse. 12.
Hate makes quarrels, but charity covers all grudges. This witness does teach
us that the root of dissentions and debates, is ye default of christian
charity, which does not only cover outward sins, but also ye ignorances of ye
understanding.

Ibidem. 15. Verse. 17. and 18.
The furious man moves contention, but the pacient man appeaseth quarrel: this
is a looking glass wherein we may behold the troublesome minds of our time,
who upon small causes will stir up strange quarrels and debates.

^. John.
Well-beloved, let us love one another, for charity is of God, and who loves, is
borne of God, and knows God, and he yt loves not, knows not God, for God
is charity. In this is manifested ye charity of God toward us, yt he has
sent his only son into the world, to thend we may live by him. In this is
charity, not yt we have loved god, but because he has loved us, and sent his
son to be the appointment for our sins: Well-beloved, if God have so loved us,
we ought also to love one an other. Never any man has seen God. If we love
one another, God dwells in us, and his charity is accomplished in us: by
this we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, that he has given us of his
holy spirit. And a little after: If any say, yt he loves God, and hates his
brother, he is a liar: for if he love not his brother who^ he sees, how can he
love God whom he sees not? And we have this commandment of him, that he that
loves God, loves also his brother: this text has no need of interpretation,
but rather of proof and examination wherein let every man sound and prove his
heart whether these words be with him or against him.

Thou shall not see the ox or sheep of thy brother straied out of the way,
Leuit. 22.
and hide thee from them, but thou shall bring the^ again to thy brother. And
if thy brother be not thy neighbor, and thou know him not, then shall thou
lead the^ within thy house, and suffer them to remain with thee until thy
brother demand them, and then thou shall restore the^ to him: thou shall do
in like manner to his Ass, to his garments, and all the lost things of thy
brother, which he has lost and thou found, neither must thou hyde them: thou
shall not see the Ass or ox of thy brother fallen in the way, and hide thee
from them, but thou shall help to lift the^ up with him. If the Lord command
that our charity be showed in the lifting up of beasts, let us consider with
stronger reason, that his majesty would that we have care of the souls of our
brethren and neighbors: whom if we see strayed from the way of truth, let us
labor to reduce them: if they be fallen into the pit of error, let us offer the^
our hands rather than to pronounce sentence of condemnation, and pursue the^
even unto death.

Texts of the divine word, exhorting us to love our enemies, and pray for
such as persecute you.
Leui. 19.
THou shall not walk as a detractor amongst the people, thou shalt not dress
thy self against the blood of thy neighbor, for I am the Lord: Thou shall not
hate thy brother in thy heart, correct thy neighbor, and suffer no sin upon
him: Thou shall not revenge nor keep malice against the children of thy
people: but thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: for I am the Lord.

You have heard yt it has been said, Math. 5.
thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thy enemy. But I say unto you: love
your enemies, bless those which curse you, do good to such as hate you, and
pray for those that run upon you to persecute you, to the end you be the
children of your father that is in heaven: for he makes his sun shine upon the
good and evil, and sendes rain upon the just and iniust: For if ye love those
that love you, what reward have you therefore? The Paganes do not they the like
also? And if you embrace only your brethren, what do you more? Do not ye
pagans also the like? Be you perfect as your father is perfect that is heaven.

Do not render to any evil for evil: Romans 12.
procure honest things before al men: And if it may be, at lest as much as in in
you, have peace with all men. Do not revenge (well-beloved) but give place to
anger, for it is written: To me belongs vengeance, says the Lord, and I
will give it: if then thy enemy be hungry, give him to eat, if he have thirst,
give him to drink: for in this doing, thou shall assemble coals of fire upon
his head. Be not ouercom with evil, but surmount the evil by the good.

Romans 13.
Owe nothing to any man, if not that you love one another: for who loves an
other, has accomplished the law, which says, Thou shall not commit adultery:
thou shall not kill, thou shalt bear no false witness: thou shall not covet,
etc. And if there be any other commandment, it is in effect comprehended in
this word, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy self. Truly if we had this
stone of foundation of brotherly charity in the buildings of our life,
traffickes and contractes with our neighbors, all the parts of this spiritual
house which God has given us in charge, should be well ordered and couched.

John. 13.
After the Lord had washed their feet, and taken again his garment, and that he
was set again at the table, he said unto them: Know you what I have done unto
you? you call me Lord and master, and you say well, for so I am: if then I that
am Lord and master have washed your feet, you ought also to wash one another
feet. For I have given you example, that eue^ as I have done, you may also
do. Why have not we remembrance of this holy ceremony when we celebrate the
supper of Christ, seeing that he himself has prepared the hearts of his
disciples with this admonition, before he showed or did institute the sacrament
of their coniu^ction with him, giving them to understand that he is not worthy
to receive Jesus Christ, which does not apply his heart to wash the feet of
his brethren?

I speak truth in Christ, I lie not, Rom 9.
my conscience bearing me witness by the holy spirit, that I have great sorrow
and continual torment in my heart: for I did desire to be separated with Christ
for my brethren which be my parents according to the flesh. When we shall feel
our hearts so well touched with the spirit of God, as S. Paul was, let us set
upon hardly to correct ye errors and opinions of others, and so long as we are
fleshly, and guided rather by stomach tha^ spiritual zeal, let us employ our
time to pray God for ye ignorant.

Colos. 3.
Let us be the^ (as chosen vessels of God, holy and well-beloved) clad in the
intrailes of mercy, humility, gentleness, and of a mind of patience,
supporting one another, and pardoning one another if we have quarrel: as
Jesus Christ has pardoned you, even so forgive you others: and besides all
this, be attired with charity, the very bond of perfection. And let the peace
of God govern in your hearts, whereunto you are all called in one body, and be
gracious. The word of God dwell fruitfully in you in all wisdom, teaching and
warning one another, in Psalms, songs, and spiritual praises with grace,
singing with your heart to ye Lord, whereby we shall see how far from these
rules of charity be they, that in place to edify the Church of Christ, do
rather procure her confusion with their debates and questions.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON, by Francis Coldocke, and Henry Bynneman. ANNO. 1577.


