A THEOLOGICAL DIALOGVE.

Wherein the Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to the Romans is expounded.

Gathered and set together out of the Readings of Antonie Corranus of Siuille,
professor of Divinity.

PSALM. 122. Lord deliver my soul from false lips and a deceiptfull tung.
What shall he give thee, or what shall be put unto thee thou deceiptfull tung?
The sharp arrows of a strong man, with the coals of Juniper. Imprinted at
London by Thomas Purfoote, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the
^^^^ece. A^ 15^5.

Illustrissimo Heroi and Domino, D. Roberto Dudleio, Comiti Lecestrensi, Baroni
Denbighensi. etc. Domino suo Colendissimo.
SOlent hi quibus plurimi sunt creditores, supellex vero adeo curta, and
tenuis, vt omnibus satisfacere nequeant, id imprimis curare, vt cum ijs, quibus
plurima debent, primum paciscantur: Ita and ego, Heroes illustrissime, cum
habeam infinitos prope, tum hic, tum alibi, quorum beneficijs sum obstrictus,
simque simul omnibus solue^do impar, ab ijs potissimum, ordiendum duxi, qui me,
prae reliquis, summo meritorum suorum cumulo, quodammodo manciparunt. In horum
catalogo, cum tua celsitudo, non postremas teneat, vt quae, octo ab hinc annis,
cum primum in Angliam venissem, non modo summo fauore ac beneuolentia, me
excepit, verum etiam insigni liberalitate, quam tamen (vt quod res est dicam)
minime captabam, vltro est prosequuta: officij mei esse duxi, aliquam animi mei
gratitudinem erga tuam Amplitudine^ depromere. Sunt (fateor) and alia, exinde
innumera tua, in me beneficia, quorum longam seriem sigillatim enumerare, and
operosum foret, and tua fortassis excellentiae, non ita gratum: qui vt
beneficia tua apud peregrinos omnes (maxim autem qui literarum pietatisque
nomine commendarentur) ponere nunquam dubitasti: ita (quod proprium est
virtutis veraeque beneficentiae) recte factorum conscientia contentus, nullam
pro ijs aliam gratiam, aut laudem, aliquando repoposcisti. Itaque etsi de tuis
meritis, multa habeo, and vere dicere, veritus tamen (vt dixi) ne intempestiua,
aut nimis magna, fortassis, laudum tuarum co^memoratione, generosissimum tuum
animum, ea quae nos admiramur fastidientem, offendam, his omnibus consulto
relictis, ad id me conferam, quod cum excellenti, Heroica tua virtute est
dignissimum, tum ex omnibus tuis, in me beneficijs, summum semper, maximumque,
merito duxi. Non enim (vt nunc sunt hominum mores) secundis meis rebus
duntaxat, fautorem te meum haberi, voluisti: verumetiam (quod singularis est
virtutis, perfectaeque euiusdam beneuolentiae) difficillimis meis temporibus,
benignissimum te mihi patronum praebuisti, neque temere in vulgus sparsis,
statim fidem adhibuisti, sed (quod fortissimi atque prudentissimi erat Herois)
cum magno illo Alexandro, alteram aurem mihi asseruasti, ac iuxta vetus illud
Atheniense, (...), mea innocentia cognita, authoritatem tuam ac patrocinium,
praesidio mihi esse, hactenus semper voluisti. Eoque pacto, vt non modo mea
fama, quae partim ambiguis quibusdam rumoribus, partim nimia quorundam
credulitate, in periculum venerat (quantum in te fuit) incolumis, atque integra
mihi constat, verumetiam beneuolentiam, bonamque tuam gratiam, insuper sum
adeptus. Quorum istud, tantifacio, quanti nobilissimi, liberalissimique Herois
gratia, homini meae conditionis, facienda est: illud, quo nomen meum singulari
tuo iudicio ac prudentia, ab infamiae nota, bona ex part vindicatum sentio,
ita charum est, vt prae hoc vno, reliqua (quae alioqui sunt maxima) pene nihili
ducam. Quid enim esse potest, Euangelicae doctrinae praeconi, fama charius?
quid acceptius, quid denique maius aut in vita optatius? vt rectitissime mihi
dixisse videatur Solomon. Melior est fama bona, quam ingentes diuitiae:
Contraque in Christianom charitatem grauissime peccare videantur, non hi modo,
qui hanc fratri, per fraudem eripiunt, verum etiam qui calumnijs temere fidem
adhibent: cum nisi inuenirentur qui (...) criminationes acciperent, totum illud
perniciosissimum calumniatorum genus, sua sponte corrueret, falsique rumores
prorsum euanescerent. Et sane nisi talpa (quod aiunt) essemus coeciores, vel
natura ipsa duce intelligeremus, fama^, quam optimus quisque, ipso capite
chariorem habet, sine summa iniuria, omnisque humanitatis violatione, alteri
eripi non posse. Nec non frequenter illud nobis in mentem veniret, quod vel ab
Ethnicis prudentissime animaduersum legimus: Sapientissimum rerum omnium
conditorem Deum, vnam duntaxat homini linguam dedisse, non ad mentiendum, aut
calumniandum, sed ad animi and pectoris (cui e regione posita est) sensa, vere,
ingenue, candideque exprimenda: binas vero aures largitum, tam apta ratione
collocatas, vt quae nobis dicuntur, and dextrorsum and sinistrorsum audire
valeamus. Sed vt ad rem, tandem aliquando veniam, Heroes amplissime, volui pro
tot, tantisque tuis quibus obstrictissimum me habes meritis, hanc meam
metaphrasim in epistolam ad Romanos, primo quidem Latin a mescriptam, meisque
auditoribus co^municatam: deinde amici cuiusdam mei opera, in Anglicum sermonem
transfusam, nomini tuo dedicare: vt cum refer omnino gratiam, tanto Heroi,
non possim, aliquam saltem gratitudinis significationem darem. Et quanquam
munus istud, non sit, aut praestantia tua, aut acceptis beneficijs dignum, sed
nec voluntati quidem meae par, (si non sacrosanctam ipsam Apostoli epistolam,
sed meos duntaxat labores, intuearis:) spero tamen te (quae tua est animi
generositas, ac magnitudo) non leuidensi isto dono, sed donantis animo (qui
sane in tuum obsequium propensissimus est) inspecto, mea^ hanc qualemcunque
opellam, aequi bonique consulturu^. Ex cuius lectione, si quid emolumenti
acceperis, id omne vni Deo opt. Max. acceptum feres, qui mihi sancto suo
spiritu, hasce meditationes suggesserit, quas in commune Ecclesiae bonum
depromerem: Sique opinionem illam tuam, quam de doctrinae meae puritate, non
iniuria (vt spero) concepisti, confirmabit istius libelli mei lectio, tum id
abs te petam (de quo tamen dubitare non debeo) vt non solum beneuolentia, ac
fauore tuo, magis magisque me co^plectaris, verum etiam scriptum hoc,
authoritate tua foueas, atque tuearis: Quod tametsi in tuo nomine Anglicano
sermon, veluti noua quadam vest, indutum, appareat: vniuersae tamen Ecclesiae
Anglicanae, tanquam fidei meae confessionem, and examinandum and iudicandum
propono. Been and feliciter vale Heroes clarissime, Deumque praecor Opt. Max. vt
celsitudinem tuam, firmissimum huic Regno praesidium, diu seruiet incolumem.

Tuae celsitudini deditissimus Antonius Corranus.

TO THE RIGHT honorable, and his singular good Lord, the Lord Robert Dudley
Earl of Leicester, Baron of Denbigh, Master of the Queens Majesty's horse, of
the noble order of the garter Knight, and one of her highness honorable privy
Counsel. etc.
SVche as are indetted to many men, and yet have so short and slender
ability, that they cannot satisfy them all, are wont to lay by all means to
co^pounde first with them to whom they owe most. So I also, right noble Earl,
having in manner infinite persons both here and elsewhere, which have bound me
to them by their benefits, and being unable to discharge my self toward them
all, have thought it meet to begin chiefly at those, which above all others
have after a sort brought me in bondage to them, by ouerloding me with their
deserts. In which number, forasmuch as your Honor is not the furthest
behind, as who about an eight years ago, at my first coming into England,
not only received me with singular favor and good will, but also rewarded me
with very bountiful liberality, which notwithstanding (to say the truth) was
the thing that I least sought for: I deemed it my duty to utter some
thankfulness of mind toward your Lordship. There are (I confess) other
innumerable benefits of yours toward me since that time, the reckening up
whereof in order one by one would be both tedious and peradventure not very
acceptable to your Honor: who, as you have not at any time sticked to bestow
your benefits upon all strangers, and specially upon such as were commended
to you for learning and Religion: so being contented with the conscience of
weldooing, (which is the property of virtue and of true bounteousnes) you have
never required any other thank or commendation for the same. Therefore although
I have many things to say (and that truly) of your Honorable deserts: yet
notwithstanding for fear (as I said) least I might perchance by mine
unseasonable or ouergreat setting forth of your praises, offend your noble
mind, which despises the things that we have in admiration: I willingly leave
all those things, and proceed to that which both beseems both your excellent
and noble disposition, and which I have always justly taken to be the cheifest
and greatest of all your benefits toward me. For you have not only
voutsafed to favor me in my prosperity (as the manner of the world is
nowadayes) but also showed your self a most favorable Patron in my cheifest
distresses (which is the property of singular virtue, and of perfect good
will) and not streightwayes given credit to matters unadvisedly given out, but
(which was the point of a most stout and wise noble man) did with great
Alexander keep one ear for me, and according to the old said saw of
Athens, gave ear to both sides alike, and perceiving mine innocence,
voutchsafed always since to employ your authority and protection to my
defense. By means whereof not only my good name (which partly through ccrtein
doubtful reports, and partly through the ouerlight belefe of some persons,
was fallen in peril) abides whole and sound to me, so far as lay in you to
do: but also I have moreover obtained your well liking and good favor: Of which
things I make so great account, as a man of my mean state ought to make of the
favor of a most honorable and bountiful noble man. And surely that dealing
of yours whereby I find my good name for the most part defended through your
singular judgment and wisdom, from the reproach of infamy, is of so great
account with me, that in comparison of that alone, I take the residue (which
notwithstanding are very great) in manner as nothing. For unto a Preacher of the
doctrine of the gospel, what can be more dear, what can be more acceptable,
and finally what can be greater or more to be wished in this life, than a good
name? So that, to my seeming, Solomon has said very rightly, that a good name
is better than great riches. And contrariwise me thinks that christian charity
is greatly impeached, not only by such as bereeue their brothers of it by
their crafty dealinges, but also by such as credit misreports unadvisedly,
because that if there were none to be found which would admit misreportes
ouerhastily, all the whole pestilent kind of backbiters would fade of it own
accord, and false reports would utterly vanish away. And truly, if we were
not blinder than Beetles, we might perceive even by natures direction, that a
good name, which every good man sets more store by than by his life, can
not be taken away from others without exceeding great wrong, and the breach of
all humanity: and moreover the thing vvoulde come oftentimes to our
remembrance, which we read to have been very discretly considered even of
the Heathen, namely that God the creator of all things, being most wise, has
given to man but one tung, not to lie or slander with, but to express the
conceiptes of his mind and heart (where against it is placed) truly,
plainly, and meeldly: and two ears, so fitly placed, that we may well hear
the things that are spoken to us, both on the right side, and on the left. But
to the intent I may at length come to the matter, right Honorable, when I my
self had first written this Metaphrasis of mine in Latin upon the Epistle to
the Romans, and communicated the same to my hearers: and afterward had
caused a friend of mine to translate the same into English: I purposed to
dedicate it to your name, for the manyfolde and great benefits vvherby you
hold me most straightly bound unto you: that whereas I am not able to make any
recompense at all to so great a Lord, I might at leastwise give him some
inckling of thankfulness. And although this present (if you have an eye but to
my labor only, and not to the holy Epistle of the Apostle) be neither worthy
of your excellency, nor of the benefits that I have received, no nor
correspondent to my will: yet I hope (such is the nobleness and greatness of
your mind) that in respect, not of the gift, but of the giuers mind (which
surely is most forvvade to do you service) you will take this small work of
mine (such as it is) in good worth. By the reading whereof if you take any
profit, you shall think your self beholden for it alonely unto our most
gracious and almighty God, who by his holy spirit has put these meditations
into my mind, to set them forth to the common welfare of his Church. And if
the reading of this my little book shall confirm that opinion of yours which
your Honor has conceived (and not without cause as I hope) of the pureness
of my doctrine: then I make this petition to you, (vvherof notvvithsta^ding I
ought not to doubt) that it may please you not only to embrace me more and more
with your good will and favor: but also to cherishe and defend this
vvriting by your authority: which although it come forth under your name in
the English tung as clothed in a new garment, yet is it set out by me as a
confession of my faith to be examined and judged by the whole church of
England. And thus I wish your noble L. most happy welfare and prosperity,
beseching our most gracious and almighty God to preserve your Honor long in
health, as a right strong defense unto this Realm.

Your good L. most humble Anthony Corranus.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL THE GENTLEMEN OF BOTH THE TEMPLES, which study the
common Laws of England: Anthony Coranus of Civil sends greeting in Christ.
RIGHT Worshipful, to whom I am in many respects beholden, it is now full
three years ago, since by Gods providence and (as I believe) calling, and by
your voices together, with the confirmation of the right Reverend father in
God, the Lord Edwine Sands Bishop of London, I was chosen to execute the
office of reading the Divinity Lecture in your companies. In which time how
great courtesy I have received at your hands, it is not needful to rehearse
here, for as much as the end of your weldooing, is not to seek perishing
glory among men by the sound of a Trumpet, but too have it appear before the
eyes of Gods majesty, by whose inspiration and grace they be done, there to
be adorned with their due praise and reward. Therefore leaving the setting
forth of your friendlinesse toward me, I will say somevvhat of my duty
toward you, and of the office of teaching, in the executing whereof the
Apostle Paul wills his dear beloved Timothy too observe these points. 2.
Tim. 2. and. 15.
Indeuer (says he) to yield thy self a tried vvorkeman unto God, such a one
as needs not too be ashamed, and as deuideth the word of truth rightly.
The Apostle requires here (as I think) three things both in his shepherd
whom he fashioneth, and in all the dealers forth of the heavenly doctrine. The
first is, that they strain themselves to the uttermost, to yield themselves
tried workmen unto God, eue^ in the manner of their teaching, in no wise
coveting the perishing praise of men, and much less standing over fearfully
in awe of the judgments of ambitious teachers. Another is, that they stick
lustely to the work that is enjoined them, in no wise being ashamed of Christ's
Gospel, but gladly and cherefully embracing the miseries that are laid upon
them, and the cross which is wont to be the inseperable companion of all
Christ's disciples, and specially of such as are called too the building up of
Gods church, and labor stoutly therein. The third is, that they divide the
word of truth rightly: that is to say, that as nere as is possible, they
advisedly set forth and observe a true Method or order of teaching, taken out
of the holy writers, and fashioned like to the pattern and practice of the
sermons of the Prophets. As touching the first point, Paul warns Timothy,
that he which has the charge to instruct me^ in the faith, must have his eyes
cast upon god, and not covet to vau^t himself to the worldwarde. For witty men
are wont to hunt more for the praise of the people, tha^ for the edifying of
the Church. Therefore the effectuallest remedy of that leawdnesse, is to
yield proof of our selves, and of our service unto God, with whom if we
think our selves to have to do, all desire of perking up will be gone, and
we will be much more careful to become faithful stewards of Gods truth,
than idle disputers of it. Setting this warning of the Apostles before mine
eyes, I have purposely (as near as I could) absteyned from all contentious
questions and alterations, which are wont to have more curiosity than profit.
Again I considered how ye have very famous Universities, full of excellent
learned men, in which I know that if any point of Christian doctrine require
more diligent opening, it is wont to be enlightened and made plain by public
disputations: and therefore, to knit many and hard knottes, and to vnknitte
them again, and to devise curious questions, in the decyding whereof there may
appear more worldly slight than heavenly light, in open assembly, where
persons ignorante of holy matters, are oftentimes wont to intermingle
themselves with the learned, I thought it was no discretion at all.
Nevertheless, leaving every man free to his own judgment, I will make haste
to the considering of the Apostles second precept. For he wills us to be
workmen in buylding of the Church, and to bestow our travel in such sort, as
the fruits of godliness which our hearers shall bring forth, may bear
record of our diligence in husbanding the Lords vineyarde. And whereas he
says that Gods servant and workmen must not in any wise be ashamed: it
conteyneth a notable lesson, of the bearing of the Cross, which is wont to
accompany Gods faithful ministers. For it is not enough for them to apply
their enjoined charge day and night: but they must also with an vndiscouraged
mind abide the hissings, raylings, and wrong-dealings of such as pass by, yea
and sometimes also the backbytings of those whose vineyarde they seek to do
good unto. The mynding of this precept has brought again too my remembrance,
what a number of troubles and incombraunces I have borne out, since the time
that the lord called me to the charge of teaching in his Church. But to say
the turthe plainly as it is, they for whose sakes I have taken pain these full
ten years, do more comber me with their privy manner of dealings, than other
that are at open defiaunce against Gods servant and workmen. Wherefore
leaving the miseries and sorrows of mind, wherewith men of my calling are wont
to be vexed, I will speak here, but only of those incumberaunces which have
made my cross the greeuouser, added undoubtedly and laid upon me by their
means, who (if I be not deceived) ought rather too have been Joseph's of
Aramathia, in helping me to bear the burden of my cross, than to have made
it heauyer, I will not say importable by their attempts. But to the matter.
Although not with such diligence as I ought to do (for I am a man, and
therefore think not my self privileged from any frayltie of man) yet too the
vttermoste of my power I have (too use Paul's manner of speech) indeuered to
make my self alowable before God, in discharging my duty among you most dear
Readers. In the mean while none of both the crosses, neither inward nor
outward has wanted. Inwardly the changing of my function did long trouble my
mind. And outwardly the misreportes that were spread abroad of me and my
doctrine, did grieve me more than can be uttered. Of mine inward grief, this
was not the least part (for thereat will I begin) that whereas from my very
youth, all my studies have amed at this mark, namely to encourage and exhort
my own Countrymen to the exercises of godliness, (For of all that ten years
space which I taught in France in the French tung, me thought I wrought in
another man's harvest, and therefore vvoulde never bind my self too any
Church there, but executed my charge alvvayes with condition, till
opportunity were oflered too do service too mine own Countrymen) surely I
could not but be grieved and sorry at the heart, in so sudden changing of my
function. For I beseech you, if we have an eye but to humayne affections, what
could happen more acceptable to me, after so many windlasses, wanderings, and
pains sustained in the vprores of France and Flaunders: than to have found in
England, not only a most safe and welremoued haven from those streams, but
also the ready occasion which I had wished many years before, namely of
gathering a Church of mine own countrymen in some place, where I might both
learn the pure doctrine of the Gospel by teaching it, and teach it in
learning it? By the goodness of the Divine Majesty I obtained the thing which
I had long time, and with most earnest prayer sought, and at London I gathered
together my Countrymen that had forsaken the Realm of Spain for the Gospels
sake: and I began to teach the doctrine of the holy Scriptures openly, not
without great anguish and nipping grief of mind to the envious sort, but to
the exceeding great joy of the godly, and to such as mind Christ's glory
rather than their own commodities and estimation. This pleasure of mind and
wished quietness, I could enjoy no longer tha^ two years. In which space, how
much comfort, how much heavenly delight, and how great increase of doctrine I
received, living right poorly in this City among my most poor Countrymen:
none know but he who of his mercy bestowed those benefits upon me, and I that
had the experience of his goodness. But o the crafty conueiance of the old
Serpent. There wanted not enuiers of this my happy state. What needs many
words? Satan using his wonted slightes, did both dissolve and put to wrecke
the said congregation of outcaste Spaniards, which had forsaken their own
Country for religions sake, and conveyed themselves into foreign Realms: and
utterly bereeue me of the quietness which I had scarce tasted of with the
uttermost part of my lips. Verily it stood me in hand in this calamity, to
bethink me ageine of the Apostles precept, and to bear this most cruel spite
with a quiet mind: which thing by the benefit of Gods grace I have (to my
joy) performed so far as man's frayltie avoorded, verily upon assurance of
mine own innocence, For as the Poet says.

In this behalf becomme a brazen wall.
And another fear, ne blush what ever fall.
Furthermore I could here justly complain of the furtherers of this deed, and
of the second causes as they term them. But I think it better and more
discretion, too pass over men's untoward attemptes in this behalf with
forgetfulness, and too mount up too the providence of the divine majesty, and
too believe that this ruin of the Spanish Church was made by his will, and
that the same shall peradventure fall out too greater profit both of me, and
my countreimen than man's wisdom can epsy. Undoubtedly for mine own part, I
perceive my self to have reaped no mean fruits by this change, whereof I see
it is not the least, that I have tried the intentes of them which with their
mouths do continually pretend the spreadinge abroad of Gods glory, when as
by their attemptes and false accusations (I will not say deceytes) they goo
about too hinder it. But of this matter, I shall peradventure speak more at
large heareafter. My specifying of these things at this time is partly too the
intent that my countrymen which are absent may know it was not long of me,
that the Spanish Church, which was erected at London, continewed not unto this
day, and partly because I would that this public writing of mine should bear
record both of mine innocence, and also of the Gospel among mine own
countrime^. In the mean season, I beseech God that those men, which (too
speak no rowghlier of the^) have with their wyles presumed too cast down that
building, bace in deed too fleshly eyes, as which is made (to outward
appearance) of refuse stones, but most acceptable and beautiful in Gods sight,
may amend. Out of this fountain sprang also one other Cross more, which was
very grievous to me: namely the alteration of the Language in teaching, which
notwithstanding I bare with a metely indifferent mind, howbeit (to confess
the truth) against my nature. How that came to pass I will tell you in fevve
words. I am not so forgetful of my bringing up, as to be ignorant how unable
my shoulders are too bear the burden that I have undertaken among you:
neither am I ashamed to confess how little I have profited, both in the
knowledge of human arts, and chiefly in the exercise of the style, and in
getting the eloquence of the Latin tung: neither surely will I fall out with
them that shall call me an old Trewand. For the Lord knovveth how that I
acknovvledge mine own dullness and lack of cunning, insomuch that I challenge
none other skill too me, than the knowledge of mine own unskillfulness. And
too be at fevve words, no large furniture of the Roman tung, no readings of
many Authors laid up in store, no excellent knowledge of Gods secrets, has
made me to yield to your election. For it was enough, and more than enough
known to my self, how far the ability of my wit was unmeet, for the
charge that I took in hand specially in a Realm so plentuously replenished
with excellent learned men. But what should I do? Whither should I turn
me? You on the one side called me: and I on the other side wished some fit
means too rid away the misreportes that were spread abroad of me (even by
such as ought least to have done it) and to wipe away the spots of infamy
that were sprinkled upon me. Therefore being vvelneere overwhelmed with
slanders, I determined both to obey your will, and to satisfy mine own
desire, and I chose rather to show how little I have profited by pouring out
rude and vnfiled speech in your company, tha^ to suffer those suspicio^s of
vnpure and erroneous doctrine, which mine adversaries had blazed abroad of me
both openly and privily, to take deeper root by my silence and ceassinge from
my function in the church. At one word, necessity constrained me to follow
your request. In goinge through wherewith, the shifting of the language was not
the least part of my grief. For whereas in the Spanishe tung I could after a
sort express the meaning of my mind: in the Latin tunge I am often times
compelled too stick, too stamer, and too bewray mine own childishness.
Howbeit, forasmuch as mine unpolished speech is not unacceptable unto you,
which do rather wey the matter that is spoken, than with how well fyled
terms it is uttered: I am another vvearie nor ashamed of the charge that I have
taken in hand. Nay rather I do often think and bethink me of this saying
of S. Austins, that happy is that necessity which drives a man to the better
things. For this I may plainly confess, that of these many years I never
led a meryer or happier life, nor continued in my studies with more
cheerfulness, and peradventure fruit also, tha^ since I began to execute the
office of a teacher in your company. And would God that mine old adversaries
did not ageine envy this my happy state, and prepare new snares too incumber
this my quietness: of whose vntovvard dealing against me I could here say
overmuch: and truly the order of my promised partition, requires that I
should reckon up here the false reports that are spread abroad of me, and
disperse them by shevving the truth: but it is better to pass them over with
silence, than to speak to little of so wrongful and long a matter. I wish no
more but only this, that those men will give me but so long truce, as to pass
out of this life with a quiet and pesable mind. And when I am dead let the^
gnaw even the stones of my grave if they list. But if the thing I wish cannot
hape^ to me (as it befalls not to mortal wretches to have any thing happy in
all points) I will willingly in the mean while both hear and embrace the
cross that God has prepared for me, and laid upon me. And if the weight of
it ouerlode my shoulders, I will rather call some Cyrenian too me too bear
the one half of the burden upon his shoulders with me, than cast it quite
away. But what Cyrenian shall I find more friendly, or willing to ease me of
my burden, than him that with his most sweet words allureth all men to him,
Math. 11.
saying: Come unto me all ye that faint and are ouerloden, and I will
refreshe you. Therefore I beseech Jesus Christ the only begotten son of the
living God, and savior of mankind, to help me in bearing of my cross, and
so to hold and bear up with his most mighty hands, the burden of it, which
doubtless is too me intolerable, as I may patiently and willingly bear it
with him: and that he suffer not my heart to be tickled with desire of
revenge, against such as stayne me, defame me, persecute me, and trouble me.
The heavenly doctrine commands us to love our enemies, and not to pay them
like for like by railing upon them, but rather to do good to them that hate
us, and to wish well to them for the wrongs that we have received at their
hands. Therefore following this rule, I beseech almighty God the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to give my backebiters the spirit of amendment, and a better
mind toward me, that by seeking to deface me, they hinder not the course of
the gospel, specially among mine own countrymen, which may here some
uncertain reports but not the reasons likewise. God grant at this my prayer
and request, that the minds of my persecuters may one day be bowed and
turned. For, to speak with a good conscience what I think in my heart, I had
rather contend with these men in the duties of charity, than by slanderous
Epistles, biting books, spiteful wrytings, raylings, tauntes, and such other
(as I suppose) most unseemly weapons, which eue^ christian soldiers ought to
abhor, and much less can in any wise become the preachers of the Gospel.
Therefore as long as I can, I will ward their injuries with prayers, and use
modest defenses, least I take harm in the mean while by holding my peace.
But if I see them proceed in their vntovvard manner of dealing, I will not say
maliciousness and rancour of mind: I will peradventure desire the Lord to
help me with fit and lively colors, wherewith to peint out the image of
slanderousnesse, as Apelles did, that I may discover their spiteful lies,
wherewith they go about to oppress mine innocence. But hereof enough. Now I
return to the text of the Apostle. Paul's third precept is, that the dealers
forth of the holy doctrine should divide the word, of truth aright. In the
Greek word Orthotomein (for that word answers to two Latin words) as I
think there lies hid a most excellent allusion to the Ceremony of
sacrifising in the old Law. For as Mosesis Priest ought to have a most
exact skill both how to cut out the ^^crifice, and how to deal it
forth: (and the sleying and distributing of the ^^crifice, did out of all
doubt repre^^nt Gods only begotten son, who became the sacrifice of
propitiation ^or us, to take away the sins of the world) so also the priest
of the Gospel must be skillful and taught of God, that he may be able to
cut or divide the word of truth, and know how to deal it forth
discretly and fitly. Setting this precept before mine ^yes, from the time that
the Lord called me to this Ecclesiastical function, I have indeuered not only
to deliver to my hearers a pure and sound doctrine drawn out of the
fountaynes of the holy Scriptures: but also to observe that way and trade of
teaching which the holy writers were wo^t to use in their sermons. For I am of
opinion, that an untoward and disordred trade of teaching does in manner no
less harm to the hearers, tha^ the vnpurenesse of doctrine, It is an old
Pro^erb, A good thing is evil if it be done out of season. For like as a
Physician may minister good and wholesome medicines too his patient, and yet
very far ouershot himself in this, that he neither considers well the
complexion of the party diseased, nor observes the fit opportunity of time: so
also it falls out often times in the dealing forth of the heavenly doctrine,
that some man being touched with unadvised zeal, steppeth forth uncalled of
God, and thrusts out the true things which he has gleaned up here and there
out of other men's booke^ or sermons, without having any respect of the persons
of his heerers, or without any considering of the circumstances of the time.
But to mount up yet higher, and to say plainly what I think. This most
excellent part of the holy ministration, that is too wit, this skill of
dividing and dealing forth, which sothly is the divine logike that opens the
trade of teachinge the gospel, has his original of Gods calling. For even he
that makes men fit ministers of the new Testament, that is to wit, not of the
letter but of the spirit, even he himself (I say) gives the spirit of
discretion to the dealer forth of his heavenly word, to know how to give
measurable meal in due time, and also to have wit to bring forth both new
things and old out of his storehowse, as a skillful scribe in the kingdom of
heaven. The not knowinge, (I will not say despising) of this heavenly and
divine calling, is the cause that the world at this day has, and in all ages
has had innumerable ministers of the word, innumerable workmen, and
innumerable (I say in their own opinion) builders and master builders, who
peradventure in Gods judgment (by whom they were not sent, and yet they run)
are but dirtdawbers (or to say more rightly) pullers down, ouerthrowers, and
destroyers. Howbeit, forasmuch as the knowledge, or if I may so term it, the
certeintie of his calling, depends upon the witness of the spirit in every
ma^s own conscience: I will leave the judgment thereof unto god. It is more
for our behoof to know, and advisedly to consider, what manner of dealing
forth God teaches his Prophets, that we treading in their footesteppes, may
on either side do our duty, the teacher in dividing the word of truth
rightly, and the hearer in partaking the apt and true dividing of Gods word,
rather than any of them both to disgrace them selves with curious and strange
sifting out of things for a bravery of their wit. And for examples sake, let
us consider the calling of Jeremy, whom when God chose to take the room of a
teacher in the Church of Jerusalem, he instituted him with these words: See
(says he) I set thee this day over Nations, and Kingdoms, to pluck up, and
pull down, to destroy and overthrow, to build up, and to plant, and so
forth. In which saying the everlasting Godhead has with most apt
similitudes, and with a certain pithy contrary matching of words, showed
Jeremy the heavenly Logike, which teaches that the first point of the
ministration of the Gospel, is to rid the hearers minds from common and false
opinions, that the heavenly doctrine may find men's consciences ready, and plant
abundance of true spiritual fruit in the^. To speak more plainly. The law
must first play his part in us, before the seed of the Gospel be sowed. Now
unto the duty of the law pertein those most pithie words of Plucking up,
pulling down, destroying and overthrowing. And unto the other part of the
ministratio^, belong the other words of building up, and planting. How much
majesty, grace, and unespied learning, these similitudes borrowed of husdandrie
and buylding have, the sermons of the other prophets show, but specially the
sermon that is in the.xiij. of Ezechiell, which I will not put in here,
because I mean to be short. You Gentlemen (if it please you) may read it
your selves, and wey thoroughly what the lord says against the false
prophets, which with their forged promises seduced the Church dispersed and
banished in Babylon for their wickedness, and foaded them still in their
errors, whereas they ought rather to have set open the vvelspring and
fountain of Gods vengeance before the captive peoples eyes, and to have
exhorted the sinners to repentance. For in very deed it behooves us first too
pull down, overthrow, and undo the old things, that afterward we may
reere and build up the new. But those false prophets dealt contrariwise,
whom the holy Ghost likeneth to evil builders, which either for want of
skill, or for covetousness, or being corrupted by some lewd affection,
undertake the botching up of decayed howses. Howbeit forasmuchas the casting
down and digging up of fou^dacions is not void of peril, and the laying of new
requires much labor, and the rearing of them up again will ask expense of
much time: those fellows had lever (o builders most unworthy of Gods work)
those fellows (I say) had lever too botch up unhandsomely the ruinous
foundacions which they find, and too parget them over, and so too set on a
roof and other by works ready to fall again within a while after, that
they may seem to be buylders, than to begin their house at the ^^rst
foundations, or to speak more ^ightly, at the very digging up of the ^uinous
fou^dations, as the right order of buylding requires. But as touching this
matter it is best for you to read Ezechiell him self, that ye may the better
perceive how greatly God mysliketh the doings of such as seek to commend
their buylding in the Church, rather with pargetting and botching, than with
any right order of building. And the holy Ghost shows how unhappy end
wayteth, not only upon such buyldings, which for all their whitelyming are
ruinous still, but also upon the botchers and vvhitlymers them selves. He that
has ears to hear let him heeare. Thus much concerning the similitude of
building and the duty of builders. Now let us return to Jeremy, and learn
of him after what manner our hearers ought to be manered in the knowledge of
the holy doctrine, according to the manner of dealing in husbandry. He
bespeaketh his Disciples in thi^ wise. Cut up your lays (says he) an^ sow
not upon thorns. Surely a ver^ fit and needful order, first to pluck^ up
breers, and to stub up thorns, before we sow our sede, lest we lose bot^ our
labor and our cost, and in steed^ of corn reap but the straw and chafe But
it is best to here Jeremy declar^ his own similitude. Be ye circumc^sed to
the Lord, says he, and pluck a way the foreskin of your hearts, lest hi^ fyrie
wrath burst forth, and burn^ vnquencheably, for the lewdness o^ your nature.
The prophet Ozeas beating upon the same similitude, techeth the same thing. Sow
ye (says he) unto righteousness, and ye shall reap according to the mesure
of your godliness, break up your lays, while it is time to seek the Lord,
til he come and besprinckle you with righteousness. As now through your
untoward manner of dealing ye plow wickedness, and reap naughtiness, and
therefore ye eat the fruit of lying, because ye trust to your own manners,
and to the multitude of your own soldiers. Thus much concerning the order of
the prophets, which the teachers of the new Testamente have also hilde, as
appears plainly by the sermons of John Baptist the Lords forerunner, who
preached repentance, and amendment of life, to the forgiveness of sins. The
same way and manner of teaching was kept by the Apostles, who first exhorted men
to repentance toward God, and then to believe in Jesus Christ. Being led by
all these examples, right dear beloved Readers, the first year of my
ministration in your company, I undertook the opening of the Epistle of Paul
to the Romans, which in the judgment of all the Learned, conteyneth the
sum of our Christian religion, comprehended in so excellent order, that
whether ye have an eye too the truth, or too the trade of teachinge, there
can no fault at all be found in it. For after that it has laid the
foundation of true repentance, it teaches the two chief points of our
religion, namely the doctrine how to believe well, and how to do well. Unto
the which partition may all the writings both of the old and nevve Testament
be referred. All which things (as I suppose) do ame at this mark, namely of
embracing Gods truth with a true faith, and of expressing the believed truth in
holy conversation. And all these things both generally and particularly, as
men term it, are taught by the Apostle in this Epistle to the Romans, the
exposition whereof you have heard of me this last year. And because that in
the time of my reading, I have gathered many things here and there, out of the
Commentaries both of the old and nevve Expositors, which have enlightened
this Epistle with their vvritings: I intended to set together this dialog out
of that houge heap of my papers, and to offer the same unto you: and that do
I for two causes. First that the reading of this book may bring the things
again to your remembrance, which I have handled more at large in my Readings:
and secondly, that there may remain some public vvriting among you, as a
record both to them that are absent, and to such as shall come after, of the
pureness of my doctrine which I have taught in your company, and how much I
abhor the opinions of Sectaries, which trouble the Churches nowadayes with
their errors. Also you are my witnesses, after what manner I confuted the
froward opinions of the Pelagians and self iustifiers, in the discourse of
Justification. Ye know also with how great diligence I have in the
discourse of Predestination, or of the calling of the Gentiles, unfolded and
confuted both the madness of the Stoikes, and chieflye the horrible
blasphemies of the Manichies, that by my showing of these breakneckes, you
might keep your pace in the kings high way without stumbling, and embrace the
Apostles doctrine as the only rule of truth. Finally to conclude, I beseech
you of your gentleness and courtesy, as to whom I think my self in many
respects right greatly beholden, too accept this my small travel with like
mind as it is offered unto you, and where shall I find any thing in this
writing that may stir up your minds too the love of godliness, thank
almighty god of it, who has imparted these things unto me to do you good
withal. And where any thing shall seem rude and unpolished, lay that all
wholly upon me, who forasmuch as I am a man, do well know my self to be
ignorant in many things, and not able always to express in fit words the
things that I know. Wherefore I beseech you have respect of man's weakness,
and where ye shall mislike any thing, first admonish me friendly of it,
before ye conceive amiss of me for it. For as I confess, I may err, so I
protest with good conscience, that I will not stand in any error. Fare ye
well, And I beseech almighty God the geuer of all good things, to be with
yo^, and to further your attemptes, that ^our studies may not only profit
^he common Wealth to yield every ^an his right by the knovvleege of ^our
Laws: but also be to the vvel^are of the Church, that true godliness, and
the pure doctrine of the Gospel may be furthered by them. Out of my Study
the last day of May. 1574.

A general Argument upon all the Epistles of the Apostles.
THe holy Ghost has so tempered the Epistles of the Apostles, that every of
the^ handles a sundry matter from other. F^ the Epistle to the Romans is a
perfect instruction of a Christian.

The two Epistles to the Corinthians do open the doubts of Churchmatters.

That to the Galathians breaks the strife between Moses and Christ, and
between the selferighteous and the believer in Christ.

That to the Ephesians does most plenteously lay forth the kingdom of Christ,
lik^ as that does which is written to the Colossians.

The two to the Thessalonians describ^ Antichrist and the last day, with the
mystery of the Resurrection, and the things belonging thereunto.

The two unto Timothy, and the one unto Titus, do peint out lively the office
of (...) true shepherd and Bishop.

That to Philemon sets down the profe^ of mercy and Christian charity.

That which was sent to the Hebrews, lyghteneth Christ by the shadows of
Moses and the Oracles of the Prophets.

S. James corrects the error that sprung of the misunderstanding of Paul's
doctrine, and shows that the saving faith must be lively and fruitful.

Peter treats of Christ's kingdom and of the mystery of his cross, howbeit
in his own style and peculiar gift: and he says the same thing that Paul
does, but not after the same manner, so as ye may perceive them to have had
both one meaning, but not both one mouth.

John teaches the freendship and unity which we have with God through
Christ: and thervppon he urges charity and good works with James.

Jude disclozeth the dangers of backeslyding, as an vpholder of Peter: and
also will have the fear of God taught to new-beginners, and not only his
favor and mercy, least the preaching of Gods louingnesse might turn into
fleshly liberty.

The Apocalips opens the mysteries that shall happen in the last times.

Hereby it appears manifestly that nothing can be had or red more absolute
than the new Testament.

For it teaches the things that are to be known, forwarneth things hurtful,
and prophesies both of good things and bad things to come.

The Argument of the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Romans, taken out of
the books of Athanasius Biship of Alexandria.
THey be called Paul's Epistles because he wrote them. And by them he both
admonishes and corrects those whom he had seen and taught: and also
laboreth to teach them the same things whom he had not seen, as they may
perceive which light upon the^. This to the Romans he wrote from Corinth, at
what time he had not yet seen them, but yet had herd of their faith, and was
desirous to see them. And first of all he prayseth their faith which he herd
spoken of euerywhere. Then does he them to understand, that he had purposed to
come to the^ for the good will that he bare them, but hitherto could not.
Howbeit he frames his Epistle after a manner of teaching, informing them of the
calling of the Gentiles, and that circumcision served but for a time, and was
now abolished, that Adams tra^sgression was discharged by Christ, and that the
shadow of the Law was vanished away. Therefore that the calling of the Gentiles
was done consequently in good order, he prouth in this wise. He shows that
the law is grafted in all men, and that any man may know God even of his own
mother wit by the creation and state of things, without the doctrine of the Law
written. And therefore he does worthily first of all blame the Gentiles, that
whereas God has opened the knowledge of himself unto them by the works of the
world, and therewith also showed them his everlasting power, which is his word,
wherein and whereby he made all things. They considered not by the creatures,
that God was the workmaster of such things, but rather ascribed godhead to his
creatures, and worshipped them, rather than the maker of them. Also he blames
the Jews, for that they had not kept the Law, but rather dishonored God by
breaking the Law. And so he rebukes both parts, as well Jews as Gentiles, and
shetteth the^ up under the iniquity of tra^sgressio^, to show that all men are
made felowlike, and alike gyltie, and that they have need of redemption.
Again, that there was just cause of the calling of the Gentiles, he shows by
this that grace and redemption ought to befall alike both to the Jews and to
the Gentiles, and that when the Gentiles were called, circumcision and the
shadow of the Law did of necessity cease. For Abraham (says he) being
justified, not in Circumcision, but before Circumcision, was named Abraham,
because it should come to pass that he should be made the father of many
Nations, according to the faith which he had when he was uncircumcised. And
after that he was justified, he received circumcision in his flesh, as a sign
to his offspring that should be borne of him as concerning the flesh, that
circumcision should cease when the Gentiles should become the children of
Abraham, and begin to live according to Abraham's faith, wherethrough he was
justified when he was yet uncircumcised. For whereas he was called Abram
before: in respect of these things he was now called Abraham. And it was
requisite that the sign should cease, when the things that were betokened by
it were come. Wherefore if any body compel the Gentiles to be Circumcised,
they must of necessity both take from him the name of Abraham, and call him
Abram. Now seeing he was named Abraham by God, the Gentiles must not be
circumcised, neither must the Jews have the foreskin of their flesh cut of, to
the intent that the name Abraham may abide steadfast, and he be called the
Father of many Nations. For it is not to be borne with hereafter, that any man
should be circumcised, seeing that the faith of Abraham suffiseth, and there is
no need of any shadow of the Law. For no man is justified by such things,
but by faith as Abraham was. When he has proved these things after this
fashion, he shows again that neither Israel nor the Gentiles can obtain
redemption and grace by any other means than by being quit of that ancient
and original sin that is spread into all men by Adam. But that can not be
wiped away by other than by the son of God, by whom also the curse was made
from the beginning. For it was not possible that any other body should
discharge that trespass. Afterward he writes, that that thing was not done by
any other means, than that the son of God took flesh upon him, and became
man, that he might deliver all men from death, by offering up the same body for
all, which was subject to the same sufferings that we be. And like as by one
man sin entered into the world, so also by one man grace came upon all men.
From the^cefoorth as a good steward he comfort the Jews, telling the^ that
they shall not be transgressers of the Law, if they believe in Christ, and
warns such of the Gentiles as believed, that they should not be puffed up
against the Israelites, but consider that as the boughs are grafted into a
tree, so were they grafted into the Jews. When he has finished these things,
he adds exhortations to good manners, and so ends his Epistle.

A Dialoge wherein the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans is familiarly
expounded. The persons or Talkers thereof, are Paul, and some one of the
Citizens of Rome, which visits Paul in prison at Rome. Act. 28. This Citizen
asks questions, and Paul answers him almost with his own words laid
forth in larger manner.
The Roman, and Paul. Although I be very glad of this your coming to the
City, right dear Paul, yet should I be much gladder of it, if I saw you
discharged of these bonds.


P. Sir I thank you right heartily for it. But yet must not these bonds of
mine abate or put away your gladness, forasmuch as they be the sure records and
as it were certain badges of mine office or calling. But what is the cause that
you have vouchsaued to come to me?


R. Surely nothing else but a certain incredible desire of understanding the
Epistle which ye sent not long ago to our Citizens. Of whom although many be
grown into the one Christian Church: yet notwithstanding I can not tell how
some of them take singular pleasure of it, and other some either of
wilfulness, or of ignorance, or of a certain subtle dissimulation, can
neither abide to see it nor to hear of it. Wherefore if you have any leisure
from your business, I pray you, and beseech you, let us sifte out all the
places of it diligently betwixt us, that where any things shall seem darksome
unto me, You may make them easy to me, by answering my demaundes according to
the true Copy of it laid before us.


P. Nothing could have happened to me more acceptable and pleasant than this
exercise, forasmuch as I apply my self wholly with all my power and strength
to the executing of mine office. Now therefore begin whereat you will, and I
will answer to al things orderly and plainly.


R. Then let us begin at the very in^ling of the Epistle. What teach you ^ere?


P. I profess my self to be the same Acts. 9.1. Gal. 13. Act. 13.2
and to all ^ hristians, and is now a servant of the ^^ me Jesus Christ: and
not that only, ^ ut also (which is more excellent) sholed out, chosen, and
called to be his Apostle, that is to say, his Ambassador, messenger, or
Interpreter, not to deal ^ ith worldly affairs, but to publishe ^ nd spread
abroad the Gospel or the ^ appie and healthful tidings from al^ ightie God:
which thing I say for this ^ urpose, least any man might think ^ e to have
stepped rashly into this of^ ce or function, whereas I protest no ^ esse truly
than plainly to all men, that ^ his charge was laid upon me of ^ od.


R. Very well. But how is this a glad ^dings or happy message, sith many ^en
do note it of a certain newfan^lenesse?


P. So small cause is there that the


R. What witnesses and interpreters of them have you?


P. Even the Lords prophets themselves which are worthy to be believed, both
because they were many, and most assured mainteiners of the truth.


R. Out of what records of writing, or out of what Presidents were these
promises delivered unto you?


P. Out of the holy Scriptures, which the Lord reveled unto his servant, to
the intent that all men might conceive a sure persuation and belief of his
will in their minds.


R. What is the substance or groundworke of this Gospel.


P The son of God, who was made of the seed of David, only as perteyning


R. Wherein appeared this Godhead of Gods son, or by what means?


P. In the raising up of the dead from their graves, or by the rising again of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who both rose again himself from the dead, and also
called other men again unto life.


R. I acknowledge here a wonderful description of the person of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is both very man and the very son of God. Now I pray you
show who called you to this office of preaching the Gospel.


R. The very same Christ our savior,


R. I pray you what is the end of this function.


P. To cause the people of all countries and holiness, I wish peace and
everlasting happiness from God him self the heavenly father, and from our
lord Jesus Christ his only begotten son.


The entrance into the Epistle.

R. Hitherto ye have laid forth the title of your Epistle, wherein you have
showed us, who you are, to whom you write, and finally what you intend to set
down unto us, namely the Gospel concerning the son of God. Now remains
that we come to she whole body of the Epistle, and first, if it please you, set
down the state and ground of the whole Epistle in few words, that I may the
easlyer conceive the whole matter, and bear it in remembrance.


P. To be short, the drifte of the whole Epistle is this: to show all men
indifferently the two chief points of Religion, namely the doctrine of faith,
and the doctrine of good conversation proceeding out of faith, because that all
the things which are contained in the holy scriptures may easly be referred
too those two. And furthermore I take him not to be the worst learned man,
which has learned the true manner both of believing rightly, and of doing
well.


R. In what order handle you these things.


P. First I teach what is to be believed, and afterward by what deeds
godliness is to be showed and exercised. For the works that are called good
being destitute and void of true faith, notwithstanding that to outward show
they be excellent and prayseworthie, have nothing in them but a fading gloss
of glittering brightness. But God the sercher of the inward thoughts,
laugheth them to scorn, and sets light by them, as things that proceed not
of faith.


R. What order keep you afterward in laying forth the faith?


P. Even this, that I divide it as it were into two places. Whereof, the one
shows the way whereby men knowing themselves to be guilty and enemies to
God, may nevertheless recover his favor and repair his good will as it were
after banishment: which place, if you think good, we will call the place of
Justification. And afterward I show that all mankind may without difference
enjoy this benefit of atonement and Gods favor, by the force of faith which
the Lord bestowed upon men from heaven, whether they be Gentiles or Jews.
Which place let us call the treatise of Gods election, or of the calling of
the Gentiles.


R. I like very well of this kind of teaching. Therefore it is to be wished,
that all the professers of true religion should set aside the manifold
intanglings and great windlasses of curious questions, and specially the great
number of men's forgeries and inventions, and employ their whole mind about
these so needful things. But now let us come to the entrance of the first
treatise.


P. In this entrance I give thanks to my God through Jesus Christ for you
all, whose faith is blazed abroad over all the world with so great
preaching the Gospel of his son, is my witness that I make mention of ^ou
without ceassing, and have always minded you in my prayers, that by


R. All men for the most part are wont to visit this City, either to behold
the greatness of it, and the beauty of our buildings, or else to seek gain.
But I hope that some other honest cause brought you hither.


P. Yea in deed. For mine only desire


R. As who should say, Paul, that you know not how there are no small number
here indewed with Gods spirit, which were able (though you were away) not
only to lay the foundation of our faith by their exhortations, but also to
increase it, and to build it up too the roof by their teaching.


P. I know that welinough. Therefore my meaning was not more to strengthen you,
than to take comfort among you, through mutual faith both yours and mine.


R. But the necessity of these bonds seems rather to have brought you
hither by force, than your own good will, specially forasmuch as ye could
find in your heart to travel so long in other places


P. Nay rather, my brother, I would ye should be well assured, that I
oftentimes purposed upon this journey unto you, that I might, I say, reap some
fruit among you as well as I have done among the rest of the Gentyles, but
stayed by reason of lettes and hindrances unto this day.


R. But wheruppon springs this your so great earnestness and desire to
publish the Gospel.


P. Even of mine office. For inasmuche as I am appointed to be an Apostle, it
is my duty to think my self a detter of all that I can do, both to and
both to the wise and to the unwise alike. For this cause I was desirous and
still am desirous with all my heart to preach the Gospel with a ready and
cherefull mind to you also that dwell at Rome.


R. Yet am I wont to marvel that you will teach the Gospel in these bonds
and forlorn prison, seeing that every man of power and wisdom does so stiffly
gaynsay it, and chiefly seeing that so few followers of this learning are to
be found in this most renowned city.


P. Other men may for me through


R. If the case stand so, what can be said to be more worthy and excellent
than the Gospel? For thereby mankind returns into Gods favor, and is quit
or justified at his judgment seat, and moreover (by your saying) obteyneth
everlasting life. But in what things is the power of the Gospel seen.


P. Chiefly in two, namely in the effects, and in the contraries. For first, it
is not only showed by the Gospel, what innocence, righteousness, and
holiness of life God requires of men, that they might so be justified,
regenerated, and saved: but also God uses it as a certain touchwoode. Whereby
he kindles the fire and light of faith in men's minds by his holy spirit. And
that faith grows up by little and little, and as it were by certain degrees,
and becomes daily greater and greater, and also imbraceth and applies to it
self the righteousness that is showed in the Gospel. Which is the very
spiritual life of the beleuers, according as that godly Prophet says: Aba. 2.4
Gal. 3.11 He. 10. 39
The righteous man lives, thriueth, and is saved by faith. Contrariwise, where
this Gospel of God is not, the vengeance and wrath of and unrighteousness of al
me^, as who do hold down the truth of the natural light and law buried in
their vices, iniquities, and wicked deeds, and do not so much as perform
their own laws.


R. But no man is able to look sufficiently upon this truth, by reason of
vnskil and ignorance.


P. How can they excuse their ignorance,


R. Is this the only mean and way whereby God has made himself known to
mankind?


P. No: but by another also as manifest as that.


R. Which is that?


P. Even the creating and governing of as many as pretend the not knowing of
God.


R. Then remains there no starting-hole, nor covert of ignorance to the
foreign Nations.


P. No: but they be rather worthy of so much the sorer punishment, because that
whereas they know God sufficiently by the inward light, and by the things
that are created, Ephesians. 4.17
as I said before: they yielded not God his due honor, nor were thankful for so
great benefits, but for a punishment of their sin, employed all the sharpness
of their wit about vain and trifling imaginations and devises (a just
punishment of sin) and their hearts were hemmed in with fondness and
darkness.


R. This perchance may seem true universally, but yet does it most peculiarly
belong to the ignorant and rude multitude of common people, who for lack of
skill are wont to run headlong into all lusts. But it is most certain, that
in the noble and famous universities of the world, there is a great breed and
store of excellent learned men, yea and even among the common sort ye shall
find diverse that are not utterly unlearned.


P. So much the more then is their


R. As touching the worshipping of God I can not deny but they did greatly
ouershoote them selves in it, by reason of their manifest Idolatries and
superstitions. But as concerning the precepts of the second table, many of
them did (in my judgment) lead a very commendable life.


R. No, but clean contrary. For in sin by sin, they suffered horrible
punishment for offending Gods majesty. For God to punish their sin, willed and
suffered them to be harried thorough all the puddles of vice, insomuch that
they defiled even their own bodies with all manner of filthiness: even for
this cause (I say) that they burned the divine truth of the natural and
inward light into lies and dreams, and preferred the worshipping of the
creatures before their maker, who is to be praised for ever.


R. O incredible thing. Does God punish Idolatry with so horrible vices?


P. Surely that is the very cause why God delivered and cast them up into most
shameful and filthy lusts, in so much that their women despising the natural
use of their bodies, followed the


R. My whole mind and body shuddereth at so many and terrible judgments of the
sovereign God, to here how the despisers of the divine majesty do slide so
wretchedly from small vices, still to greater and greater, and finally into
eeuerlasting destruction.


P. Good reason. For when they had


R. I can not deny but that the most part of the Greeks and Gentiles are
infected with all those vices, even for despising the majesty of God. But yet
dare I say also that there are a number, which by following the precepts of
their Philosophy, do lead an vprighte and honest life, and in no wise defile
themselves with such manner of vices. For who knows not that Solon, Socrates,
Pithagoras, Aristides, and many others not only Greeks but also Romans, did
always abhor all manner of unhonesty and wickedness, and stablished Laws,
and wrote judgments and ordinances against offenders? And therefore it seems
not in any wise agreeable to reason, I say not to condemn, but even to blame or
accuse such and so great persons. Wherefore let us suppose we hard some one of
the^ speaking after this manner: I being a Heathen man, have by the power of
the law of nature grafted in our minds, drawn out and taken to me the doctrine
of worshipping God obediently: and for the stablishing of the same worship
rightly and orderly, I have set down Laws in writing, and appointed penalties
and punishments for all such as offend against them. Does not this saying
seem worthy of commendation?


P. I grant there have bin, and still are many, that have not defiled them
selves with common vices: but what their minds were, and how far off from the
pureness which God requires by the Law of nature, even the wiser sort
themselves were not ignorant, and as for us we know well enough. For whereas
Chap. 2. 1
But thou o man whosoever thou art, which by thy Laws condemnest other men,
as one that is indevved with the knowledge of Gods law, art inexcusable,
even in that behalf.


R. Why so? will the Philosopher answer?


P. Because that thou thy self which take upon thee as a judge and
controller of other men, give sentence against thy self, in as much as thou
do the same things. And although the covert of thy heart be so thick, that thy
vices do easly escape unespied of other men: yet thine own conscience
bewrays thy wickedness. Mat. 7.1.
For Gods law is not satisfied by bearing the countenance and report of
goodmen, but by being good men in deed. For it requires not so much the
outward show of virtue commendable to the worldward: as the true virtue of the
mind most acceptable unto God.


R. But perhaps ye Philosopher might answer, who can call to account ye secret
and privy thoughts and intents of ma^s mind?


P. In this case we site not men to the judgment seats of men, but to the
streit and vncorrupt judgment of God himself, who sifteth and discerns not
only the outward doings, but also even the inward conceits. Now then, in a
matter of so great weight as is our salvation, the false and counterfeit color
of feigned honesty is not so much to be regarded as the sound and substantial
virtue that shall have settled deep rote in our minds.


R. What is that judgment of God which you tell me of? Surely there never came
any glaunce of it in my mind unto this hour?


P. O the blindness of men. For although


R. The Philosopher will not yield or give place to thee in this case, to
shrink a hear breadth from his accustomed and wonted Religion, or to give over
his Philosophy. For he is in love with the outward show of virtue, taking no
care at all for the pureness of his mind. Peradventure also he believes, that
it is in men's own power to rid their minds of the vices that are bredde in
them, or else weeneth that God is not greatly offended at them as slight errors
of men's minds, and thinks moreover that he is favorable and friendly to
mankind, and will not punish men's misdooings with so sore and grievous
punishments: or at leastwise he trusts that he him self is free from them,
and that they be not yet come upon him.


P. Surely he is far ouerseene which is of that mind, and I will not stick
to use such words as these against him. James. 5. 3
And for this stubbornness of thy mind void of al repentance, thou procurest
and heapest up wrath and destruction to thy self, hoording it up against the
time when God shall show forth his wrath and most just judgment to punish
wickedness.


R. O wretched mankind. But utter thou unto me the manner and description, or
fashion of that judgment.


P. At that time God almighty which Psa. 62.3 Math. 16.27.
and thereafter give sentence on either side, and then shall it appear
moreover, how cold the excellency of outward things and doings is, even in
them that are counted vvisest, if their consciences be not pure and clean
therwithall.


R. I quake both in body and mind at the rehearsal of so terrible judgment.
For if God list to deal with men according to extremity of Law, how can
they ever hope to escape? Nay rather what should it avail men to live
honestly, or to trust to Gods promises, if their offenses committed through the
infirmity and feblenesse of mind, should be sifted and punished so severely?


P. I have not set down this judgment of God to discorage the minds of the
godly, but rather to cheer them up, and to comfort them with a certain


R. And what shall become of the stubborn, wicked, and froward men?


P. Surely as for the froward sort and such as withstand the truth, and
follovv iniquity, the wrathful vengeance of God is certainly prepared for
them.


R. Happy then are the Jews or Israelites, whom God takes for his own. And
contrariwise unhappy are the Gentiles, which are out of his covenant. For they
shall feel Gods mercy, whereas we Gentiles shall feel his sharpness.


P. No, not so. But sorrow and anguish shall light sore upon the soul of every
man that does evil, as well Jew as Gentile: whereas glory and honor,


R. My mind is greatly cheared and refreshed by this your saying, which shows
Gods singular vprightnes toward all men without any diversity. For otherwise
the pride of the Jewish people is so great by reason of gods ancient and as it
were peculiar louingnes toward the^, that besides their despising and
disdaining of all other men in respect of themselves, they for the same cause
keep the residue of the Gentiles from the true religion of God.


P. And yet notwithstanding let this there is (as I said) no respect of
persons before God. De. 10.17 2. Pa. 19.7. Job. 37.19
The Jew and Gentyle, Greek and Barbarian, Rich and Poor, are placed all in
one rank before God. God looks with sharpersighted eyes than Lyncenssis upon
men's minds, according whereunto he esteems all their sayings and doings.


R. It can not be spoken how great dignity and privilege the Jews challenge
to them selves, by reason of the law given them of God.


P. That bragging is but like a smoke.


R. What? Is it possible that the people of Israel should fare never the
better for their Law, nor for the execution, exercising and practicing of their
Law, unless their life agree with their doctrine?


P. That is very true. For not the hearers or preachers of the law, but the
Ma. 7. 22
In somuche that he which will get Gods favor, Ja. 1. 22.
and be partaker of his righteousness, must in any wise endeavor, not only to
bear Gods word about him, and to spread it abrod with his mouth, but also to
lead a life agreeable to his talk, and to express Gods law in his deeds.


R. May not the Gentiles seem to be happier then the Jews, in that for as
much as they had no law to bewray and to punnishe their sins, they might also
seem worthy of less punishment?


P. Not a whit. For although they wanted the law written, yet were they not
without the law of nature, whereby they were very well taught what things were
to be done, and what things were to be left undone. And furthermore For thence
flowed the great number of those grave sentences of the Philosophers most fit
for all trades of life, whereby both they themselves perceive, and also teach
others what is right and wrong.


R. I grant this without gainsaying, howbeit that man's reason do not
thoroughly perceive by what means or instruments that Law is printed in men's
minds.


P. what needs any over curious serching thereof, since all nations show as
clear as daylight, that the very work of the law is rightly engraven in their
hearts, insomuch that their own consciences bear most evident witness, on
either part, while that even the thoughts of men do either accuse or excuse
them. Hereby it is sufficiently perceived, that in the minds of all the
Gentiles there is a certain law of God thoroughly printed and set fast, from
whence the great number of the excellent laws ordained by nations, cities, and
peoples have flowed, and also the seeds of Religion sown euerywhere abroad,
have at length sprung up and flourished.


R. Certesse it seems a great wonder, that whereas they carry that souereine
law about with them planted in their hearts, yet they be (I wot not how)
blind in their own vices, and do flatter themselves, and have no feeling at
all of their own infirmity and weakness.


P. It seems so commonly to outward appearance, because one of us cannot enter
into another heart. But if that they would tell the truth, they should plainly
acknowledge and confess, that their own conscience is as a certain severe and
uncorrupted iudgmentseat, where they be arreigned and found guilty of their own
wicked deeds as often as they be cited and drawn unto it. And there also are all
men's thoughts, inte^ts, deeds, and sayings arrested, that when al things are
thoroughly and advisedly considered and weyed on either sides, they may be either
quit or condemned


R. Then if we search and wey thoroughly how many ways our minds are tossed and
turmoyled in themselves, we must needs grant ourselves to be most miserable.
Yea and not only they yt live among ye Gentiles tyles in ignorance of all
things do run in danger of Gods severe justice, but also even they yt excel
others in the study of wisdom, notwithstanding that they pretend a certain
singular soundnes of life. For if their doings be tried by the rule of Gods
righteousness, as gold is wont to be tried in the fire: I pray you what a
number of vices and filthy things will be found in them? But when shall that
day come wherein God will lay open the secrets of men's hearts, and search out
all the works of them? when shall the vices that are ouergrowen with scarres be
brought to light?


P. At that day (say I) when God shall bewray men's priuities, and lay before
all eyes the things that were concealed as buried, and sunken deep into the
bottomes of their hearts: and this shall God perform and bring to pass by his
own son our Lord Jesus Christ, as I declare in my Gospel.


R. Then must we pray earnestly unto God, to show himself merciful to us at
that time, of his own infinite goodness, forasmuch as it appears that none of
all the Philosophers is indewed with so great wisdom and innocence, that he
is able to escape Gods judgment, unless he give over the trusting to his own
virtues, and yield himself wholly to the goodness and mercy of God. But here
let us break of our talk concerning the Gentyles, who not only have had a
will to serve false Gods and Idols rather then the true God: but also have
invented infinite (and those also altogether fond) superstitions: and
henceforth speak of Gods people, that is to wit of the people of Israel.
Therefore let us now imagine some one, not an ignorant person of the Gentyles,
but some one of Gods chosen people, a man of great knowledge and countenance,
as Gamaliel or some other like him, speakinge thus, I am a Jew (will he say)
and a partaker of gods law, by the keeping whereof I trust to obtain
everlasting salvation without your Gospel or any other learning. What would you
answer him?


P. I would reply upon him in these words, thou verily art called a Jew, and
surely that is an honorable and excellent name. But to what purpose serves it,
unless excellent doings accompany so excellent a style?


R. What? Set thou so light by the law which was given of God as a
prerogative to this people?


P. Nay rather I make great account of it, and think you to have a preferment
above others even in that respect. But what booteth the law, except ye keep
it both with an earnest mind, and in excellent deeds?


R. But the hope and salvation of the Jews is grounded upon many other things.


P. Who knows not that the Jews are wont to hunt for glory by (as ye would
say) the propriety and peculiarity of god? But that is altogether vain except
a man embrace the same God with


R. But the law of God is of great force in working choice of good and evil.


P. In deed it is certain that the difference of things is very well perceived
and discerned by that law. But that is not the only thing that Gods word
requires: it will also have men to learn the true worshipping of God by the
same. Therefore although I grant that the Jews are able to discern good from
bad by the help of the law: yet do they not in all points observe Gods
commandments.


R. I pray you Paul suffer me to take the person of the Jews upon me, and to
maintain their case. Thus do I reason with you. I bestow my labor lustely in
opening of gods laws, and in teaching the^, and in persuading men to frame
their manners and life according to the appointment thereof I show my self a
strait ouerseer in corecting of other men's vices, and let slip no part of my
duty. What desire you more?


P. Me think I do now see either some Doctor or Gamaliel himself, at whose
hand I learned the law of Moses when I was a young man. Whom I intend to
talk unto in these words. Thou most


R. If any of them should hear these words, he would out of doubt crack and
burst a sunder in the midst. Howbeit that perchance so great naughtines and
dishonestie be scarce to be found in those Doctors and Phariseis. For although
they live not so chastely as would become them, yet they offend more warely
than ye would wish: and their cloking of things is so clenly, that they can
not be taken tardie with their faults if any be in them.


P. That is true in deed, but the eyes diffamed among the foreign nations
through the wicked dooinges of the Jews, as Ezechiel and Esaias and other of
Gods prophets do witness.


R. I yield to the truth, and I confess that all sorts of men are subject to
very greeuouse errors, and that not even the Jews are to be exempted out of
the same number, but are rather worthy of sore blame, if they will needs be
counted holy in show only, and not be holy in very deed. But what think
you of circumcision? Do ye dout whether it be of sufficient ability to skoure
away all spots of sin, as the Jews auowch? For it was ordained of God
himself as a certain peculiar badge of Gods people, and it wants not most
grievous pain of letting blud, and finally it is the express seal whereby it
may appear yt the maker of the whole woorlde is the father of the Jews, and
that the Jews likewise are his children. Otherwise circumcision were too no
purpose, unless the Jews were to be preferred before all other nations by
that prerogative, and that it were a most sure pledge of their salvation.


P. I am glad that we be come by little and little, and as it were by degrees
to his ^oynt, of showing that the circumcised ^ewes shoot farie wide from the
true ^arke of circumcision, whereof we will ^peake more largely hereafter,
when ^e treat of the justifying of Abraham. But if it be so, that circumcision
be the covenant whereby God couenanteth to become the God of the Jews, for
ever, indentinge with the circumcised that they shall yield him such obedience
as it becomes children to yield: then does it follow of consequence that
circumcision was of great valewe in Moses law so far forth as Gods law
and ordinance were obeyed, specially seeing that the said cutting off of the
piece of flesh or foreskin, was a and degree that the Greeks or Gentiles were
which are vnpared. Yet notvvithsta^ding, I deny not but that they which held
the true use of circumcision did also reap most ple^teous fruit thereby, as
who had both kept the Law, and also conceived in their mind a sure trust of
Gods mercy, for the which only they believed that their sins were forgiven
them, and thereupon took to them the seal and warrant of circumcision, whereby
the forgiveness of their sins was sealed up. And let these things be
spoken, not to imbace the dignity of circumcision ordained of god, but to
beat down the pride of the Jews, who even for the bare circu^cisions
sake, thought themselves worthy to be adopted to be gods children.


R. Welneare the same error seems to have caught hold upon the Christians,
among whom there are many to be found nowadayes, which trust no less to the
outward baptim of the elementall water, without true faith, and without any
keeping of Gods law, than the Israelites trusted to Circumcision. But hereof we
will speak more an over time. Now go you through, and show ^hether you think
circumcision to be (...) value at all, or no.


P. Surely I think of little, or rather


R. Then show wherein the true use and fruit both of the name of Israelite
and of circumcision consists.


P. He is not, undoubtedly he is not ^ Jew, that is commonly taken for a Jew,
and poynted at openly with the finger: neither is that the true circumcision,
which nippeth of the visible part of the body. But he, he (I say) is a true
Jew, which bears a right Jewish mind in deed, that is to say, which fears
God, and keeps his law. Also that is the excellent circumcision, wherthrough,
not the flesh is cut off by the ceremony of the law, but the sinfulness of
man's heart is cut off by the spirit. And the praise of this inward
circumcision, is not to be sought for at the hands of men, that is, of most
corrupt judges, but at the hand of God himself.


R. As I may well agree to your sayings Paul: Chap. 3.1
yet me thinks that the Israelites do not without cause glory in the great
number of privileges given them of God. Therefore you shall do a good turn,
if ye show in what prerogative they excel other men, and consequently declare
the worthiness and profit of circumcision.


P. I will do it with a good will, so you grant me first that you will not
judge of the whole matter, before you ^aue thoroughly and advisedly weyed ^t.
For I grant and acknowledge that


R. Very well. But yet I am afraid, least as it is wont to fall out in men's
bargains and couenaunts, that either party stands in like and equal state
unto other, so as either both of them must stand to their couenaunts, or else
if any of them both break covenant, the other is at liberty: even so also by
reason of the distrust and disobedience of some of the Jews, God taking his
advantage will neither keep his couenaunts nor perform his promises to them.
And if it should come so to pass, I cannot conjecture to what end those
stately couenaunts and promises will come.


P. But it is unseemly to think, that God can by any means alter his mind
and determination, or that his constancy can be overcome and compelled by
men's unthankfulness, that he should not perform his promises. For it is to be
considered, Psa 15.3.
that God will never fail the godly and good men, though they seem never so
few by reason of the wicked multitude of unbelievers.


R. It is meet to think so of Gods majesty, as the which does utterly shun
and abhor the righteousness and inconstancy of men, wherthrough they
oftentimes break their promises.


P. Even so is it: Psa 15.3.
according as the Prophet says, all men are liars and vain, but God is
true, yea and even the very truth it self. As even the princely prophet had
said, although there was no let in me and in my wickedness, but that God might
have deemed me unworthy of his promises, and have disapointed me of them? yet
is his faithfulness, righteousness, uprightness, and truth so great, that he
neither can nor will swerve one inch aside from his sayings and determinations.
In so much that not even the extremest naughtipackes and spitefullest persons
in the world, which think woorst of him, can reprove him of inconstancy or
lightness for he is most constant.


R. Of this your answer ryseth a another question. Seems it not by that
reason, that God increases his own glory by men's sins? for truly his
constancy becomes the cleerer and brighter, when his divine goodnsse in
keeping towch with men unworthy, surmounteth man's distrust and stubbornes. And
if it be so, I fear me it will seem to follow, that God does wrongfully
punish those that have done any wickedness, because Gods praise flows out of
the same, and moreover that the wicked have very good cause to blame God, for
punnishing there offenses whereby they beautified his glory.


P. To speak after the manner of men no dout but it may seem so to the man,
which is ignorant and unskillful of things belonging to God. But yet is that
surmise unmeet to come in any man's head, for nothing but holiness, pureness,
and vndefilednesse ought to come in any man's mind concerning the majesty of
God, specially for as much as ungodly folk another can nor will refer their
own lusts to Gods glory, but only to their own pleasure, and to their own
private profit and praise.


R. I never perceived the fault of this kind of reasoning, till now. For Gods
goodness and faithfulness get not their praise by men's wicked deeds: but even
of this, that they break not their course no not even for those wicked deeds,
which thing I gather even of the example which you used right now. Psa. 51.
For whereas God performs the mercy that he had promised to David, that came
not to pass through David's wicked deed: but the promised mercy shyneth forth
so much the bryghter, in that so great a wickedness was not able to disapoint
it.


P. Yea, and add further, that God could not be the competent judge of all
men, if he should punnish offenders unjustly, forasmuch as the virtue of a
judge consists most in uprightness.


R. Now do I percyue men's error. And yet notwithstanding there want not some,
which soothinge themselves in their own vices, dare lessen the heynowsnesse
of them, yea and ad wickedness to wickedness, as who should say that Gods
glory shone forth the more by their lying. And they be not afraid to quarrel
with God for punnishinge their offenses, which do rather beawtifie than deface
his glory.


P. That is the very thing which diverse persons do falslye lay to our
charge, shamefully belying us that we by our doctrine do provoke and entice
men to sin, that Gods glory might grow the greater by it, and finally say
that evil is to be don that good may spring thereof: upon whom shall come
assured damnation as they have justly deserved.


R. Truly to my seeming, you have in good season prevented the false slanders
and accusations of most wicked unthrifts, whom the inticement of sinning
holds snarled in such snares, that their


P. If you beat still in mind what I


R. No man will lightly grant you that, unless it be confirmed by authority
of holy writ. For God, and not men, is too be believed in so weighty a
matter. For why? Seeinge that the powers of man's wit, namely right reason, and
the ability of understanding and reasoning, are so great, and that he has
moreover a free will, purpose, and indeuer to do the goodlyest things: can any
man deny but most excellent and altogether divine virtues flow out of that
welspring?


P. Surely I grant and agree to you, but yet so as I will prove by textes of
scripture, that no man is furnished with so great gifts of nature, as that he
can be faultlesse or attain salvation by him self, except he be indewed and
inlyghtened with the heavenly gift of faith. Ga. 3.2.
There is not one Psa. 13.2
no not one. There is Act. 25.2
all are become naught and unprofitable, and at one word, there is not one
that does good at all.


R. Surely nothing can be said or thought more clear, myghtie, and strong
than this authority, to beat back and throw down man's pride.


P. Lo here another divine and heavenly saying no less lyghtsome than the
other. Man's throat is like a deep and stinking grave, men's tungs are seasoned
with honey of decit and guile, their lips are steeped and steyned with the
poison of Aspes.


R. Certesse the Prophet uses a singular similitude. For like as graves of
dead folks do send forth a most filthy and stinkyng sent, and also
pestilent too living bodies: so also there comes nothing but uncleanness and
filthiness out of the unclean breast of a corrupt man. And besides this,
Serpents do not woorser or sorer harm with their poison, than men do with
the wickedness of their tungs.


P. You say truth. Psa. 9.7.
But the Prophet adds further, that men spitte forth fyrebrandes burninge
with


R. Verily even so is man's nature utterly void of Godly light and faith.


P. And I cannot let pass the saying Esa. 19.7 Pro. 2.16 Psalm. 13.1
They be frovvarde (says he) booth with hand and foot too sheade man's
blood. And they be so far of from keeping peace with men, that as folk
utterly unacquainted


R. Alas with how many such and with how sorrowful examples do these our
most ungracious times swarne wherein wars, manslaughters, robberies, and all
kinds of wickedness do abound.


P. Lastly when the prophet has reckened up the particulars, he poynteth out
the fountain and welspring of all evils, Psalm. 35.2
namely a certain sluggish rechlesnesse utterly void of all the fear of God.


R. Soothly you have set before mine eyes a wonderful and not ashadowed, but
an express and lively image and shape of a man that wants Gods spirit, or
rather you have cunningly painted out every part and limb of him. For by these
words Gods spirit shows that man of himself is destitute of righteousness.
Again it bereueth him of true understanding and knowledge. Lastly it bewrays
his foreward and ready inclination bent to all dishonestie and alurement of
sinning. And he teaches yt this description belongs to al mankind, all
prerogatives set aside. Now is it not a marvel to see man's offspring so
advisedly peinted out with so lively, so apparent, and so natural colors?
Moreover if ye take the fear and reverence of God, not of men's mind, I
beseech you what can be so holy, which they shall not stain and defile with the
filth of their vices: yet notwithstanding so great is the wilfulness and pride
of the Jewish people, that they both vaunt themselves to be clear from all
offense, and also think that only the Gentiles are defamed and steined with
those kinds of wickedness.


P. But they must needs confess (and


R. So it seems. For reason requires, that like as ye rewards are set down
for them if they keep the law: so they should be demed to have deserved most
grievous punishment, if they break the law. But to what end were those things
forspoke^ so plenteously by Gods Prophets.


P. That not so much as one of al mankind might presume to mutter, and much
less to boast himself stoutly, but that al men, as well Jews as Gentiles should
(as they say) lay their hand upon their mouth, and every of the^ acknowledge
his own fault and filthiness, and so upon remorse of their own consciences, at
length submit them selves eueriwhere to gods power, and yield themselves
wholly unto him.


R. Why so?


P. Because that of al men there is not one, be he never so well fraught and
furnished with all works, either of the law of nature, or of the law
written, that ca^ bear away the praise of righteousness at Gods judgment, so
as he ought to be counted righteous for his weldoings, if he want faith, which
alonely imbraceth the favor of God.


R. All this discourse then ameth at this point, that we should believe that
another the Jews by the power and works of the law written, nor the Gentiles by
the power and works of the law bred in them by nature, can pass for
righteousness before the iudgementseate of Gods majesty. So greatly is nature
in all points corrupted and marred, unless it be restored again as ye would
say, to her birthright by the operation and benefit of the heavenly spirit.
For what clennes can spring out of uncleanness, or perfection out of
vnperfectio^? But teach me I pray you, to what use the law now serves.


P. Out of all doubt, to very great and plenteous uses. Whereof this is the
chief and most excellent, that whereas men ar otherwise blind, the law sets
their vices before their eyes, so as they be compelled to acknovvledge them
whether they will or no. For it serves us for a most clear looking glass to
spy out our spots in.


R. Even so is it: and that have I learned by the examples both of other men,
and also of my self, namely that unless we look upon the law as upon a
glass, all of us shall become blinder than betles in our own vices. But I
pray you, when we have found out our errors and sins by the bewraying of
the law, whence shall we seek remission, or where shall we find Physic for
the diseases of our souls?


P. Out of the gospel or glad tidings of eternal salvation, whereby God
utters his good will and mercy toward us. For by that, without the help or
furtherance of the law, To. 2.17.
God shows his own righteousness, I say not the righteousness of the Law,
but his own righteousness, to be received and embraced by the hand of faith,
and he ingraffeth and ingraueth the same in our minds by the power of his
spirit, together with all the company of virtues, as innocence, holiness,
clennesse, mildness, honesty, godliness, louingnesse, and hope. For all
these things are drained from him as from a spring that can not be dried, into
men's minds. And although this righteousness of Gods whereof we speak, have
hitherto been wrested aside to the Law alone, through the ignorance of the
Jews, howbeit not of all, but of most part of them: yet has it always
been confirmed and proved by most evident records, not only of the Prophets,
but also of Moises and of the law it self, and therefore this righteousness was
not in any wise invented by the vvitte and cunning of men.


R. What can be spoken more plain, more profitable, or more plentiful, than
this saying of yours? For hereby it is manifest, that all hope of salvation,
both for Jew and Gentile, must be reposed in the righteousness of faith, and
not in the works of the Law. For inasmuche as that righteousness is Gods
righteousness, and therefore God him self is the author of it: no doubt but
it shall most of all, yea and alonely avail at the judgment seat of
almighty God, specially forasmuch as it is not deuized by man, but springs
of God himself, and is set forth by his word. But what is the mean to enjoy
this so precious and healthful righteousness thoroughly?


P. The whole atteinement of that by Christ imbraceth the true and
substantial holiness, innocence, or righteousness which is set forth in the
Gospel.


R. Nothing is or can seem more profitable, nothing is or can seem more
pleasant than this doctrine, specially to minds that are cumbered with the
tyranny of sin, or with the accusation of the law. For it shows both
that the Physic of our diseases comes from god, and that the order and
means how to use it is rased us by his hand, all which things are received
by faith and assured belief of Gods good will toward us: and also that the
same benefit is common to all people, least any man conceyuing an untoward
opinion of Gods goodness, should set out him self from the function of so great
a benefit. Howbeit forasmuch as God has determined to make us righteous,
holy, and his children by the said faith as by an instrument: which think you
to be the nearest for us to attain to this faith? Or by what deserts may we
wind our selves into gods favor, to earne the same?


P. I wish you to be better learned in


R. So much the better comfort and hope ought wretched men to have which are in
thraldom to sin, since they be sure that their salvation is laid up in the
keeping of so faithful and friendly a creator and father. But in what thing
rests this good will and friendship of God?


P. Even in the redemption of mankind wrought by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. Genesis
3. 16
whom the everlasting father had before the creating of all things, and before
all time, appointed to be the reconciler of all things, for their sakes which
should repose their trust in his blood.


R. O saying worthy to be had in everlasting remembrance, that men's mynds may
always be cheered up to give God continual thanks, in that for their sakes he
is a most merciful father, has voutsafed that his eternal word should
become flesh, to the intent that the treasures of Gods unmeasurable goodness,
should be discovered and laid forth to the children of Adam. Now do I
perceive that the said everlasting word being become flesh, John. 1.18
is the ransom of our redemption, and the very counterpane of the old
merciseate wherewith the Arc and the Law enclosed therein, were covered:
howbeit after such a sort that Gods glory was shed from them into Gods people,
as from a most plentiful storehouse. For so does that word of God by taking
flesh upon him not only shrewd us from the curse of the law, but also sheeld
us and defend us from it, and gives us most certain assurance of Gods loving
kyndnes, if we put our trust in his blud. For he is succeeded as our souerein
king and everlasting priest in sted of Moses and Aaron. But show me wherefore
God did cast so great good will to mankind.


P. Doubtless even for this cause, that he had determined to show his
ryghtuousnesse more bright than the daylight to mortal men in time too come,
both in forgyuing all men's offenses, his Christ.


R. I believe it to be verily so. Therefore it behooves that so great a
benefit to be borne always in remembrance; of those too whom Gods goodness
has granted to enjoy Christ, as their prophet to teach them the will of the
heavenly father: as their high priest which has with his own blood sealed up
the covenant made between the father and us: and as their most mighty King,
to sit in our mynds and to govern us by his spirit.


P. You see then what are the causes of man's salvation. Now therefore if a man
should ask a Jew whether he thought that there were any thing left him
wherein he either could or should glory: what might he answer? Nay rather (if
it please you) answer you for him, and utter what you think.


R. Nothing so God help me, I se nothing why he should be loftyminded or boast
himself or his prerogative. For all cause of boasting is shut out.


P. Again, if I should ask him whether the Israelites have any such vauntage
by the law it self the rule of good deeds, that they should think
themselves better than all other nations: or whether the glittering works of
the Jews can have so great force, as justly to set them in such a iollitie: I
pray you what would he say to it?


R. I believe he would be more dum than a fish: as the proverb says. For
how can any doings of men either he or seem to be so much worthy before God?


P. Therefore it is meet that all mankind should be rid of all self
weening, pride, stubbornness, and boasting, by the doctrine of faith, and be
driven of necssitie to yield the whole glory of all things unto God alone.


R. Doubtless, I think that to be out of all controversy.


P. Therefore it is too be believed woorks of the law or without deserts that
spring of men's deeds.


R. If the way to ryghtuousnesse, too salvation, and to everlasting life, be
opened unto men by faith, and not by the law: there is no cause why the Jews
should repyne at the Gentyles, or envy them.


P. None at all. For which of them is so blockishe or ignorant of things
belonging to God, as to imagine in his mind that God is the God of the Jews
only, and not of all other nations also? Out of doubt god is the god of al
people and nations, and will have all men to be saved and to come to the
knowing of him. 1. Ti. 2.4



R. Then does it follow that there is no odds between circumcision and
uncircumcision as in respect of salvation.


P. Surely they be both in one case, or for rightuous by faith, and takes them
for his own.


R. But here is a doubt greeueth me,


P. It is nothing so. For we be so far of from purposing to overthrow the law
by faith: that we indeuer to strengthen, uphold, and stablish it most of all
thereby: which thing I will show most evidently in convenient place. For
seeing that Christ is the end, the performing, and the utmost point of the
law, and that the law is as a certain scholing and trayning of men unto
Christ, (as the which yields not wherewith to fulfill Gods commandments,
but only shows the necessity of fulfilling them): I beseech you how greatly
is the law beautified and advanced by faith, when by the doctrine of faith, we
show the way to perform the law by the spirit of Christ.


R. Sir, Cha. 4.1.
you have spoken enough of the law, more truly (in mine opynion) than men will
well like of. But we will say more of this hereafter. You know of how great
authority Abraham was always among the Israelites for his good works sakes.
And yet notwithstanding, all that dignity shall seem to fall to the ground,
if he obtained no righteousness and innocence by his own procurement. Or
else point you me out some fruit of those good works wherewith he was adorned.


P. I grant that Abraham had gotten no small glory and commendacion of
ryghtuousnesse to himself by his good, Godly, and well ordered doings, if he
had become ryghtuous by his works. But yet, then should this praise have
rested either in him self, or have taken place alonely among men, but not at
all before God.


R. I pray you show by what means that came to pass.


P. Truly the holy scriptures show it enough and more than enough. Ge. 15.9.
Gal. 3.6. Ja. 2.23.
For thus is it written: Abraham believed God, and that true faith of his was
reckened to him for ryghtuousnesse.


R. I acknowledge the record of the old testament, and embrace it with both my
hands. But whereto tends it?


P. You shall hear. Consider the state and circumstance of that time. For as
yet the law was not, which was afterward given by Moses, in somuche that
what soever Abraham did at that time, he ought not to father it upon the law
written. Therefore he could not glory of the performyng of the law. And for
that cause, God by that saying


R. Think you the whole matter to be dispatched with this one argument?


P. No: But you shall understand and earned a thing by his own labor,
travel and pains taking: his obteyning of it is not a reward or free gift,
but a right and duty. But if a man do not the things whereby he may deserve,
(which is most truly verefied of man) but does so perceive, taste, and feel
Gods goodness and loving kindness, that he believes himself to be taken for
giltlesse before him through his mere mercy, without any work of his own:
unto him is innocence given freely as a reward and not as a duty, and his
steadfast trusting to the iustifier is reckened to him for ryghtuousnesse and
innocence.


R. I agree fully to this reason. For the thing that is freely, bestowed upon
any man, is not to be taken for a wages or desert, but must be ascribed to Gods
goodness. Moreover the same faith, for the which God rewards us with
righteousness, is sheaded into our hearts by God himself, and that of his own
mere free liberallitie and good will, without respect of any desert at all,
whereof the wretched sinners might by any means brag or boast. But have you
any more to say yet of the same matter?


P. Behold moreover the evident authority Psa. 32.1
Blessed are they (says he) whose iniquities are released, and the filthiness
of whose sins


R. How fowlly then are they ouersene which surmise so many kinds of
happiness and blessedness, and write so sundry sawes of it? And to let pass
the Philosophers, how wicked ought those godly, and how foolish ought those
wise me^ to seem, who upon a conceit of I wot not what a kind of
blessedness, refuse no pains too make satisfacion for their sins, whereas
notwithstanding, the said divine Prophet protests that they be released and
forgiven men, of gods only mere goodness? And not only that, but also to the
intent that men's drooping hearts should be chered up more and more, he affirms
that they be after a sort concealed and hidden and ouerpassed, least they might
at any time come into the sight of the angry judge. And how far does this
manner of hyding sins differ from the manner that Adam used, Genesis 3.2.
when he would have hidden his wickedness from God with fig leaves if it had
been possible. For he would have hidden him self with things that grew in the
fields: But God clotheth his with Christ's righteousness, Romans 13.14.
which is a most glorious garment, or rather with Christ him self. And if your
leisure would suffer you to open all the other parts of that Psalm, O how
great comfort would it bring to men's minds? For they that are to be registered
in the number of those blessed men, must be void of al guile and disceite, and
flee to Gods mercy, whereby they having the filthiness of their sins wiped
away, and having gotten the righteousness of faith, must apply al their indeuer
to lead a godly and righteous conversation among men. I let pass the residue
of the notable things there. Now that our talk may return to our purpose,


P. Surely he received not that benefit Genesis 17.11.
For so do the holy scriptures most plainly show, which tell us that
circu^cisio^ was appointed to Abraham instead of a cognizance or badge, his
own faith shall be reckened to him for righteousness.


R. Forasmuch then as Abraham was justified fowrteene years before he was
circumcised, it appears that circumcision was not the cause of his justifying
(for it followed his justifying) but rather the seal of it, so that the
Israelites may easily epsy their own error, in attributing so much to the
cutting off of a little piece of flesh, Esa. 1. Psalm. 50.
as who should say, that God did set so much store by the Ceremonies (though
he him self ordained them) when they be void of true and lively faith. And
yet notwithstanding me thinks that some Christians do fondly follow the same
error, who have no Christianity in them, saving that they were dipped in the
clenzing water in the name of Christ. Furthermore, if Abraham, when he was yet
uncircumcised was so dearly beloved and accepted of God for his only faith:
how cheerful minds, and how assured hope ought all the uncircumcised
Gentiles to have, if almighty God voutchsafe of his infinite mercy to bestow
the most excellent gift of righteousness upon them? Nay rather, even hereby
it appears that the pride of the Jews is in no wise blerable, who standing
upon the reputation of their only circumcision, disdain the poor Gentiles,
and would keep them off from entering into everlasting salvation. For it is
now more evident than the daylight, that salvation belongs no less to the
Gentiles than to the Jews, inasmuche as Abraham was justified (that is to say,
was taken into the number of Gods children) when he was yet a Gentile.


P. But by the way you must remember,


R. Hereby does gods wonderful goodness and louingkindnes toward all mankind
shine forth most of al, in that it imbraceth both Jews and Gentiles, setting
all, as a certain pattern for either of them to fashyon their mynds unto, by
following both his belief given to gods promises,, and also his singular
awfulnesse and obedience, together with his contempt of all worldly things, and
all other his excellent virtues betokened by the sign of circumcision. But yet
me thinks I stick in the mire, forasmuch as I am fully persuaded that God
gave not his law to the Jews for naught, but rather that it might be a certain
sure way to salvation, and a certain gain way unto righteousness.


P. As for Abraham himself the notable Patriark of the Jews what promises
soever he obtened of possessing the heritage of the world, another he nor his
offspring obtained it for any law, or for any works of the law, but for the
same faith whereby he was justified, or for the righteousness of faith, if you
had lever so to term it. For be you sure that Abraham was taken into gods
favor, and adorned with the praise of righteousness, not for that he had
deserved it by his singular virtues, but because he had believed Gods words
steadfastly.


R. I believe it to be so. But by the way I would feign be taught at your hand,
whether you think it to be a discommoditie or hinderaunce to us to seek
righteousness, salvation, and favor at gods hand, by keeping the
commandments of his Law, as the thing wherein his will is expressed?


P. Undoubtedly very much. For if the


R. It were rather to be wished that belief should be given still to the
promises, and that we should go right forth to salvation by the guiding
thereof. But what if we should add the law as a companion unto faith, so as
our righteousness might consist of both?


P. Nothing were more to be wished mould, that it is loath to be bownd to any
law, insomuche that it stryueth against the thing that is forbidden, and
follows the worser things: what other thing can the law work in a man, but
the flinging of Gods wrath upon him for his despising of god? Verily even by
certifying the^ that a sure plague is prepared for the^ that shall have broken
gods comaundements, and not obeyed his will.


R. Then like as gods favor is seen by his promises, so also his vengeance
uses the law as a weapon against men's sins. For even so do I my self feel
in my conscience when I look upon the Law. Wretch that I am, me thinks I am
set at gods iudgementseate, where my sins are set before me as in a glass,
whereat I am wholly both body and soul stricken in fear, by reason of the most
grievous and deadly wrath of the Judge kindled against me. Heerevpon there is
kindled a wonderful hatred of the law in my heart, notwithstanding that even
spite of my teeth I acknowledge my sins to be justly punished, because I have
not obeyed god.


P. Surely the law is so far of from giving any righteousness, that there
would scarsly be any feeling of sin, but for the law. For sin is then
committed when the lusts or bownds of ryghtfulnes are passed: and those bownds
does the law appoint. Therefore take away the law, and the bounds of the law,
and there shall be nothing to transgress. But contrariwise set me down the law,
and publishe it: and by and by there is transgressio^ through the wilfulness
of men.


R. Surely this seems worthy of careful loking too. For by this saying you
show the infirmity of man's disposition, or rather the corruptnesse (I will not
say the utter marrednesse) of the whole man, which is full contrary to the
innocence that God requires. By means whereof it co^mes to pass, that
whereas Gods law requires such perfection and soundness of us, as no man
either will or can perform: we being privy to our own weakness and
frowardness, can hardly by any means put our trust in the meeldnesse and
mercy of God, who is the author of the law. For the law makes none end of
urging, compelling, threatening, and tormenting.


P. Therefore everlasting thanks are to be given unto God, that he would have
all such as are nu^bred in the seed of Abraham, to attain to the eternal
inheritance, not by the law but by faith, that the same faith resting upon the
fou^dacion of Gods grace and free favor, might never be moved, but continue
steadfast, substantial, and everlasting.


R. What mean you by this word sede?


P. As many me^ of al nations and all places as are by true faith become the
children of Abraham the father of al beleuers and not only the^ that have
received the words of the law, and are called the disciples of Moses: For it
is left in writing that God himself named the said Abraham the father of many
nations and people.


R. Now I perceive whereto these things tend. For that is the cause why he
was called Abraham, whereas his name was Abram before: to the intent that he
might from time to time be put in mind of Gods promise, as often as that name was
rehearsed. And that custom was conveyed over to his posterity from their
forefather, who were wont to give their children their names at the
circu^cising of them, that they might remember the covenant when they heard
their own names that were given them at that time. But to let this matter
pass, me thinks you teach scarce agreeable things, in referring promises
which (as it should seem) were but transitory and worldly, yea and already
performed, unto spiritual matters, as namely to the adoption that is made by
faith, and to such other things. For the scriptures bear witness that God
performed his promises abundantly unto Abraham, whom he so appointed to be the
father of many nations, first when he raised up twelve noble and mighty tribes
of his son Ismael whom he begat of Agar: and secondly when he incresed other
twelve most flourishing houses out of Jacob the son of Isaac. Besides these, what
an infinite offspring was there of ye Edomits? and moreover what a number of
successors begat he of Choetura? Thus it seems not needful to extend the
bownds of Gods promise any wider or further out, unless ye mean perchance to
ad some secreter and sutle^ allegories.


P. Not so. But the eyes of men's minds must be lifted up to heaven, or rather
unto God himself, and not be fastened only upon this earth. For when I say
that Abraham was appointed of God to be the father of many nations and people:
I look not upon the world, but upon God, I say upon the almighty God, whom
Abraham believed in all things, and which is able to raise up the dead from
their graves, and which does as certainly and by name set before him self the
things that have not yet bin, as the things that are already present. In so
much that as there cannot be any thing which comes not of him: so is there
not any thing which may not come of him.


R. If I be not deceived, you seem to betoken two things unto me. The one is,
how great difference there is between the children of Abraham, of whom the one
sort being puffed up with the nobleness of their birth, do boast themselves
and will needs be counted Abraham's seed: and the other sort are adopted to be
his children by faith. For as the former sort vaunt themselves to the
worldward: so these are known and apparent only to God. Those are begotten of
the flesh: and these are taken in by faith. Those know Abraham for their
father but as touching the flesh: and these are counted his children in spirit
and faith. Again I mark how wonderful Gods power shone forth in that case:
whereupon Abraham resting, did by faith understand and comprehend in mind and
faith, things wonderful and above natures reach. For what is it that Gods
power is not able to do? Therefore if we settle our trust upon that, it can
never swerve, it can never be removed, it can never quayle. But to the intent I
may call to mind the things that you have said here before: first you have
showed that ye Jews as well as the Greeks (in which two names all mankind is
contained) are so in thraldom unto sin, that they can never return into Gods
favor for any deeds or deserts of their own: and therefore that there
remains but only one way to salvation, namely even faith, which is ingreffed
and inspired into our mynds by the spirit of God, by the help whereof he
plucketh up the roots of natural sin out of our mynds, and dryueth distrust
or unbelief a great way from our hearts, and thrusts out of our breasts the
doubting of Gods mercy and the fear of his wrath, which Satan had thrust in
by his false persuasions. Secondly it is showed that the strength of faith is
so great, that the man which of himself is hedged in with all kind of
wickedness, is adorned with Gods ryghtuousnes and holiness, whereby he may
becomme acceptable and welcome unto God. Nevertheless, in these days I see
very many ouerseene in the case of faith. Of whom some surmise faith to be but
a worldly opinion and persuasion gotten by reading of the scriptures or by
hearing of men's sermons. Othersome are proud of this counterfeit and imaginatiue
faith, and do brag of it beyond all measure: and because it is barren and
utterly frutelesse, it is commonly deemed to be but a certain device and conceit
of men. Wherefore I pray you heartily to peynt it out to me in lively colors,
and to set as it were an express image of it before mine eyes, that may sink
so deeply in my mind, as I may not surmise any feyned and counterfeit, or any
vain thing to my self. And to the intent we may not depart from our
purpose, set forth that image of a faithful man in the person of Abraham, and
show what he did when he was once inlyghtened with that heavenly light of
faith.


P. The strength of that Godly man's faith was so great and so thoroughly fast
settled in his mind, Ge. 15.5.
that he trusted to Gods sayings and promises, without any doubting at all. And
although all things seemed to be joined the reach of all hope, after the
common course of men's affairs: yet notwitstanding, he through hope overcame
all hardness of hoping, and believed that he should be the father of very many
nations.


R. Even in this point me thinks I behold the strength of faith very nearly
as in a most clear loking glass. For I perceive it to be, not a certain
historical knowledge, or a vain opinion and slight in sight of the truth,
but as it were a certain heavenly sunbeame and most clear burning fire,
whereby both man's wisdom is consumed, and the faithful mind betaks it self
wholly unto God, and aduanceth it self above all worldly things even into
heaven. Insomuche that it imbraceth with vnwauering, belief, not only things
invisible, but also things to it own judgment repugnant. But if it please
you, show at what mark it bends her eyes.


P. At the manifestation and heavenly oracles of the everlasting God. And
specially at that prophecy wherein God spoke to him in this wise: Thy seed shall
be as the stars of the sky, Ge. 15.5.
and as the sand of the sea, that is to say unmeasurable and almost without
number.


R. Away therefore with men's imaginacions and deuyces, and let faith rest only
upon Gods promise. Whereof we receive then most fruit, when Gods majesty
plainteth the feeling and record of his goodness and mercy in our hearts,
whence al other virtues do easly spring. But what have you to say more of
Abraham's faith?


P. Verily this is to be considered


R. Surely you tell a wonderful, and welneare a monstrous thing. The thing
that you desire to conclude (as I take it) is this: that we must lift up our
eyes from the beholding of worldly things into heaven, and that faith must
consider not so much the wisdom of men as the mighty power of god. For in
things that are above nature, there is no room for man's wisdom, which if
Abraham had followed for his guide, peradventure he might have doubted of Gods
promises, whereas by setting light by it, and by passing it over, he abode
always like him self, constant and vnouercome.


P. Add further, that this most excellent Patriarch bowed neither to doubting,
nor to curious debating and searching, ne opened the gappe to any distrust at
all.


R. You tell me of a stout and invincible mind. For how great troubles and
turmoyles does distrust stir up in men's minds? For when men begin once to
distrust, or to be thoughtfull, specially in matters perteining to God: they
make none end of their debating, questioning and searching, in so much that
we can scarsly persuade our selves that God is able to bring any great thing to
pass, except we perceive the reason how he should do it.


P. Yea: but he not only neither stumbled nor tripped any whit at al through
unbelief, but also confirmed and in^reased the power of his faith, or rather
^ecame the cheerefuller, lustier, and ^^ronger through the heavenly power ^f
faith.


R. Doubtless I am fully persuaded, that it is scarce possible that a man
should ^iue any credit at all to Gods promises without some battle first
fought against ^umaine doubting and unbelief, and that all men ought to enforce
the^ selves with all ^iligence, to beat back all the weapons of worldly wit, and
to rid the^ quite away: because that if a man once suffer him self to be
assaulted, and his mind to be wounded by the^, he is in peril to be throwe^
down from the highest step of his faith. For after that manner did Abraham
triumph gloriously over his own flesh, by subduing and overthrowing the
wisdom thereof, that it durst not attempt any thing at al against Gods
promises. But I pray you, ascribed he the glory of this his victory to him
self, or to God?


P. He yielded all the whole glory unto God. For he that abateth any whit of
Gods power, abateth also his glory. Therefore he gave the glory to God, both
because he acknowledged the victory to come from God, and also because he
believed that God both can and cold do all things.


R. It is a most evident token and record of a very true faith, when we ascribe
the happy falling out, and the luckie succes of things to Gods providence.
Otherwise the faith (if it be to be called faith) which chalengeth ought to a
man's own power, and glories in his own strength, is scarsely pure and void
of suspicion of light belief and inconstancy.


P. But wey you thoroughly how lightly it was to be esteemed, that he through
vnwauering faith, believed that God was utterly able to perform whatsoever he
had promised.


R. Two things are chiefly to be considered in God his good will, which is
seen in his promises: and his power of performing and bringing things to
pass. Upon which two I see that Abraham's faith was grounded and settled. But I
long to hear what he obtained by this so great faith.


P. That faith of his (say I) was im^^ted


R. It is a wonderful force of faith which you show me, wherewith if a man
(...) fenced and furnished, he may certen^^ warrant him self that God is
loving ^^d merciful to him, and be bold to ap^eare before his judgment
seat. But ^hinke you that God will voutsafe the ^^me benefit upon all other
men, which ^e bestowed upon Abraham?


P. Yea verily. For it is not for his sake of our sins, and raised agein for
the justifying of us, that the sin of distru^^ might be dispatched out of our
hearts by the minding of his death, and the indeuer of righteosnes and newness
of life be stablished and increaced in us by the mynding of his resurrection.


R. O treble and tentimes happy mankind, if at leastwise he happen to hau^ some
desire to enjoy so great a benifyte. For to what purpose were this example,
unless we might fare somewhat the better by it? that is to say, unless
Abraham example encouraged us to settle assured trust in Gods goodness? Seeing
the^ that that is the amingpoynt of those s^ notable promises, and that they
belon^ to all men: who can now despair? Specially seeing that our faith has
Christ^ set before it as a visible mark to ame at who by his death has
reconciled us t^ God, and taken away sin, and the welsprin^ of sin, that is to
say, the natural stubbornness and wickedness of our harte^ matched with
distrust, and by his resurrection has called us again to life, that upon
assurance of Gods fauou^ through faith, we might become righteous and
acceptable in Gods sight, and give our selves to newnes of life. But to
rehearse in few words, what has been said before, you have sufficiently showed
and declared what righteousness god requires at men's hands, and also which is
the right way thereunto, and finally what is the power of faith which takes
hold of that righteousness. And I can not marvel enough how those so great
things should be so lightly esteemed among men. Therefore I demand now what
profit and fruit he that is endued with faith reapeth of al ye foresaid things
at the time that he becomes righteous?


P. First of all, Chap. 5.1
as soon as we be justified by faith, by and by we be at peace with god
through our lord Jesus Christ.


R. O most pleasant and precious fruit of so noble a tree. For once take away
sin, and the welspring of sin, and distrust, which stinketh before God, and
is a deadly enemy to him, and has an evil opinion of his goodness, and there
remains no more grudge nor enmity between god and us mortal wretches, but
rather a certain incredible assuredness of good will, insomuch that man's mind
being indewed with faith, may be frre from all unquietness, and enjoy safely
continual peace. For (as you said) of sinners we be made righteous through
faith, and by that righteousness we be accepted into Gods favor, and
consequently rest in his friendship. Otherwise if we be bereft of this faith,
and of the trust of Gods good will, we be hateful to God, and subject to
damnation, and our minds are always troubled and unquiet.


P. The second fruit of faith being linked with a very strait band unto
the former, is, that by the same Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.23
and by faith in him, we have an entrance set open for us, into the grace
wherein we stand without quayling in our hearts.


R. Who would not be amassed and wonder at gods so great mercifulness toward
men, that he can not find in his heart to forbid them his presence as unholy,
but rather of his own accord allureth them to him, that they should come
freely and boldly unto him. For we have free passage unto God, and it is
lawful for all believers to goo unto God, that is to say, to serve him, to
worship him, and to call upon him in the bottom of their hearts without ceasing.


P. Lo here one other fruit of faith: that we also being so justified,
notwithstanding that we be but silly wretched souls do glory in the hope and
longing for Gods glory.


R. What a word is that? Think you it to be the point of a christian to glory
so? Unless you mean perchance that because this life is accloyed with so many
mysteries, trubles, and adversities, therefore men's minds are to be cheered up
with a most sure hope of the quietness and felicity to come, which who so
hops to obtain, may justly glory in that behalf. But is there any more?


P. Yea. For we not only receive the Jam. 1.3.
and therefore much rather do bear them out with a cheerful and glad heart.


R. What can be said more wonderful, since that either the infirmity or else
the frowardness of men is so great, that they hate nothing worse than the
miseries and adversities of this world, and the cross which Christ has laid
upon his servants to bear daily? And yet notwithstanding it comes to pass
through Gods singular goodness toward his rightuous ones, and through his
power sheaded into their minds from heaven, that they be no whit at all
discoraged with adversity, but do conceive even a special pleasure and
cheerefulnes at it in their hearts. Another is the burden of the cross not
grievous to our senses. But yet is it eased by the softnes of his fatherly love
and tender hartednes, which laid ye cross upon our shoulders and comforts
our minds with his power.


P. But there is yet one thing more to quicken you up withal. For we sustain
and swallowe up all troubbles cheerfully, because we are sure, that of
tribulation is engendered patience, of patience experience or trial, of
experience hope, and hope has such power of it self and gives such power to
a man, that never deceaueth him ne disapoynteth him of the things that he
looks for.


R. I like very well of this witty mou^ting by degrees, specially for as much as
it concludes and confirms our present matter: namely yt afflictions are not
only not bitter or slau^drouse to ye faithful, but also are matched with great
praise and glory. But by your saying, no man is utterly ignorant of
afflictions. As for trial or experience, I refer it either to our selves or
to God. For there our constancy, courage, and strength are tried, and good men
show a warrant of a noble mind. Here ye softnes, ye loving kyndns, and (most
of all) the faithfulness of our most merciful father are felt, in yt he never
fails his children in their adversities. Therout issues and springs hope
which rests upon the goodness of our most gracious and almighty God. But by
what reason prove you that ye end of hope is always happy.


P. I auovve that hope can never drope nor be overthrown, even in this
respect, for that Gods love is sheade into our hearts from heaven by the holy
Ghost, whom he has given unto us.


R. To my seeming, you place hope in the strongest hold that can be, namely in
the spirit of God. For inasmuchas he is the strength, power, and might, of the
most high God, and communicates his helthfull force to the man that is endued
with righteousness, and finally breaths and sheadeth Gods favor, love, and
good lyking into his heart, so as he cannot by any means doubt of Gods good
will: it is impossible that hope being walled in with so great strength should
be beaten out, shaken down, thrust out, or disapoynted of his expectation. But
seeing that man is such a lover of him self, and that he esteems and
measures God by his own nature: how can he persuade himself that he is
dear and well-beloved of God, and that freely and for no deserts of his own?


P. You shall easily understand the mean and reason thereof, if you often and
thoroughly consider in your mind, the time when Christ undertook to die for us
most forlorn sinners, Heb. 9.5. 1. Pe 3. 18
yea even then chiefly when we were most unworthy of so great a benefit.
For in very deed, I think there is scarcely any that will die for an honest
man, scarcely I say, for I deny not utterly but it may be so. For here may be
some one perchance


R. Hereby it appears sufficiently how much Gods love is excellenter than
man's love. For men love their lovers and praysers. But God (a wonderful thing
to be spoken, and right hard to be believed) did cast so great a favor to his
enemies defiled with all sinfulness, that he gave his most dearly beloved
son to death for them. Than the which I see not that there can be desired any
greater or surer warrant of love.


P. Now then if God showed his love in such wise toward us when we were yet
at deadly food with him, how much more boldly becomes it us to hope, that we
shall be saved from his wrath, now that we be reconcyled too him by the


R. Surely my heart hoppeth for joy at the cheerful report of so many and so
great benefits.


P. And now being so brought into Gods favor (as I said) and enriched with
so great riches, we have moreover certain boldness to glory, howbeit only in
God, and that by our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom that atonement of ours is
made most steadfast and certain.


R. As though it were a small thing too rejoice in our hearts for the hope of
Gods glory conceived in our minds: you add also that it is lawful for us too
do it with boldness, and with any dowting: by the lord (say you) who is the
only foundation of true hope. Therefore henceforth I will comfort my mind with
these musings and studyings, as often as it shall be put to encounter with
adversity, as one that knows certainly by ye great number of examples of his
unmeasurable goodness showed upon me, that my most merciful Lord is on my side
and favors me. And to knit up the things in short room which you have
hitherto said, I do now understand by what means men's sins are forgiven
the^, and also how they conceive hope of eternal life. But yet for all yt, I am
utterly ignorant why it comes to pass that men are clothed with Christ's
righteousness, and how it is communicated to them.


P. By a comparison the matter will be made very plain. For like as by one man
that is to wit by our first forefather Adam, sin entered into the woorld, and
death by the same sin, so as it reigned over all mankind, in as much as al men
have sinned: so also the manne Christ or the second Adam, does by sheading
faith into us, make us sure and certain of the forgiveness of our sins,
power ryghtuousnesse into us, and give us the spiritual and everlasting life
the adversary and vanquisher of death.


R. How prove you that sin entered into the world, since it seems to be
against reason, that there could be any sin without a law, as is said before?


P. But you must understand that sin was long ago, and that it uttered his
force among men, even before the law was set forth and published.


R. I scarcely believe that. For if sin be the breaking of the law, then
without the law there is no sin.


P. No: but death is the hyre or wages of sin: and death executed his power
aforetymes from Adam unto Moses the minister of the law, even upon those
that had not yet sinned after the manner of Adam: which mischief God remedied
by sending the heavenly Adam, of whom the former earthly Adam was a tipe and
figure, that like as the first Ada^ had brought in sin and death, so this
latter Ada^ should bring in forgiveness of sins and righteousness, and
consequently also everlasting life.


R. It may seem scarce convenient that the old Adam should be a figure of the
new. For he did hurt both him self by his sin, and his posterity by his
example, and by the spreading forth of his sin by descent of birth, and all
men do even yet still to this day feel the marks of that old offense, that
is to wit, natural leawdnesse, distrust, fear, hatred of god, and other such
things. But Christ is the fountain and welspring of all good things, and
chaseth al terror, douting, and naughtiness out of our minds, and procures
us Gods good favor and welspring. Furthermore what just comparison can there
be between the sin of Adam, and the favor of God recovered for us again by
our Lord Jesus Christ?


P. Truly you have hit the matter as one man's fall very many fell into the
tyranny of death: so the gift and grace of God did ouerflovv and sheade forth
it self more abundantly upon many through Jesus Christ.


R. Now I perceive the matter more plainly and lyghtsumly. For either of the^
(as I see) did convey over a certain heritable right of his into mankind. The
old Adam conveyed over sin and death: and the second Adam Christ conveyed over
righteousness, life, grace, and atonement. Or if it be lawful to match the
greatest things with the smallest, God seems to have incou^tered as it were
hand to hand with Satan, and to have utterly cut up and overthrown his
kingdom, that is too wit sin and death, and moreover to have delivered Ada^
from his tyranny, and to have tryumphed and set up a monument of victory, in
grace, ryghtuousnesse, and everlasting life, by his own most dear beloved son.


P. After that you have most fitly noted what is peculiar too be either of
the Adams, and what is common to them both, now it seems meet to be
considered, that there is great odds between the afterdeele which the first
Adam brought mankind unto by his fault, and the unmeasurable grace that is
brought us by the heavenly Adam Christ. For by the one sin of the first


R. Truly I am thoroughly persuaded of these things. For albeit that all the
vices that ever were, are, or shall be, do spring out of that one offense as
out of the very well head: yet notwithstanding there is offered us so great
and so vnconsumable a treasure of all goodness and virtue in Christ, that we
be no more in any peril, either of that original sin, or of any of all the
fruits thereof. For all that fountain of sinfulness shall be drawn dry by the
divine power of Christ, and by the presence of his spirit. But what remedy
show you for death?


P. Verily even a ready one. Death reigned over all men, and subdued them to
his tyranny, by one man's most heinous offense. But they that receive the full
measure of Gods grace, and the gift of righteousness, shall much more reign in
life, through one, namely Jesus Christ.


R. O noble victory whereby Satan and his kingdom, and death it self, and
all the rest of our enemies are overcome by the heavenly Adam our Captain and
Emperor.


P. But to the intent we may at length make an end of the comparing of the two
Adams together: thus stands the case. Like as by one man's fault and offense,
condemnation was spread over all men: so also by one man's righteousness,
wherthrough we be made rightuous, the benefit and gift also was bestowed upon
all men, to justify them, and to restore them to the spiritual life.


R. Surely Paul I am maruelously delighted with these your trim comparisons,
wherein (to my seming) you have comprehended the whole state of christian
religion. Which order of dealing, would God that all such as will justly be
counted Christ's disciples would follow, and leave all curious disputations. To
be short, I bear this in mind and ever shall, that all evils are to be
fathered upon the first Adam, and all good things upon the last. But I can not
tell what a bone you leave me to gnawe upon. For seeing you attribute all
things to Gods grace and mercy set forth to us in his Christ: I see not to
what purpose or use the Law should any more serve, but to accuse us, and to
bewray our sin, and to provoke us to sin more and more.


P Of the law and of his offices we will speak more at length hereafter.
Gods grace, that the more that sin abounded and grew strong, the more also
did Gods goodness and mercy over abound: that like as sin had reigned to the
death and destruction of mankind: so also grace might reign through
righteousness unto eternal life, and that by the means of our Lord Jesus
Christ the purchaser of man's salvation.


R. Sir you have hitherto discoursed many things notably well, concerning the
free righteousness wherewith god endued the beleuers. Howbeit forasmuch as many
men (as I said at ye beginning) do take liberty and occasion of sinning,
because the Lord does lay forth the treasure of his grace to all men by his
Gospel, and not only not imputes not their sins to the believers, but also
pours the spirit of righteousness into them, as though the praise of gods
mercy grew out of ye multitude of sins: therefore (if I may be so bold as to
take their person upon me) I demand of you whether it be lawful for ye
justified sort to continue lice^tiously in sinning, Chapter. 6.1
either because men are frail and subject to corruption, or to the intent that
Gods grace may appear more and more.


P. God forbid. For seeing we be dead


R. I scarce understand this geere.


P. What, know ye not that as many


R. I am glad that you have vttred unto me both the true signification of
baptime, and also the bond of righteousness. For by this mean the manifold
error of many may be spied out. First there are which full lewdly do make
more account of the sign, than of the thing that is signified by it: and there
are very few which think that baptim betokens the mortifying and wasshing
of the old Adam, and of all unrighteousness and and unhonesty, and
consequently the renewing and restoring again of our souls and of our whole
life to their first state. Again, there are othersome, which being utterly
ignorant of ye power of Christ's spirit, and of the workfulnes of his
righteousness, do still leave open ye gate to sin, pretending I wot not what
excuses of ma^s fraylty, as who should say yt Christ were not stronger than ye
devil, nor Gods grace able to confound the power of sin.


P. Truly you have hit the prick. But you shall understand the contrary
doctrine if you advisedly wey the similitude of greffing, which I use here?
For if we be planted and greffed into the likeness of Christ's death: then
must we needs also be made partakers of his resurrection.


R. By this trym and most proper A metaphor is an apt co^ueying of a word or
spech from his own proper signification, to the betokening or setting forth
of some other thing.
metaphor you mean that we must be like branches yt are greffed into other
trees: that being greffed into Christ, and having Christ greffed into us, we
may bring forth new fruits of life, namely ryghtuousnes, innocence and
holiness.


P. Verily even so must we persuade


R. O the miserable frowardness of men, who at the report of Gods favor
purchased to us by the benefit of Christ's death, do wondrously leap and skip
for joy, verily because they be certefied thereby of the remission of their
sins past. But when mention is made of his resurrection, to the intent that
after his example, we should begin a new life, fashyoned and framed according
to his innocene, yrightuousnes, and other virtues, and by that means labor
and travel with earnest desire to heauenward, despising all worldly pleasures:
there, there our hearts faint, and we be even at ye point to quayle. So greatly
are we delighted and foaded with the inticeme^ts of our sins past.


P. Yet notvvithstanding, they that are justified of god, must needs renounce
and give over there sins, wicked deeds, pleasures, and to be short, all
dishonest things, after the examples of Christ, who being once risen from death
dies not any more, another has death any more


R. O excellent exhortation. But alas for sorrow, and O miserable nature of man
utterly awk from it, as wherein sin has taken so deep root, that it can
scarce be thrust out. We have received sin into our minds as a guest, or rather
as a tira^t into our innermost bowels, from whence he can hardly be driven or
thrust out, both by reason of our natural corruption, and also by reason of
custom and continuance.


P. Even so is it. But yet must you strive that this sin may not reign in


R. These things matched together ought both to fray our minds from sinning
and also to inflame them with most earnest desire and indeuer to live well and
blessedly. For what is more shameful, than to be slaves of lusts? Contrariwise
what is more honorable and excellent, than to use righteousness, godliness, and
innocence? Therefore we must pray to almighty God, that as he has of his own
infinite goodness already justified us, so he will also deliver us from the
bondage of sin.


P. Be of good cheer. For sin shall no more execute tyranny over you.


R. By what way or means may so great a good turn befall us? For to my
seeming, that is right hard to be done.


P. In deed it is hard unto men, but nothing is impossible unto God, another is
there any thing which he cannot bring to pass. But receive here the reason of
it in few words. For sin reigns not over those that are under grace, but over
those that are under the law. But now that you be justified you are not under
the law, but under grace.


R. Many men seem to be like Spiders, turning all things into poison. For
when unthrifts and naughtipackes here this saying, by and by, as though they
had by justification obtained liberty to do what they list, they cry out,


P. God forbid that any man should be of that mind.


R. But what is to be don to these fellows that abuse Gods goodness unto
evil doing? And yet notwithstanding, these wily and captious wits cannot be
subdued but by most sustantiall and myghtfull reasons.


P. Those wilful stubborn natures must be left to god the sovereign judge:
and as for the men of who^ there is better hope, I would exhort them after
this manner: know ye not that to whom soever you yield your selves as
servants to obey his servants you are, Ioh. 8.34. 2 Pe. 1.19
whither you obey sin that leads you unto death, or obedience, innocence and
righteousness which lead you unto life?


R. If men were clear of hearing, they would receive and embrace this your
most certain and strong saying. For what is more against reso^, tha^ to seek to
match and join together things yt are most repugnant? as for examples, light
and darkness, fredome and bondage, sin and grace? and yt do they surely inte^d,
as often as they fear not to bynd themselves to sin, under pretense of grace and
liberty. Yet must you not think all me^ to be of this mould. For there are many
in this our church of Rome, which having shaken of ye yoke of sin by the
benefit of


P. And I truly do give continual thanks unto God, and ever shall, that
whereas you were the bondslaues of sin, now you being set free by Gods mere
goodness, and made his children, have heartily obeyed the order of his doctrine
that is to wit, of the Gospel, which is delivered


R. Certesse a great number of us are notably well minded unto holiness: such
is ye singular grace, and working of Gods spirit in our hearts, and we hope
that he will continually help our infirmityes.


P. In good sooth to the intent I may have respect of your frayltie, I will
deal and your strength as instruments to uncleanness, and levvdnesse, to do
levvdly, so as you became every day worse than other through the reigning of
levvdnesse in you: so now yield you your members, if not more lustily yet at
leastvvise not more lasyly as instruments unto innocence, as instruments to
work holiness, and beco^me you every day cleaner from all uncleanness. And
thervvithall remember, that at such


R. Every man's own fault reproves himself. As for mine own part, you will
not believe how ill I am ashamed, as often as my former wretched and lewd life
comes to my mind. For what shall I tell you, how that even from my very
cradle, as soon as I had any wit and discretion, (according to mine own natural
corruption and naughtines and ye wylines of ye old serpent which called for ye
lesson yt he had once taught Ada^) by and by trusting to the ability of mine
own wit, I thought my self wiser than all the world, and took my self almost
as a God in all my doings, so as I can not sufficiently marvel that Gods
mercifulness was so great, as to voutsafe to bear with me so patiently when I
followed my sin so long time, and so wilfully.


P. Now then seeing you be both loosed from the bonds of sin, and made the
servant of God: you shall reap the fruit of your holiness, and everlasting
life abides for you in the end. For as death is the wages of sin, even so
is everlasting life (I say not a wages or hire, for the excellency thereof is
such, that we can not compare it, and yet must we not therefore covet it or
care for it the less, but rather the more, inasmuch as it is the more
excellent, and lies in the power of gods sovereign bounteousnesse, but) the
free gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, and not in any wise for our
deserts.


R. I easily agree with you in this case friend Paul, But I do not well
understand what you mean by saying that we be loosed from the law. For in as
much as Gods law is holy and righteous, and as a certain light whereby to
walk in the true way of salvation, and was appointed to the Israelites by god,
for the necessary uses of the leading a good life, so as they might behold
the will of the Creator in it as in a clear glass: how is it possible that
the man which is borne anewe should be loosed from that law, and that he
should thencefoorth live as without law? Or by what means can the law, (seeing
it is of god) bring forth evil deeds?


P. I will make the whole matter plain in as few words as I can, Chap. 7.
and in the example of my self show the offices of the law, so you consider
the three states of man, namely unregenerated, regenerating, and regenerated.
Now, that the whole matter might be understood the better, I borrowed a
similitude from the law of wedlock. For these are my words. Know ye not
brethren, (I speak of such as have skill of the law) that the wife is bound
by the law of wedlock, so long as her husband lives? Cor. 7.33
For the married woman is bound to the man by the Law so long as she


R. These things will never be denied, another of the Gentiles which are
enlightened but by the light of nature, nor of the Jews which have the law
written.


P. You judge right. Even after the same manner, you having obtained the
righteousness of Christ, are dead in respect of the law, by the body of
Christ, and on the other side, the laws power of condemning is dead in respect
of you: so as now you be at liberty to couple your selves to another, namely
unto Christ the sacrifice of propiciation for our sins, who afterward was
raised again from the dead. Another have you now any more to do with the law,
both because you be no more subject to the curse of it, and also most of all
because that being now possessed and led by the spirit of god, you be not
driven by the comaundements of the law, but led by the guiding of the spirit.
Therefore as now we have to deal with grace, to bring forth the fruits of
holy works unto God, which has made us righteous freely through Christ.


R. The law of wedlock I know very well, and what benefit free justification
brings, I now understand the better by you. But yet I do not thoroughly
perceive what manner of one this marriage of the law with man is.


P. I will utter the meaning of my mind full power by the law (for by the law
are they stirred up, I say they had their full power, in our members, and in
the instruments of our souls, and in our senses and powers, to make us bring
forth the fruit of sinful deeds, which in the


R. Now I understand better the application of the similitude. And if I be
not utterly deceived, your meaning is to set us down two wedlocks. The one
before our Justification or new birth, wherein the law, and the power of the
law executing as ye would say the office of a husband in us, do as it were
engender sin, and bring it forth, which sin is the very root whereof
wicked sayings and doings spring afterward, as fruits that grow out of the
root of a rotten tree. The other new wedlock you assign to be, when
Christ's spirit as a new husband executing his strength in our minds,
ingendreth righteousness, wherout spring good sayings and doings as fruits of a
good tree. But I do not yet well understand, how this righteousness, is not
engendered at all in the oldnesse of the letter, but in the newnes of the
spirit.


P. Harken to the interpretation of


R. I can not gaynesay any of these things, for I have found by experience
how workfull Gods spirit is in ye minds of such as trust in god truly and
earnestly. But to confess the dulnes of my wit plainly, I do not understand
at all, by what means the law being of god, and the rule of holiness and
virtue, can engender sin. Ex. 20.7 and. 17. D^. 5.11
For if the issue resemble ye nature of the father, it will be concluded
thervppon that the law is sin, because it ingendreth or begets sin.


P. No, not so sir, god forbid we should evil. For I had not known that
lusting is sin, unless the law had said. Thou shall not lust.


R. These last words of yours are very well known unto me, and now comes to
my remembrance that first and most miserable state of my former marriage with
the law, at which time yt law plays the part both of a husband, and of a
bewrayer in me. For although my lusts were so unbridled that they hindered me
and plucked me back from the perfect, holy, rightefull, and due loving of
God and men, wherein the whole law consists, and therefore were in me as
certain venomous and pestilent roots, wherout of it sprang that I in no wise
obeyed ye law, but wrought against every whit of it: yet was I so blind, that
if the law being in deed both just and holy, had not told me that those
most wicked roots are sin, I had never taken them to be so. But yet is not
the knot undone so apparently as I would wish.


P. These things could not have escaped you, if you had weyed the rest of


R. I am sure that the like befalls to my self, and to many others. For when
a man being pressed down with earthly, transitory, and perishing things, does
utterly let loose the bridle of sensuality, and considers not any more what
is ryghtfull: the law executes not his office, it quickneth him not up, it
rebukes him not up, it twitcheth him not, it puncheth him not, it tondemneth
him not. Then his sin and unbridled lusts are as it were a sleep and after a
sort dead: and he himself in his own opinion is a live, because he feels
not himself condemned at all by the law. In this plight was I not only in my
tender years when I was not able to discern good from evil, but also
afterward when I was man grown and yet stepped in my sins.


P. I am glad that you have not forgotten the state of that old marriage, since
the time that you were delivered from it by the benefit of Gods grace: and I
also do find my self to be set fre by the benefit of the same grace. Now give
me leave to go through with the offices of the law. Therefore as soon as sin
(by the name of sin, I mean the corruptnesse and lustfulnesse, which erst
without the law might have seemed to be dead, sin, I say, being accused and
condemned by the law, and therewithal wakened and stirred up, began to wax
lively again: and I was dead in the sight of God and of his everlasting law
when I perceived mine own naughtiness, and so it fell out, that the thing
which was given me to lead me unto life, (for the law shows which way to go
to God, who is our life) led me unto death, not through any default of it self
but because that I was so lewd, that I not only obeyed it not, but also (such
was my pride) taking skorne to be so bound by the law, striued and struggled by
all means against it like a mad and frantik man. Therefore sin, that is to say,
mine own inward corruptnesse, beguiled me and called me back from the
right way which the law shevved me, and so slew me at his own pleasure by
taking occasion at the commandment where none at all was given, least you
should imagine that gods law were sin.


R. Then do you utterly discharge the commandment of the law, by whose
occasion the thing was done, from all blame of naughrines or lewdnes.


P. What else? 1. Ti. 1.8.12
For the law is holy which shevved me what I ought to do,


R. These things are well. But how came it to pass that the commandment
which of his own nature is good, became death unto you? And look what I say
of you, the same do I mean of my self also being in my former state.


P. You must not in any wise think that it was long of the commandment:
but sin, that is to say corruptnesse or concupiscence bred death in me by
means of the good commandment, and of the law which is both ryghtful and
holy, and caused it to seem to be sin: and so the naughtines of it was
bevvrayed, in that it took occasion of evil, even feersly and furiously.


R. As often as I call to remembrance that heavenly and in manner unutterable
orderlynesse and forecast which God uses toward sinners and evil men in the
very time of their justifying: I cannot but praise his most divine mercy and
providence, in leading men at length through so many roughe and steep places
full of dangers, to the knowledge of his Christ, that they may becomme
rightuous and bear in mind their former state, undoubtedly of all states most
miserable. who (I beseech you) would believe your discourses concerning the
offices of the law, if he had not first had experience of all these things in
himself?


P. In deed it is true as you say: and these things require the practice of
godliness and the experience of justification. For before that time, sin and
man's wicked concupisence are so styrred up, that sin becomes out of measure
sinful and evil, insomuch that death is engendered of sin and the law, not
through any by showing us the way of life. But for as much as the law is
spiritual, it requires of us not only the outward deeds, but also the inward
affections of the heart. Also it requires of us all divine virtues in their
full perfection, together with their fruits and deeds proceading from a godly
instinct and tending to the glory of God. Now I at that time being yet earthly,
and more over a bondslaue of sin (as you and all others were when ye had not
yet received the spirit of righteousness) was not able to discern the
dignity, holiness and excellency of the law, and much less was vvilling to
submit my neck under the yoke of it, too frame both my mind and all my doings
according to the precise rule thereof.


R. Suerly I have often tried this, and I find it true, that it is not all in
my power, not only to love God with all my heart, to have a perfect belief in
him, to hope for all things at his hand, to love other men (specially to love
mine enemies with all my heart, and that only for Gods glories sake) to be
endued with all Christian virtues as perfect as is possible as the rightuous
and holy law of God byndeth me: but not even to rule the affections of my
mind, to be at a word, surely I feel, that without Gods grace and the spirit
of righteousness, I cannot but love my self and worldly things to much, I
cannot love God above all natural things, and much less with all my whole
heart, another can I fall to hearty atonement with mine enemies, but rather even
yet still I am enforced I wot not how, to hate the^, because I am earthly and
the servant of sin and concupiscence, which reigning tyrannously in me do over
rule me, and harrie me about at their unbridled pleasure, another am I able too
with stand them of my self.


P. These things are very modestly spoken, but I hope it is better with you
than you speak of. In the mean time I am glad to here this your accusation.
For you speak by experience, and I conjecture by your words that you have
bin a very diligent examiner of your self. For all men perceive not this
tyranny of sin. But I will proceed to declare in my self what is wont to
happen to such as are in regenerating. Surely I wist not what too do. I put
you out of doubt I do many


R. By this your speech, and by your acknowledginge of your former state, I
see now there are two kinds of men, some are utterly lawelesse, and though
they do always obey sin, yet feel they not the stinges of sin at all.
Again there are othersome which have I wore not what a heavenly seed with
the^, and although they sin, and now and then obey the affections of sin, yet
do they it of all the while as it were unwillingly, so as the judgment of
their mind stryueth against it. But yet as I think, these latter sort have no
excuse at all in the sight of God, although they be earthly. For that same
willingness and forewardnes of mind, whereby they be glad and feign of the
good, is so weak and faint, that now and then they suffer themselves too be
led wholly by their unbridled lusts, whereas contrariwise it ought be so
effectual, mighty, stout, and constant, as to outstande sin when it would
ouerrule them.


P. You judge aryght. For the forevvardnesse of the will makes sin: another is
that thing sin which is done against the will of the sinner. But I know
and am able to affirm it for a certeinty, that those men (as I have learned by
mine own experience) are willingly led of their own lusts, after the manner
that you spoke of. For I


R. You mean in the fleshly man, in whom the law executes the office of a
husband. But you deny not that there is some goodness in respect of the
presence of Gods seed, which can not yet utter his strength without the
spirit of righteousness. For either I am utterly deceived, or else in those
men that I spoke last of, there is some knowledge of gods will: also there are
already in them some sparks of commendable likings and desires, howebeit that
these things be not in the flesh, which regards nothing but her self and
her own pleasures.


P. See that you understand these things well, least perchance you confound the
sundry states of man together, or else unadvisedly wite that thing upon gods
law, which can not be wited upon it without great wrong to the eternal God. For
to the intent I may make these things plain in mine own person, truly there
is in me a will to do good, but I find not any way to perform it. For I am
hindered by the flesh, and by sin that reigns in me, and I am carried away
man: that is to say, as in respect of reason enlightened by Gods law, gods law
does please me, and delight me, I allow it to be rightful, I agree with it,
and I would feign obey it. But on the contrary


R. O Paul it can not scarsly be uttered how many ways, and how mightily
this talk of yours which are a most expert soldier in this spiritual
battle, does move my bowels, and in manner enforce me to tears. For these your
words do bring me in remembrance of that old plight and state of mine, wherein
I perceived that our own strength is far to weak to get the upper hand in
this incomber, unless Christ ye coeternal word of God be with us to arm us
with his spirit, and to give us victory against so great tyranny of our enemy.


P. Therefore I thank my God, which has delivered me from so miserable
bondage of sin by Jesus Christ our lord. For to conclude in two words, unless
he utter his power, and undertake the battle for me, and overcome, and
triumph: farewell my good days. I truly in the mean while do serve Gods law
with my mind, but with my flesh I serve the law of sin, which strives to
overcome me in the battle.


R. You have so plainly and lightsomly in your own person showed how great the
worthiness and holiness of Gods law is, and how diverse offices it is wont to
execute toward man till he be truly and perfectly borne a new in Christ: that
now by this talk of yours, I understand one of the hardest points of this
epistle, which point consists in the knowing of the offices which gods law
uses toward a man: now if it please you, let us treat of the third state of
man, that is to wit, when he is justified and made holy. But first of all I
pray you show me more plainly what manner of state this state of the regenerated
sort is: and afterward by what marks the party that is godly minded may be
certified of his regeneration or newbirth.


P. Like as in the considering of the first and second state of man, namely
unregenerate, and in regenerating, I used mine own example: so in laying forth
of this third member of our partition, I will allege mine own experiences, as
a pattern wherein to represent the image of a man regenerated. Chap. 8.
As touching the first part of your demand, surely the state and dignity of
the^ that are justified and regenerated is most excellent, as who being dead
to the old Adam, and greffed


R. I pray you let us fifte out the first part of my question, and show me
more plainly gods drift and manner of dealing in the case of our justification,
without the righteousness of the law.


P. Have here the sum of the whole which obey not the corruptnesse, lusts,
and lykings of the insatiable flesh, but the holy inspiration of the spirit,
whereupon it comes to pass, that our dooinges are acceptable to God, though
they be not fully in all points answerable to his law, which otherwise
requires most perfect pureness.


R. If it be true as you say, (as I believe it to be most true in deed) in any
opinion few are at this day become ryghtuous and holy. For the number of them
is exceading small that think upon newness of life, or which are careful to
obey Gods will, and much less which bestyrre themselves in making war
against their own natural and new incomme sinfulness.


P. But believe me brother, so long as men hold with flesh, they will care for
things belonging to the flesh, and sin shall execute his tyranny over them.
Contrariwyse, they that hold with the spirit, will be spiritual minded: and
because Gods spirit reigns in the^, they will also delight in spiritual
things, as whose intentes and indeuers are all guyded by the holy Ghost, and
therefore tend to Gods glory, which thing cannot happen to such as follow the
flesh, because they do rather purchase Gods displeasure, and consequently
endelesse destruction to themselves, by their naughtiness and wicked deeds.


R. Most miserable is the state of the ungodly which you tell me of. But
wherefore ascribe you so much evil to the loving and obeying of the flesh?


P. Because the intent, the indeuer, the desire, and (to use mine own words)
the wisedo^e of the flesh is deadly, or to speak more rightly, very death it
self, as which is contrary to God, who is our life. But on the contrary
part, the intent, affection, and wisdom of the spirit, is very life, and
peace. And if you ask me the reason why, it is ready shapen. For the wisdom
of the flesh is enemy And therefore much less will she pass for his will and
commandments. For how should she have any mind to obey his commandment,
whom she believes to be her so? This (as I think) is the reason, why the
flesh, another will, no nor can obey Gods law, so long as it


R. O most miserable wretches as we be, which are compelled to keep continual
wrestling with the untrusty wisdom of our own flesh, so long as we be
enclosed with the bulk of this body.


P. Be of good cheer. This wrestling


R. Herein is all the cunning and maistrie, Paul.


P. Surely if any of you have not Christ's spirit, he is none of his, mark well
what I say, I say he is none of Christ's he is no member of his, he is no
brother of his, he is no heir of eternal felicity with him.


R. I believe that with all my heart. But the thing yt I thought with my self
was this, that there are a great sort now a days which boast of the receiving
of Gods spirit, whose life is notwithstanding no more like ye holiness and most
pure example of Christ's life, than an apple (as they say) is like an Oyster.
Wherefore I pray you tell me by what marks I may discern such as have Gods
spirit in very deed. For it will do me good also, to perceive ye presence of
Gods spirit in my self.


P. Let this be the answer to the other part of your demand: and bear you
well in mind the true and sure tokens of regeneration: of which the one
consists in life and death, and the other in the inward motions of Gods
spirit.


R. In life and death say you? What is that to say?


P. Harken, and you shall understand. If Christ and his spirit be in you, the
old man, that is to say the flesh, is dead as in respect of sin and the unruly
and unstayed deeds of wickedness. And this is the death of the old man:
upon putting away, on the contrary part reigns the spirit of God and
executes his power upon man, and lives as in respect of righteousness.


R. Surely a very notable mark of regeneration or newbirth. For the spirit of
Christ into whom we be greffed, not only gives us life by inspyring us to
goo unto God our life, as meet is we should: but also is himself our
spiritual life. But to confess unto you plainly my thoughts (or I wot not
whether I may better say temptations) in that behalf when I looked upon mine
own naughtiness and the tyranny of sin over me, I have oftymes doubted of
the power of Gods spirit in us, and whether the working thereof do kill the old
Adam, and pluck up the roots of that evil tree and despayring of victory
against my flesh, I am wont diverse times to quayle.


P. These doutinges of the power of Gods spirit are dangerous. Think you that
the tyranny of sin is greater, than the might, efficacy, and inwardwoorking


R. Is there so great peril in the not knowing, and in the omitting of ye
thing?


P. Yea yearly: and of all perils it is the greatest. For if ye live after the
lyking of the flesh, you shall surely die. But if that by the spirit, you
vanquishe the doings, works, devices, desires, and in deuers of the flesh, and
fight against the lusts thereof: out of all doubt you shall live, and you shall
continue in the life that you have received by the benefit of Christ, who is
the life of the faithful, even in whose minds the quickening spirit utters
his power.


R. Hereafter I will bid such doubtinges farewell, and sift better both my
self and my doings, and not yield mine ears so open to such as do lessen and
diminish the effectualnes of the holy ghost: who also (to the intent their
manners may answer their doctrine) are wont oftentimes to brag of the presence
of Gods spirit in their hearts, when as they be drowned in the filthynes of
sin and wicked doings.


P. Let others alone, and stand to thine be Gods children. And believe me, he
that is not sure of this being Gods child, can another be said to be
regenerated, nor in any wise satisfy the accusations of the law, as which
requires an absolute and perfect righteousness in all points at our hand, which
we be never able to perform, except the power of the holy ghost do work and
fulfill the thing in us which he requires in his law.


R. Surely it is an ouerhard thing for us to give our selves continually to the
keeping of Gods law, specially since we be trenched in with so great
sinfulness of our flesh, whereunto the pureness of Gods law is quite contrary.


P. What have you now to do with the law, or with the comdemnation thereof?
For seeing you be greffed into Christ not only call upon him, but also cry
unto him with inward familiarity and boldness, and with earnest love, as
unto our father. Now he that has this spirit of adoption applies himself
to the keeping of the law, not as a hireling in hope of reward, or for fear
of punishment, but willingly as a son.


R. I am of opinion that we can not call God father, so safely, so boldly, and
so swetely, but by the breathing of his spirit upon us, whose record is most
certain, as the which is greater than all record of man. But I pray you which
are the other marks of our regeneration?


P. Surely even the inward motions of Gods spirit will be no doubtful signs
of our regeneration in Christ. For gods spirit witnesses inwardly to our
spirit, that we be gods children by grace and adoption, as who are partakers of
his divine nature by the same spirit in Christ.


R. You tell me of a great dignity.


P. Truly so is it. And if we be children, then must it needs be confessed
that we shall be heirs also: verily the heirs of God, because we be his
children, and fellow heirs with Christ because we be his brethren.


R. He that has such a record in him self, neither wauereth, nor staggereth
in his mind. But what other inward motions require you in the regenerated?


P. That they should know themselves to be the true members of Christ, and
enter into the way of the cross armed with the remembrance thereof. For since
it behooved Christ to suffer, and so to enter into his glory: it is meet also
that his members should not shun the state of their head: specially considering
how many and how great commodities spring unto us thereof.


R. What commodities I pray you?


P. The first is, that if we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with
Christ.


R. Truly this promise is very sweet, but the way to attain to it is very
sower.


P. But I am of opinion that the adversities which we suffer in this world,
are not equal or co^parable to the glory that shall be uttered upon us in time
to come.


R. Unhappy certesse is the state of ma^kinde. For only man feels sorrows
and troubles, only man bears all things, only man grows, only man is
vexed and pineth away.


P. Nay rather if you behold this frame of the whole world advisedly, you
shall see that all kind of things, yea even of the senseless creatures, do
with very great, thoughtfull, and vehement desire long for the discovery of
Gods children, because that being very near of kin to us, they desire our full
and perfect glory: and also because that day they themselves also shall be
repaired and made immortal.


R. Why so?


P. Because the nature of things is subject to vanity and corruption, not
willingly (for that is against their natural liking) but for his sake by whom
they be so made subject to decay. For God is contented that they shall dec^y to
do us service withal, howbeit in hope that they shall come much more
beautiful, and less subject to decay. Else the desire of an everlasting state
were bred in them in vain. Therefore they themselves also shall be set free
from


R. Surely the state of the godly is miserable, notwithstanding that all
creatures be fellows of their afflictions.


P. Nay verily, the faithful have also shall be in the life to come, and for
the setting of our bodies free from destruction, which shall come to pass
when we rise again.


R. Art you the chief blasers abroad of the Gospel subject to sufferings
as well as other men?


P. See you not how I am cast into this prison for the Gospels sake? neither is
there any cause why you should either be offended or wonder at it. For we be
not yet come to the possessing of our


R. To confess the truth, the adversities which the professors of Christ's
religion suffer, seem to me to pass our strength, and therefore I think we
be scarce able to bear them.


P. You have a very present remedy


R. I think that by the name of spirit, you mean that part which being
renewed in us by Christ, inforceth it self to the glory of God. For out of
that by the working of the holy Ghost in us, there proceeds a certain inward
and secret desirousnesse of Gods glory, which supplieth the room of
supplication before God, and therefore it is true that after this manner the
spirit prays for us, though we diverse times perceive it not.


P. It is enough that God which searches men's hearts, knovveth and allows
the secret meaning of our spirit, which prays for Christ's holy and true
members at Gods appointment.


R. Surely a most excellent comfort of the godly, sith they know that their
salvation can not in any wise be let or hindered by the adversities of this
world.


P. Nay rather unto such as love god, al things turn to their benefit,
whether prosperity or aluersitie befall them.


R. Most excellent (as you report) is the desert of such as love God.


P. Away with all mention of man's desert in Gods sight. For by Gods grace are
we whatsoever we be, by whose purpose and appointment they be called forth
as many as love god through the vvorking of Christ's spirit. For to the intent
you may know whom God begotten, the principal, and the chief among many
brethren. Hereupon springs belief in God, hereupon springs love toward
god, herevpo^ springs hope of everlasting life, and finally hereevpon
springs the calmnesse of mind, the long suffera^ce, and the chereful patience
of the elect in their adversities.


R. Now I plainly understand the cause why many being strike^ with fear of
the cross, leap back from the Christian religion, and will not hold out to
the end. For they want the foundation of true godliness, namely gods election
and calling, by reason of their wickedness.


P. You have hit the nail on the head. For who^ God has predestined and
gifts of grace. And whom he has so made rightuous and giltlesse, them also
has he glorified, in this life in hope, and in the other life in very deed.


R. Surely I am ravished with great admiration to hear you discoursing of
these matters. For what can we say to these things? what can the wisdom, or
(to speak more rightly) the distrustfulnesse


P. In good sooth no man. Specially seeing that God has loved us so greatly,
that he has not spared his own son, but has given him up to the Cross
for us all. And since the case stands so my brother, how shall he not give
us all other things with him? For how is it possible that he which gives
the chief things, should not give the appurtenances also?


R. These reasons of yours Paul are most plain, and full of comfort. For by
them it appears that your foresaid grownd is true, wherein you auow that
they which are truly greffed into Christ are not in danger of any damnation.


P. Who is he that may accuse Gods chosen, when God himself who is both Ps.
43.2^
or that we being possessed with such misbeleefe, should not love him? Can
adversity do it? Can nakedness? Can that went before us are daily put to
death for our Gods sake, and are in case as sheep appointed to the slaugther,
and yet want another faith nor love for


R. These proofs of true faith do so move my mind, that henceforth I will not
set a straw by the threatninges and scaringes of our Emperors, or (too
speak more ryghtly) of our tyrants, as whose power may show cruelty to the
body, but not pluck the mind from faith and the love of God.


P. Now to make an end of this treatise of justification, I am fully
persuaded happen to us alive or dead, yea I am fully persuaded, that another
Angels, nor Principates, nor potestates, nor


R. By this your discourse Paul, I perceive well, not only the love that God
bears us, but also the constancy, steadfastness, and stablenesse thereof, in
so much that I am sure it cannot by any means be brought too pass, that God
should not love us in Christ Jesus as his members, or that we should not
always love him again. How be it, as I perceive by the order which you have
set down, you have hitherto treated of Christen ryghtuousnesse, and you have
showed plainly that another the Gentyles can becomme clear by keepinge of the
law of nature, nor the Jews by the works of the law written, because none of
both them performs the commandments of Gods will to the full, which require
to be kept to the uttermost tittle. And therefore there is offered us a most
present remedy by the preaching of the Gospel, namely that we may becomme
rightuous by believing in Christ, and being endued with his spirit give our
selves wholly to the duties of obedience, so as at length we may attain
everlasting happiness with Christ the head of all the faithful. But now
remains the greatest hardenesse of this Epistle. For if men be justified by
faith, and Christ belong but only to the beleuers: undoubtedly then is the
seed of Abraham cast of. For (as you your self see) very few of Abraham's seed
receive Christ's doctrine. Whereupon it comes to pass that some say flatly
that this Jesus of Nazareth is not the true Messiah that was promised to the
people of Israel: and othersome affirm that he is the true Messiah, but that
God abides not by his promises, but rejects it at his pleasure. Now for
as much as none of both these things (as I think) is true: I would feign
understand the doubts of this treatise, which you entitled of election, or of
the calling of the Gentyles.


P. As for the casting of or (to speak more ryghtly) the unbelief of mine
own countrymen: Cha. 9.
I cannot speak of it without grief of mind. For I say the Act. 9.1 1. Co.
15.7
that I am stricken with great grief and continual sorrovv of To. 2.18. Epi.
2. 12.
to whom belong son of God, he is God to be praised above all things for
ever. Amen. He is the true Messiah, the very Savior, the very mediator
between God and man, eue^ in spyte of the powers of hell. Therefore there is no
cause why any man should call it in question, whether Jesus of Nazareth be the
very same Messiah that was promised to the children of Israel. And whereas you
say there are others that blame God of inconstancy, surely I am sorry for it.
For that error springs of the not knowing of Gods determination, whereby he
did once decree in his own mind, that none should be saved but the beleuers.
And To. 2. 16.
as though his word that is to say, faithful, descended of the father of the
faithful. But of Isaac (says God to Abraham) shall thy offspring take their
name: Ge. 21.12 He. 11.25
which is all one as if he should say, they shall not be called Abraham's
children which shall come of thee by Ismael thy fleshly son: But the children
which are thine in deed and which shall be called the children of God, are
they that shall co^uey their pedigree from Isaac the son of the spirit rather
than of the flesh. To conclude at a word, they be not the true Israetites,
which are the children of Abraham's body: Gal. 4.28
but they that are his children by promise are counted the children of Abraham
and of God.


R. Truly this your saying of gods promise, seems new and strange to ye Jews.


P. Undoubtedly their own blyndnesse is the cause of this error, and not my
true interpreting of the^, which they diffame with nouelty: for the prophesies
and sermons of the prophets do continually teach and enforce this decre of the
everlasting god. But least my cou^trimen may complain of my sayings: let us
look Ge. 17.10
I will visit thee at this time (says God unto Abraham) and Sara shall by my
favor have a son, notwithstanding that she be barren and both of you be
stryken in years. Therefore ye see that under this figure of Isaac and
Ismaell, God did shadow and show aloof, his free chosing of all believers,
whether they were Jews or Gentyles, that by that means he might make it
known, that he is the God of all men, both Jews and Gentyles, Joh. 1.12 Joh.
3.15.
and that he gathers his chosen indifferently out of both peoples, not by
fleshly generation, but by beleeefe of the promise and by acceptance.


R. But the Jews think the casting off of Ismaell and of the Ismaelites to
have another cause, namely the mothers birth: For as you know, Agar was a
bondwoman of Egypt, and but Abraha^s concubine, and not his chief wife. And
therefore her issew had not like right as was granted to the children of Sara.
For this cause Isaac and Isaacs offspring had the preferment and dignity of Gods
elect people: and Ismaell with his posterity more cast off.


P. I will not now dispute of the lawfulness of the marriage between Abraham
and Agar, and much less of the right of the issue that came of it: But I will
leave that question, and allege the another which they can not gaynsay. For
the figure of the chosen and of the Genesis 25.21.
not only in Sara and Agars issue, but also in Rebecca, when she was with
child with a pair of twins, namely Jacob and Esau, by our father Isaac. Gene.
25.23.
God told Rebecca that the elder should serve the younger.


R. I remember I have read this answer of God unto Rebecca in the first book
of the Law. For there Moses declares, Gal. 3.24
that Rebecca prayed to God that she might conceive, and obtained her prayer.
But when the children strove in her womb, she wished rather to have dyed than
to be in such pain, and therefore she resorted again to God for counsel, of
whom she received this answer: Two nations are in thy womb, and two peoples
shall be divided out of thy belly, of the which the one shall be a greater man
than the other, and the elder shall serve the younger. Afterward (as Moses
declares) when the time of her deliverance was come, she was delivered of
two, of whom the first came out all red, and like a hearie rugge, and he was
named Esau. Then came out his brother holding Esau by the heel with his hand
and he was named Jacob. I take this to be the order of the story, which you
affirm to be the figure of the choosing of the Gentiles, and of the casting
away of the Jews. But how these things were fulfilled, according to the
presence of the History, I can no skill at all.


P. You shall understand that by the saying of the Prophet Malachie, Mal. 1.2
whose words are these: I love you, says the Lord. And if you ask in whom I
love you: was not Esau Jacobs brother, says the Lord? yet loved I Jacob, and


R. Soothly a hard saying, but yet most just as I think, both in the figure
and in the pattern. For these judgments of God are to be honored rather
than too be over curiously searched: And I am fully and thoroughly persuaded,
that our destructyon comes of our selves, and our salvation of God. But
forasmuch as we do here deal with the case of Jacobs posterity, which
fasten all the whole ankerhold of their salvation in their auncetrie,
Circumcision, works, and deserts of fulfilling the law: surely we must needs
answer their objections. For if God do cast up the people of the Jews who^ he
had once chosen, and take to him the Gentiles, according as Esau was despised,
and Jacob the younger brother was chosen to the dignity of the birthright:
undoubtedly there seems to be accepting of persons with god, if there be not
inconstancy. What shall we say to these things Paul? Shall we grant the
Jews that there is parcialitie in God?


P. Far be it from God that he should be partial, howbeit that the
indifferency of Gods doings depends not upon us, nor upon our thoughts. But
to the intent to stop these brablers mouths with Gods word, and that they may
know that God is the God of all Nations, and will have all believers to be
saved: see what is answered to Moses talking to God in these words: Behold
(says he) thou say to me, Exo. 33.12.
lead this people, and thou have not shevved me whom thou will send with me,
and thou say that I am known to thee by name, and that I am highly in thy
favor. Therefore if I be in thy favor, teach me thy way, that I may know
thee, and that I may be sure that I am in thy favor, consider also therwithall
that this nation is thy people.


R. As who should say that God is not the God of all Nations, or that he had
determined to bestow the treasures of his mercy and goodness upon none but only
the Israelites.


P. Hear out the residue. Then the Lord said, I my self will go with thee,
and give thee rest. And Moses answered, surely unless thou go with us, I had
lever we might not go hence at all. But whereby shall we discern that I and thy
people are in thy favor? Shall it not be by thy going with us, that so I and
thy people may excel all Nations on the earth?


R. O how unhappy are al other nations of the world, if ye only Jews be in
gods favor, and all the residue cast of.


P. Give me leave to go through. The Lord answered unto Moses, that he would
do according to his request, and that he would not give the people an Angel to
be their guide, but that he him self rather would bring them into the land of
promise with his own presence and favor.


R. Moses then prayed and obtained.


P. It is true. But yet presumed he to ask greater things, when he said, Lord
I beseech thee show me thy glory and thy brightness. Exodus 33.18.



R. What said the Lord to that?


P. I (says he) will make al my good to Exodus 33.19.
and I will show compassion on whom I will show compassion.


R. O most pitiful God and worthy to be praised everlastingly, which tieth not
his inward mercy to any one people or nation but according to his good pleasure
lays forth the treasures of his clemency to whom he will, and when he will.
For I


P. Then upon this manifesting or rather defining of gods majesty, you may
gather that god is not tied only to the Israelites, nor their deserts the cause
that they be counted Gods people. For


R. Truly I believe so, and I conceive so great hope of our Creators goodness
toward mankind, that he will have mercy not only upon the Jews, but also upon
the Scithians, Assyria^s, Egyptia^s and al other nations that dwell throughout
all parts of the world, so they thrust not Gods most merciful favor from
them through their unbelief and stubbornness of mind.


P. You judge rightly: and that is the thing which the scripture reports of
that most wicked and false hearted king of Egypt, whom the Egyptians call
Pharao, to whom being out of measure cruel and disobedient, god speaks in
these words. Eue^ for this purpose have I raised thee up and advanced thee to
the kingdom, Ex. 9.16
and preserved thee alive and in health to this day, that I might shevve my
power upon thee, and my name be renowned through the whole world.


R. This justice of God is most rightful, whereby he dazeleth the unfaithful,
blinds the cruel tyrants, hardens the stubborn sort, takes light from
the hardened, and which is more worthy to be wondered at, not only uses their
persons, but also their sins to the setting forth of his glory. So singular
a workmaster is he of good things, that he furthereth his own most holy
devices, by the lewd attempts and indeuers of the wicked.


P. You see then that God has no respect of persons, people, nations,
functions, or dignities in punishing of wicked deeds and sins, but rather
paieth has mercy on whom he will, and contrariwise he hardens whom he will,
another is there any man that can justly plead with him, and much less charge
him with any vnindifferencie.


R. The Jews will in no wise grant that, who think Gods mercy to be reserved
alonly to themselves to cover their iniquities withal, and that blyndnesse,
stubbornness, hardness of heart, and finally ^^delesse destruction is prepared
by Gods eternal ordinance for all other nations of the whole world. But for
as much as I have once begone to plead the case of the Jews, I pray you answer
me in few words, why God is angrye with the Israelites for rejecting of the
doctrine of the Gospel. For if he will Esa. 1.6.
I say if God set forth his own glory among all other nations of the world
by the blyndnesse and unbelief of the Jews: why vpbraydeth he them with their
unbelief and hard hartednesse?


P. I know you speak not as you think, and therefore I will answer a
railing Jew, rather than your self: and I vvil say, O man, bred of the earth,
and Ose. 1.
For by means of thy hard heart which can no skill to repent thou have horded
up gods wrath to thy self, because thou have despised the abundance of Gods
goodness, long sufferance, and myldnes. But if thou speak as an Israelite, and
aledge Gods election for thy self: call to remembrance the divine sayings of
the ancient prophets, wherein they have set before thine eyes the nature of
God and the punishments that were to come upon the people of Israel. And (to
use Ieremies similitude) shall the pot say to the potter, why have thou made
me thus? Is it not lavvfull for him to make what he lists of his clay? Has
not the potter power to make of Sap. 15.6
and another to dishonor, to put filthy, stinking, and unclean things in?
Surely he that denies that, denies both the power of the potter, and
believes the power of God to be mained in the governing and forecasting of
men's affairs.


R. God forbid yt the godly should have that wicked conceit with the^. But in
good s^th you make me very glad in bringing ye most holy sermon of Ieremies to
my remembrance, ye words whereof I minded to commit to memory: and I trust you
will not be offended if I rehearse them to in^^^hten your doctrine withal.


P. Nay rather I entreat you to do it.


R. Go to (says ye Lord speaking to Jeremy) go down into ye potters house,
Je. 18.6.
and there I will utter my word unto thee. I therefore (says Jeremy) going my
way into ye potters house, found him making his work upon his wheels. And
when yt vessels of clay yt ye potter was making of, was mard between his hands,
he went to it new again, and made another vessel of it as be thought good. Then
the Lord talked thus unto me: Ye house of Israel, may not I do to you as the
potter does, says the Lord? Look what ye clay is in the hand of the potter,
the same are you in my hand, o ye house of Israel. As for examples sake, I
threaten, wasting, spoiling and destruction to some nation or kingdom. Now if
that nation which I shall have threatened withdraw themselves from their wicked
deeds, I also will stay from the evil which I thought too have laid upon them.
Again for examples sake, I promise some nation or kingdom to build it up and
stablishe it: If they offend me by disobeying my words, I also will stay from
the good which I meant to have done them. Go to therefore and tell the Jews and
the inhabiters of Jerusalem, these words. Thus says the Lord, behold, I
purpose evil against you, and I am devising of somewhat: forsake every one of
you your wicked customs, and amend your fashions and manners. No (say they) but
we will follow our own devices, and every of us will obey the lewdnes and
wicnes of his own heart.


P. I promise you it was a notable answer given by the Israelits to maintain
and confirm Gods election where of they boasted so much.


R. But what and if they complain still of Gods everlasting ordinance? For if
God knew that the Israelits would forsake his heavenly covenant, why chose he
them? And as soon as he saw that they were covenant breakers, why did he not by
and by cast them of, punnishe them, wear them to the stumps, and consume them
to nothing? Why did he not out of hand take the Gentyles to be his people?


P. What a saying is this? If God intending


R. He that thinks of any deserving, is stark madd. But see again what the
Isralites obiecte. If God, say they, do punnishe the falscharted,
disobediente, and stifnecked Jews, he may do as he sees cause: but yet
should he not for those wicked men's sakes, dispossess the people of Israel
of their prerogative and dignity, which is now conveyed to the uncircumcised,
which (as they surmise) are out of Gods covenant, and cast awaies. To
conclude in few words, the Jews accuse not God of injustice for punishing the
Israelites offenses: but they blame him of inconstancy for gathering a new
people to him by the preaching of the Gospel.


P. No marvel though he do so. For god the maker of all men had so determined


R. But this seems strange and unwonted to the Israelites, and they cry out
with full mouth, that this is a new found and forged doctrine, and utterly
unknown of old Prophets.


P. O gentle interpreters of the Prophets. Ose. 2.23 1. Pe 2.10
Remember they not what the Lord promised by Osee? I will call a people mine
(says he) which are not my people: and a nation beloved which is not beloved:
and where it was said,


R. I see a very evident record of the casting of the Gentiles.


P. Here also on the contrary side Esa. 10.22
yet shall but a remnant be saved. For the Lord shall do the thing
rigorouslye, and at once, and that with ryghtuousnesse,


R. The Prophet the^ foretells that it was done as soon as said, and yt it is
justly done that so few of them shall be saved. Therefore ye matter (as it should
seem) is impossible to be called back because it is justly decreed.


P. Here further what the same Esaias said in his first sermon concerning the
casting off of the Jews. Esa. 1.9.
If the Lord of hosts (says he) had not left us some seed, we had bin like
to Sodom and Gomor, we had all perished for our falshartednesse and
stubbornness. For you must understand, it is the singular benefit of the
everlasting God, that I and a few others do believe the Gospel of God: For
our wicked deeds deserved everlasting damnation.


R. I am right well assured of that, another think I that Gods mercy shyneth
forth less manifestly in the calling of you, than in the calling of us. But I
pray you what shall we say to this, that so many Gentiles embrace the Messiah
that was borne of the Jews and promised to the Jews, and that so few of the
Jews believe in him? Seeing that the election and calling of them both comes
of Gods grace, whereof comes so great difference, that so few of the one
sort, and so innumerable of the other sort receive Christ.


P. My judgment is this, that the


R. What is the cause?


P. As I suppose it is for that the Israelites Esa. 8.14 and. 18.16
when he bespake the children of Israel in these words: Behold I will lay in
Sion a stone to stumble at, and a rock to dashe against, and whosoever
believes in him shall not be ashamed nor beguiled.


R. Truly the falling out proves the Prophets foresaying. For Christ is a
stumbling stone to the unbelievers and disobedient. But to such as stick to
him by faith, he is the sure foundation of singular quietness, peace, and
happiness. But to tell you the truth Paul, you are very ill reported of among
your own countrymen for this doctrine. For they think you speak it of spite,
or that you seek your own glory in the Churches of the Gentiles by their
unbelief.


P. Cha. 10.1
My dear brother: I pray you give no credit to their words. For I assure you
that I have an earnest good will toward them. And in my prayers which I power
out unto God, I make suite for the salvation of the Israelites, and vvishe it
with all my heart, and cease not to be earnest with God for it, rather


R. I thought as much my self: but harken. Some seem to them selves to be
led with a certain desire of Gods honor, and think that he thrusts them
forward to withstand the justification of ^ayth. But if a man could creep
into the bowels of their hearts, perchance he should see that they refer not
al their intents and indeuers unto god. Nevertheless I would be loathe to
condemn any body: but yet dare I say thus much, that they have no pretense of
excuse before God, though they sin through ignorance.


P. I will show you the welspring of al of the Law is the same Christ, Gal.
3.24
to make them righteous and clear which trust in him. Thus ye see how great
difference there is between the righteousness of the law, and the righteousness
of faith, which difference my countrymen confound Leu. 18.5 Ex. 20.11 Gal.
3.12
that he which performs the things which the law commands shall live by
them: contrariwise pronouncing them accursed which contitinue not in all things
that are written in the book of the law. de. 30.12
But when the same Moses treats of the righteousness that springs of
faith, he speaks


R. What is it then that Moses concludes?


P. The word (says he) is near thee de. 32.41
and that is the word of faith which we Apostles of Christ do preach.


R. Now I see plainly, that even the ancient fathers of the old testament, had
the same mark set before them for the faith of the believers always to ame at,
which we have: namely Gods everlasting word, very God and very man, the
Savior, the Messiah, and the foundation of true righteousness and innocence,
to whom whosoever cleaves shall out of all doubt be saved. Therefore no need
at all have the Israelites, and much less we, to go on pilgrimage, to pass
over the sea, to climb up into heaven, and to attempt things above our power,
to become rightuous. For it is sufficient to believe the Gospel, to embrace
Christ the fathers word, and to be made one with him by the spirit of
regeneration.


P. You hit the matter in deed. For if the heart makes righteous, and the
Esa. 18.20.
whosoever believes in him shall not be ashamed nor deceived,


R. You say truth. But the Jews restrain this general distribution, only to
the Israelites: and are of such opinion as to believe that the Gentiles are
shut out from that promise.


P. Surely they be utterly ouerseen^. the sayings of the prophets, whosoever
calls upon the name of the Lord shall be safe.


R. I remember I have read this sentence in the sermons of the prophet Joel.
Joel. 2.32
But there is a certain doubt which greueth my (...) very much. For if it be
true as you say that god is the creator of al men, and that be creates men
able to receive blessedness: how happens it that ye most part of the world
abides in ignorance of the truth and that a great sort even of those that
here the truth, do not believe it and obey it? For to the intent we may speak


P. Surely you reason sharply. For to the same purpose the prophet Esaias said
How beautiful and fine are the feet of such as bring glad tidings of peace,
Esa. 52.7
and bring news of good things?


R. Ye see also that not all the Jews obeyed the Gospel. Esa. 53.1
For the same Esaias complayneth of their unbelief in these words. Joel. 12.31.
Lord who has believed our sayings? Heerevpon I conclude that the cause of
damnation comes of God, who denies to some men the degrees whereby they might
come to the true worshipping of him, and so consequently to salvation.


P. Nay rather you must gather hereof,


R. I doubt not at all of that matter: The thing that I demand is this:
whether the nations to whom the preaching of the gospel came not at all, are
utterly rejected of god, or whether they may allege any excuse for not hearing
gods voice. I say I would feign know, whether everliving God.


P. Yea out of doubt have they. For as the princely Prophet witnesses,
treating of Gods school, namely of his creatures wherein he shows his
godhead and power to all Adams posterity: Psa. 19.5
Their sound (says he) went forth into all lands, and their words into the
uttermost parts of the world. Romans 1.16
Therefore look what can be known of God, is first manifest in themselves,
that is to say, in their own minds: For God has manifested himself to them
by a certain inward law. Again, concerning his invisible things, such as
are his ever lasting power and Godheade, they be perceived in the workmanship
of the woorlde by considerning them in his works. And therefore they make
themselves inexcusable, because that when they knew God, they yielded him not
glory, and thanks meet for God, but wandered in vain imaginations, and their
folishe mind became dim. And whereas they profess themselves wise, they
become the more fools. Thereupon it comes, that they turn the glory of the
incorruptible God, into an image fashioned to the shape of a mortal man, of
byrds, of fourefoted beasts, and of worms. And therefore for a punishment of
this wickedness, God gives them up to the lusts of their own hearts, into
uncleanness, to defile their bodies among themselves, for turning Gods truth
into a lie, and for worshipping and serving the creatures, passing over and
neglecting the creator, who is to be praised for ever. Amen. Hereuppon sprang
the mischief, the damnation, and the destruction of those whom you spoke of.


R. You have enough and more than enough satisfied my doubt with these your
words. Now I desire to know whether the doctrine that you set down
concerning the rejecting of the Jews and the calling of the Gentyles were
known to the Prophets of old time: I mean whether the Israelites did ever
know Gods eternal decree to have bin such, that if they showed themselves
disobedient and believed not, the Gentiles should be taken to be Gods people.


P. Yea verily, this doctrine was very De 32.21
For Moses the first Captain of the Ievvishe people speaks thus to them in
Gods name. I will provoke you to enuyinge (says he) by a nation that is no
nation, even by a nation that is without understanding will I provoke you.
Also the prophet Esaias uses greater boldness against the misbeleuing Esa. 65.4
I am found (says he) of them that asked not after me.


R. Surely these are most manifest auouchments of the calling of the Gentyles.


P. And concerning the rejecting of the Jews, see what the same prophet Esa.
62.2
Here, here must the causes of the rejecting, blyndinge, and destruction of
the Jews be sought, and not in God.


R. Chao. 11
Of a troth I marvel that the Israelits are so blind, as not to see these so


P. No not so. For I my self am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, and of
the trybe of Benjamin, and yet notwithstanding, by his divine favor he has
sholed me out from my mothers womb, not only to be partaker of the heavenly
grace and everlasting happiness: but also to publish the benefit of Gods son,
by preaching the Gospel among the Gentyles. Therefore God not rejected his
people whom he knevv and allowed, for his aforehand, that is to say, the true
believers in him, which obey him and follow his sayings. For in as much as
God had chosen them from everlasting, they be not in any wise in danger of
damnation.


R. But truly the number of these chosen is very small.


P. Yea but it is greater than you Ge^tyles ween. Know ye not what is left
in writing concerning Elias? He prayed unto God against the Israelites,
thinking that of so great a number of Jews he only had been left alone, 2 K.
19.20
and therefore he said: Lord, the Jews have slain thy Prophets, and broken
down thine altars, and I only am left alone, and they


R. And good reason why, in my opinion. For if it be freely, then is it not for
works: for then were free gift no longer fre gift. But if it be for woorks,
then is it not of free gift: for then were work no longer work. This most
strong reason we Gentyles take hold of, to stablishe our free calling with
all. But I pray you, what shall we answer the Jews, which urge the election
of the whole people of Israel, garnished with so notable commendacions of the
holy


P. Mine answer is wont to be this: that the whose people of the Israelites
has not obtained the thing that they sought: but the chosen, the believing,
the obedient, and the submitters of themselves to Gods word have obtained it:
but the residue are hardened and blinded for a punishment of their unbelief.


R. You said also even now, that these unbelievers obtain not salvation
because they sought it otherwise then they ought to do, that is to wit, not of
Gods fregift, but by the deserts of their own works: And therefore that they
be worthelye left in their ignorance and blyndnesse.


P. Yea, and they be not only left up, Es. 29.10 6.9. Ma 13.14 Jo. 12.14. Ac.
28.26
For these causes (say I) God being a just judge, has given them the spirit
of drowsiness (as was foretold by the Prophets) eyes that they might not
see, and ears that the might not here even to this day. Ps. 69. 12
a stumbling block, and a punishment. And not contented with this, he adds:
let their eyes be


R. What means this word Always. will God be angry with ye people for ever?
Have they stumbled in such wise, yt God is determined to destroy them utterly?


P. No not so. But by their fall salvation follow the example of the Gentiles.


R. Your meaning ihen is, that the lord ordained this rejecting of the Jews,
to give an occasion to the casling of the Gentyles.


P. Yea.. And God being his crafts master in all good things shall again
turn this calling of the Gentiles into occasion of restoring the Jews, that
being kyndled by the example of the gentyles, they also may at length embrace
the Gospel.


R. O providence of the most holy god worthy of admiration and everlasting
praise. But I am afraid of this, least as the fall of the Jews is healthful
to us Gentyles: so also their salvation shall be our destraction hereafter. For
peradventure if the Jews had stood, the Gentiles had not obtained salvation.


P. Let that matter never trouble you. you Gentiles: much more shall their
safenesse turn to your salvation. For if they had believed, and so
consequently not been rejected, you also should have believed the gospel after
their example. But let us leave the ordring of these interchaunges reverently
unto god.


R. Your counsel is good. Therefore it is our duty, only to consider deeply in
what wise God as it were taking occasion by their fall, has dealt forth the
most plentiful store of his grace to the Gentiles. And the fewness of those
that receive Christ, shows us Gods treasures as it were more richely and
plenteously, and therefore makes us the richer.


P. God grant that your thankfulness and save some of them: and in so doing I
consider oftentimes with my self, how great joy there would be among men, and
how unspeakable glory would redounde to the everlasting God for their
salvation. For if the casting away of the Israelites be the reconcilement of
the world, what else shall their recovery be but life from death?

Of Gods mercyfulnesse toward the Jews I doubt not at all. But I am in some
doubt whether they will answer to Gods voice, and open their eyes to the
light that shines upon them: specially forasmuch as I see them to be now
so hardharted of so wilful stubborn mind, and so rebelious against the
truth.


P. It is not for us to judge of any ma^s salvation or damnation. The Lord
knows generality, and in their root, that is to wit, in Abraham, is holy,
notwithstanding that many of the branches be cut of. Therefore in judging the
Israelites, we must not stand upon their own unworthiness, to think them all
cast away at once: but we must consider the root of the covenant, and rather
look back to their faithful forefathers, that we may think that the
covenant of blessedness remains still in their posterity, which shall
undoubtedly be discovered in his due time.


R. Truly Paul you speak very modestly, eue^ of your most deadly adversaries,
and you hope well of the^. And would God that we followed this example of
yours. For there are many of us, who because they have obtained mercy of God, do
triu^ph over ye Jews that hold scorn of gods grace, despising the^, and
counting them as forlorn and castawayes, and by all means seek to do them
mischief.


P. You therefore my brother beware that you follow not the untoward manner of
dealing of such men. For believe me such manner of slothfulness shall


R.


P. This that you say is neither all nor nothing. Well may thou glory of thy
greffing in, howbeit but in God, and not I say, and all the Gentiles, for look
what I say to one, I say to all) mark, I say, gods gentleness and rigor.
Rigor


R. By this means many are cut of for a time, that is to say, they be without
the root, which in their time shall be greffed in. And many also after a sort,
and to see too, are now ingreffed: who notwithstanding are through their own
fault cut off afterward, and utterly cast away.


P. So is it. By the way I would that you my brethren (I speak to the
Gentiles) should not be ignorant of this secret, least you should be proud of
your selves, that this hardening which is fallen in part upon Israel, is happened
but for a time, til the fullness of the Gentiles become Esa. 29.9
Out of Sion (says he) shall come the deliverer, and he shall turn Esa. 9. 20
This shall be the covenant that I will make with the^, when I shall have taken
away their sins. To conclude at a word, the Israelites are not cast away,
neither altogether, nor without certain most merciful can not repent him of
them.


R. Then seeing that the covenant of eternal life was once stablished with the
Jewish nation, it can not be disanulled.


P. No verily. Also you must consider that although the unbelievers and
stubborn hearted be worthily punished, yet this hardnednes of the Jews
happens not properly for any hatred that god bears to that nation: but to the
end there might be as it were a gap opened to bring the gentiles into the
Church, and that the Jews being afterward kindled with a kind of envying at
the mercy shevved to the gentiles, might also be made partakers of the same
benefits, and so it might manifestly be seen, that both the gentiles and the
Jews that believe gods promises, are chosen, called and saved, not by the
desert of their works but by gods only grace and mercy. For like as you in
times past obeyed the mercy that god has bestowed upon


R. Surely this purpose and determination of God, is worthy of singular
admiration and reverence, as which surmounteth the wisdom and understanding of
men. For by this means is his divine grace uttered, which should not have
been so manifest, if he had either brought all at once together into the
beginning, or saved the Jews without this breaking of, as ye might term it.
But by what reasons I pray you can it be proved that this was Gods eternal
purpose and ordinance.


P. O my brother these secrets of gods mind, are made manifest to us by their
fallings out: neither are to be sifted with curious scanning, but rather to be
reverenced with submission of mind. For as often as I think of these matters
(and I think of them ofte^tymes) I am compelled as a man ravished out of his
Sa. 9. 13. Esa 30.13.
and his doings past finding out? Has ever any man known the mind of the
Lord? Has ever any man bin of counsel with him? Who has don him a good
turn before hand, that he may de requyted with like kindness? Surely of him and
by him are all things and at him do all things, 1. Co. 2.16
and as at their end. To him alone be glory for ever.


R. Here (as I suppose) you make an end of the treatise of faith, which
reaches the manner of obteyning true righteousness, and makes the beleuers sure
of Gods election. Henceforth I perceive you give precepts of framing ye manners
of such as are regenerated: but in what order you do it I am utterly ignorant.


P. Forasmuch as man's state is to be considered two ways, that is to wit in
private when he deals but with himself, or in public when he deals with
others: and that either in the common wealth, or in the congregation of the
faithful: hereout of spring two, or rather three sorts of precepts. Therefore
first I exhort the godly to diligent trial of themselves, that they may so much
the better apply themselves to the exercises of the virtues which Christians
have need to continue in. And for as much as it is not enough for a godly man
to be garnished with virtue and honest behavior, except he utter his
godliness before others by example of life when need requires: Therefore I
do secondly admonish your countrime^, that they despise not the authority of
their magistrates, under pretense of christian liberty. Moreover, because I herd
there was strife among you about things indifferent, and about the ceremonies of
Moses law: I set down certain rules whereby both parties, as well Jews as
Gentyles, may walk with a good conscience before God, and maintein peace and
tra^quillitye with their brethren. To be short in this second part of mine
Epistle, ye have precepts of manners, of government, and of churchmatters, if
you list so to term them.


R. A very true order surely, and very needful for our congregation. For
welnere all men now adays do think words to be godliness, and therefore do
vaunt forth ye profession of ye Gospel, rather with prattling (which they call
eloquence) than with honest behavior and examples of life.


P. Those me^ do I chiefly speak unto, Chapter 12.1.
where I write unto you in these words. Therefore my brethren, if you will be of
the chosen sort and have received christ's spirit: I warn you for gods mercy
sake, that you make your calli^g sure by good works. And first of al I beseech
you offer up unto God, not dum beasts any more after the manner of the Jews,
but your own bodies, even your own selves, I say, and your own beastly
affections, as a living, holy, and acceptable sacrifice to god, that your
service may be reasonable and spiritual in the sight of his divine majesty,
who delyteth not now at all in the slaughter and sacrifising of du^ beasts.


R. Truly Paul this is a short precept in words, but hard to be
understood, and most hard to be performed aryght.


P. If these alludings to the sacrifices of the old law seem hard to your
understanding: I will show you the meaning Ep. 5.10.
but rather be changed and transformed by the renewing of your mind. For to
change a man's apparel, diet, place, or trade of living, it is not so hard a
matter but to follovv on continually with the reneuing of his mind, like as it
is paynefull (I will not say over hard): so is it a most acceptable kind of
sacrifice unto God. I let pass that is the fittest schole for men to try and
find out what Gods will is, in what manner of goodness he delights, and
what is perfect and acceptable in his sight. For man's reason destitute of
heavenly light, is blynder than a betle to judge of these things.


R. Undoubtedly there spring up daily many and great braules among us about
these spiritual matters. For there are some that will needs be all, and
always ouerpeere and outface, other men by hook or by crook, so attainted
with pride and statelynesse of mind that they will needs be sisters of all
other men, and appoint all men what they shall do or not do.


P. You tell me of very idle men and such as are to buisy in other folks
matters. Have they so good leisure from their own buisinsse at home, that
they may care for other men's affairs? But I according to the charge of
admonishing you which God has given me, we have many members and all the
members have not one office: Ephesians. 4.4.
so we being many are one body in Christ, and several


R. Would God these light wits were away from among us. For with their
inconstancy and lightness, they turmoyle and confound all things, stir up
contentions among the teachers, and disquiet the consciences of the weak, and
to seem sharperwitted tha^ other men, they thrust out old foreworne affections
of things unknown to themselves, and very hurtful to other men.


P. Farevvell these light heads with their lightness, and you setting the
example of man's body before your eyes, do every of you your duties. 1. Pe. 4.10
Ye have in your congregation diverse gifts according to the grace that is
wont to be given us or by foreshewing things to come through gods reueling of
the^ unto him, let him apply himself thoroughly to his charge, according to the
proportion of faith, and yet let him not take upon him to be only wise, only
learned, and only skillful in all things.


R. Good God, how necessary a lesson is this for our church, wherein there is
such confused disorder at this time, that all me^ must hold their peace, and
but one man speak: one man must talk whatsoever comes at his tungs end, and
all the rest must be feign to sit still as toungtyde.


P. But in other right Apostolik churches it is not so: but two or three
Prophets speak, and the other that sit by do discern of their sayings. 1.
Co. 14.20.
And if aught be reveled to any other of the sitters by the former holds his
peace. For by this means ye might all prophesy one after another, so as al
might learn, and al be stirred up to learn. Besides this the spirits of the
Prophets ar subject to the prophets and the prophesies, and one of the^ suffer
themselves to be ruled by other judgments Another is God (who has reveled this
manner of dealing unto us) the author of debate, but of peace. Therefore I
beseech you do all things comely and orderly in your church. If any man


R. God grant that all these functions may be stablished and maintained in all
Christen congregations. But for as much as we cannot deal uprightly toward
others, unless our doings flow from the fountain of true godliness: charity
is becomme so cold, as I am afraid least these functions, or (to term them
more rightly) these gifts of the holy Ghost be turned but into vizors of
godliness. For surely among us many seek their own commodities, rather than
the commodities of their brethren.


P. So much the more indeuer you that your charity and brotherly love may be
unfeigned: beware that it be neither cou^terfeit nor cloked, but strain your
selves to the vttermoste that it may come from the heart. Be ye haters of
evil, and shun ye worse than a dog or a snake the things that may hurt or
offend other men. Yea rather cleave to the thing that is good, seek one
another welfare, be forward in brotherly love one toward another, let no
vaineglory,


R. They be most profitable exhortations. For I see it avails greatly to the
maintenance of mutual good will, to yield honor modestly to others as to our
betters.


P. Also there are other inward duties of godliness, 1. Co. 6.1 Ho. 13.2 Math.
5.44.
through the exercise whereof we must earnestly indeuer to profit daily in
faith and charity. Therefore be quick, ready, careful, and diligent to do
well, fervent in spirit, and seruers of the time. For to know the occasions
and oportunities in our doings, is not the least point of wisdom.


R. Eccl. 3.1.
So do I perceive by Salomons sermon, where he disputes of man's sovereign good.


P. And because we must always continually bear Christ's cross: we must also
bear in mind the precepts of christian patience. Therefore rejoice in
troubles and sorrows upon hope of the good things that are to come. That ye may
quickly bear out the sufferings and injuries that you be put unto, be ye
pacient in adversity. And because this quietness of mind is not gotten but
by often prayer, it behooves you to continue in praying.


R. O steep and very hard way.


P. Be of good comfort. For all things you should be faithful Stewards of the
goods that you have received at gods hand, in releeuing all men's wants, but
specially in communicating to the penury of the Saints, and the faithful.
For although christian charity ought to extend it self to all men: yet is it
more bound to the household folk of faith. Also keep hospitality, and the
further that any man is from home: so much the more charily let him be
interteined in your house, and let him be used so much the more courteously.


R. We have an example worth the following in the holy Patriarch Abraham, and in
his nephew Loath. But it falls out diverse times, that instead of gwests we
lodge spies and talebearers: and that restrayneth many men's diligence in
enterteyning of strangers.


P. Say not so my brother. For it becomes us, us (I say) that are professors
of Christ's mildness, to will well even to


R. Surely a hard lesson. Can any man


P. There is the ground of the grief where every man will be a Lord, there
can be none accord. Therefore I warn you be all of one mind among yourselues,
not taking highly upon you, but yelding to the lower sort. Neither stand ye in
your own conceit, nor have you a better opinion of your selves than


R. What and if that after the performance to bring us to destruction? Think
you that such wicked men are to be borne with patiently? Is it not


P. My brother, these sayings smell of fleshly wisdom, and not of Christian
meekness. Which if you will give your selves unto, you must only not requite
that most holy saying of god wherein he shows himself to be both a judge and
a reue^ger of our wrongs in that he says vengeance belongs to me, and I will
requite it says the Lord. Seeing then that to revenge is gods office and not
yours, let the whole matter be left alone to his judgment, and he will yield
every man Prou. 25. de. 32.35
For by receiving of these benefits, your enemies mind shall either be overcome
and mekned, or else burned and svvelted with the record of his own
conscience, which surely is not a


R. I would with all my heart that this profitable and necessary doctrine to
purchase quietness of mind, might take place with all men. But (alas the while)
the most part of our company begin now adays, not only to seek to be revenged
of their persecuters, but also to be so bold, as to take weapon in hand, and
to withstand the magistrates and judges that hinder the preaching of the
Gospel.


P. They that think the sufferings of the faithful to be impedime^ts to
hinder the course of the gospel, Chap. 13
are sore deceived. For the blood of the Martyrs waters the garden of the
Church, so as the stocks of it do increace and flourish the more for it. But you
that love godliness, 1. Pet. 2.3 Sap. 6.4.
or be he one of you, must be subject to the higher powers. For to what end
are they placed in higher degree, but that the inferior sort should be
subject unto them?


R. What if evil Princes reign by degree of succession? What if there happen
to be cruel Consuls, Senators, or other officers by election of the people, or
by favor of partaking? Think you that such are to be obeyed?


P. What else? For they that bear rule, are not considered as private persons,
but rather reverenced because they be ordained of God. For you must assure your
self that there is no power but of god. The powers that are, as Magistrates
and Principalities of kingdoms, and as all other Potentates, are ordained of
God to our behoof howsoever they reign. For if the fear of God do draw them
to further godliness, you see how great benefit their good example brings.
For it is a common said saw, that the whole world fashioneth it self after the
example of the king. But if they do amiss, Gods vengeance is to be
considered, who causes hipocrits and dissemblers to reign for the sins of
the people. And this household order of Gods, brings also his commodities to
the godly.


R. Then are not you of opinion that it is lawful for us to make war against
our Princes and Magistrates, though they go about to hinder the course of the
Gospel, and to rid us quite and clean out of the would.


P. No in deed: and I add further to knit up the matter withal, that
whosoever sets himself against the magistrate, resists Gods ordinance.
And


R. O lamentable state of our age, wherein we see so many civil wars,
insurrections of commons, treasons of subjects most cruel murtherings of
princes, and passing barbarous slaughters of subjects committed.


P. All these things happen, percha^ce through the fault of booth parties,
namelye both of the people and of the governors. For the people forgetting
their duty, do peradventure despise the authority of their prince: and on
the other side, the considering not the bound of the kingly office, executes
crueltye, not like a shepeherde of his flock, but as a most unnatural tyrant.
For magistrates are not a terror to good works, but to evil works: and therefore
they must strike, not into such as do well but into such as do naughtily: for
God


R. Surely an excellent mean to bear that yoke which else were an intolerable
burden, to bear it (I say) not only without unquietness, but also with
singular fruit. But fools will not beware till it be to late as they say.
Would God this doctrine were as thoroughly graue^ in men's hearts, as it is often
talked of in their mouths. For the^ would it come to pass that yt minds of ye
faithful should have inward peace and quietness, and the commonwealth enjoy
greater profit.


P. Whersoeuer thou becommest, put thou forth this saying, in season, out of
season, in way of rebuking, in way of intreata^ce, and in way of teaching:
namelye


R. Then your judgment is yt the magistrate is to be obeyed, not only for fear
of punishment, but much more because that although the magistrate has no
power over men's consciences, yet because he is Gods minister, he cannot be
resisted with a good conscience.


P. That is my judgment. And for that cause to show the inward obedientnes of
your mind and your bound duty, you pay tribute to your magistrates. Ma. 17.22
For they be Gods ministers serving to take charge of the commonwealth, in
punishing offenders and in praising


R. O Paul, if you wist how many and how great suits in law there are among
us about the yelding and paying of tributes and customs: surely you would
wonder. For there are a great sort, which under pretense of christian liberty,
uphold ye there is no propriety of goods, and thereupon they snatch all that
comes in their way, stir up strife, are troublesome to the magistrates, cry
out too have all things in common, and maynetaine quarrelles and braules.
Again there are another sort, which to confute these opinions, behave
themselves so pinching and nigardly in all things, that be it right and wrong,
they rake other men's goods to them by sewing and pleading at the law.


P. Both of them be evil. But I will show you how it may be brought too
pass that there shall be very few suits and actions among you: namely if you
order your lives in such wise, as no man may iustlye demand aughte at your
hands, saving that one thing, which we owe one unto another by a certain
everlasting bond through Ex. 20. 4. De. 5.18. Le. 19.18.
that love is the content of the law. For he that loves another has
fulfilled the law. For these commandments, thou shall not commit adultry,
Ma 22.36
thou shall not kill, thou shalt not steal, thou shall not bear falls witness,
thou shall not covet, and whatsoever commandment else is, is comprehended
breefly in this saying, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. For love
hurts not a man's neighbor. To be short, either I am utterly deceived, or
else charity is the fulfilling of the law.


R. Good God, I wot not by what evil destinye it falls out, that now since
we embraced Christ's doctrine, brotherly love is less lively among us, than it
was before. For before, when we were as good as overwhelmed with the darkness
of ignorance, and walked in the miste of superstition and false worshipping of
God, there seemed to be such concord,


P. My brother, the preaching of the Gospel is not to be blamed for it, that
you be becomme worse since the receiving of it (if at least wise ye be beco^me
worse, as you say ye be): but rather you have to thank Gods light, that you do
now better discern that former life of yours. For counterfeit charity
deserves not the name of charity: and colored pretense of honesty is another
praised nor allowed of God. Therefore Lu. 21. 24
Let us not give our selves to feasting and dru^ke^nes, let us not welter in
sloughfulnesse, let us not cocker our selves in wanto^nesse, let us not give
occasion of quarreling and brauling, let us not give heed to spiting, heart
burning or envy: but let us chefly strein all the sinews of our wits to the
putting on of our lord Jesus Christ: and let therebe such an earnest indeuer of
holiness in us, and so great charity, that such as se us, may say they have
seen the true members of Christ. Therefore in any wise be not carefulll for
the flesh too fulfill the lusts thereof, but rather seek for the peace and
joy of the spirit. For by that means, you shall through Gods inspiration,
not only obey your magistrates, but also maintain mutual love among your
selves.


R. If the professers of the Gospel would frame their manners after this order,
their example would allure very many to embrace the heavenly truth. But too
speak plainly as the matter requires, our licentious living scareth ye minds
of the ignorant from the receiving of the Gospel. Again what shall I tell you
of the contentions and controversies that are among us, even unto railing and
falling out, about indifferent ceremonial things? The keeping whereof can (as
I believe) make men neither better in them selves, nor more acceptable to God.
As soon as this church of ours at Rome was grown together, there stepped up
certain men either descended of the Jews, or which had bin conversant in
Iewry, or (which I rather believe) had been trained up by the Doctors of
Jerusalem. These I say did so earnestly and vehemently urge the Ceremonies of
Moses Law, the choice of meats, the keeping of feasts and holydays, and such
other like things, that they troubled and turmoyled all things with their
zeal. My countrymen on the other side, leaning as it were of set purpose to
the contrary part, esteem all mean things at naught, and which worse is, do
disdeine the teachers and professors of them, and skorne them with unseemly
mockages.


P. Either of them both do offend, Chap. 14
by sticking too stiffly to partaking, peradventure even against their own
consciences. But as for you professors of true godliness, if you wish to have
quiet consciences, and to give no occasion of stumbling: keep these precepts
rebuke and condemn that party that eats all kinds of meats. For god
imbraceth both the one that eats, and the other that eats not, as christ's
members, so they do it with faith. Therefore neither he that eats not, ca^ be
justly despised, nor he that eats be iusty condemned. Surely if such men
were now before me, I would deal with them in such words as these: first I
would step to him that takes so great authority upon him, as to condemn
another man's servant, and say: who are you I working days. The christian
conscience must walk safely between these two extremities. For if behooves
every man to be full assured in his own consciences: that is to wit, the
strong must be sure of his liberty, namely what it is, and how far he may
use it. Again, the vnstrong must profit daily more and more, and go on still
forward in knowledge of the Christian liberty. For by that means, neither the
one sort shall abuse gods gift, nor the other sort always foade them selves in
their own weakness. To be short, let either of them try his own conscience
and intent, and let them by all means indeuer that whatsoever they do, they
may believe that they do it well.


R. Surely right wholesome counsel. For so long as men hang upon other men's
sayings and examples, without asking counsel of their own consciences: their
minds are ever wavering, and while they be in doubt what to do, they be driven
to and fro every moment, according to the alteration of the time.


P. You shall the better understand my rule, if it be lightened with some
examples. The reason of like things is ever al one. Mark I pray you. He that
makes weakness of his faith, absteineth to the Lord, and gives god thanks
as well as the other. You see then how both of them do honor god, and that god
only (if you consider the whole matter throghly) is the judge of both those
doings. Therefore you see it is reason that we should beat down this
loftines of our mind, wherthrogh we either despise or co^de^ne one another,
and leave all power of judging unto god alone, either to acquit or condemn,
specially since we be all his servants. condemn thy weak brother, which is
rather worthy to be pitied than to be scorned, for whose salvation Christ died?
And thou that boastest of thy christian liberty, why art thou so proud to
disdain thy brother with such a lofty look? Surely thou ought not to blame
him of unbelief for that fearful manner of dealing of his: but rather co^ster
it with a welmeaning mind, and leave the judgment of it to god, and to his
Christ. For all of us shall come before Christ's Es. 45.23
And specially Esaye speaks after this manner in the name of the Lord: As I
live (says the Lord) al knees shall bow to me and all tungs shall praise god.
Seeing then that every of us shall plead before god, for and judge not one of
another. But rather


R. To utter my mind plainly unto you, I am not a little moved at the
straungnes of this doctrine. For I can scarsly perceive how the scholmastership
of the law is abolisheo by Christ's benefit, from such as know the liberty of
the gospel. For you say still, that to ye end this liberty may be used rightly,
we must consider what is expedient, that our weak brother may be borne
withal, and yet you uphold that the christian liberty is not forgone in so
doing.


P. I will make my meaning plain unto you concerning this matter in few words.
I know and am fully persuaded by the light of faith through Jesus christ, that
nothing is of the own nature unholy or unclean, that it should defile thy
mind. Therefore it is free for thee to eat what thou listest, so it agree
with thy nature. For Christ's presence puts away all shaddovves of the
law, and all kinds of meat are pure and clean to such as are pure and
clean, that is to wit, to true beleuers, so that nothing is of it self unholy
or unclean. But mark what I say, a thing is unholy, only to him that thinks
it unholy. As for example. Some man thinks he sins in eating: now must he
either forbear eating, or else cast away that superstitious scrupilositye of
his. And if he eat without putting of it away out of thou be fre, yet art
thou not compelled to eat: but thou art evermore bound not to offend others,
and therefore thou sinnest in so doing if thou eat.


R. Truly it is the property of a cruel heart to set more by a piece of meat
than by a brothers soul health.


P. Then destroy not thou him by thine eating (which is but a vile thing and
little or nothing vvorth) for whom Christ dyed. In deed the fredo^e of the
Gospel is good, but yet must you not abuse so singular a benefit to the
offense of others. Therefore cause not this good thing of liberty in the Gospel,
to be ill spoken of for your abusing of it. For the


R. You have fully satisfied my doubt, and I easly agree to you in this
description of gods kingdom. For I think it consists in this point, namely
in ye opening and inlightning of our minds in such wise by ye holy Ghost, as we
may thoroughly perceive gods goodness by ye light of faith, and with ye same
faith as with a hand, embrace ye mercy of our most merciful God in his Christ,
yt by ye means we may be justified and saved, and walk reverently and
awefully with a quiet conscience in gods sight.


P. You understand the matter. Wherefore let us professers of the Gospel follow
because he eats against charity.


R. Would God that all Gospellers understood the use of this liberty. For
then would it come to pass, that all of us would rather apply all our whole
life to edify one another, than to vaunt of our liberty to the great offense
of others.


P. See how great account I make of this mutual edifying of the godly. You
remember what I have said of the pureness and cleanness of things in their
own nature, to all such as are pure and clean: whereby you may gather that
it is lawefull for me to use any manner of meat or drink. And yet for all
this, I think it most discretion to eat no flesh nor to drink no wine, nor to
do any thing else, whereat my brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made
weak.


R. It is very hard for this kind of doctrine to be hilde on both parts, as
well of such as know the liberty of the Gospel, as of the other sort that
are not endued with such strength of faith.


P. Nay, it is very easy in mine opinion for both of them to use this
doctrine, so every of them beware of ouerhastines. Here first the caveat which
is very needful for him that has proceeded further in knowledge of the
Gospel, and therefore will needs set out his christian liberty to the show: To
such a


R. I know a good sort of the scholars of that school, who as soon as they
have red any thing in other men's books, or gathered aught out of their
sayings or preachinges, by and by as though they had a full and perfect faith
in all points, do set upon things which they know not, and finally do the
things which their own consciences allow not. But to leave this complaints,
what caveat give you to such as are yet weak in says?


.P Truly a very short one, and a very not by the allowa^ce of thine own
conscience, and by the record of the holy Ghost to be thoroughly acceptable to
God.


R. Now I see plainly how great danger there is in setting out of christen
liberty to ye show, Chap. 15.
when ye fou^dacio^ of faith and the fear of God is not laid before, from
whence ye seking of brotherly love proceeds. But to say ye truth, Paul, your
cou^trymen do overmuch hinder ye course of ye gospel in our church, by holding
fast ye ordinances of the law, and we think that such weakelinges are not to
be borne with all. Hereupon spring braulinges, strife, and contentions among
us.


P. But I think the contrary. For we example, who suffered all things to the
intent to bring unto his father not only the weaklings, but also even his
cruellest enemies, by ouercomming them with patience. Therefore this mediator
between God and man, cockered not himself, ne cared to please himself only,
but took upon him all slander, reproach, Psa. 69.
and finally torment and infamy, according to this saying which the Kingly
prophet has written of him, the reuilings of them that reuyled thee are light
upon me.


R. Yea? Think you that that saying of David's is a prophecy of the messiah,
and that the Prophet incorageth us too patience by his example?


P. Yea verily. For whatsoever things are written in the books of our
forefathers, are written to our learning, that we might have hope through
patience and comfort of the scriptures. For in as much as they be the words of
the holy Ghost, we must believe that they be not unprofitable or vain, but
that they make for our instruction.


R. It is strange ye we should always be occupied in reading ye holy
scriptures, and yet profit so little in these virtues. For how many do know at
this day, that Gods giving of strength to the stout, is not to the intent they
should condemn the weak, but to ye intent they should help them? Or who is he
also which takes so abundant comfort by reading the holy scriptures, yt he
faints not in adversity?


P. These virtues my brother, depend not upon the letters, but upon the spirit
of gods word which lies hid in the letters: which if you have not, you shall
ever stick still in the bark of the letter. And I pray god the author of
patience glorious god. I know you have very many of my country men among you,
which are still feeble and weak in the faith: but you must have a care of them
after the example of Christ, and you must set before your eyes the footsteps of
that heavenly master, who notwithstanding that the Jews were never so
unworthy, did yet voutsafe the^ such honor for the couena^ts sake that was made
unto their fathers, that he bare the room even of a servant among them with
incredible patience. Now if the son of god esteemed men so much: then godliness
requires not only that you should not reject the^, or hold scorn of them, but
also that ye should be so kindled with the spirit of charity, as to receive
them, to teach them, and to further them more and more to the knowledge of
the liberty of the Gospel, by your all things for Gods truths sake, and for
the confirmation of his promises.


R. These things are true in deed, howbeit their unthankfulness against Gods so
great goodness, is the cause that God has shaken them off, and taken us to be
his people.


P. In deed their sins are the cause of their shaking off: but the receiving
of you depends upon the incomprehensible goodness of our most merciful God.
And therefore you Romans must Ps. 18.50 1. reg. 21. Deu. 32. Ps. 117.1.
Therefore will I confess thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy name. And
again he says, Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people. And again. All nations
praise ye the Lord, and all people praise ye him together. Es. 11.10
There shall be a root of less, and he which shall rise up to reign over
the gentiles: in him shall the Gentiles trust. Heerby you may gather, that
your calling to the participation of the kingdom of heaven, is not by reason
of the sins of the Jews, and much less for your own deserts, but because
god of his goodness would have it so. Therefore like as he has showed his mercy
toward us: so also on the other side it behooves us to be merciful to others.


R. Would God that this lesson might take deep root among us all.


P. And I also beseech god the author of hope, and in whom the trust of all me^
ought to be reposed, to fill you with all spiritual joy, quietness of mind,
and peace of conscience, in true faith: that by believing you may abound in
hope through the power of the holy ghost. For there is none other way for men
to attain to these ornaments of christian godliness, but by the mere benefit
of god, by the power of his spirit, and by the working of faith.


R. To the intent we may now at length make an end of this our talk, I can
not marvel enough at this your so free manner of dealing with us. For you are
not ignorant how great the dignity and excellency of this City is, which is
the head of the world. And yet you have been so bold as to write this Epistle
unto us as to folk ignorant of holy matters, or as though there were no
techers and shepeheards among us, by whose travel, preaching, and writings
Gods will might be opened unto us.


P. Truly my brother I am fully persuaded preaching it as a thing of most
excellent majesty: that the sacrifice whereby I offer up the gentiles purified by
faith, may be acceptable to god, forasmuch as it is already halovved by the
breathing of his holy spirit upon it. Therefore I have written this letter,
not to teach you, and much less to rebuke you, but rather to put you in
remembrance of things.


R. But there are diverse which term this deed of yours a bold enterprise, and
impute it to the disease of a stately mind. Specially your own countrymen
spread abroad misreportes of you, to bring your ministration in misliking among
the unskillful. For they take it sore to heart, that you should as it were
despise the Jews, and go to the Gentiles, among whom you have not yet greatly
prevailed. But what is the let of your preaching, I am utterly ignorant.


P. Of those men's reports I pass not at all, but of mine own office too
the Gospel, and in offering them up to God, surely I have cause too glory,
not proudely among men, but humbly before god, in Christ Jesus, upon whom I
father all good things.


R. What did the other Apostles which saw Christ, did not they also preach in
those Countries?


P. What others judge I have not to known or named before, but where there
had never been any mention made of him.


R. For what cause?


P. I had causes inow of this mine intent, which it is not needful to rehearse.
This among other I always observed, that I would not buyld upon another man's
foundation, and I had continually before mine eyes this prophecy of Esaies,
wherein the preaching of the gospel among the gentiles is most manifestly
described. Es. 52.26
They (says he) that were never told of him, (he speaks For I hoped to see
you in passing this 2. Cor. 9.
So seemed it good to those churches, and truly they owe it of duty. For
although alms deeds are of vnco^streyned will: yet do we owe them by the law
of charity. For it is agreeable have come this way into Spain. And


R. That is no new thing Paul. For so is god wo^t to deal often times with his
servants: and in ye mean while he will have us to ha^g wholly upon his
appointment and providence, and to assure our selves yt that issew of things is
both acceptablest to him and most for our behoof, not which likes us, but
which pleases his providence. If you had come at yt time to Rome, and
afterward gone hence into Spain, peradventure you would have had so^e good
opinion of your own diligence. Also ye flesh being desirous of glory, would
have wished his tryumphes, for yt you had durst to preach Christ's Gospel in a
place of such majesty. We also being not yet rid of our old affections, would
have imputed ye proceeding of ye gospel among us, altogether to your coming
and to your sermons. But you now be com to us, howbeit not in such time, nor
with such liberty as you wished. For now as you se, impriso^me^t, Iaylers,
fetters, manacles, and cheines are yt triu^phes of your Apostleship, yt ye
cross of Christ may retain still his glory in this preaching among us. I
am not ignorant how there are a great number of our citizens which would
willingly here your Sermons, if you might preach the Gospel openly: who
being now offended at your bonds, voutsafe not so much as to come at you. But
what for that? Farewell worldly wisdom with all his ambitiousnes, and let
Christ reign even with his cross: which is too the Jews a stumbling block,
and to the Gentyles foolishnes, but unto us that believe, it is Christ
crucified, the power and wisdom of God.


P. Surely you cheer my heart with


R. Amen.


P. The last part of mine Epistle conteyneth commendacio^s and greetings. Chap.
16.
First of all I commended to you our sister Saints, in any matter wherein she
needed your help. For she has helped many, yea and even me my self.


R. I saw the woman, surely very honest and worthy of your commendacion. And it
is not for naught that you give her those notable tytles. For you call her
sister, yt is, as I take it, a fellow of your own religion. But I understand
not why you call her a minister.


P. Perhaps you have not yet ordained any such ministry in your church. But
whersoeuer I preach the Gospel and set order in the church, there I look if
there be any widow that is childlesse, free from cares of houshoulde keeping,
and such a one as because she is old and has led an honest and holy life,
seems not that any suspicion of evil can light upon her. If I find such a
one, (for as much as she is a very rare bird) I admit her into the publik seruis
of the church to minister to the necessityes of the Saints. Such a one was the
said woman whom I decked with those tytles of commendacions. And I exhorted
you to show courtesy toward her, grounding my reason upon your duty. For
you that of woorshippers of Idols are become professers of the Gospel, must
interteine all folks gently, and specially those that have deserved well of the
Church.


R. We did for her sake whatsoever she required of us, so far as our
abilitye would stretch.


P. But the intent of my commending this woman unto you, was not only that you
should be a help to her: But I meant also that your matrons of Rome which
were become Chistians should learn both godliness and honesty by her
example, and also diligent seal to serve the whole Church, and to do good to
the poor comfortless and diseased, which have need of the service of
women.


R. This your intent Paul was not altogether vain and ineffectual. For that
virtuous and weldisposed woman did by her example and communication bring many
of our country women from their worldly superfluity, and from pleasures and
delights of this city, which in mine opinion is most given to pleasure of all
the cities in the world.


.P Also I greeted Prisca and her husband


R. We have heard much here, of the godliness and holy conversation of this
couple. And your freende Luke has in his storye written of their seal in
furthering the Gospel, Act. 8.
and of their love toward the Saints, and in what wise they lodged you when
you came to Corinth. Truly both we and all the Churches of the Gentiles which
profess the Gospel, are much bound to them. For seeing that you are
peculiarly appointed of God to be our Apostle, he yt saved your life, did us
also a great benefit which attain ye true life and salvation of the soul


P. It is no marvel. For you Romans are not much acquainted with the Hebrew
phrases, when I called him the first fruits of Achaia, I alluded to the
sacrifices which are made of the first fruits in the law of Moses: whereunto I
lyke^ such as are the first converted unto Christ. Now this Epenetus a
perfect man as you know, was the first in Achaia that embraced Christ and
suffered himself to be offered up and dedicated to God as a most acceptable
sacrifice unto him. These are my sacrifices my Brother, and the sacrifices of
all other priests of the new Testament. ye should salute Andronicus and
Iunias my kinsfolk and fellowprisoners, who are renowned among the Apostles,
and were before me in Christ.


R. Yea? do you register them in the musterbooke of the Apostles? But there
are a great sort in our Church which think this office of Apostleship to
belong only unto you, and that it shall endure but for a time.


P. I give the name of Apostle generally to all such as are sent of God to
preach the gospel of his son. And I pray god that as long as there shall be
any christian Church, there may be store of true Apostles, that is too say,
Messengers sent of God to teach it.


R. Also you greeted Amplias your


P. It is true. For I have proof of his godlynes by often trials. Furthermore
I desired ye to commend me to those of the house of Aristobulus, and to
Herodian my kinsman, and to them that are of the house of Narcissus, and his
friends and acquayntaunce in the


R. These salutations of yours were very welcome to all of us. For as you know,
the Citizens of Rome like very well of this courteousnesse of greeting. And
therefore you have won many men's hearts to you by that means.


P. In deed I did at that time bethink me of this custom received among you:
but yet there was another cause why I greeted these men by name: that is to
wit, for that I meant to set the^ forth unto you as patterns of true honesty
and holiness. For if you list to confess the truth, these men are not only
worthy of honor and estimation, but also such as you may set before you to
follow in godlynes and religion. Also I desired you to greet one another


R. Among you Jews kisses of peace are given and received with a holy mind,
and pure intent: but with us they have much wantonness and uncleanness,
specially among the unchristian sort.


P. I was not ignorant of that, and therefore I added the word holy, to the
intent that your kisses should have no resembla^ce to the heathenish and wicked
kissings, wherewith the unchaste fort are wont to show their uncleanness. But let
these commendations pass, I would have you and others to wey thoroughly


R. Surely a necessary warning, and such a one as ought to make us the more
watchful, that the pure doctrine of the Gospel be not defiled with men's
inventions or rather toys. But when we red these things, we marueled greatly,
that whereas you made so long a bederol of those whom you commend unto us, and
whom you set out with your salutations, yet you point us out no man here by
name whom we should shun.


P. It becomes not Christ's Apostles and the preachers of the gospel, to
deface any men by name for light causes, or to bring them in suspicion with the
whole Church by their writings. For oftentimes it falls out, that such open
defamings do more harm than good, not only to those whom we meant to warn, but
also to those of whom we gave warning.


R. Our Church has learned by it own experience, that these things which you
say, are too true. For at the beginning, when the gospel was preached to us in
houses and privately, many who otherwise were none evil men, would not be
present at our privy assemblies. Now, some of our company did of a good zeal
soothly, but yet unadvised (as I think) fall to taunting and girding at them by
name, whereby they made a great sort of them become adversaries to us, and most
deadly enemies to the gospel: whereas if they had bin handled with such
Apostolical mildness as you use here toward these men, out of doubt there
was great hope of meekening them, and of bringing them again to our company.


P. Therefore take ye warning by their example, to eschew this untoward manner
of dealing, and rather follow Christ, who giving to Caesar that which was
Cesars, and leaving the correction of vices unto Magistrates, did hurt no man
by name, wrate no reproachful libels against any man, ne bronded no man with
the mark of infamy, but behaved himself with a most meek and modest mind
toward all men, eue^ though they were his enemies of set purpose. It is enough
for you if you keep watch with all diligence as it were in a watch tower, and
spy out such contention in your Church, and such as lay stumbling blocks in
the way of the weaklings, either by their life, or by evil and lewd
persuasions contrary to the doctrine which you have learned. And when you
find them to be such as may do you harm by their communication or
conversation, eschew them: but yet in the mean while pray to God for them,
that he may give them the spirit of repentance, and a better and holyer
mind. I would not have any hartburninges, mislikinges, disagreements, or
strife, sown among you, and much less any vvritings full of railing,
taunting, or scorning spread abroad against such as cleave not to you,
peradventure not of any evil will, but because they yet still hold fast some
remnants of the old religion which they received from their tender years.


R. O Paul, you have touched as it were the bile of our Church with your
finger. But to the intent we over shoot not our self in this case, by what
marks may we discern those whom you counsel us to eschew and beware of? I
speak chiefly of the teachers of whom there is now a great number among us,
and they inuey so sharply one against another that ye sily people wot not which
way to turn the^, and much less who^ to believe, so contrary are their
sayings one to another.


P. Christ has set down many marks whereby to discern false teachers, and
false prophets, which (I believe) you have learned. But here I will point you
out some, which in my opinion may make you ware and wise enough. Let the first
mark be this, which is of two parts. When you see any teachers and the Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own bellies: shun you them as most cruel Wolves.


R. What call you the seruyng of Christ?


P. In that speech I comprehend many things which it were needelesse to open
severally as now. But considering the circumstance of our talk, to serve
Christ in the preaching of the gospel, is to acknovvledge Jesus Christ to be
our master, and to win servants and disciples unto him alone, and not to our
selves. To speak more plainly, when you see a teacher set up a schole of his
own to him self, to win scholars or disciples to him self, and taking no
care for the catholic and universal church, but rather laboring to purchase
him self many friends, fellows, praysers and comme^ders of his sermons and
writings: him eschew you. For believe me, that teacher serves not the Lord
Jesus Christ, but himself: he seeks not the glory of the Redemer, but of
himself: and all his intent is by all means to provide for his belly. And by
the name of Belly, you must understand, not only feasting and all manner of
deynty fare, but also riches, vain glory, and fame above other men, which
they are wont to hunt for by all means either right or wrong: and so they may
bear the bell, and have pre-eminence among men, they pass not for the bonds
of Christen charity which else they extol with wondrous commendacions.


R. Call you this a serving of the belly? I promise you I thought nothing
less. Now I see there are not a few teachers of this stamp among us. But you
say they may be discerned by fair speech and flattery. I pray you what call
you fair speech?


P. I use here two terms which paint out the nature of hipocrites, and
counterfets very plainly: for they be full of fair speech. The Greeks call
him fair spoken, which promises much in words and performs nothing in
deed, and also such a one as if you here him, you would say he is more
careful of you and your welfare than of his own, when in the mean while all
his seeking is but to pleasure himself. With this virtue are


R. Think you us to be so dulwitted, that we epsy not the natures and
dispositions of these falspackers?


P. I know you be wise, nevertheless that forewardnes of yours in hearing and
obeying, (for I will not term it simplicity) I say that readiness of yours
to receive whatsoever is put unto you, is very well known to all men.
Which virtue I make great account of, so it be matched with discretion: and I
am glad that you be endued with such obedientnesse. But I am vvonderfull
desirous that you should be wise and sharpwitted in good things, and simple and
harmless in evil things. And although I use these vvarninges toward you
by virtue of mine office: yet do I not doubt, but that god the prince of peace
will tread down Satan under your feet, and that shortly as I hope. For
surely that most merciful father has a care of his children and will not
suffer them to be led out of the path of godliness by the Serpents devices.
And therefore I beseech God that the grace, favor and protection of our Lord
Jesus Christ may be with you, to defend you alvvayes from the snares of
vvycked men. Amen.


R. Also there are peculiar co^mendacions to us from Timothy that helper and
workefellow of yours: and from Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater your kinsemen.
Furthermore Tertius your clerk and secretary which wrote this Epistle from
your mouth, would not in any wise let pass his most loving salutatio^s.
Moreover there is mention made of your host Gaius, and of the whole church,
and finally of Erastus the chamberleine of the city, and of his brother
Quartus. All these we know almost by sight, and therefore we received their
commendacions the wyllinglier.


P. This manner of dealing am I wont to use not only to maintain mutual
alyance betvveene the Greek churches and yours, but also too the intent that
this mine Epistle being confirmed with so many (as it were) vvryters, might
bear the more sway with you. For I make so great account of the consent of
my brethren in my writings, that I do also desire to have my doctrine allowed
by their record and subscription. For it beseemerh not the meeldnesse of an
Apostle, to seek but his own fame only, and as it were to hold skorne of
his other help fellows. For trust me, the intents of the old serpent are very
secret, and man's wisdom without Gods spirit is not able to search them, and
much less to discover them and escape them. For this cause I do always


R. Excellent surely is this tha^ksgiuing of yours, whereby you commend Gods
power and wisdom. Which virtues even as they show themselves most wonderfully
in all Gods works: so shine they forth most chiefly in the calling of us and of
all the Gentyles, by the preaching of the Gospel. But harken, when this Epistle
was brought unto us from Corinth by Phebe one of the ministers of the Church of
Chenchrie, our Alderman and Burgesses seeing so mean a messenger dd very
greatly disable your Apostolical authority, because you had no better
pursiuants nor more honorable messengers to send your letters by which ye
write to the Churches, as our Bishops have.


P. Brother, all these things are but vvoorldly visors, vvherof superstitious
doctrine stands in need, because it has no substantial ground to rest upon.
But Christ's Gospel needs not the helps of this woorlde, another do the
preachers thereof seek other cariers, or ministers, tha^ such as are endued
with the fear of God, and these do they use to spread abroad the glory of the
gospel. Therefore (to make an end at length) shak ye off the stateliness of
this unclean world, and embrace ye the cross of christ, and be not ashamed to
be the disciples of him, who whereas he was Lord of all things, made
himself a servant for your sakes. And I thank you peculiarly for this your
visiting of me, and I pray god to increase the gifts of his spirit more and
morein you for this friendly courtesy which you have shevved toward me. If
you visit me any time hereafter, you shall be heartily vvelcome.


R. I will come when I can: and I for my part beseech our most merciful God
likewise, to be always with you in this your imprisonment, and to strengthen
your mind with the power of his spirit. Fare you well.


FINIS.
The Articles of the Catholic faith which Anthony Coranus Spaniarde Student
of Divinity professes, and always has professed: Now set out in Print for
their sakes which have not been present at his Readings.
To the Christian Reader.
1. Pet. 1.15.
THe Apostle Peter exhorts the faithful in these words, To be ready to yield
an account of their faith. Be ye always ready to answer every man that asks
a reason of the hope that is in you, with mildness and reverence, having a
good conscience, that they which slander your good conversation in Christ, may
be ashamed of their misreporting of you as evil doers. Being warned by this
counsel, an eight years ago when I taught at Andwerp in the French tung, I
wrate a confession of my faith in the same language, which (by Gods grace)
shall within a while come forth in Latin and English also. Afterward I wrate
at London certain Tables concerning Gods works, which were printed in four
Languages, Latin, Frenth, Dutche, and English. In the short Articles of those
Tables I indeuered to comprehend as it were in propositions, the holy doctrine
of both the Testamentes. And I believe assuredly that in that writing I have
set forth the true, the right meaning, and the very pure truth of the
Christian Religion, drawn out of the fountaynes of the holy Scriptures, and
that in such orderlye method and apparante playnnesse as my conscience
vpbraydeth me not with any error: How beit that soome report otherwise,
either peradventure because they perceive not my meaning at all, or else
because they look but slightly upon the articles them selves. Now therefore
for their sakes which have not read those writings, I will set down certain
short articles concerning ye chief points of our christian religion, which I
embrace with all my heart. Farewell gentle reader, and hereafter neither think
nor speak evil of any man for the reports that are spread abroad of him, but
first give him ear and hear his reasons.

Of Gods written word.
I receive and embrace the Canonical scriptures both of the old testament and
of the new, and I thank our God for raising up that light unto us, that we
might have it ever before our eyes, least we should be led away to errors or
fables, either by deceiptfulnesse of men, or by the wiliness of devils. I
believe that they be heavenly voices, whereby God has vttred his will unto us:
That men's minds can have no rest but only in them: That in them (as Origin,
Austin, Chrysostom, and Cyril have taught) all things are contained abundantly
and fully, which are needful for our salvation: That they be the power and
might of God unto salvation, That they be the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, whereupon Gods Church is builded: That they be the most certain rule
whereunto the Church may be enforced if it swerve or go astray, and whereunto
all the doctrine of the Church ought to be ^alled back: And that against them
there ^s no law, no tradition, no custom to be ^eard, no not although Paul
him self or an Angel from heaven should come and teach otherwise.

Of the mystery of the holy Trinity.
Therefore I believe that there is one certain nature and divine power, which we
call God, and that the same is distinguished into three equal persons, the
Father, the son, and the holy Ghost, al of one self same power, of one
selfsame majesty, of one selfsame euerlastingnes, of one selfsame Godhead, of
one selfsame substance. And that although those three persons be so
distinct, that neither the Father is the Son, nor the Son is the holy
Ghost, or the father: yet they be all three one God, and that the same one
created heaven and earth, and all things that are contained in the compass of
the heaven, whether they be seen or unseen.

Of Christ the Mediator between God and man.
I believe that Jesus Christ the only son of the everlasting father, took
flesh and man's whole nature upon him, of the blessed and pure virgin, when the
fu^ time was come, according as had bin determined long ago, before all worlds,
to show unto men the secret and hidden wi^ of his father, which had bin kept
close from al ages and generations, and to accomplish the misery of our
redemption in humane body, and to nail to his cross our sins, and the
handwriting that was written against us.

Of the holy Ghost.
I believe that the holy Ghost which is the third person in the holy Trinity,
is the very true god, not made, not created, not begotten, but proceeding from
both, that is to wit, from the father and the son^ by an unutterable means
unknown to men: and that it belongs to him to soften the hardness of ma^s
heart, and that when he is received into their breasts, either by the preaching
of the gospel, or by any other mean, he inlighteneth them, and leads them
unto the knowing of God, into the way of all truth, into newness of the whole
life, and into hope of everlasting salvation.

Of the Catholic Church.
I believe that there is but one church, and that the same is not now shet up
into any one corner or kingdom as it was in times past among the Jews: but
that it is Catholic and universal, spread abroad through the whole world, so
as there is now no Nation that can justly complayn that it is excluded, and can
not belong to the Church and people of god. That the same Church is the
kingdom, the body, and the brid^e of Christ: that of that kingdom, only
Christ is the king: that of that body, only christ is the head: that of that
bride, only Christ is the bride grome. That there are diverse orders of
ministry in the Church: some Deacons, some Elders, some Bishops, to whom the
teaching of the people, and the care of ordering of Religion, is committed, and
that no one either is or can be ouerruler of the whole, forsomuche as Christ
is ever present in his church, and needs not a lieuetenante to supply his
room in the whole, and no man is able to comprehend in mind the whole Church,
that is to say, all parts of the earth, and much less to set them in order
and to rule the^ rightly and handsomely: Tha^ the Apostles (as Cyprian says)
were a^ of like power among themselves, and that the residue were the same that
Peter was (...) That it was said alike to them all, feed^ ye: That it was said
alike to them all* Go ye into ye whole world: That it was said alike to them
al, Teach the Gospel* and that (as Jerome says) all Bishops whersoeuer they
be, either at Rome, or a^ Eugubium, or at Constantinople, or a^ Rhegiu^, are all
of one desert, and all of on^ Priesthood: and that (as Cyprian sayth^ there is
but one Bishopric, and that euer^ Bishop holds a part of it as the whole and
that according to ye Council of Nice^ the bishop of Rome has no more power
over the church of Christ, than the other Patriarks of Alexandria and Antioche:
bu^ that the Bishop of Rome which now adays calls al things back to
himself, is no Bishop at al, no nor so much as an elder, except he do his duty
in ministering the Sacraments, and in instructing, admonishing, and teaching the
people.

That God is the creator of al things.
God being singular good and almighty, created all things both visible and
invisible by his coeternal word, and also preserves the same by his coeternal
spirit, according as David witnesses, saying: Psalm. 33.
by the word of god the heavens were made, and all the power of them by the
breath of his mouth. And al things that God made were (as says the Scripture)
exceeding good, and made for the use and commodity of man: and I say that all
those things proceeded from one beginning. Therefore I condemn the Manichees
and Marcionites, which did wickedly surmise two substances and natures, the one
good and the other bad, and likewise two beginnings, and two contrary gods, one
good, another naught.

Of Providence.
I believe yt al things both in heaven and earth, and in all creatures are
maintained and governed by gods wisdom. Psa. 139.
For David witnesses and says: the lord is high above al nations, and his
glory above the heavens. Who is like the lord our god, who has his dwelling
on hye, and yet stoupeth to look upon ye things that are in heaven and earth?
The same man says again unto god, Thou have forsene al my ways. For there is
not a word in my tongue, which thou know not every whit, O Lord. Also Paul
witness the same and says: by him we live, Act. 17.
move, and be. And of him, by him, and in him are all things. Most truly
therefore and according to the scriptures, Romans 12.
does Austin in the eyghte chapter of his book concerning Christ's Agony, say:
the Lord said, are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of them
lights not upon the ground without the will of your father? In saying so he
meant to show yt even the thing which men take to be vilest are governed by the
Lords almighty power. Ma. 10.
For after the same manner does the truth say, Ma. 6.
that he feeds the birds of the a^re, and clotheth the lyllies of the feeld,
and also keeps just account of the hears of our heads.

Of the Angels both good and bad.
I admit with the right believing church that among all things created Angels
and men are the chief: the scripture of God pronounces of the Angels, that he
made his Angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire. And again, are
they not al ministering spirits, sent forth to do service for them that shall be
heirs of salvation? And the Lord Jesus himself witnesses of the Diuill that
he was a murderer from the beginning, John. 8.
and stood not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks
a lie he speaks of his own: for he is a Liar and the father of lies.
Therefore we teach that of the Angels, some abode still in obedience and are
appointed to the faithful service of God and man: and that othersome fell of
their own accord, and were thrown down into destruction, and are become
enemies of all goodness and of al faithful men.

Of man's creation.
Concerning man and creation, I believe the doctrine of the scripture, that at
the first he was created good, after the Image and likeness of God, and ye God
did set him in Paradise, Genesis 2.
and put all things in subjection to him. Which thing David co^me^deth mightily
in the eight Psalm. Also he gave him a wife, and blessed the^. And I say that
man consists of two diverse substa^ces in one person: namely of an
immortal Soul, and a mortal body.

Of the state of Innocence, or of the original ryghtuousnesse of our first
fathers, and of their fall.
God made man at the beginning after the Image of God, in true ryghtuousnesse
and holiness, good and ryghtuous: but by the inticement of the Serpent, and by
his own fault, he fell away from goodness and ryghtuousnesse, and became
subject to sin, death, and sundry calamities. And such as he became after
his fall, such are al ye spring of him, namely even subject to sin, death, and
sundry calamities.

Of Sin,
I understood Sin to be the native corruption of man, deryued and spread
abroad into us all from those our first parents, wherethrough we be plunged
in lewd lusts, and turned away from goodness, but forewarde to all evil, and
full of all naughtiness, as distrust, contempt and hating of God: can do no
good of our selves, no nor once think any. But rather the more we grow in
years, the more do we bring forth corrupt fruits meet for an evil tree, in
our thoughts, and words, and deeds done lewdly against Gods law. In which
respect being through our own desert subject to Gods wrath, we be put under
just punishments, in so much that we should all of us have bin cast of from
God, if Christ our deliverer, Mat. 12. Genesis 14.
in whom mankind which else was lost, was restored again, had not brought us
to him again.

Of death the wages of Sin.
Therefore by death I mean not only bodily death, which we must all of us
once suffer for our sins sake, but also the endless punishments due to our
sinfulnes and corruption. Ephesians. 2.
For we were dead (says the Apostle) in our offenses and sins, and we were
the children of wrath as others are. But God who is rich in mercy, quickened
us with Christ when we were dead through our sins. Romans 5.
Again like as by one man sin entered into ye world and death by sin: so also
death passed into al men, inasmuch as al men have sinned.

Of original sin, and of the cause of sin.
I acknowledge that there is original sin in all men: and I acknowledge yt all
other sins, which spring thereof, are called sins and are sins in very deed,
by what name so ever they be called, whyther deadly or venial, Mar. 3.
or the sin that is called the sin against the holy Ghost, which is never
forgiven. Also I confess that all sins are not equal, though they spring all
out of one fountain of corruption and unbelief, 1. John. 3.
but that some are greuouser than othersome, according as the Lord has said,
that it shall be easyer for Sodom and Gomor, Math. 10
than for the city that refuses the word of the Gospel. Therefore I condemn
all such as have taught contrary heereto, and specially Pelagius and all
Pelagians, and Iouianistes, who with the Stoikes make all sins a like heynouse.
In this case I am fullye of opinion with Saint Austin, who alleged his
matters out of the holy scriptures and defended them by the same. Furthermore I
condemn Florinus and Blascus, and all such as make God the author of sin,
Psam. 5.
against whom Ireneus wrat. For it is expressly written, thou art not a God
that delights in wickedness, thou hate all such as work wickedness, and wilt
destroy all such as speak lies. And again, when the Devil speaks a lie
he speaks of his own, John. 8.
for he is a liar and the father of lying. Yea and even in our selves there is
vice and corruption enough, so as god needs not to sheade any new increase of
naughtiness into us. Therefore when the scriptures report God to hardened men,
to blind men, and to deliver them up into a lewd mind, it is to be understood
that God does it by rightful justice, as a ryghtuous judge and just punisher.
Finally as often as God in the holy scripture is said or seems to do any evil
it is not meant thereby that man does not the evil, but that God by his just
judgment, suffers it to be done, and lets not the doing of it, whereas he
could let it if he lysted: either because he uses man's evil doings to good
purpose, as he used the sin of Joseph's brethren: or because he ouerruleth men's
sins that they burst not out ne rage further than is meet. By a wonderful and
unspeakable mean (says Saint Austin in his Enchiridion or hand weapon,) it is
not done without his will, for it should not be done, unless he suffered it to
be done. And surely he suffers it not unwillingly. Another seeing he is good,
would he suffer evil to be done, unless that being also almighty, he could
of evil make good. Thus much says S. Austin. As for these questions whether
it was Gods will that Adam should fall, and whether he drove him to fall, or
why he let not his fall, and such other like, I reckon them among the curious
sort, except it be perchance when the lewdness of Heretics or of other
importunate persons, inforceth men to open those things out of Gods word, as
the godly teachers of the church have often times done. For we know that the
Lord forbad man to eat of the fruit, and punished his transgression, and
moreover that the things which are done are not evil in respect of Gods
providence, will, and power, but in respect of Satan and of our will stryuing
against Gods will.

Of freewill, and consequently of man's own power.
In this matter, which has ever bred many contentions in the Church, 2. Tim.
2
I think we must consider man in three states or conditions. First what he
was before his fall: to wit, ryghtuous and free, so as he might both abide in
the good, and swerve unto the evil: and that he swarued unto evil, and
wrapped both himself and all mankind in sin and death, as has bin said
before. Again it is to be considered in what plyght man was after his fall.
Surely his understanding and will were not taken quite from him, another was he
utterly turned into a block or stone: Ephe. 12.
howbeit they were so changed and diminished, that they could no more do as
they did before his fall. For his understanding was darkened: and his will, of
free became bond. For it serves sin, not unwillingly, but willingly. For it is
called a will and not a nill. Therefore as in respect of evil or of sin, man
does it not as compelled either of God or of the devil, but of his own
accord: and in that behalf his will is most free. And whereas we oftentimes
see men's wicked doings and devices let by God, so as they come not to
effect: that takes not away man's freeness in evil, but God disappointeth
that thing by his power, which man had freely purposed in him self. As for
example, Joseph's brethren determined freely to rid him out of the way: But
yet they could not, because Gods ordynance was otherwise. But as for in respect
of goodness and virtue, man's understanding does not of it self judge ryghtly
of godly matters. For the scriptures both of the Gospel and of the Apostles
wrytings, require regeneration of every of us that will be saved. Whereupon it
follows that our former birth in Adam, boteth us nothing at al to salvation.
For the natural man (says Paul) perceives not the things that come of
Gods spirit. 1. Cor. 2.
etc. And in another place he denies us to be able to think any good thought
of our selves. 2. Cor. 2.
Now it is certain that the mind or understanding is the guide of the will: and
if the guyd be blind, it is easy to perceive whyther the will goes. Therefore
there is not any free will unto good in any man unregenerated, another is there
any strength in him to espy the thing that is good. Our Lord says in the
Gospel, John. 8.
verily verily I say unto you, that every one which commits sin is the
bondseruant of sin. Romans 8.
And the Apostle Paul says that the lust of the flesh is enmity against God:
For it is not subject to Gods law, neither can be. Nevertheless, the
understanding of earthly things is not quite gone in man. For God of his mercy
has left him wit, howbeit far unlike that which was in him before this
fall. God wills men (as it were) to manure their wits, and adds gifts
and proceedings therwithal. And it is manifest how little or nothing we profit
in any art without gods blessing. For surely the Scripture fathereth all arts
upon God. And even the very heathen men fathered the original of all arts upon
the invention of their Gods. Last of all it is to be seen, whether the
regenerated have freewil, and how far forth. In regeneration man's
understanding is enlightened by the holy ghost, to understand Gods mysteries
and will. And his will is not only changed by the spirit, but also indewed
with ability, so as it both will and can do good of it own accord. Romans 8.
Unless we grant this, we shall deny the Christian freedom, and bring in
the thraldom of the Law. Besides this, the prophet and bring in the thraldom
of the law. Besides this, Ezec. 36. Jer. 13.
the Prophet brings in God saying thus: I will give my law into their
minds, and write it in their hearts. 1. John. 8 Phi. 2.
Also the Lord says in the Gospel, If the son make you free, then are you free
in deed. Again Paul to the Philippians, says: unto you it is given not
only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him. And again, I am persuaded
that he which has begone the good work in you, will go through with it even to
the day of our Lord Jesus. Again it is God that works in you both the will and
the performance of the will. Where by the way, I teach that two things are
to be marked. First that in the choosing and working of good, the regenerated
are not only sufferers, but also dooers. For by Gods working in them, they do
the things which they do. And therefore rightly does Austin allege this text,
that God is said to be our helper. But none can be helped, but he which does
somewhat. The Manichies bereeued man of all doing, and made him as a stock or
a stone. Secondly I make, that in the regenerated there remains infirmity.
For as much as sin dwells in us, and the flesh fyghteth against the spirit
in the regenerated, even to the end of our life: the regenerated perform not
their purposes altogyther without incomberance. These things are confirmed by
the Apostle in the seventh to the Romans, and in the fifth to the Galathians.
And therefore that freedom of our will is weak, by reason of the dregs of
the old Adam, and of the corruption that is bred and borne with man, and
remains in us even to the end of our life. Notwithstanding for as much as the
strength of the flesh and the remnants of the old man are not so effectual,
as utterly to quench the working of Gods Spirit: therefore the faithful are
said to be free, but yet so as they acknowledge their own weakness, and
boast not at all of the freedom of their will. For the faithful must ever
bear in mind, this saying which Saint Austin harpeth upon so much out of the
Apostle: Mar. 11.
what have thou which thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why
bostest thou as though thou had not received? Moreover, the thing that I
had determined does not forthwith come to pass: For the fallings out of
things are in gods hand. And thervppon S. Paul prays the Lord to prosper his
journey. Romans 1.
Therefore even in that respect man's freewill is weak. Nevertheless no man
denies but that both the regenerated and the unregenerated have freewill in
outward things. For man has this property common to him with all other
living things (to whom he is not inferior) namely to will some things, and to
nill other some. So can he speak or hold his peace, and go abroad or tarry
at home: howbeit that even in this behalf an eye must always be had to Gods
power, which caused that Balaam could not attain to the mark that he shot
at, nor Zecharie speak as he would have done when he came out of the Temple:
In this case I condemn the Manichees which deny that man's freewill when he
was good, was the beginning of evil unto him. Also I condemn the Pelagians,
which say that an evil man has sufficient free will to do a good
commandment. For they be disproued by the holy scripture, which says unto
the one sort, God made man righteous: and unto the other, if the son make you
free, then are you free in deed.

Of the true justification of the righteous.
By the word Justify, the Apostle in his discourse of justification, Romans 8.
betokens the forgiving of sins, the acquiting of men from gilt and
punishment, the receiving of them into favor, and the pronouncing of them to
be righteous. For the Apostle says to the Romans, It is God that justifies,
who shall then condemn? There Justifying is matched against Condemning. Act. 13.
And in the Acts of the Apostles the Apostle says, By Christ the releasing of
your sins is preached unto you, and of all the things from which you could
not be justified by the Law of Moses: by him is every one that believes
justified. For in the Law and the Prophets also we read in this wise: Deu. 25.
If variance rise between man and man, and they come to judgment, let the
judges judge them, and let them justify the ryghtuos and condemn the ungodly.
And in the fifth of Esaias it is said, woo be to them that justify the ungodly
for rewards. Now it is most certain that by nature all of us are sinners and
ungodly, and cast and convicted of wickedness, and condemned to die before
Gods judgment seat, and that we be justified, that is to say, released, or
set free from sin and death by God the judge, only for Christ's sake, and not
for any desert or respect of our own. For what is more manifest than this
saying of Saint Paul's. Romans 3.
All men have sinned, and are destitute of Gods glory, but are justified
freely through his grace by the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. For Christ
took upon him the sins of the world, and took them away, and satisfied Gods
Justice: God therefore only for Christ's passion and resurrections sake, is
merciful to our sins, and lays them not to our charge: but imputes
Christ's ryghtuousnesse unto us as our own, so as henceforth we be not only
cleansed and purged from our sins, or made holy: but also rewarded with
Christ's ryghtuousnesse, 2. Cor. 5. Romans 4.
and so consequently set free from sin, death, or condemnation, and finally
made ryghtuous and heirs of the endless life. Therefore to speak properly,
only God justifies us and only for Christ's sake does he justify us, not
imputing our own sins unto us, but imputing unto us Christ's righteousness.
Romans 3.
And because we receive this justification, not by any works, but by trust in
Gods mercy and in Christ: therefore I teach and believe with the Apostle, that
the sinner is justified by only faith in Christ, and not by the law or by any
works. For the Apostle says, Romans 4.
I am of opinion that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the
law. Again, if Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to boast,
but not before God. Genesis 15.
For what says the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was reckened unto
him for righteousness. Now unto him yt works not but believes in him yt
justifies the ungodly, his faith is imputed to him for righteousness. And
again, you be saved by grace through faith, and that not of yourselues, but it
is gods gift. Not by works, least any man should glory. Ephe. 2.
For as much then as faith receives Christ our righteousness, and imputes
all things to Gods free favor in Christ: therefore is justification fathered
upon faith, howebeit for Christ's sake, and not because it is our work, for it
is the gift of God. But that we receive Christ by faith, the Lord himself
shows by many words in the sixth of John, where he puts eating for
believing, and believing for eating. For like as we receive food by eating, so
do we participate of Christ by believing. Therefore I divide not the
benefit of Justification partly to Gods grace or to Christ, and partly to our
selves, or to our own charity and works, or to our own deserving: But I
attribute it wholly to Gods free favor in Christ by faith. Besides this our
love and works could not please God if they were done of us being yet
unrighteous: and therefore it behooves us to be first justified, before we can
love or do good works. But we be justified (as I said before) by faith in
Christ, through the only grace of God, who imputes Christ's ryghtuousnesse
to us and not our own sins, and consequently imputes our believing in
Christ unto us for ryghtuousnesse. Furthermore the Apostle does very apparently
deryue love from faith, 2. Tim. 2
saying the end of the commandment is love from a pure heart, good
conscience, and unfeigned faith. Therefore in this case I speak not of a
feyned, empty, idle, or dead faith: but of a lively and quickening faith, which
for Christ's sake who is our life and quickens us, whom it takes hold of,
both is and is said to be lively, and so shows it self to be by lively
works. No whit at all therefore is S. James contrary to this doctrine, Jam. 2.
for so much as he speaks of an empty and dead faith, which some men did boast
of, whereas they had not Christ living in the^ by faith. The same James in
saying that works justify, is not contrary to Paul, for then were he to be
rejected: but he shows that Abraham uttered a lively and justifying faith, by
his works, which thing all the godly do, who notwithstanding trust all only
unto Christ and to no works of their own. For the Apostle has said again,
Now do not I live, but Christ lives in me. The life that I now live in the
flesh, I live by believing in the son of God, who loved me and gave himself
for me. I hold no skorne of Gods grace: For if ryghtuousnesse come by the law,
then has Christ dyed in vain.

Of Gods predestinating and chosing of the Saints.
God from everlasting has freely of his own mere goodness without any
respect of men, Ephesians. 1.
predestined or chosen the Saints whom he intends to save, in Christ,
according to this saying of the Apostle, God chose us in him before the
foundations of the world were laid. And again. Which saved us, and called us
with a holy calling, 2. Tim. 1
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and free favor
which was given us in Christ Jesus before all times, but disclosed now by the
appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ. So then, Gods choosing of us is not
without a mean, though it be not for any desert of ours, but in Christ and
for Christ: so that they which are now greffed into Christ by faith, are the
self same also which are chosen, and the reprobates or castawayes are those
that are out of Christ: according to this saying of the Apostle, Try your
selves whether you be in the faith or no. Know ye not your selves, 2. Cor. 13
how that Jesus Christ is in you? unless perhaps you be castawayes. Finally
God has chosen the Saints in Christ to a certain end, which the Apostle
declares in that he says, Ephe. 12.
he has chosen us in him to the end we should be holy and vnrebukable
through love before him, which did predestinate us before hand in himself to
adopte us to be his children through Jesus Christ, to the glory of his grace.
And although God know which are his, and that in some places mention is made
of the fewenesse of the chosen: yet ought we to hope well of all men, Phl. 1
and not to be rash in reckening any man to be a reprobate. Surely Paul to the
Philippians says, I thank God for you all, (he speaks of the whole church
of the Philippians) that you are come to the communion of the Gospel, assuring
my self yt he which has begone the good work in you, will also go through with
it, and meet it is that I should so think of you all. And in the xiij. of
Luke when the Lord was asked whither few should be saved: he answers not that
there shall be few, or many saved or damned: but rather counseleth every of them
to strive to get in at the narrow gate: as if he had said, it is not for you
to be curious in serching of these things, but rather to indeuer to go into
heaven by the narrow way. Therefore I like not the ungodly speeches of some
me^, which say that few be chosen, and since I am not sure whether I be of that
number or no, I will not refrain mine own pleasures. Othersome say, if I be
predestined or chosen of God, nothing shall put me from salvation which is
certainly appointed for me, what so ever I do. And if I be of the number of the
castawayes, no faith or repentance can help me, because Gods determination
cannot be changed: and therefore all teaching and warninges are to no purpose.
For the Apostle fyghteth against such folk, saying: Gods servant must be
ready to teach and instruct such as stand against him, 2. Tim. 2
if God at any time will give them repentance to know the truth. But Saint
Austin in the.xiiii. chapter of his book de bono perseuerantiae, and in the
chapters following, shows that both of them be to be preached: that is to
wit, booth the grace of Gods free choosing and predestinating, and also
wholesome warnings and teachings. Therefore I mislyke of such as seek without
Christ whether they be chosen from everlasting or no: and what God has
determined of them before all time. For we must give ear to the preaching of
the Gospel, and believe the same, and take it to be out of all doubt, that if
we believe and be in Jesus Christ, we be chosen. For the father has uttered
unto us in Christ, the everlasting sentence of his predestination, as I
declared even now, from out of the first chapter of Paul's second Epistle to
Timothy. Therefore we must teach, and consider above all things how great
the love of the father is reveled to be toward us in Christ. We must daily
harken what the Lord himself tells us in the Gospel, how he calls us and
says, Mar. 11.
come unto me all ye that are weary and ouerloden, and I will refresh you. God
so loved the world, John. 3.
that he gave his only begotten son for the world, to the intent that every
one which believes in him should not die but have everlasting life. Math. 18
Also it is not the will of the father that any of these little ones should
perish. Therefore let Christ be our loking-glasse wherein to behold our
predestination. We have evident and substantial record enough, that we be
written in the book of life, if we communicate with Christ, so as he be ours
and we be his through true faith. In the temptation of predestination, than the
which there is not a more dangerous, let this be our comfort, Luke. 11.
that Gods promises are universal to all believers: that he says, ask and ye
shall receive, for every one that asks receives: and finally that we pray
together with the universal church of God. Our father which art in heaven,
and that we be greffed into Christ's body by baptim, and are often fed in his
Church with his flesh and blood unto eternal life. Being confirmed with
these things, we be willed to work out our own salvation in fear and
trembling, according to S. Paul's counsel.

FINIS.
These articles of the right believing faith, I meant to add to the end of my
dialoge, to disprove the untoward dealings of such men as slander me of
Pelagiamin without any just occasion, only because I do often exhort my heerers
to good works. Which thing I deny not but I do very diligently, howbeit not
for that I think the children of Adam to be able to attain salvation by their
own strength without the grace of God: for I impute the beginning, Romans 8.
the increase, and the accomplishment of our salvation and happiness to the
only free favor and grace of God. But for as much as I see man's nature
forewarde enough of it self to embrace vain carelessness and fleshly liberty:
I minded that my sayings should rather hold them in awe, Act. 13.
and lead them away from the pleasures and delyghtes of this world, as it were
by casting a bridle upon them, than put spurs to them running already of their
own accord to do evil. Therefore as for those that like not of my manner of
teaching, it is fre for them to device apter and to put them forth to their
heerers, so they do it in the fear of God to the furtherance of his church,
and without disgracing of others that follow another trade of teaching. Ephe. 2.
But of these things I shall perchance speak more largely at another time.

Our present age misdemeth things through spite,
The age to come will judge things more upright


