THE NONENTITY OF PROTESTANCY. OR A Discourse, wherein is demonstrated, that
Protestancy is not any Real thing, but in it self a Platonicall Idaea; a wast
of all Positive Faith; and a mere NOTHING. Written by a Catholic Priest of
the Society of JESUS.

Dormierunt somnium suum, and NIHIL inuenerunt. Psalm. 73. Vae Prophetis
insipientibus, qui sequuntur Spiritum suum, and NIHIL vident. Ezech 13.
Permissu Superiorum



1633.

TO THE JUDICIOUS AND LEARNED PROTESTANT.
LEARNED MEN,
This Treatise was for you chiefly first undertaken. The Ground-vvorke,
vvhereupon the Systema, or Frame thereof is built, is a mixture of Philosophy,
and Schoole-diuinity: Points, with reference to the more ignorant Protestant,
being (as the School- Dialect is) extra sphaeram Actiuitatis; that is, beyond
the limited apprehe^sion of their shallovv and narrovv conceits. It is but
small (you see) in Quantity; but I hope, it will hold out in weight. The
subject of it, is unusual, and (to my knowledge) heertofore ex professo, not
much vvalked in, or tracted. It is also (no doubt) nauseous, and displeasing to
you; seeing it attempteth to prove, that your Religion is in it self a mere
Nonentity; Its Being consisting in a Not-being, and Essence, in want of
Essence. That Religion of yours, I mean, which at this day has invaded
several parts in Europe; whose high flight is mantained only with the vvings
of certain Princes, and Commonvvealths power and greatness; which violently
carries (where it reigns) all things before it, with the impetuous stream
of its own torrent: briefly to which for our not yielding obedience in our
own Country, so great and heavy mulcts and pressures are imposed upon
Recusants: though even in all Justice, the paying of Nothing is a sufficient
penalty, for the not professing, of what is Nothing. I confess it is painful
to discourse well of Nothing; as it is difficult to run a division of
knowledge, upon the ground of ignorance. Nevertheless, since your own
learning will force you to give assent to those Theorems of Divinity and
Philosophy, upon the Arch vvherof, the weight of the whole Treatise rests;
I am not wholy in despair, but that at the closure of all, your morning and
more retired thoughts (as being voyded of prejudice) may perhaps entertain it
with a more indifferent, and impartial Censure. If you here demand, how can
this great Attempt of mine be performed, (for great in your Judgments, it must
yet needs be thought) in shevving, that Protestancy is in its own Nature, a
Nonentity, and that, its All, is Nothing, as not having any reality of Being
to support it to this I answer, (omitting other reasons hereafter insisted
upon) that since Protestancy consists only in the denyalls and Priuations of
Affirmative points of our Christian, and Roman Faith; (which denyalls and
Priuations in their own nature are Irreall, as hereafter will be euicted)
that therefore it is wholy disuested of all true Subsistence, or Being. For
who observes not, that Protestancy is a Religion, resting more in denyalls of
Truths, then in defense of Positive, and formal Errors? The veyle under
which Protesta^cy masked it self when it first entered upon the stage, was
the outvvard appearance of a grateful Reformation; which word of Reformation,
is by them used, as in opposition to a precedent Corruption; from which the
Protestants profess to rescue and deliver the Church of God. Which Corruption
(they say) was first brought in by the Bishop of Rome, Simon de Voron in his
discourse upon the Catalogue of Doctors. Epist. to the Reader.
Who overwhelmed the whole world in the dreggs of Antichristian filthynes,
abominable Superstitions, and Traditions etc. Thus did the first Protestants
think good, to cloth their naked Religion in the fair attire of a presumed
Reformation; which Reformation consists only in an utter subuerting, and
destroying of most of our Affirmative Catholic Articles of faith; and in lieu
of them in introducing the Negatiues: so as by this proceeding the Protestants
may be said (to speak allusiuely) to trench over, near upon Gods Omnipote^cy,
in attempting to exercise the two Acts of Creation and Annihilation, peculiar
to his divine Majesty: for their own Protestant faith (as grounded only upon
Negatiues, and Priuations) they have drawn out of an Abyss, and Informity of
Nothing: and our Positive and Affirmative Catholic faith they labor (what
they can) by such their molitions, to reduce to Nothing. And although the
Protestants do endeavor to enamell and guilde over their Negative faith,
with many detorted and misapplyed Texts of Sacred Writ, by the help of the
Private revealing Spirit (their Oedipus,) that so it may appear glorious in an
erring eye: nevertheless certain it is, that after such testimonies are truly
balanced and weighed by the Authority of the whole Church of God; all such
fading splendor of Protestancy does but resemble the light of a Glovv-vvorme,
which, the nearer one comes to it, the lesser it appears, til in the end it
wholy vanishes away. But seeing, a short Preface best sorteth to a short
discourse, I will here stay my Penn; remitting the learned Reader to the
diligent and impartial perusal of these ensuing Leaves; and assuring him,
that it impugneth the light of Reason (since God and Nothing are incompatible)
that he, whom the Philosophers for his greater Perfection of Essence, style,
Ens Entium, should be truly honored with a Religion, which is, a Non-Ens.

Your in Christ Jesus W. B.

THE CONTENTS OF the several Chapters. Certain Prolegomena, of which the
first is,
CHap. 1. That in all positive and Affirmative points of Faith, the Protestants
do agree with the Catholics; The Protestants borrowing the said Affirmative
points from the Church of Rome. Chap. 2. The second Prolegomenon, viz. In such
points of faith, wherein Protestancy differs from the Roman Church; all the
said points are merely Negations, to the contrary Affirmative Articles,
believed by the Church of Rome. Chap. 3. That the Protestants have often
corrected and reformed their Translations of the Bible, and the Lyturgy, or
common Book of Prayer, in favor of their Negative Religion; every later
excepting against the former, as corrupt, and impure. Chap. 4. That Protestancy
is a Nonentity; proved from the Principles of School Divinity, and
Philosophy. Chap. 5. The Nonentity of Protestancy by reason of its Negations,
proved from the like supposed Example of a Philosopher, denying most Principles
of Philosophy. Chap. 6. That the Heathen Philosopher conspireth with the
Protestant in the denial of most (if not all) of such points of Religion,
wherein the Protestant by his like denial of them, differs from the
Catholic. Chap. 7. That Protestancy is but a Nullity of Faith (and
consequently with reference to faith, a Nonentity;) proved from the definition
of Faith, and other conditions necessarily annexed thereto. Chap. 8. That
Protestancy cannot be defined: And that therefore it is a Nonentity. Chap. 9.
That Protestancy consists of Doctrines merely Contradictory in themselves:
and that therefore Protestancy is a Non Entity. Chap. 10. That Heresy, as being
a Privation, is Non-Ens; and consequently that Protestancy (as consisting of
the old condemned Heresies) is a Nonentity. Chap. 11. That there are diverse
Positions of Protestancy, which (besides that they ar^ implicitly but
Negations to the Catholics contrary Affirmative Doctrines) are in their own
Nature, merely void of all reality of Being. Chap. 12. That the Protestant
Church is a mere Nonentity, or Idaea; proved from the confessed Inuisibility
thereof. Chap. 13. That the confessed want of Personal Succession and lawful
Calling in the Protestant Church, proves that Church to be no Real thing: and
consequently that Protestancy is but an Intentionality, or bare Notion of the
mind. Chap. 14. The Nonentity of Protestancy, proved from that it works in
the wills of the Professors. Chap. 15. The Nonentity of Protestancy, proved
from that, it is not agreed upon what doctrines be Protestancy, or what
Professors be members of the Protestant Church. Chap. 16. The Nonentity of
Protestancy demonstrated, from that every Protestant either in himself, or in
his Predecessors, originally departed, and came out from the Roman Catholic
Church. Chap. 17. That the Protestant denies the Authorities of all those
Affirmative and Positive Heads from whence the Catholics draw their Proofs.
Chap. 18. That sundry learned Protestants (as not houlding a Negative faith to
be any Real Faith at all) agree with the Catholics in believing the
Affirmative Articles of the Catholic Faith. Chap. 19. Certain Porismata,
rising out of the several passages of this Treatise. Chap. 20. That the
Catholic Church and the Protestant Church, are not one, and the same Church:
though some Protestants teach the contrary, for the supporting of their own
Church. The Conclusion.
CERTAIN PROLEGOMENA: Of which the first is, That in all positive and
affirmative points of faith, the Protestants do agree with the Catholics; the
Protestants borrowing the said affirmative points from the Church of Rome.
CHAP. I.
LEarned Reader. For the better facilitating of this my assumed task and
labor, and for the more easy playning the way to the ensuing discourse, I am
first here to prefixe certain Prolegomena (as I may call them) or Prefaces:
The first whereof is to show, that the Protestants in all affirmative articles
of faith, houlden by them at this day, do agree with the Roman Catholic
Church. The second; that in such points of faith, wherein the Protestants do
dissent from the Roman Church; all the said points so defended by the
Protestants, are merely Negations of the contrary affirmative Articles,
believed by the Catholics. In this Chapter I will entreat of the first part;
seposing the chapter following for the second. And according to this my
assertion, we find, that the Protestants do believe affirmatively with us; that
there is One God, and three Persons; that, the second Person was incarnated,
and suffered death upon the Cross, for the expiation of the sins of the world;
that there are two Sacraments, to wit, Baptism, and the Eucharist; that there
are certain Canonical divine writings, commonly called the Holy Scriptures:
and finally they believe with us Catholics, the Apostles Creed. All which
points (so needy and begging is Nouelisme in faith for its own supporting) the
Protestants do freely acknowledge, that they borrow and receive from our
Catholic and Roman Church. For thus does D. Whitaker confess of this point:
D. Whitaker. de Eccles. page 369.
The Papists have the Scripture and Baptism etc. and these came to us from
them. With whom agrees herein D. Dove, saying: Dove in his persuasio^ to
English Recusants page 23..
We should the Creed of the Apostles, of Athanasius, of Nice, of Ephesus, of
Constantinople, and the same Bible, which we received from them. But Luther
with full consent herto more amply discourses of this point, thus
acknowledging: Luth. l. contra Anabaptist.
We confess, that there is under the Papacy most of the Christian good, yea
rather all the Christian good, and that from thence it came to us. Verily we
confess, there is in the Papacy true Scripture, true Baptism, the true
Sacrament of the Altar, the true keys to the remission of sins, the true
office of preaching, true Catechism etc. I say further, there is in the Papacy
true Christianity, or rather the true kernel of Christianity. Thus Luther. Now
from these liberal (yet most true) confessions of our adversaries, this
inevitable resultancy rises, to wit; that the Protestants, though they believe
these former affirmative Articles, (and perhaps some few others) with the
Catholics, yet for such their belief of the^, they are not, nor can be truly
reputed Protestants, but only Christians in general, or rather Catholics (and
this but (...), or at most but Analogically) since they borrow their belief of
the said affirmative Articles from our Catholic Church (as is above
confessed) and therefore Protestancy does not rest in the belief of the said
affirmative dogmaticall points. From hence then we may conclude, that the
reduplicatiue formality, or ratio formalis, as I may say with the Shoolemen, of
Protestancy, only consists in the denial and reprouall of the particular
affirmative Articles, in which it differs at this day from the Church of
Rome, as hereafter will be proved; and that a Protestant ( quatenus a
Protestant) is not, as he belieueth these former affirmative Articles; but as
he belieueth not other affirmative points, believed heertofore, and now by the
Church of Rome. And according heerto, Philosophy teaches, that this particle
quatenus, or the reduplicatiue formality, ever falls upon the differentia,
and not upon the genus.

I will exemplify this point in other innouations of doctrine. Iouinian taught
(as S. Hierome lib. 1. and 2. contra Iouin.
Hierome and de haeresib. cap. 82.
S. Augustine do witness,) That virginity was not to be preferred before
wedlock; that, fasting was not meritorious; that, a man once having true faith
could not sin (all good Protestancy at this day. Iouinian in all other
affirmative points agreed with the then Church of Rome, but dissented from it
only in these Negatiues. Now Iouinianisme truly rests only in the defense of
these its Negative Positions, and not as it agrees with the then Church of
Rome, in other affirmative points. And his followers were called Iouiniani,
only by reason of their defense of the said Negations, and not otherwise.
Again Manichaeus did only deny freewill in man (as Lib. de hoeres. cap. 46.
S. Augustine records) and co^parted with the then known Church of Christ in
all other affirmative points; and accordingly his Sect was called Manichisme,
not in that it agreed with the then Catholic Church in other affirmative
positions taught by the said Church; but only by reason the author thereof
denied the aforesaid Affirmative Article of freewill. In like sort Brownisme
rests only in the denial of such points, wherein the Brownists dissent from
the Protestants, and not in their conformity with the Protestants, or
Catholics in any affirmative points. Now to apply this to our present
purpose; the obiectum adaequatum (to speak in the Philosophers idiome) of
Protestancy, is only the denial of such affirmative Catholic points, wherein
Protesta^cy differs at this day from the Church of Rome; and not in its
belief of those few affirmative Articles, wherein the Protestants as yet agree
with the said Church. According heerto, it did fall out, that in the first
infancy of the late appearing faith of Protestants, the first stampers thereof
at their public meeting volu^tarily, for their better distinguishing of
themselves from the Catholics, imposed to themselves the name of Protestants,
and to their faith the title of Protestancy: implying, by that word, that they
protested themselves absolutely to deny such and such affirmative points of
faith, which the Church of Rome at that time (and ever before) maintains and
affirms. For if we respect those few doctrines, wherein they did agree with the
Church of Rome, the Protestants had no reason to use any such term of
distinguishment, seeing both sides did believe the same Articles. Therefore of
necessity the word Protestancy (as serving for a character, or signature of its
separation from our Catholic faith) is to be restrained to such points, wherein
the Protestants by their denial of them, then dissented from the Church of
Rome. But by this we may see, how loath is Nouellisme in doctrine to impath it
self in the beaten tract of Reverend Antiquity, or to run in the accustomed
known channel, wherein the stream of Christian Religion in former times had its
course. And thus far of this point; the conclusion being, that Protestancy (as
Protestancy) only consists in denial of such affirmative points, which the
Church of Rome affirms to be true; and not in believing with the said Church
certain chief points of Christianity above expressed.

THE II. PROLEGOMENON. In such points of faith, wherein Protestancy dissenteth
from the Roman Church, all the said points are merely Negations to the contrary
affirmative Articles, believed by the Church of Rome. CHAP. II.
MY second Prolegomenon is, to demonstrate, by gradation, how the Protestants,
as above is intimated, have reformed (or if you will, refined) their Religion
in several points of Faith; and this only by pure Negatiues to the Catholics
contrary Affirmative Assertions of them.

Thus did the Protestants reform our supposed errors, with their own true and
real errors; so the Luc. 18.
Pharisy reproved the Publicans sin, with far greater sin. But to dissect
the particulers, Luther (the Prodromus of these calamitous times) was first an
acknowledged Catholic Priest, as himself So witnesses Sleydan in li, 16.
fol. 232.
writes. This man first begun his Reformation with a mincing hesitation and
trepidatio^ of judgment, and busied himself only with the denial of Pardons;
but by little and little taking greater courage, he next proceeds to the
denial of Luther in captiuit. Babylon. tom. 2. fol. 63.
Papal Jurisdiction, and Luth. de votis Monasti^is in tom. 2. Wittemberg.
Monastical state and profession. And being once fleshed in his profession, he
(daily more and more sharpining his censuring rasour) cut of at one blow, Luth.
tom. 2. fol. 63.
four Sacraments. He finally concluded with the denial of the Luth. de
abroga^da missa priuata. in tom. 2. fol. 244.
Mass and Priesthood, of several parts of Luth praefat. in epist. Jacob. and
vide Bulling upon the Apocalips englished, cap. 1.
Canonical Scripture, Luth. de seruo arbitrio in tom. 2. fol. 424.
of freewill, and of Justification of works. Thus far proceeded Luther. And
that the denial of these former points did not happen at one time but by
degrees, appears in that the further he proceeded in this his denial of
Catholic Articles, the more he reputed himself reformed; and in his later
writings he entreats pardon of his reader for his presumed defect in his
former writings, he thus excusing himself. The tom. 1. Witte^b. in praefat.
and tom. 2. fol. 63.
Reader may find how many, and how great things, I humbly granted to the Pope
in my former writings, which in my later, and these times I hold for greatest
blasphemy and abomination: therefore, pious Reader, thou must pardon me this
error. O see, how pride of judgment (the Hypostasis of heresy) masketh it
self under the borrowed veil of religious zeal.

From Luthers loins immediately descended Zuinglius, Bullinger, Bucer, and some
others. But these ungrateful and disobedient Impes did not rest satisfied with
their Fathers reformation, but retayning it for good, as far as it went,
proceeded much further in their Negatio^s of the Articles of the Roman
Religion: since they denied the Real Zuinglius tom. 2. fol. 375. and 416.
Presence, denied Zuing. tom. 2. fol. 378.
Purgatory, and praying for the dead, denied Vide Luth. in ep. ad Georgiu^
Spalatinum.
praying to Saints, denied See Whitgifts defense in the examination of places.
fol. penul.
the use of Images, and finally denied Lib. entitled against Symbolis. part.
1. c. 2. Sect. 30
crossing of ones self. Thus far these men made their progress in their
Negative Religion; who conspired with their Father (through their desire ever
of further reformation) by excepting in their later writings against their
former, as not being See Zuingl. to. 2. fol. 202. and vide Bucer. Script.
Anglicana page 680.
Negative enough: and yet we are taught by the abortiue Apostle, (1. Cor 5.)
that, modicum fermentum totam massa^ corrupit. Bu^ to proceed higher; for as
yet the Scene of a Negative Reformatio leaves not the Stage. From these former
men, did spring Calvin, Beza, the Puritans of England, Scotland, and Geneua;
which men, as being presumed to be wholly spiritualized, and as it were obsest
with the holy Ghost (such is the pride of Nouelisme) made a far more refyned
and sublimated Reformation (and all by Negatiues) then their Predecessors had
done. For almost all the other Affirmative Catholic Articles passed under the
fyle of their dislike. And therewith they wholly denied the said articles* The
chief articles denied by these Enthysiasts (to omit diverse of them for
breuity) are these following, D. Willet, in his special book entitled:
Lymbomastix, and most Puritanes.
Christ's descending into hell: the Headship of the Church to reside in one
alone: Denied by Beza, Calvin Knox, in whole Treatises.
universality of grace, Vide the Survey of the Book of common Prayer.
the power of priesthood to remit sins, denied by Calvin as appears by
Schlusse^b. in Theolog. Caluinist. lib. 1. fol. 60. and by D Willet in
Synopsis. page 432.
Baptism by lay persons in time of necessity, Con^l in his examen page 63. 64.
Ceremonies, and Vide Whitgifts defense, page 259.
Church apparel etc. But the denial of Beza shall serve as a Chorus, to the
former particular denyalls; who taking (as it should seem) a wanton
complacency, in repeating the word, I deny, thus writes. See Duraeus in
co^fut. respo^s. Whitaker. ad december rations. Camp. rat. 10.
I deny that God can make Christ's body to be present in the Eucharist, I deny
seven Sacnaments, I deny grace to be given by Sacraments, I deny freewill in
man, I deny good works, I deny prayer for the dead, I deny Christ to be borne
of a Virgin, I deny that he descended into hell, I deny the Communion of
Saints, I deny the forgiveness of sins. Thus Beza. To whose denyalls, I will
make bold to add one more: to wit: I deny, that Beza, houlding these Negations,
can be saved. And thus these former Men, who as before did Luther, Zuinglius,
and Bucer, much vaunt of their proficie^cy in this their negative controlling
of the Roman Church: for Calvin being expostulated by some how endless he and
his sect were in going out from their former proceedings, thus salueth the
point: Calvin. lib. de sca^dal. extant in Tractat. Theolog.
They do, as if a man should accuse us, that at the first breaking of day, we
see not yet the Sun, shining at noone day.

But what? Is not Protestancy come yet to its (...), and perfection of its
negative Reformation by all the former Protestants? No verily. For the
Protestants Reformation, in regard it is never at an end, is like herein to
Eternity, which is ever spending it self, and yet never lessens. For in this
next place step in the Brownists, and the Anti-trinitarians, both of them
challenging to themselves a new Reformation, even in the Negative part. Thus do
the Brownists, for example, deny the Barrowes book in his discourse against
Universities.
Lords prayer, and See Halls Apology, sect 30. against the Brownists.
Baptism of Infants, which they say, is the mark In Hals descript. to the
Separat. before the Epistle dedicatory.
of the Beast. They also deny our Hall vbi supra.
material Churches, and Barrows vbi supra.
Universities.

To conclude with the Anti-trinitarians, they yet urging a further Negative
Reformation, do heervpon deny the blessed Trinity, and divinity of Christ;
condemning the Catholic Article of the Trinity for the most notable relic,
or brand of all Romish corruption: for thus M. Hooker writes hereof: M. Hooker
in his Ecclesiastical policy lib. 4. page 18^.
The Arians in the reformed Churches of Poland, think the very belief of the
Trinity, to be a part of Antichristian corruption etc. Hitherto of the
Protestants Reformations of the Catholic and Roman faith, and all this by
mere Negatiues: I mean Negatiues to the Affirmative contrary Articles taught
by the Church of Rome; from whence we may well infer, that the faith of a
Protestant in regard of such his Negative Religion, is a mere wast, and
deuastation of all true faith, and that his belief consists only in not
believing.

Now that the Judicious Reader may more fully and intensly observe, how many
Articles of our Catholic Religion the Protestant denies, I will here amasse
the chiefest of them together, though most of them have been above expressed,
that so the Reader may have a full Synopsis or sight of them all at once. The
Protestant then denies the Real presence, the blessed Sacrifice of the Mass,
the visibility of the Church, the Churches freedom from error, the succession
of Pastors, universality of grace, freewill, prayer to Saints, Purgatory,
prayer for the dead, Pilgrimages, diverse parts of Canonical Scripture, Papal
Jurisdiction of Bishops, power of Priesthood to remit sins, Monastical
life, vowed chastity, single life of priests, prescript fasting-dayes, the
Grace and Necessity of Baptism, five Sacraments, Christ's descending into Hell,
besides some others. So wholly negative are the Protestants in all the Articles
controuerted at this day, between them and the Church of Rome. Neither can our
Adversaries reply, that they hold diverse Affirmative points, ventilated at
this day between us and them, we retayning the Negatiues; as for example:
Parity of Ministers, Marriage of Priests, and other Votaries, Reprobation,
Christ's only Mediatorship by way of intercession, Christ's suffering in soul
etc. To this I answer, that these points are Affirmative in words, but merely
negative in sense, (like some drugs, which are pleasant in the taste, but
dangerous in the operation) since they are negatiues, to the Monarchy of the
Churches government, to vowed chastity, to Universality of Grace, to the
intercession of Saints, and to the all sufficiency of Christ's corporal death:
all which our Catholic points are Affirmative. Such is the subtility of
Innouatio^ in doctrine, as to inuest their Negative Tenets in Affirmative
Titles, that thereby they may seem more specious and regardable. And thus
far concerning the foresaid Prolegomena.

That the Protestants have often corrected and reformed their Translations of
the Bible, and the Liturgy or Common-booke of prayer, in favor of their
Negative Religion; every later excepting against the former, as corrupt and
impure. CHAP. III.
I Will subnect to the former Prolegomena, this passage following; which is to
show, that after our Protestants had newly molded their Religion by their
pure-impure negatiues; then instantly their next labor was to make new
Translations of the Holy Scripture, and to reform their public Liturgy, or
book of Common prayer, according to their before chosen negative Religion. And
as the Protestants at several times more and more reformed their Religion by
increase of Negatiues; so they also at the said several times made new
Translations of the Bible, and set forth new books of Common Prayer, ever
sortable to their last negative Reformation. Thus we see, how this censuring
and reforming humor is the very eye, comportment, and carriage of Protestancy.
From which course of theirs the judicious Reader may observe the preposterous
method taken by the Protestants herein. For whereas themselves do teach, that
faith and Religion is to be extracted out of the true and infallible sense of
the Scripture (and consequently that their judgments in the Scripture) ought
to be known, and to precede in time before faith, yet with the^ the faith was
first established, and then the Scripture was after by their Tra^slations,
squared to their faith. Thus with them it fell out, that the Scripture was true
in such, and such a point, because it confirmed by their translation, their new
assumed negative faith; and not that their faith was true, because it was
consonant to the Scripture, before it was so translated by them: so making
their faith the square of the Scripture, and not the Scripture the square of
their faith. But to come first to the several Translations of Scripture, the
later ever condemning the former, as not sufficiently translated in full
defense of their negative Positions. And first Luther translated the Scripture
presently after his open revolt and Apostasy. This translation was as the first
much admired (so blazing stars at their first appearance, are much gazed
upon) yet because it warranted many affirmative Articles of our Catholic
faith, never denied by Luther, therefore Zwinglius does in great acerbity of
words traduce him for such his Translation, thus inueighing against him:
Zwingl. tom. 2. ad Luther. lib. de Sacram. page 412. 413.
Thou, Luther, do corrupt the word of God, thou art seen to be a manifest
corrupter and peruerter of the holy Scriptures. Now by reason of Luthers
presumed false Translation, a new Translation was after set forth by the
Deuines of Basil; which translation was nevertheless wholly condemned by Calvin
and Beza (as not favoring enough their negative Faith) for thus Beza writes
thereof: Beza in resp. ad defens. and respons. Castal.
The Basil Translation is in many places wicked, and altogether different
from the mind of the Holy Ghost. Heerupon a third translation of the Scripture
was made by Calvin and Beza, wholly presumed to be according to the holy Ghost;
yet it is found so defective and impure, that Molinaeus (a learned Protant)
puts upon it this Theta, or mark of condemnation: Molin. in sua Tra^slat.
Noui Testam. Part. 12. fol, 110.
Calvin in his Harmony makes the text of the Gospel to leap up and down; he
uses violence to the letter of the Gospel; and besides, he adds to the
text. The same Protestant thus also auerreth of Beza; Ibid. part. 20. 30. 40.
etc.
Beza actually changes the Text. And thereupon insta^ceth in diverse of Beza
his corruptions. But Castalio (the remarkable Protestant) is not afraid to
reprehend Beza his Translation in this full manner: In defens. Tra^slat page
170.
To note the errors of that ^ranslation, would require a great volume. Finally
Castalio himself composed a translation, yet so defective and impure, that Beza
(by way of recrimination) condemns it (to use Beza his own words) Beza in
Testam in praefat. and in Annot. in Math 3. in 1. Cor. 1. etc.
as Sacrilegious, wicked, and Ethnicall. And thus much for some taste and
delibation of our forayne Protestants Translations of the Scripture; each later
translation accusing the former for imperfect and impure, as not being Negative
enough in behalf of their Negative Religion: so certain it is that the very
pulse, life, and energy of Protestancy are mere Negations.

But before we end this point, we will cast our eye upon our English
Translations of the Bible, and see what entertaynement they find at the hands
of other more reformed and Negative Protestants: for though diverse English
translatio^s have been made of the Bible (the later ever conde^ning the
former, for not being reformed or negative enough; yet the Puritans (whose
grace chiefly rests in disgracing their Predecessors, and who are most
devoted to this negative faith) condemn all the said translations, as false
and impure. For Carleile (the Puritan) thus censureth them: Carleile, that
Christ descended. not into Hell page 116. 117. 118. and sequent.
The English Translations have depraved the sense, obscured the Truth, and
deceived the ignorant; and in many places, they do detort the Scripture from it
right sense And other English Puritanes do vomit out their judgment of the
English translation in these words: Abrid g^ment of the book given to his
Majesty, by the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese.
A Translation, that takes away from the Text, that adds to the text, and
that sometimes to the changing and obscuring of the meaning of the Holy Ghost.
And heerupon they solicited the late King for a new tranon, which was granted
to them, and after published by authority. But how can we rest assured, that
they will unchangeably satisfy themselves with this last translation, and will
not in time be as earnest for another? Now, let us descend to their often
alteration of their public Prayer-booke, made by the advice of Crammer, Peter
Martyr, and Bucer; and as the Statute says In the statuts of 2. 3 Edward 6.
cap. 1.
made by the aid of the holy Ghost. This prayer-booke retained diverse
Affirmative points of the Roman and Catholic Religion: for it All these (with
diverse other Catholic points) are expressly set down in the book of
co^mon-prayer, printed in folio by Edward Whit-Church, cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum anno 1549.
admitted Baptism by lay Persons in time of necessity, as also, grace given in
that Sacrament; in like sort it retained absolution of the sick penitent,
given by the Priest, in these words: By authority committed to me, I absolve
thee of all thy sins: and accordingly it retained special confession of the
sick penitent. It further allowed the anointing of the sick Penitent; It
maintained the consecration of the water of Baptism with the sign of the
Cross. It also retained the usage of Chrisme, and of the child's anointing,
and of Exorcisme. Briefly (to omit many other dogmaticall and Affirmative
points of the Roman faith and Religion) it maintained prayer for the dead, and
intercession, and offering of prayers by the Angels.

But this Liturgy, or Book of common Prayer, was houlden during the reign of
Queen Elizabeth over Papisticall, as each man knows. And thereupon the said
Praier-booke was reformed in her time, and made more Negative, by culling out
of it the former Affirmative Catholic points; yet this was not done in so full
a manner, as it gave contentment; for Master Parker thus complayneth thereof:
against Symbolizing part 2. cap. 5. sect. 2. page 4.
The day star was no^ risen so high, in their days, when ye^ Queen
Elizabeth reformed the defects of King Edwards Communion book^ etc. Ibid. sect.
17. page 39.
yet so altered as when it was proposed to be confirmed, to the Parliament, it
was refused. To whose judgment Cartwright (the Puritan) thus subscribeth:
Cartwright in his 2. Reply, part. 1. page 41.
the Church of England changed the Book of common Prayer, twice or thrice,
after it had received the knowledge of the Gospel. And yet the last change
made is so imperfect in the judgment of the Puritanes, as that they (wishing a
new Common prayer book to be composed) thus censure of the former: In
Whitgifts defense. page 474.
The form of the communion book is taken from the Church of Antichrist, as
the reading of the Epistles and Ghospells etc. the most of the prayers, the
manner of ministering Sacraments etc. of Confirmation etc. Neither are our
Puritanes less forbearing to charge the Communion book (as being in their
judgment over Affirmative) for thus some of them do write: In the book
entitled: The petition of twenty two Preachers in London.
Many things in the Communion book are repugnant to the word of God. And
again: In the Communion book there be things, of which there is no sense,
there is contradiction in it, even of necessary and essential points of
Religion. And upon this their dislike the Puritans at the Page 58
Conference at Hampton Court, motioned, that they might not be forced to
subscribe to the Communion Book.

In this last place let us examine a little the Liturgy of the Brownists. This
their form of Prayer is so Negative, as that rejecting all other matters, it
chiefly consists, of an extemporall conceived Prayer, singing a Psalm, and a
Sermon. And yet the singing of a Psalm was in doubt once to be taken away by
some of the Brownists, as being but a humane Invention; and thereupon some of
them do style, singing of Psalms in the Church, In the bobke called, the new
age of old names cap. 2^. p. 122
howling of wolves, croking of Ravens etc. By all this we may see, how variable
and inconstant the Protestants have discovered themselves to be in admitting of
the Book of common Prayer: which point D. Dove (an eminent Protestant) as
making a recapitulation of several forms of their Communion book, thus
writes: Persuasions to English Recusants page 31.
Concerning the Book of Common Prayer, when the Mass was first put down,
King Henry had his English Liturgy, and that was judged absolute, and without
exception: but when King Edward came to the Crown, that was condemned, and
another in the place, which Peter Martyr, and Bucer did approve, as very
consonant to Gods word. When Queen Elizabeth began her Reign, the former was
judged to be full of imperfections, and a new devised, and allowed by consent
of the Clergy, But about the middle of her reign, we grew weary of that Book,
and great means have been made to abandone that, and establish another. Which
although it was not obtained, yet we do at the least at every change of Prince,
change our book of Common Prayers: we be so wanton, that we know not, what we
would have. Thus plainly and fully D. Dove of this point. And thus much to
show, how the Protestants and their descendants have made several Translations
of their Bible, and composed diverse forms of Liturgy, or Common Prayer; every
later Translation of the Scripture, and every later form o^ Common Prayer,
being more Negative then the former. From all which we may most certainly
conclude (and so extract Truth out of falsehood) that as yet the Protestants
have never enjoyed a sincere Translation of the Scriptures, or an Orthodoxall
Liturgy, or form of Common Prayer.

That Protestancy is a Nonentity, proved from the Principles of School
Divinity, and Philosophy. CHAP. IIII.
NOW after we have manifested the former points, which are but certain
graduall steps to the main question here to be entreated of; it follows,
that by the applying the said points to certain acknowledged and received
Theorems, and Principles of School divinity, we are to euict the certainty of
our assumed Thesis, or Position; to wit, that Protesta^cy is a mere Nonentity.

Wherefore for the better illustration of this subject, we are to call to mind,
that the Schoolmen do teach, that S. Thomas part. 1. qu. 16.
Omnis res est vera, secundum quod habet propriam formam suae naturae. And
again S. Thomas vbi supra.
Vnumquodque sicut custodit suum esse, ita custodit suam veritatem. Every thing
as it keeps its essence or being, so it keeps its truth. And yet more. S.
Thomas vbi supra. vide Dura^d. lib. 1. distinct. 20. q. 6. and Viguerius de
anima cap. 2. sect. 2. and Aristot. in Metaphys. 9.
Verum non potest apprehendi, nisi apprehe^datur sub ratione entis. Truth
cannot be apprehended, but as it is apprehended, as a thing having a real
being. And hence it is, that they conclude: Res quaelibet vera est absolute.
Every thing, in that it is a thing, is true. And again in more express
terms: Fundamentum veritatis est entitas rerum. The foundation of truth is
the Entity, or being of things. With whom assenteth S. Austin, thus teaching
Aug. in Soliloq. l. 2. cap. 8.
verum est, id quod est. From all which their last inference is, that: Ens, and
Verum conuertuntur. Every thing that is, is true; and every truth has a real
Entity. Now the maine source, from whence all these scholasticall sentences
receive their spring, is, because every Entity, or being, is from God, Genes. 1.
who wholly made all things; and that all Truth proceeded likewise from God, who
is John. 14.
truth it self.

But now touching that, which is not, but only is a privation, or denial of
that, which is; the Schoolmen further teach; S. Thomas part. 1. q. 17.
Intellectus decipitur no^ circa quid est, sed circa quid non est. The
understanding is deceived, not about that, which really is, but about that,
which is not. And further: S. Thomas vbi supra.
falsum est id, quod non est apprehendere, vt esse; and quod est non esse. That
is false, which is not to be apprehended, as it is a thing, but as it is not.
And from hence they conclude, that of such defects and priuations, as lying,
falsehood etc. there is no efficient, but a deficient cause: and that all such
proceed only from the Devil, John. 8.
the father thereof. And according heereto, your own Peter Martyr thus truly
discourses: Peter Martyr in Common places in English. part. 1. c. 17. page 184.
An evil thing has no efficient but a deficient cause; if any will search out
this efficient cause, it is even like, as if he would see darkness with his
eyes, or comprehend silence with his ears; which being Priuations, it is no
need they should have efficient causes. Thus far Peter Martyr; which saying
is sortable to the judgment of Austin de ciuit. Dei lib. 12. cap 7.
S. Austin himself: so undeniable a truth it is, that what is in it self
Nothing, cannot proceed from God, who is but One, yet All things; most simple,
yet contains in himself, eminenter, the perfection of All things. And thus
it is certain, that he cannot make nothing, who yet of nothing made all
things, since to make that, which is not, is not so much to make, as rather a
not-making; to the performance whereof Impotency, not Power is required. Now
from these former doctrinal speculations in School divinity (acknowledged for
true, even by all learned Men, either Catholic or Protestant) it is unavoidably
euicted, that all truth, which is (as is above demonstrated) ever apprehended,
subratione entis, is positive; and therefore in reality of sense, evermore
affirmative: as on the contrary side, that error, or falsehood, (which is no
other thing, then a denial of some truth) is upon the same ground (and by
force, and law of Contrarieties) always Negative.

But to prevent the wilful or ignorant mistaking of our A duersaries (for
some men are of that liuor, and harsh morosity, as that they even meditate how
to contradict) my meaning here is not that every verbal Affirmative
Proposition does contain in it self a truth of real Entity; for it is
willingly acknowledged, that Man's brain does often fabricate many Chimera's,
and aerie Imaginations, which are deprived of all reality of true existence, or
entity to support them. But this I maintain (which is sufficient to my
designed end) that whatsoever is true, has entity, and is in this respect ever
Affirmative; and whatsoever is false, is but a denial of a truth, and therefore
(as having no real Being) is evermore negative. And though it is in man's
power, through a voluntary frame, and contexture of words, that falsehood may
be masked under affirmative terms, and truth under negations; yet if we look
into the reality of sense and true understanding, the truth is ever
Affirmative, and the falsehood negative. To exemplify this; to say, God is not
cruel, or, Man is not blind: these Propositions, though they be in terms
negative, yet they are in sense affirmative; only as denying the negation of
Mercy in God, and of blyndnes in man: so on the contrary part, to say in
affirmative terms, God is cruel, and man is blind: though these sayings be
delivered in show of affirmative terms; yet if we do vnueyle them they are
found to be in sense and understanding merely negative; since cruelty is
exclusive to Mercy, and blyndnes to sight: and it is as much as to say in
negative words, God is not merciful, or, man cannot see. Thus far of these
speculations. Now I draw from al these former grounds this unavoidable
Conclusion; to wit, that Protestancy (as it is Protestancy) I mean as it
consists merely of negative Propositions and Tenets (and to consist only of
such, it is above demonstrated) has no true reality, or subsistency in it
self, but is a mere vaporous, intentionall, and Imaginary Conceit, and
consequently in it self false. For if things be only true, as they have a
real being, and therein affirmative; and false, if they want such a being and
therein negative (as the former Axioms of school divinity do most evidently
teach: (how then can Protestancy, which consists only in denyals and negations,
which have no being, be real, or true? For what reality of being is there, in
a not-being of Purgatory, or in not praying to Saints, and so of the rest? and
if there be no reality in these (as infallibly there is not) how then can
Protestancy have any Reality in self? And if it have no reality in it self,
how then can it be really in the soul of man? For certain it is, that what
wants a subsistency in it self, must necessarily want an existency in any
other thing. Now I will conclude this Chapter, in assuring the Reader, that I
rest half amazed, to see me^ (presumed to be of Judgment) thus to suffer
themselves to be befooled by others (and this to the irreconciliable and
interminable overthrow of their souls) by entertaining certain aerie and empty
Positions in lieu of faith, obtruded upon them, which in a final and even
libration are found to be merely a destruction, and anihilation of all faith:
Galat. cap. 3.
O insensati Galatae, quis vos fascinauit!

The Nonentity of Protestancy, by by reason of its negations, proved from the
like supposed example of a Philosopher, denying most principles of Philosophy.
CHAP. V.
SVch is the nature of prejudice of judgment, as that it is better able to see
its own defects in a third point, wherein by resemblance it may glass it
self, then in that, to which it is so much devoted; like as the weakness of
our eyes can better endure the sight of the sunbeams reflected by the water,
then in the body of the sun it self. He that will not acknowledge the
irreality, and Nonentity of the faith of the Protestant, by his denying almost
of all positive Articles of Christian Religion defended at this day by the
Church of Rome; let that man (if he be a scholar) seriously peruse over this
ensuing Chapter, which treats by supposall of a Philosopher, who should deny
most parts of Philosophy, acknowledged and taught for true, by the famous
Philosophers of all times. I have made choice purposely to insist in Natural
Philosophy; since nature is the subordinate Instrument of God, first created by
himself; or rather nature is Gods great hand, wherewith he sternes and gouernes
this whole Frame and Universe; every Cause in nature, being as it were a finger
of this Hand; and every Effect of the cause, a print of the said Finger. Now
then let us, as they say, ex hypothesi, imagine a man, who would usurp to
himself the title of a natural Philosopher, by only denying most of the
positive, and Affirmative Axioms and principles in natural Philosophy, some
few of the chiefest excepted, taught by Aristotle, and all other learned
Philosophers; and then let us conclude, in the closure of all, what a strange
Philosopher would this man be: and whether his Philosophy could truly deserve
the name of Philosophy, or rather that it would prove to be a mere denial and
wast of all true Philosophy. Let this man, then I say, agree with Aristotle,
that natural Philosophy entreats of a corporeal substance, animate or
inanimate, with all his natural causes, effects, and accidences: to wit, as it
is subject to mutation and change. Let him also grant, that there are Four
chief parts of this natural Philosophy: of which the first part concerns
the general and common Principles of natural things. The second entreats of
the world, of the Elements, of their first and secondary qualities, of the
composition of the bodies, through the mixture of the Elements and first
qualities. The third part discourses chiefly of Meteors. The fourth and last
part disputes de Anima, of the soul, and of its several kinds or degrees,
and faculties. Let us suppose, I say, this man to agree with Aristotle, and al
other chief Philosophers in these and perhaps in some other few Affirmative
head Theorems, and principles of natural Philosophy, as the Protestant does
agree with the Church of Rome in some maine Affirmative Articles of Christian
Faith. Yet withal, let us suppose this new Philosopher do deny most of other
subordinate Positions, which Aristotle holds affirmatively in all the said
four parts of natural Philosophy: as for example, touching the first part of
this Philosophy, we will suppose, that he maintains, that Materia, forma, and
Priuatio, are not principia reru^ naturalium; that there is no Materia prima of
the which a natural body is first generated, and into which it is lastly
corrupted: and that this Materia prima is only a Philosophical conceit, and
fiction. That there is not any Motus in that sense, as it is commonly defined
by the Natural Philosopher; to wit, to be, Actus entis, quod est in potentia,
quatenus est mobile. An Act of a thing, which is in potentia, as it is
moveable. That, admitting there were any such motus, yet that the division of
motus, is not perfect, to wit, that there should be six kinds of motion: viz.
Generation, Corruption, Augmentation, Diminution, Alteration, and Lation.

Let him also maintain, that Locus Physicus, is not the vltima superficies
concaua corporis continentis immobilis primo, but that it ought to have some
other definition given to it. Finally (to omit infinite other Affirmative
Propositions in the first part of Natural Philosophy) that Tempus Physicum, is
not, Numerus mensurans motum rerum mutabilium, secundu^ prius and posterius:
that is; that time is not a space, which is measured by the motion of the
Heavens, and the Sun, but that this definition is most false, and to be
exploded.

Now in like manner to come to the second part above specified of natural
Philosophy. Let us further imagine, that this all-denying Philosopher
maintaynes, that the motion of the heavens is not precisely Circular, and
Uniform. That, the particular motion of the spheres proceed neither, ab
intelligentijs, nor ab interna forma of the heavens. That, nihil est extra
vltimum Caelum. That, it cannot be proved, that a star is densior para sui
Orbis; the more thick, or gross part of its Orb. That there are not any
Excentrikes, or Epicycles in the Orbs of the Planets. That one and the same
star cannot have two different motions at the same time, though these
several Motions be supposed to be made upon different Poles. That the sphere
of the fixed Stars, or the Sun do not move at all, but in lieu hereof, the
Earth moves, according to Copernicus; and that not the Earth, but the Sun
(according also to his opinion) is the Center of the world. That the stars do
not borrow their light and splendor originally from the Sun, by means of
their opacity, and thicknes of their substance, receiving into it the beams of
the Sun. That the four Elements are not the Principles or secondary matter
of all natural bodies. That the form of all the Elements is not spherical.
That there is no such Symbolisme in the qualities of the Elements, as Aristotle
teaches to be. That the Elements do not consist only ex partibus Homogeneis,
but also ex partibus Heterogeneis. That the eleme^t of fire is not placed above
the highest region of the Air. That there are not three Regions of the Air,
or if there be, that the middle region is not cold, per antiperistasi^. That
there is no transmutatio^ o^ the elements of one into another.

To come to the third part of natural Philosophy. As first let him maintain,
that there are not five distinct species of conpounded, or mixed bodies, to wit,
Meteors, Mineralls, Plants, Living Creatures, and Man; but that there are,
either more, o^ fewer. Tha^ a Vapor, is not the matter of watery Meteors, and
an Exhalation o^ fiery Meteors. That Snow is no^ ever engendered in the lowest
regio^ of the Air, and Hayle in the middle Region only. That the cause of
Thunder, and rain following it, is not an exhalation set on fire, being
encompassed within a watery clowd. That the Moon by casting its beams upon
the Sea, and with its heat dilating and spreading the exhalations, mixed with
the Seawater, is not the cause of the flow^ng, and ebbing of the Sea.

To descend to the last part of natural Philosophy, which chiefly treats of
the Soul: And first let him justify (among other things) that the Soul (here
we ^peak as well de anima vegetatiua sen^tiua, as, de anima rationali) is not
(...), that is, the Act, Essence, ^r form, by force whereof its natural ^ody
is moved, and performs its ope^ations. That man has not one ^nly soul, but
three different sou^es; to wit, the Vegetative, the Sen^tiue, and the Rational
soul. That ^pecies ser sibilis is not ever required that by the help thereof,
the ex^ernall and internal sense should ^erforme their operations. That ^he
Eye (of whose artificial natural fabric or compacture I will speak nothing)
sees not, either, extramittendo, or intromittendo, but by some other unknown
way, ordained by God. That in man's body the Diaphrama, or septum transuersum,
serves not as a partition wall to divide the Concupiscible faculty, from the
Irascible. That, that Principle in Anatomy is to be denied, which teaches,
that the veins proceed from the liver and give nourishment, the Arteries from
the heart and give life; the Synews from the brain, and give motion and sense.
That in the Soul of man, there are not two principal faculties (to wit, the
understanding and the will) but that the operation of both these are performed
by one only faculty: that the Anima spirits are not first elaborated and
wrought in that connection of the sinews, toward the Cerebellum, which is
called, Rete mirabile. That the division of Intellectus agens, and patiens, is
not to be admitted for good. That anima separata cannot exercise its
operations, but during the time it is organized with the body. Finally (to omit
infinite other Affirmative points maintained by Aristole, and all other learned
Philosophers) that there are not those several Natural habits in the soul of
man, which all Philosophers ascribe to it; to wit, Sinderesis, dictamen
Rationis, and Conscientia; so as Synderesis should in every Sillogismo
practico, as it is called, ponere maiorem, dictamen rationis, minorem; and
Conscientia out of the two former, elicere Conclusione^. Now to draw toward an
end of this passage: if we suppose a man, as before we entreated, to retain
some few points or Principles in Philosophy with Aristotle, and other great
Philosophers; but in most of the branches descending from these Principles
wholly to dissent from them, by maintaining ever the Negative part in those
Conclusions (as here this Philosopher does) what should we conceive of such a
Philosopher? and how poor, barren and naked a Philosophy would this be? or can
we truly justify, that this Philosophy (as wholly resting in the denyals and
Negations of almost all affirmative points, taught by Aristotle and others)
has any reality of Being in it self? No: for though this Philosophy
entreats Negatiuely of things, which are in rerum natura; yet it self (for
want of a real being) is not in rerum natura. And yet such is the state of the
Protestants herein, both being cast in one mould. Therefore to parallel them
both together, I here say, that the Philosopher here supposed, reiects most of
the affirmative points of Philosophy: The Protestant denies most of the
Affirmative Articles of Christian Faith, The Philosopher by this his denial
contemnes the authority of all chief Philosophers, living within the compass
of these last two thousand years: The Protestant by his like denyalls,
betramples the authority of al Orthodoxall Fathers, for these last sixteen
hundred years. The Philosopher needs not any pregnancy of judgment as long
as his Philosophy rests only in denyalls: The Protestant neither needs any
supernatural light, which is required to true Faith to insist in his
negations. To conclude, the Philosopher by these his Negatiues introduces a
wast, and destruction of all true and solid Philosophy: The Protestant
begets by his Negations a deuastation, ruin, and utter extinguishment of al
real and positive Articles of Christian faith and Religion.

That the Heathen Philosopher conspireth with the Protestant in the denial of
most, if not all of such points of Religion, wherein the Protestant by his like
denial of them differs from the Catholic. CHAP. VI.
IT will not be here, I hope, impertinent, to show in this place, how the
Heathen Philosopher co^parteth in the most points (for I will not say in all)
with the Protestants, in which points the Protestants do differ by their
negative Faith, from the Catholic faith. From which, being once declared, it
will appear, that if he Heathen Philosopher has no true and positive Faith of
Christian Religion, who penetrateth no further, then into the Nature impressed
in things, which nature is the very Art, or Organ of God; then may it be
deservedly called in question, whether the Protestant Faith has aany reality,
or formed being in it self? And thus may falsehood be controwled by the patrons
of falsehood. And to exemplify this assumed task, in most of the chiefest
Articles of the Protestant Negative Faith: The Protestant acknowledges not any
true real Sacrifice to be in these days; the Heathen Philospher agrees with
him therein. The Protestant acknowledges not Freewill in man; the Heathen
teaches the same, by maintaining of his Stoicall fatum, or destiny. The
Protestant denies Lymbus Patrum, Purgatory, and Invocation of Saints; The
Heathen being demanded of these points, would answer, they are but mere
dreams or fictions. The Protestant denies all merit of works, or
Justification by works, much more Evangelical Counsels; The Heathen (as not
knowing what these things mean) disclaymes from the same. The Protestant
takes away Universality of grace, purchased by our Saviors passion; The
Heathen does the like, since he is ignorant what Grace is, and rejects our
Saviors passion. The Protestant teaches the Impossibility of keeping the
Commandments; the Heathen not acknowledging the said Commandments, but
guided only by the stream of Nature, without Grace, must therefore of
necessity deny the possibility of observing them. The Protestant maintains,
that Christ from his Nativity was, as man, not free from all ignorance; and
full of all knowledge; the Heathen as not believing in Christ, must needs
justify the same. The Protestant denies all reverence, and bowing to the name
of JESUS; the Heathen does the same. The Protestant denies, that the
Sacraments do confer Grace; the Heathen acknowledges no Sacraments, and
therefore no grace to be derived to man, by his participating of them. To
conclude, the Protestant denies all Monachisme, Vows, the necessity of
Baptism, and diverse other Affirmative Positions, above recited, and taught by
the Catholic Church; Will the Heathen Philosopher, think you, acknowledge as
true, any of the said Catholic points? Thus we see, that where the ratio
formalis of Protestancy, consists in absolutely denying the Affirmative
positions of the Catholics; this unbelieving Naturalist, or Heathen
Philosopher, by his like denial of the said points enters into a most strait
league, and intercourse of Friendship with the Protestant therein. And from
this great conformity of negative Faith between the Heathen and the Protestant,
it ryseth, that diverse Protestants do wholly gentilize herein, granting
Salvation, and eternal happiness to Heathens, dying Heathens. Thus for example,
we find no less an obscure Protestant, then Swinglius to write in this sort;
Zwing. in l epist. Swingl. and Oecolamp. lib. 1. page 39.
Ethnicus si piam mentem domi fouerit, Christianus est, etiamsi Christum
ignoret. And thereupon Swinglius concludes particulerly, that Swing. tom. 2.
fol. 118. and 559.
Hercules, Theseus, Socrates, Aristides, etc. are now in heaven. A point so
confessed by Swinglius, that Echarius, a learned Protestant, thus acknowledges
of Swinglius; quod In his Fas^iculus Co^trouers. printed Lipsiae. an. 1009.
cap. 19. p. 427.
Socrates, Aristides, Numa, Camillus, Hercules, Scipiones, Catones, and alij
Gentiles comparticipes sint vitae eternae scribit quidem Swinglius, ad Regem
Galliae, quem defendunt Tigurim, Bullingerus, Gualterus, Hardenburgius etc.
That these named Protestants, I mean, I Gualterus in his Apolog. p o Swi^g.
fol. 27. praefix. 1. tom oper. Swingl.
Gualterus, Bulling. in co^fes. Eccles. Tigurin. and Bullin. in his preface of
allowa^ce to Swingl. his exposition fidei ad Regem fol. 559.
Bullinger, Simlerus in vita Bullingeri.
Simlerus, the Tigurine Deuines did defend with Swinglius, the saluauation of
the Heathens, dying Heathens, appears further besides, from the testimony of
the forsaid Echarius, even from the references here set down.

Now, where the Protestant, to vindicate his profession from reproach and
contumely, may reply, in answer heerto; that seeing most of the points above
rehearsed do presuppose belief in Christ, in which belief the Protestant does
differ from the Heathen Philosopher, the Heathen not believing in him: it
therefore must of necessity follow, that the Heathen Philosopher, as not
believing in Christ, must therefore not believe the former Articles, which
depend of the believing in Christ* I urge, this answer is impertinent, for I
do not here insist in the reason, why the Heathen Philosopher houldeth the
negative part in the former points: but I insist only in auerring that the
Protestant does agree with the Heathen Philosopher in the denial of the said
points, affirmed by the Catholic. Neither avails it any thing to say, that
though the Protestant houldeth the negative part in the former conclusions; yet
that he belieueth with the Catholic in Christ; that he houldeth with him,
there is Grace, that there are Sacraments, that there is Scripture etc. though
in the manner, or some other circumstance accompanying them, he differs from
the Catholic. This solueth not the doubt. First, because we observe that
Swinglius, and those other Protestants above cited, do not exact any articulate
belief in Christ at all, as necessary to salvation; since we see, they are not
afraid to indenize Heathe^s for good Christians. Secondly in that I restrain
this my Assertion of co^paring the Heathen Philosopher with the Protestant only
in those points, wherein the Protestant differs from the Catholic: But in
the former points, it is certain, that the Heathen agrees with the
Protestant, and the Protestant as maintayning the Negative, differs from the
Catholic defe^ding in them the Affirmative. Again, where the Protestant
agrees with the Catholic, for example; that Christ is the Savior of the
world, that there is Scripture, Grace, Sacraments, Baptism, Eucharist, etc.
these Articles in general the Protestant houldeth not, as he is a Protestant,
but only as he is a Christian (as in the front of this Treatise is manifested.)
For quatenus he is a Protestant; that is, quatenus he is a man differing from
the Catholic, he ever houldeth the Negative. And even where he houldeth the
Affirmative foundation in some of the said points; as that Christ is the
Savior of the world, that there is Divine Scripture, Grace, Sacraments,
Baptism, Eucharist etc. these he takes not from himself, but borrows them
from the Catholic Church. This is evident, for at the time of Luthers first
revolt (who was the first Protestant in these days, as his own Conrad. Sl^es.
in Theol. Calvin. l. 2. fol 17. says: It is im^udency to say, tha^ any learned
men in Germany before Luther, did hold the doctrine of the Gospel. See Luther
of this point in loc. co^m. class. 4. p. 51.
brethren do teach) from whence did Luther learn, that Christ was the Savior
of the world, that there is divine Scripture, Grace, Sacraments, or from whence
received he his Ordination, if not from the Catholic Church?

The confessed Inuisibility of the Protestant Church, not only at the first
rising of Luther, but also for many ages before (proved in this Treatise) does
convince the truth of this point. And therefore D. Field had just reason to
say, D. Field in his Treatise of the Church lib. 3. c. page 72.
In the known Church of the world, wherein our Ancestors lived and dyed, Luther
and the rest were baptized, received their Ordinance and power of Ministry. If
now any other should at last expostulate and say, that the Protestant is
wronged by comparing him to the Heathen Philosophers, seeing many of those
Philophers were Idolaters; to this I reply, and say, that the comparison here
made, is not with such wicked Philosophers, but only with those most learned
Philosophers, who acknowledged a Deity, and never taught, nor formally
practiced Idolatry: and such were Plato, Xenophon, Aristotle, Seneca, and many
others. Again the co^formity in faith here made is not touching those points,
which the Philosophers affirmatively believed or practiced; but only in such
negative Positions, which are also denied by the Protestant. And with this I
will here rest, concluding nothing of my self; but will refer it to the
censure of the most judicious Reader: whether this great affinity, and
brotherly association between the learned Heathen Philosopher, and the
symbolizing Protestant in their both promiscuously denying such Articles, as
are affimed by the Catholics, do carry any blemish to the Protestants Gospel,
or no? or whether if the Heathen have no real Faith in the said negative
points, it follows not, that the Protestant (as a Protestant) can have in
like sort no real faith in his believing the same Negative points? But by this
we may discern, that the clouds of partiality and contradiction being once
gathered about the ma^s judgment, does make him think others to seem less,
and to err, when indeed they do not.

That Protestancy is but a Nullity of faith, and consequently, with reference
to faith, a Nonentity; proved from the definition of faith, and other
Conditions necessarily annexed to Faith. CHAP. VII.
EVery definition of a thing is the Touchstone, wherewith we try, what other
things can truly come within the Orb or compass of the thing defined, and what
not. I will exemplify this in the definition of faith, delivered by the
Apostle, and so see, if the Faith of a Protestant can be called faith; or
rather in respect of Faith, a No^entity, and absence of faith.

We find that the Apostle defines Faith in these words: Heb. 11.
Fides est sperandarum substantia rerum, argumentum non apparentium. That is:
faith is the substance of things to be hoped for, the argument of things not
appearinge. This definition shows (by the judgment of all learned men) that
Faith is a supernatural virtue; and the obiectum thereof is that, which through
its own abstrusnes and sublimity cannot be apprehended or conceived by force
of man's own wit, it transcending all natural reason. To exemplify this in the
supreme Articles of the most blessed Trinity, and the Incarnation (the two
Cardinall-mysteries of Christian faith) Faith teaches us, that in the Trinity,
there is one peculiar Nature, in three different Persons. Now man's natural
understanding cannot apprehend, how this Indiuiduality of Nature can be in
three Persons, without distraction or multiplication of the nature; and the
rather seeing every one of these Persons is identifyed really and formally with
this Nature; the strickest union, that can be conceived. In like sort touching
the Incarnation (by means whereof the Creator of all flesh, suffered in
flesh) man's reason cannot lay any true level to conceive, how one Hypostasis,
or person ca^ be in two natures; or how this Hypostasis or person is
identifyed, and made the same really with the divine nature, and yet is united
most inwardly with the humane nature. Thus in regard of the difficulty of
believing Articles of faith, the conclusion among all the School Deuines
(resulting out of the former definition of faith) is, that S. Thomas part. 2 2.
q. 1.
quae fidei sunt, non possunt, esse scita: so certain it is, that between
man's Capacity, and the Nature of supernatural Faith, the proportion lies only
in disproportion; and that in matters of faith, even reason dictates to us, to
believe against Reason. Now to apply this; if Protestancy be a supernatural
faith (or else it is no true-sauing faith) then the Object of this
Protestanticall faith, is of that difficult nature, as Man through the force of
natural reason cannot give any assent thereto without the special concurrency of
Gods Grace.

But here now I demand; that seeing the Object of Protestancy (as Protestancy)
is mere negations, and denials of things to be (as above is proved) what
supernaturality, as I may term it, or force of Gods special concurrency is
required, that man should give his assent to believe, that such, or such a
thing is not? as for example; that there is no Purgatory, no place but Heaven
for children dying unbaptized, no praying to Saints, no inherent Justice, and
so of the rest denied by them? I here say, that man's natural reason even of it
self (without any other external help) is propense and inclining to give
assent to these and all other negations, except the affirmatiues to these
negations, can be convinced for true, either by divine or humane proofs and
authorityes: so little is any supernatural assistance needful heerto.

If then the object of Protestancy by reason of its Negations, be most easy to
be believed, and that the belief of it does not surmou^t the force of man's
natural reason, but rather most sorting and agreeable thereto; then if the
Apostles definition of Faith be true, (as I trust no Protestant is of that
supercilious and froward disposition, as to deny) it follows, that
Protestancy is not the Object of Supernatural Faith: but, in respect of true
and infused says, is a Nonentity, and bare Intentionality

But to proceed further: The Schoolmen S. Tho. part. 2 q. 5
teach, that true, and Supernatural Faith has a necessary reference to two
things: the first is called, prima veritas reuelans, which is God: who
reuealeth all truths and points of faith. This first is styled by the divines,
Obiectum formale fidei. The second thing required to Faith, (especially after
the Church of Christ was once established) is the Authority of the Church; and
this is called Amussis, regula, or the Propounder. This propounds to her
children to be believed, all those things, which God revealed to the Church to
be believed. Now let us examine, whether these two points so necessary to true
faith, do accord to the faith of Protestancy, or not. And first, touching
Prima veritas reuelans, which is God; I here say, that no revelation of God,
touching the belief of things merely Negative, as the points of Protestancy
are, as before I intimated, is necessary; for who will say, that we cannot
believe, that there are not many worlds, without the special revelation
thereof by God? Seeing we perceive, that children, Heathe^s and Infidels who
(while they continue in that their state) are not capable of Gods supernatural
revelations, do not believe, that there are many worlds? By the same reason
then I say, that no revelation of God is necessary to give assent of judgment,
that there is no Purgatory, no place in Hell for Children unbaptized, no
inherent Justice, no praying to Saints, and so of the rest of the Protestants
Negatiues.

Now, as touching the second point, which is the Authority of the Church,
propounding to her Children the things by God revealed; we know, that in this
our age Luther was the first, who denied many Articles of Catholic Religion:
here now again I expostulate, what Church did propound to Luther, that these
points were to be denied, and that the Articles of true Faith consisted in such
denial of them? It cannot be said, the Catholic Church propounded them to him
to be denied; because the Catholic Church did then, and at all times believe
the Affirmatiues to them, as true: as that there is a Purgatory, that we may
pray to Saints etc. And to say, that the Protestant Church did propound to
Luther the denial of the said points, is most absurd. Seeing at Luthers first
bursting out, and his first denying of the said points, there was no
Protestant, but himself; and therefore no Protestant Church then, was but in
being. The verity of which point (besides that it is hereafter proved from the
acknowledged inuisibility of the Protestant Church in those days) is euicted
even from the ingenuous Co^fessions of learned Protestants: for thus does
Benedictus Morgensternensis, a Protestant, contest of this point, saying:
Tractat. de Eccles p. 145.
It is ridiculous to say, that any before Luther, has the purity of the
Gospel. And upon this ground it is, that Bucer styleth Luther, In lib. Apolog.
of the Church, part. 4. c. 4.
the first Apostle to us of the reformed doctrine. Mark you not, how our
Adversaries do subtily make the tytles, of the Gospel, of the Apostle, of the
reformed doctrine etc. to serve as certain veyles or curtains, to hide their
bad cause from the eyes of the ignorant? Thus far to demonstrate both from the
definition of Faith set down by S. Paul, and from points necessarily
concurring for the causing of true faith, that Protestancy in regard of its
want of true supernatural faith, is but an absolute Nullit^ of faith.

That Protestancy cannot be defined and that therefore it is a Nonentity.
CHAP. VIII.
EVery thing, that has a real Existence or Being, may have its nature
explicated by the definition of it; so as every true and real thing is capable
of being defyned. This definition consists of two parts: to wit, of Genus and
Differentia (as Logic teaches.) the Genus does comprehend the Essence of the
thing defined, the differentia or some other Proprieties in lieu thereof, does
more particulerly constitute the thing defyned, and distinguishes it from all
other things: for example: A man is defined to be, Animal rationale; A living
Creature, enjoying Reason. Here the word Animal, demonstrates the Essence of
Man. Rationale does constitute man in definition, and makes him to differ from
all other sublunary Creatures. Now then if Protestancy, or a Protestant cannot
be defyned, for want of Genus, and differentia; then wants it a true Essence,
and is but an Intentionall notion of the mind.

To defyne a Protestant in these words; (thereby to set the best glass upon
their Religion) A Protestant is a Christian, who belieueth the Articles of
Faith, according to the true sense of the Scripture. This indeed is a specious
definition, serving only to lay some fair colors upon the rugged grain of
Protestancy, and but to cast dust in the eyes of the ignorant. But withal this
definition is most false for several reasons. First because though a Protestant
be a Christian, yet quatenus he is a Protestant, the word Christian is not
genus to him, as above is said: for the word quatenus (implying a reduplicatiue
formality) has reference not to the Genus in a definition, but only to the
differentia, as above is noted. For the word Protestant, (as is formerly
declared) is a word only of distinction, thereby to make him differ from the
Catholic: but in the word Christian, they both accord and agree. Again, every
different Sect or Heresy will mantaine with as great venditation and
confide^cy, as the Protestant does, that its Religion or Heresy is agreeable to
the true sense of the Scripture: and will vye with the Protestant, text for
text of Scripture (by detortio^ of it) for the supporting of its heresy; as we
find by the example of the Aria^s, Eutichians, Pelagians, and the rest, who
ever fraught their pestiferous writings with an abou^da^ce of scripturall
authorities. And the like course do our later Heretics also take, to wit, the
Brownists, the Family of love, and the Anti-trinitarians: so true is that
sentence of old Vincensius Lyrinensis: Contra haeres.
Si quis interrogat quem piam Haereticorum, vnde probas, vnde doces hoc? statim
ille: Scriptum est enim. Thus we see, that those words, to wit: who belieueth
the Articles of faith, according to the true sense of the Scripture, supplying
the place of differentia in the former definition, may be applied to all sects
indifferently (if their own Interpretation of Scripture may take place) as well
as to the Protestant. And therefore as being of too great an extent, it does
not distinguish a Protestant from any other Sectary: and yet the nature of a
true definition requires, that the definition, and the thing defined should be
of an equal expansion and largenes; that is, that the definition and the thing
defined should conuertibly be affirmed, the one of the other. Lastly I say,
that this former definition of a Protestant, or Protestancy, is but a mere
Paralogisme or Sophisme, called Petitio Principij, being but a poor and needy
begging of the thing, as proved, which still remaynes in controversy. For I
eternally deny, that Protestancy is according to the true sense of Scripture.
And this denial our learned Catholic deuines have sufficiently justified and
made good in their writings, against the Protestant.

Now then, this former definition being deservedly exploded; the nearest
definition, or rather description is to pencill it out in these words:
Protestancy is a Religion, which consists in the denial of the Real
presence; denial of the Sacrifice of the Mass, denial of freewill, denial
of Purgatory, and so in the denial of the many other Articles, jointly denied
by the Protestants. But here again this definition is most defective: for here
also the differentia constitutiua, which should constitute Protestancy, and
withal distinguish it from other Religions, is wanting: first because
Negations, and such is the differentia here supposed, cannot co^stitute any
thing: for only Entia (and Entia, bare negations are not (give a constitution
and being to Entia. Again, the presumed differentia in this definition (to
wit, the denial of the Real presence, denial of freewil etc.) stretches it
self by way of application to other Religions, as well as to Protestancy; for
the Turks, the Jews, and the Heathens deny these former points with as strong
a bent of contradiction, as the Protestant does: and so accordingly conspire
unanimously with the Protestant in such denyals. Thus then we see, that this
Imaginary differentia, in this second definition, is over general, and of too
great a latitude, and does not distinguish the Protestant from Turks, Jews,
and Heathens.

Well then to contract this point, seeing every thing, that has any reality of
being, can have its nature and Essence truly dissected by definition, or
description; And seeing Protestancy cannot be defined (for how can that be
called a formed and positive faith, which in it self is mere privative) then
follows it, that it cannot be known, what Protestancy in it self truly is:
and if Protestancy cannot be known what it is, then is it to be reputed a
Nonentity. Yet to close up this Chapter, and in some sort to be officious, and
serviceable to our Adversaries, my definition of Protestancy shall for the time
be this: to wit, a Religion, which incorporates in it self the Negative
doctrines of the Ancient stigmaticall Heretics, as hereafter will be
demo^strated; or, if you will: A Religion, whose definition consists, in that
it cannot be defined. And thus Protestancy only is, in that it is not.

That Protestancy consists of doctrines merely contradictory in themselves:
and that therefore Protestancy is a Nonentity. CHAP. IX.
PHilosophy instructs us, that what truly implies in it self an absolute
contradiction, the same has no Entity or being. The reason whereof is this:
what implies a Contradiction, supposes a Being, and a Not-being of a thing,
and all at one and the same time: from whence then this absurdity would follow;
to wit that if such a thing could be, then could a thing be, whose being should
consist in a Not-being: and consequently should be an Irreality and nothing. An
unwarrantable error, since God, to whom it is more easy to do then not to
do, cannot effect or make any such thing; for every thing that is, ought in
some sort to bear a likeness to him, from whom it proceeds. But that which
has no Being, and in it self is nothing, cannot bear any resemblance to him,
who gives life, and Being to every thing; Act. 17.
In ipso viuimus, mouemur, and sumus.

This Philosophical Axiom extends it self not only to the existence, or
want of existence in things corporeal or material, but also to the Being, or
not-being in things speculatiue and immateriall; I mean in doctrines, and
other such Theories of the understanding. Since then it will easily be proved,
that Protestancy in many points is compounded of several contradictory, and
opposite doctrines and Tenets; and such, that though all may be false, and
consequently have no real Being, yet that of necessity the one part must want
all reality of being for its own supporting; then unavoidably it may be
concluded, that Protestancy (as consisting of such irreconciliable doctrines)
wants all reality, is in it self, and is but a Nonentity.

I will exemplify this in a point or two, wherein the Protestants agree only in
disagreeing. The first shall be touching the Nature of the Sacraments. All, or
most of the Protestants do conspiringly deny our Catholic doctrine therein, in
teaching, that they co^ferre grace; but after their unanimous denial thereof,
then they presently by embracing of contrary doctrines, dissent amongst
themselves (like lines, which once meeting in one common Center, instantly
break of, and run several ways:) for ^winglius teaches, that the
Sacraments in general, are bare and naked external signs; and is therefore
condemned by Lib. de Caena Do. and lib. 4. Instit. cap. 15. sect. 1.
Calvin: but Calvin by ascribing more to the Sacraments, then to external
signs, is (by way of retaliation) condemned by Epist. ad quanda^ Germania
ciuitatem. fol. 196.
Swinglius.

In like sort, The Protestants do disauow all justification by works, yet most
of them hold, that good works ought necessarily to accompany a justifying
faith. But to cross this, Luther (after he once became settled in the lees of
sensuality) thus writes: So says Luther upon the Galat. Englished in cap. 1.
It is impiety to affirm, that faith, except it be adorned with Charity,
iustifyeth not. Yea further he says, Luther tom 1. pro. pos. 3.
fides nisi sit sine etc. except faith be without good works, it iustifyeth
not etc. O the calamity of these Canicula^ and unlucky days, in which eue^
doctrinally, and religiously (as may say) is exiled all practice o^ Religion,
and good works. Again touching the Real presence in the Eucharist; all the
Sacramentaries disclayme from our doctrine therein: nevertheless diverse eminent
Protestants, as lib. 5. Eccles. Polic. sect. 67.
M. Hooker, Contra Duraeum page 168.
D. VVhitakers, and Calvin lib. 4. Inctit cap. 17 sect. 7.
Calvin himself do teach, the Manducation of Christ's true and Real body in
the Eucharist by the mouth of faith. Yet is this doctrine who* by disallowed by
In his Epistles annexed to his Common places, englished epist. 25.
? Peter Martyr, though Peter Martyr be therefore reciprocally controuled by
Bucer in his Scrip. Anglic. page 548. as inclining (to use his own words) too
much to Popery. It is in like sort condemned for the most part, by our In their
Christian letter to M. Hooker.
English Puritanes. Now to turn our Pen a little back v^on these three former
points: in ^he first we find these two contra^ictory positions: The Sacraments
^re only bare external signs: And, ^he Sacraments are more then external
signs. In the second: Good works are necessary to accompany faith: And, Good
works are not necessary to accompany faith. In the third: the true and real
body of Christ is taken in the Eucharist, with the mouth of faith: And, the
true and real body of Christ is not taken in the Eucharist with the mouth of
faith. Now what more true Contradiction can there be in Positions and Tenets of
faith then these are? seeing (as the Nature of Contradictions require) they all
have a true reference ad Idem. From whence it then follows, that the one side
at least, if not both, in these former contradictions has no reality or tru^
subsistence of Being. And hereupon then I conclude, that since all these
former alleged men are accepted by the Church of England, as good Protestants;
and all their mere contrary doctrines in the former points are taught for good
Protestancy; that therefore Protestancy as consisting of such contradictory
doctrines (whose nature requires a Not-be ng of one point) is no real, and
truly subsisting faith, but a mere Chymera, and Nonentity.

The points of Protestancy, touching which the Professors of Protestancy, and
especially the Caluinists amongst themselves, do so diametrically differ, are
(among others) these following: Whether God does decree and will sin, or but
only permit sin? Whether the Civil Magistrate may be head of the Church?
whether (as above is intimated) the body of Christ be truly and substantially
present to the mouth of faith, or, but Sacramentally only present? whether in
case of Adultery, the innocent party may marry again! whether the sign of the
Cross in Baptism, and the use of the Surplisse be lawful? whether Bishops be
Antichristian, or lawful? whether Christ suffered in soul the pains of Hell?
besides many others. The different Tenets in all which doctrines are so
repugnant and contradictory one to another (and yet all is good Protestancy as
before is said, and all the maintainers of the contrary doctrines reputed for
zealous Protestants, and Professors of the Gospel) that even by the law and
nature of Contradictories, the one side must ever want a real and subsisting
Being; and thereupon it follows, that Protestancy as compacted of such
contrarieties in doctrine, must be in it self a very nothing. This discrepancy
and Antipodes-like treading of our adversaries in Articles of Protestancy, is
made more manifest by recalling to mind, what is above set down touching the
great and violent dissentions of the Protestants, concerning their translatio^s
of Scripture, and their book of Common prayer.

But leaving that (as above touched) the same will likewise be made evident, by
remembering in what acerbity of style, the Protestants have writ one against
another; ever intimating thereby, that the different doctrines differently
maintained by them, were truly Contradictories; and therefore the Tenets of the
one side at least, mere irreall, as wanting all true Being.

But to contract this point, I will particulerly insist (as most conducing to
the subject in hand) first in setting down the express words (in their own
dialect) of the English Protestants, and the English Puritanes; and after I
will put down some few tytles of Protestants Books, written one against
another; from which the Reader may even depose, that the different
protestanticall doctrines maintained in those different books, against other
Protestants defending the contrary, must of necessity be in themselves
contradictory, and incompatible one with another.

But to begin with our English Protestants. And first we find M. Parkes thus to
write of the Puritanes: In his book dedicated to the Archbishop in Epist
dedicatory.
They are headstrong, and hardened in Error; they strike at the main points
of faith, shaking the foundation it self, and calling to question Heaven and
Hell, the divinity and Humanity, yea the very Soul, and Salvation of our
Savior himself. And yet more in the same place: The Puritanes have pestilent
Heresies etc. They are Heretical and sacrilegious. M. Powell thus styleth the
Puritanes: Powel in his co^sideratio^s.
They are notorious and manifest Schismatikes, cut of from the Church of God.
The Archbishop of Canterbury thus blazeth them. In the Survey of pretended
discipline cap. 5. and 2. and 4.
The Puritanes do pervert the true meaning of certain places both of Scriture
and Fathers, to serve their own turn. Now the Puritanes on the other side are
ready to repay the Protestants former curtesy in their own language; for thus
they write: In the defense of the Silenced Ministers supplication to the high
court of Parliament.
Do we vary from the sincere doctrine of the Scriptures? Nay rather many of
them (meaning the Bishops and their adherents) do much swerve from the same
etc. And again This appears in the book of Constitutions, and C^nons
Ecclesiassticall, printed. a^no 1604
The worship in the Church of England corrupt, superstitious, unlawful,
^epugnant to the Scriptures. The Ar^icles of the Bishops Religion are
erro^eous, their rites Antichristian.

By this we may discern, what mutual recrimination, and what ^reconciliable
repugnancy there between the English moderate ^rotestant, and the English
Pu^itan; and this even in great mat^ers, and of highest consequence: and
therefore the former M. Parks ^onfesseth sincerely and ingenu^usly of this
point, thus saying: M. Parks vbi supra p. 3.
The Protestants deceive the world, and make men believe there is agree^ent in
all substantial points: They ^ffirme, there is no question among the^ of the
truth. And this much touching our domestical Protestants and Puritanes.

In the next place I will descend to forrayne Protestants, and for greater
breuity, among many hundred of books, written by Protestants against
Protestants (see here the Isa. 19.
Egyptian set against the Egyptian, each one fighting against his brother;) I
will content my self with setting down the titles only of ten of them. From
which Titles the Reader may infallibly conclude, that the Controversies (being
the subject of those books) are not of that adiaphorous, and indifferent
nature, as that the Tenets of both sides might be true; but that the Patrones
of both sides did hold cotradictory doctrines; and such (as that granted (by
supposall) the truth and Being of the one part, the other of necessity wa^teth
all reality of Being. And to begin.

1. Aegidij Hunnij Caluinus Iudaiza^s: Hoc est, Iudaicae glossae and
corruptelae, quibus Ioannes Caluinus illustrissima Scripturae sacrae loca and
testimonia, de gloriosa Trinitate, deitate Christi, and Spiritus sancti etc.
detestandum in modum corrumpere non abhorruit. Wittenberg. anno 1593.

2. Alberti Graueri Bellum Ioannis Caluini, and Jesus Christi. braptae. 1598.

3. Oration de incarnatione filij Dei, contra impios and blaspemos errores
Swinglianorum, and Caluiuistaru^. Tubingae anno 1586.

4. Anti-paraeus; Hoc est refu^atio venenati Scripti a Dauide Pa^aeo editi, in
defensione stropharum and ^orruptelarum, quibus Ioannes Calui^us illustrissima
Scripturae testimonia, de mysterio Trinitatis, nec non oracula Prophetarum de
Christo, detestandum in modum corrupit. Francofurti. 1^98.

5. Denominatio Imposturarum and fraudum, quibus Aegidius Hunnius Ecclesiae
orthodoxae doctrinam petulanter corrumpere pergit. Bremae 1592.

6. Guillielmi Zepperi Dillinbergensis Ecclesiae Pastoris institutio, de tribus
Religionis summis Capitibus, quae inter Euangelicos in controuersiam vocantur
Hanouiae 1596.

7. Veritatis victoria, and ruina Papatus Saxonici. Losannae 1563

8. Christiani Kittellmanni december graves and perniciosi error es Swinglianorum,
in doctrina de peccatis and Baptismo: ex proprijs ipsorum libris collecti, and
refutati. Magdeburg. 1562.

9. Pia defensio aduersus Ioannis Caluini, Petri Boquini, Theodori Bezae,
Guillielmi Clebitij, and similium calumnias etc. Erfordiae 1583

10. Apologia ad omnes Germaniae Ecclesias reformatas, quae sub Zwingliani and
Caluiniani nominis inuidia, vim and iniuriam patiuntur. Tiguri. 1578. And thus
far hereof, whereby we may see, that Protestancy is deadly wounded by the
Pen of Protestancy.

Here now I close up this chapter, referring to the judgment of the learned
Reader, that seeing Protestancy is compounded of several Contradictory
Doctrines, (whereof the one side must of necessity be deprived of al real
Being) and seeing the nature of true faith exacteth, that it should be
co^plete, entire, and perfect in it self; like therein unto an action morally
virtuous, which is accomplished by the access of all due conducing
Circumstances, but vitiated through the absence but of any one: and finally
seeing that all the former repugnant doctrines of the Protestants (besides many
others of like nature by them mantained, for breuity here pretermitted) are
accounted Euangelical, and true Protestancy; whether it does not indisputably,
and irrepliably follow, that Protestancy in it self is no true faith, but in
respect thereof an absolute Irreality, and but an Intentionall Name, or word?

That Heresy, as being a Privation, is Non Ens; and consequently, that
Protestancy (as consisting of the old condemned Heresies) is a Nonentity.
CHAP. X.
IN one of the precedent Chapters it has been made evident, that Protestancy
even from the title of Negation, has no reality of Being: In this place now
the same shall be euicted from the Title of Priuatio^; where for the clearer
apprehending of this point, we are to call to mind (as above is touched) that
every Privation is but a defect of that, which should be, (thus is blyndnes, of
sight, and deafenes, of hearing) and therefore as having no efficient cause,
but only a deficient, proceeds not from God, who made all things; and
consequently, it is Non Ens. But to pass on further. Among those things, which
are Priuations, we do find, that every Heresy is ra^ged or marshalled in that
Class; and this deservedly; since Heresy is but a Privation or denial of the
truth; but all truth proceeds from God, John 14.
Ego sum veritas, and consequently Heresy is a mere Non Ens, or Nullity.

This being presumed as true and uncontrollable, if then I can prove, that
Protestancy is but a colluuies of the ancient Heresies condemned in the
Primitive Church, it then follows unavoidably, that Protestancy (as compacted
of those privative and Negative Heresies) is but a Nonentity.

But to effect this (and therein consequently to discover from what unworthy
Fathers, the Children of our new supposed Gospel are lineally proseminated and
descended, sucking from them, tanquam ex traduce, the venom of their Privative
and Negative faith) I will appeal herein to history of former ages; by means
whereof our times hold intelligence with Antiquity. I will exemplify this in
several Negative points of Protestancy. And first we find that the Protestants
borrow their denial of the Real presence, from certain old Heretics in So
affirms Theodoret dialog 3.
Ignatius his time) so early we see the Cockle grow up with the good seed) as
Theodoret witnesses; yet the affirmative is houlden both by Ignatius, and the
whole Church of those days. 2. The said heretics denied, that any Ierom.
epist. ad Hebidiu^.
Visible Sacrifice ought to be now in the days of Christianity.

3. The denial of Lib de haeres c. 33.
Prayer for the dead, is first taken from the Heretics Aerians, who (as S.
Austins words are) thought it unlawful orare, vel offerre pro mortuis.

4. The denial of freewill taken from the Manichees, of whom S. Aug. vbi
supra.
Austin thus writes: Peccatorum originem non tribuunt Manichaei libero
arbitrio.

5. The denial of fasting, and of virginity was first introduced by Iouinian,
as Ierom. lib 1 and 2. contra lonintanum.
S. Jerome, and Aug l. de haeres. cap. 8^.
S. Austin do witness.

6. The denial of the Churches visibility, broached by the Donatists, who
taught with Calvin, that the Church consisted only of the Just; and thereupon
as not knowing, who were the just, they made it Invisible; as Aug. l. de unit.
c. 12.
Austin records.

7 The denial of worshipping the Relics of Saints, first taught by
Vigilantius the Heretic, as Ierom. contra Vigilant.
S. Jerome does witness.

8. The denial of the distinction of mortal and venial sin, first
mantayned by the Pelagians, as l. con. Pelagium.
S. Jerome testifyeth.

9. The denial of al worship due to the Image of Christ, and his Saints, first
justified by Xenaias Persa, as lib. 16. cap. 27.
Nicephorus records.

10. The denial of the possibility of keeping the Commandments, was first
mantayned by certain old Heretics, recorded by In explicat. Simbol, ad
Damasum.
Jerome, and De te^pore sermon. 91.
Austin.

11. The denial of all reverence to the Cross, was first taught by Probianus
the heretic, as appears in the lib. 2. cap. 19.
Tripartite History.

12. The denial of Traditions was first taught by the Arians, as appears out
of the book, written by lib. 1 cap. 2.
S. Austin contra Maximum. The same is also taught by Nestorius the Heretic,
as we read in Act. 1.
sexto Synodo.

13. The denial of power to reconcile men sinning after Baptism, by means of
the Sacrament of Confession, was first taught by the Nouatians, as lib. 3. de
haeret.
Theodoret, and lib. ^. c. 33. Hist.
Eusebius relate.

14. The denial of voluntary Poverty, and other Evangelical Counsels,
justified by Vigilantius, as l. contra Vigilantium.
S. Jerome witnesses.

15. The denial of Original sin (especially in the Children of the
faithful) first taught by the Pelagians, as lib. 6. contra Iulianum. c. 2. and
3.
S. Austin witnesses.

16. The denial of lawfulnes of vows, of perpetual Chastity etc. first
introduced by certain Heretics styled Lampetiani: as lib. de centum haeres.
circa sinem.
S. Damascene affirms.

17. To conclude, that the Primacy of Gods Church belonged only to
Ecclesiastical Persons, was denied by Constantius and Valentinian Emperors,
as witnesses Athan^san epist. ad solitatiam vita^ agentes.
Athanasius, and Ep. 32.
Ambrose.

Thus far of this point. And now (by the way) I refer to the more retired
and sober thoughts of the judicious and learned Reader, whether it be not an
irreparable dishonor and blemish to the Professors of the new Gospel (in
whom now living, the former dead Heretics yet do live; or rather whose
bodies (by a strange Metapsychosis) seem to be organized with the souls of
those old condemned men) thus to consociate with certain old branded and
anathematized Heretics, by borrowing their privative and negative faith and
religion from them; and thereupon to dispart, and divide themselves from all
communion in faith, with the Orthodoxall Fathers of those pure and primitive
times; who ever in the former Articles set down in this Chapter, and in all
others, did hold the Affirmative part to the others Negative: so foul a
scarre herby rests upon the face of our Adversaries reputation, and honor.

Now, that these former men were recorded for heretics, for their denial of
the above cyted Catholic Articles, and their denyals taken for heresies; and
that the such recording of them was warranted with the full consent of the
whole Church of God in those times, appears from this one consideration; to
wit, those Fathers and writers, which did record the former men for heretics,
and their negations for heresies, were Epiphanius, S. Jerome, S. Austin,
Theodoret, Eusebius, and some such others; diverse of which Fathers made
certain Books and styled them, de Haeresibus. And in these their books they
registered the former men for Heretics, and their Negative doctrines for
Heresies. Now all these Fathers, and writers were learned and godly men: their
learning then would assure them, what opinions were Heresies in those times,
and what were not. Their Piety and Holiness would not suffer them, to wrong any
man with the hateful brand of Heretic, or his doctrine with the foul title of
Heresy, except both the men and their doctrines deserved such a severe Censure.
And it cannot be answered in reply heerto, that the Catholic Church of God in
those Primitive times, did ever tax, or reprehend any of the former Fathers,
for ranging that man among Heretics, or his doctrines among Heresies, which
were not taken for such by the whole and unanimous judgment of the then Church
of God.

Thus far to demonstrate, that seeing Heresy in its own nature, is but a
Privation; and every Privation is a Non Ens; that therefore Protestancy, as
being engendered of the ancient exploded Heresies, is a Nonentity.

That there are diverse positions of Protestancy, which (besides that they are
implicitly but negations of the Catholics contrary Affirmative doctrines) are
in their own nature merely void of all reality of Being. CHAP. XI.
IN this place we will take into our consideration diverse Articles of the
Protestants Faith, in the true examining of which we shall find, that not only
(as being but mere negatiues to our affirmative Catholic Articles) they have
no real Existency, or being, but also as they are to be considered in their
own particular natures.

And first, may occur their Tenet of the Private revealing, or interpreting
Spirit; which though in terms it bears the show of an Affirmative position;
yet truly it is nothing else, then the denial and negaiion of the infallibility
of the whole Church of God in matters of faith. This Spirit comprehends in
the amplitude and largenes of its own Orb most of the several passages of
Protestancy. Now to examine the Essence and nature of this Spirit, exercised
chiefly in interpreting of Scripture (if such an imaginary conceit could have
an Essence or nature, as indeed it cannot) we find that this Spirit is a mere
Phantasy of each particular man's giddy head-peece. For if it were certain and
infallible (and so it must be if it proceed from the holy Ghost) how then
comes it to pass, that several private spirits of the Protestants do
interpret one and the same Text of Scripture in different (and sometimes mere
contrary) senses, and constructions? This point is demonstrated (to pretermit
infinite other passages of Scripture) in the exposition of those few words,
uttered by our Savior, Math. 26. Luc 22. Marc. 14.
Hoc est corpus meum. Hic est sanguis meus. As also, in that Article of our
Creed, Descendit ad inferos. We find both these passages to have received
several constructions by the Protestants; and from such their different
constructions are sprung up different sects of Protestancy, as the Lutherans,
the Caluinists, the more moderate Protestant etc.

Again, to omit diverse other choking reasons, to prove this Spirit to be a
mere phantasy of the brain (engendered of Pride and Ignorance) and to have no
reality or true Being in it self; how can this private Spirit be infallible,
to which every Heretic with equal interest thereto, coueteth chiefly to
repair, as to his strongest Sanctuary; as we see by the experience of ancient
and modern times they do? For did not the test Epiphan. haeres. 69. Joan ^^
and 18. Joan. 6.
Arians Joan. 1. Joan 2.
Eutichians, the Philip. 2. Hebr. 7
Nestorians, and the rest ever labor by the help of their own Spirits,
differerently interpreting the Scripture, to ma^tayne their different
blasphemies and heresies? And do not the Anti-Trinitarians, the Brownists; the
Family of love, and diverse such others, the like in these our times? So little
reason therefore had D. VVhitakers to beautify this erroneous Private Spirit,
with his gilded description in these words: In controuers. 1. q. 5. cap. 3 and
11.
An inward persuasion of the Holy Ghost wrought in the secret closet of the
belieuers heart: and repugnant, is this his delineation to the words of sacred
Scripture: 2. Pet. 1.
No Prophecy of Scripture is made by private interpretation. And again: 1.
John. cap. 4.
early beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, if they be of
God.

The second may be the Luth. in art. 10.11 12. Melancth. in locis tit. de fide
Calvin in Antitdot. Council. Trident. sess. 6.
Protestants doctrine of Imputative Justice in us, being but a negation and
denial of the Catholic doctrine of Inherent Justice; upon which doctrine, the
Protestant more easily relyes, since his own soul even dead-aliue, (as being
organized with a living body, but a dead will) is loath to practice any good
works. Now, this Imputative Justice is in it self, a mere Ens rationis, as
having (contrary to the Nature of all divine Virtues, and to all real and true
qualities) no true Existency, or Inherency in our Soul, as the Protestants do
confess: it being only a naked application of Christ's Justice to us, whereby
our sins are palliated and covered. Again, if a man be just when he begins
to believe that he is just; then is he not justified by that, by the which he
belieueth he is just, seeing his faith is later then his Justice; And if he be
unjust, at what time he belieueth he is just; then is his faith false, and
consequently no supernatural or divine faith, but a mere fiction of this
supposed just man: so vnreall imaginary a conceit (we see) is this Imputative
Justice: and indeed to mantaine it, is as absurd, as to mantaine, that the
son can precede in priority of being his Father, or the effect, the cause:
for though in all other things the truth of the opinion relyeth upon the truth
of the matter; yet here the truth of the matter relyeth upon the truth of the
opinion.

The third point is the actual faith which Luth. in l. de captin. Babil. Kem.
in 2. part. Exam. Council. Trident ad Can. 3. Centurist. Cent. 1. c. 4. and Cet.
5. col. 5.7.
Luther, and the Lutheranes ascribe to infants, at that very instant, that they
are baptized. Now common sense and the force of reason assures us, that there
is not, nor can be any such faith in children; but that this is in it self a
mere Chymera and Pha^tasy: for first does not the poor Infa^ts struggling (what
they can) in time of their bodies immersion into the water, manifestly impugn
this aerie conceit? Since if at that instant they did believe, they should
offend God by such their resistance; and so by this means they should commit
sin, rather then have their Original sin remitted. Again, how can Infants
believe except they hear? Romans 10
Fides ex auditu. Thus I leave to every one to judge of what truth of Being or
real Existency this doctrine has in it self. And thus far of these former
aerie speculations of doctrine, broached by the Protestants, though but briefly
touched by me (for how can one well extend himself in discoursing of such
points, which in themselves do want al extension?) In the unfolding whereof, I
labor not so much to display the falsehood and absurdity of the^ (which
nevertheless incidently is by this means partly discovered) as to make evident,
according to my method undertaken, that not any of the said Protestants
Positions or Tenets have any Reality or Being; but that they are merely forged
in the imagination, without ground or foundation of any true and Positive
subsistence.

The last of the Protestant Positions, (omitting diverse others for greater
breuity) in which I will insist, shall be touching the Protestant Church;
showing that it ^s Nothing, in it self, but only a Church framed in the air,
and accordingly the Protestants are forced covertly to discourse of it ^n a
mist of dark words: so painters veyle that, which they cannot delineate by
Art. But since this will require a more large discourse, branching it self into
two parts; I have therefore purposely reserved the two next Chapters, for the
fuller dissecting of the same.

That the Protestant Church is a meer^ Nonentity, or Idea; proved from the
confessed Inuisibility thereof. CHAP. XII.
IN our entreating of the Protestant Church, first we are to recall to mind the
definition given thereof by the Protestants: secondly, the confessed
Inuisibility of the said Church for many hundred years: from both which points
the resulta^cy will be, that the Protestant Church (and consequently
Protestancy, as mantained by the said Church) is but an vnreall thing. And to
begin with the definition Lib. Institut 4. c. 1. Sect. 2. and in minori
Instit. c. 8. Sect 4.
Calvin defines the true Church (and therefore in his own judgment the
Protestant Church) to consist only of the number of the faithful and Elect,
and only to be know to God. Now, what other thing is this Church, then a bare
Intention (as ^he Philosophers speak) or phan^asme wrought in the shop of his
own brain? for first, seeing no man can know, who be those other men, who are
of the Elect, and who truly believe; how can it be known, who are the members,
who make this Church, or where it is? Again, this definition rather
destroys, and takes away the Church, then describes, or constitutes it. For
if all the works even of the justified, be mortal sins (as Luth. in Assert.
art. 32.
Luther, and Art. 6. and 20.
Confessio Augustana do teach) and that if only the ^ust do make this Church,
then follows, that no man is of the Church; and consequently, that the
Protestant Church thus defined, is but a mere Platonicall Idaea; the reason
hereof being, because there are no just men in the world since the works of
men are sins Next we will descend to the Inuisibility of the Protestant Church,
confessed by the learned Protestants, for many ages, or rathe^ since the days
of the Apostles. In handling of which point I will first set down the
ackowledgme^ts of the learned Protestants of their Churches Inuisibility; and
then after I will draw from thence the necessary deduction of sequence for
proving the Irreality, for aerie Intentionality of the Protestants faith, and
Religion. And first it is over evident, that D. Perkins thus confesses of the
inuisibility of the Protestants Church: In his exposition of the Creed.
For many hundred years our Church was not visible to the world: An universal
Apostasy ouerspeading the whole face of the earth. And yet more particu^erly he
thus acknowledges: Perkins vbi supra.
during the space of nine hundred years, the Popish heresy has spread it
self over the whole earth. But Sebastianus Francus (a learned and very
markeable Protestant) confesses more largely of this point, thus writing: In
ep. de aebrog^ndis in vniuersun omnibus statutis Ecclesiast.
For certain through the work of Antichrist, the external Church together
with the faith and Sacraments vanished away presently after the Apostles
departure; and that, for these fourteen hundred years, the Church has not
been external and visible. To whose judgment D. Fulke (to omit for breuity
the like Confessions of diverse other Protestants) subscribeth in these words:
D Ful^ in his answer to a Counterfeyte Catholic page 35.
The true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles time.

Now, to infer, and deduce Conclusions: first then, if the Protestant Church
has had no Being, since the death of the Apostles, (as we see by the
acknowledgme^ts of the learned Protestants themselves, it has not had) but
has lain hid so many years in a vast Chaos of nothing; then follows it,
that the Protestant Church is only an Imaginary thing, having no substantiality
(as I may term it) or existence in it self. Secondly, I thus infer: If the
Protestant Church has no real Being or existence in it self, but is a poor
fabric of the imagination; then follows it unavoidably, that the Protestant
faith must necessarily partake of the nature of the Protestant Church; I mean,
not to be any real, or subsisting thing. For how can that faith be positive or
real, of which there have been for so many ages confessed (and indeed for all
ages without exception) no members of the Church to make profession of the said
faith? This I auerre, is ^bsurd to mantaine; since we see a shadow cannot
produce a shadow. Again, I add here to that (by reason of inherency) there
is a necessary reference in every Ac^ident to its Subject; if the subject be
wanting, then follows it, that the Accident (as loosing its Inherency) is
also wanting, and becomes Nothing; now then Protestancy or the faith of a
Protestant, suppose it be any thing, must be a quality, and consequently an
Accident, inhering in the understanding of the Professor: but if since the
Apostles days there have been no Professors of Protesta^cy, by reason of the
Inuisibility of that Church for so many ages, does it not then follow, that a
least during all those ages, Protestancy, as wanting its proper Subject to
inhere in, has had no real Being; but has been all those many series, or
Centuries of yeare^ a mere Nothing?

That the confessed want of Personal^ Succession, and lawful calling in the
Protestant Church, proves their Church to be no real thing, but a mere
fiction; and consequently, that Protestancy is but an Intentionality, or bare
Notion of the mind. CHAP. XIII.
PHilosophy teaches us, that every thing does consist of somewhat, which is
essential to it, and of other things, which are but Accidental, and
necessary. The Accidents serve only, ad bent esse; and by means of Inherency
to give (as it were) their attendance for greater state and honor of the
thing, the which they do inuest; and therefore may actually (at least in
thought) be separated and disioyned from such their subject, without any
destruction of it. But it is otherwise with that, which is essential to any
thing; for that necessarily conduces ad simpliciter esse, of the thing; the
which Essential point, being by supposall taken away, the thing whereof it was
Essential, instantly loses its Being, and is become thereby a nothing. Now,
to apply this to the Protestant Church. And to pretermit what Accidentally
accompanyeth the Church, we will insist only in that, which is by our
adversaries acknowledgeme^t, Essential to the Church; to wit, the
Administration of the Word, and Sacraments. Now, if it can be proved, that the
Protestant Church wants this Administration of the word and Sacraments, then
may we infallibly conclude, that the Protestant Church is no Church, nor
Protestancy any Real thing in it self. But seeing this Administration of the
word and Sacraments cannot be performed, but by the help of the true Pastors,
we will first show the necessity of Pastors: secondly, that the administration
of the word and Sacraments are Essential to the Being of a Church; And lastly
we will prove, that the Protestant Church (like a mastlesse ship) has never
enjoyed any true Pastors; and consequently never enjoyed the Administration of
the word and Sacraments; the very Essence or being of a true Church.

And first, the holy Scriptures do often inculcate, that in the Church of God
there ever must be Personal Succession, and lawful calling; and consequently
that, that society of Christians, which want these two points, is no Church at
all. Touching the necessity of Personal Succession, thus we read: Isa. 59
My Spirit, which is upon thee, and the words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out
of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from hence forth for ever. To which accord
those words of the Apostle, spoken of our Savior: Ephesians. 4.
He has placed Pastors to the consummation of Saints, till we all meet in
unity of faith. That is, as the Protestants do comment, So says Do-For Fulk
against the Rhemish Testament.
for ever, and D Fulk against Heskins, Sanders etc. page 539.
to the end of the world. Now the reason, why Pastors must be ever in the
Church, or else it is no Church but only a false usurpation of the word Church,
is, because in the Church there ever must be, the Administration of the word
and Sacraments: but there can be no Administration of the word and Sacraments,
without Pastors, even according to the Apostles judgment, who says Romans 10.
How shall they believe, whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear,
without a Preacher? which things, to wit, the Administration of the word, and
Sacrament (as D. Whitaker contra Du^^cum, lib. 3. p. 249.
D. VVhitakers teaches) being present do constitute a Church, being absent do
subvert it. And D. Willet in Sinops. page 69. further in direct words
affirms. That the absence of the Administration of the word and Sacraments
does make a Nullity of the Church. And sortably heerto other Protestants do
write thus: Proposition and Principles disputed of in the Church of Geneua.
page 845.
The ministry is an Essential mark of the true Church. From which true
acknowledgment of the learned Protestants, we see that a Church without the due
Administration of the word and Sacraments wants its Essence, and is but a
Nullity, or Non Ens. Now, as Personal Succession for the administration of the
word and Sacraments is deduced from the Scripture; so also is the necessity of
Lawful vocation, according to those words: Romans 10.
How shall they preach, except they be sent? And that: Heb. 5.
No man takes the honor of Priesthood, but he that is called of God, as
Aaron was: which calling in the Apostles times was ever conferred by Imposition
of hands. But here let us see if the Protestants can make good the Personal
Succession, and ordinary calling of their Ministers for the preaching of the
word, and Administration of the Sacraments. But this is first denied, even by
the confessed Inuisibility of the Protestant Church: for if the Protestant
Church has been wholly invisible, or rather utterly extinct for the space of
thirteen, or fourteen hundred years at the least, as themselves have above
confessed: the^ during that long space of time, the Protestant Church (as not
being then in Being (wanted her Pastors; the stalk, which supports the vine:
and eonsequently wanted the Administration of the word and Sacraments, and
through such its want, it wanted its own Ess^nce, and was but a Nullity or
Nothing, during all that long Circuit of so many ages. Furthermore whereas the
Protestants, seeing themselves thus plunged, do fly for relief to
Extraordinary calling; for thus writes Calvin: Lasciuius a Protestant in his
book ac Russoru^, relig. c. 23 alleges Calvin thus saying: and see Calvin
lib. Instit. 4. c. 3. sest. 4.
Quia Papae Tyrannide. etc. Because through the Tyranny of the Pope, the true
Ordidinary Succession of Ordination was broken of; therefore we stood in need
of a new help, and this was the extraordinary gift. And D. Fulk thus writes
hereof: Fulke against Stapleto^, and Martial page 2.
The Protestants, that first preached, in these last days, had Extraordinary
Caliing.

Therefore I will show, that this poor refuge is impugned even by the
Protestants themselves; so dangerous an incision their own pens have made in
the wounds of their own Church: for first D. Bilson thus teaches: D. Bilson
in his perpetual gouerme^t of the Church. c. 9. page 111.
They can have no part of Apostolical Commission, who have no show of
Apostolical succession. Again, Extraordinary Calling is ever warranted with
working of Miracles, (as it was in the Apostles times) even by the doctrine of
the Protestants; for thus does Luther expostulate others of their Calling, (and
might not one by retortion expostulate Luther in his own words) Luth. tom. 5.
Ien. Germ. fol. 67.
Vnde venis? quis te misit? Vbi sunt miracula quae te a Deo missum esse
testantur? And yet it is most certain, that God has never honored any one
Protestant so much since the first appearing of Protestancy, as to exhibit any
one true and stupendous Miracle for confirmation of Protestancy. A point so
undeniable, that D. Fulk thus acknowledges; Against the Rhemish Testam. in
Apocalip. 13.
It is known, that Calvin and the rest, whom Papists call Arch-Heretikes,
work no miracles.

Thus far of this point. Now to encircle the contents of all this Chapter
within a narrow compass, I thus dispute, If the Protestant Church has had no
true Personal Succession, and Ordinary vocation ^f Ministers, then has it not
had any true Pastors, the ever watching Sentinels of Gods Church, as Isa. 162.
Isay styles them; if it has not had true Pastors, then has it not enjoyed
the true Administration of the word and Sacraments: if it has not enjoyed the
true Administration of the word and Sacraments, then has it lost its Essence,
and is thereby become a Nullity (as D. Willet, and other Protestants in
express words above cyted, do aver) but if the Protestant Church has by this
means wa^ted its own Essence, and became a Nullity; then even(...), and
demonstratiuely it follows, that Protestancy (which is the supposed faith,
prea-by the Protestant Church, and believed by her children) has in it self
no Essence or being, but is a mere Nullity, or Non Ens.

The Nonentity of Protestancy, proved from that, which it works in the
Wills of its Professors. CHAP. XIV.
Above we have discovered, that Protestancy is deprived of all reality of
being: both in regard that its whole Systema or frame consists of mere
Negations, (which are nothing else, but an overthrow of Positive Articles of
faith) as also (besides from several other heads) in that diverse particular
Negative Tenets of their profession, are, if they be truly unfolded, found to
be only vaporous imaginations without al subsiste^ce or being. Now, we will
demonstrate the like Irreality of Protestancy, by taking into our
consideration, what that Religion produces in the belieuers thereof, in regard
of the Will, and of Morality in conversation and ma^ners. Where first we are to
note, that Sin (I mean the deformity, which is in every sinful act) is in
its own nature, Non ens, and therefore cannot proceed from God, Who Genesis 1
John 1.
made only things, and all things. The reason heerof is, in that Sin being
a deuiation, and erring from the rule of reason, and a priuatio^ of goodness,
has (as De ciuit Dei l. 12. c. 7.
S. Austin and all learned men teach) no efficient, but a deficient cause, and
consequently, is Non-ens. And therefore Peter Martyr, as above is said (for
authorities pertinent, may well be iterated) very fully discourses of the
nature of Sin in these words: An In Common places in English. part. 1. cap.
17.
evil thing (and such is Sin) has no efficient, but a deficient cause. If
any will search out this efficient cause, it is even like, as he would see the
Darkness with his eyes, or comprehend Silence with his ears, which being
priuations, it is no need, that they should have efficient causes. Now, to
apply this to our matter in hand. Here I avouch, that diverse Negative Articles
of protestancy do of their own nature incline man's Will to sin, and al
turpitude in manners: and therefore as those protestantical Theses or Tenets in
the understanding (being but Negations, or Priuations of the contrary positive
Articles of the Catholics) are deprived of al Entity of Being; so also is
that, which they produce and beget in the Will (I mean Sin and wickedness in
the belieuers of them) deprived of al Entity or Being, though otherwise most
displeasing and hateful in the sight of God. And so that Axiom of Philosophy
may here by allusion take place, Ex nihilo, nihil fit. That Sin is the fruit
and effect of Protestancy, I will exemplify it in those few Articles ensuing,
maintained by the Protestants. And first; the Protestants Denial of Free Will
(we Catholics houlding the Affirmative heereto) impelleth man most forcibly to
the satisfying of his unlawful and voluptuous desires in all kinds of Sin.
For who is persuaded truly, that he has not Free Will in his actions, but that
he is forced to do that he does, why should he labor to scale the craggy
tower of virtue, or avoid the pleasing bayte of Sin, seeing it is not in his
power, through want of Free Will, to perform either? And upon this ground it
is, that the Protestants teach, that Luther sermon. de Moyse.
the ten Commandments appertain not unto Christians. D. Willet Synops.
Papism page 504.
And that, the law remains still impossible to be kept through the weakness of
our flesh: neither does God give us ability to keep it etc. Now does not this
doctrine open the passage to the breach of all the ten Commandments, and this
without controwle or conde^ning the party so offending, since it is not in his
power to do otherwise?

In like sort the Protestants doctrine of Reprobation (which is but the
Negative to the Catholic doctrine of Universality of Grace) much discourageth
men from virtue, and inuiteth them to vice; since that man, who is a reprobate
let him labor never so much to please God with walking in a most virtuous and
paynefull life, yet by this doctrine, certain it is, that he shall be damned.

Again, the Protestants denial of Purgatory, as it freeth a man from making
any restitution or satisfaction for wrongs done to a third person; so it much
emboldeneth him to sin, assuring himself by this doctrine, that
notwithstanding any enormous sins whatsoever committed by him, he once dying
^n a true faith, there are no temporal punishments reserved for him after this
life.

I here but briefly touch, how ^he Protestants by their defense of their
Justifying faith, excluding works both from justification and merit, do speak
and write most ^asely and unworthily of good works. For does not In praefat.
ad Romans
Illiricus ^hus traduce all good works? To hold that good works are, in
respect but of presence, necessary to salvation (as some Protestants do hold)
is a papisticall error. Yea he further most impiously enlarges himself,
saying: Vide Art. colloq. Aldeburg. page 120. sest. 11.
Good works are not only not necessary to salvation, but hurtful to it. And
D. Whitakers speaking particulerly of Virginity, does thus disualew it: Contra
Camp. rat. 8.
Virginity is not simply good, but after a certain manner. And of fasting D.
Willet thus teaches: Synops. page 241.
Neither is God better worshipped by eating, or not eating. Thus far to show,
that these former doctrines of the Protestants animate man's will most forcibly
to all Sardanapalisme, and sensuality; and beget a certain incuriou^ and
negligent torpour and slowne^ in the soul either for practicing virtue, or
avoiding of sin. For who observes not, that the will i^ faster or slower
moved to good or evil, by how much it is peyzed more heavily or lightly with
the pullies or weights of the hope of a future good, or fear of a future evil?

But to proced further. As these former negative Theses of Protestants do
incline the will to all turpitude in ma^ners, and consequent^y work in the
will, that, which in ^ts own Nature is nothing but merely negative; so upon
just examination we shall find, that the first broachers and inuentours of
them were men of most flagitious and wicked conversation; so sucking their own
venom out of their own doctrine. For greater contracting of which point, I
will ^nsist in the four Cardinal (as I may term them) and prime Protestants
of this age; by whom we may well conjecture the like in other more obscure
Protestants; for we read, that If the eye be wicked, then all the body shall be
dark. Matthew. 1.5.
Now in the displaying heerof I will forbear all testimonies of Catholics
against the^ (since they would be presumed as over partial in their Censures)
but will rest either in their own writings or co^fessions of their learned
Protestants their acknowledged brethren of the Gospel. These four chief
Protestants shall be: Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, and Beza, men, who (above all
others) have much spread and dilated this negative faith of Protestancy; and in
whom (concerning morality) you shall find little of the Gospel, though they
vanted much of their professing the Gospel.

And first to begin with Luther. Touching faith, Luther thus teaches. Luth.
tom. 1. prope finem
Faith unless it be without the least good works, does not justify, it is not
faith. Which very saying D. Couel acknowledges as spoken by Luther, and
terms it, Harsh, and D. Couel in his defense of Hooker printed 1603. page 41.
justly called in question by the Church of Rome. Concerning marriage or
divorce, Luth^r thus writes: Si Luth. sermon. de Matrins. This sentence as
spoken by Luther is acknoledged by D. Whit. cont. Ca^p. rat. 8.
nolit vxor, aut non possit, veniat ancilla. If the wife will not, or cannot
(perform the act of marriage) let the maid come. And as touching Luthers own
licentious and goatish conversation in manners, and want of chastity, hear his
own words delivered of himself: Nothing Luth. in proverb. 31. Adds this
amo^ous ryme in Dutch, signifying as it is he^r set down in the text.
is more sweet, or loving upon earth, then is the love of a woman if a man can
obtayn it. And again: As Luth. tom 5. Wittenb. sermon de Matrim. fol. 119.
it is not in my power, that I should be no man; so it is not in my power, I
should be without a woman. And yet more: I Luther tom. episto. latinar. fol.
334. ad Philippum.
am burned with the great flame of my untamed flesh etc. Eight days are now
past, wherein I neither did write, pray, nor study; being vexed partly with
temptations of the flesh, partly with other trouble. And finally: Luther in
Colloq. Mensal. fol. 526. and vide fol. 400.
I am almost madd through the rage of lust, and desire of women. But I will
cease to stir further in this filthy puddle of Luthers sensuality and lust
and will end with him in setting down the saying of Benedictus Morgensternensis
(a Protestant Writer) who reports of the Caluinists, that when they at any time
would give assent to provocation of Nature and satisfy their lust; they were
not ashamed to say among themselves: Hodie In tract. de Eccles p. 221.
Lutheranice viuemus: To day we will live Lutheran-like. Thus they using the
name of Luther (as a Motto) the more fully to express the sensual deportment
of Luther.

To come in this next place to Swinglius the second Arch of the Protestant
Church, in her first erecting in the days of Luther. First touching his
doctrine concerning good works and a virtuous life; for the more depressing
and vnderualewing thereof, Swinglius teaches, that the promises of eternal
life made to the^ in Scripture, are only Swingl. tom. 1. printed 1581. de
provident. Dei f. 137.
Hyperbolical, or tra^scending the truth. Touching God being the Author of
sin, Swinglius thus writes Swingl. tom. 1. de de prouid. fol. 3^6.
That, the thief is enforced to sin: That Swing. vbi supra.
God moves the Thief to kill: Swingl. vbi supra.
That, the Thief kills, God procuring him: That, Vbi supra fol. 366
David's adultery pertayned to God, as Author. Swingl. vbi supra. fol. 365.
Finally, that (z) sinning against the law, we are not Authors, but Gods
Instruments. A point so evident, and confessed, that In his Absurda absurdorum
etc. printed 1606 cap. 5. de praedest. fo* 3. 4.
Grawerus (Rector of the Protestant University of Islebium) condemns
Swinglius of this most blasphemous doctrine, of God being the Author of sin.

Now to come to Swinglius his deportment and carriage in manners. The title of
Swinglius and other eight Ministers supplication for wives is this: Pietate and
prudentia insigni Heluetiorum Reipublicae Huldericus Swinglius alijque
Eua^gelica doctrinae Ministri gratiam and pa^em a Deo. Extat in tom. 1. fol. 110
Swinglius with some other Ministers in Switzerland (wherein they then lived)
makes supplication to that State, that they may be suffered to marry, and take
wives, in these words following: Vbi supra fo. 115
We earnestly request, that the use of Marriage be not denied us, who feeling
the infirmity of the flesh, perceive, that the gift of Chastity is not given us
by God etc. libidinis aestum in nobis feruere negare non possumus, cum huius
ipsius opera nos cora^ Ecclesijs infames reddiderunt, we cannot deny, but the
heat of lust boyleth in us, in so much that our actios in that kind have made
us infamous among the Professors of our own Churches. And further: Vbi upra.
We desire to marry, least the Souls committed to our charge (diutius
offenda^tur) should be any longer offended. And yet more Vbi supra fol. 119
We have proved, that the weakness of our flesh has been the cause (proh
dolor!) O for grief! of our often falling. And finally. Vbi supra fol. 12^
we have burned (pro pudor!) O for shame! that we have committed many things
unseemly. By this here set down, the Reader may take a scantling of Swinglius
(who was the chief of these supplicating Ministers for wives) and how he was
wholly devoted to lust and sensuality.

In this next place occurreth Calvin (from whose pen Protesta^cy received a
more pure sublimation.) Touching Caluins life: that he was truly accused and
punished for Sodomy, and his shoulder seared with a burning iron for that
sin, is witnessed by the public records of Noyon in France extant to this
day, where he was punished; and also by In Theolog. Caluinist. printed 1594.
lib. 2. fol. 72.
Conradus Slusselburg (the Protestant) which said Protestant relates the
manner of Caluins death in these words: Slujselburg. vbi supra.
Deus manu sua potenti etc. God so struck Calvin with his mighty hand, that
being in despair, and calling upon the Devil, he gave up his wicked soul,
swearing, cursing, and blaspheming: he dyed of the disease of lice and worms,
increasing in a most loathsome ulcer, about his privy parts, so as none could
endure the stench.

Thus this forsaid Protestant writes. This manner of Caluins death is further
witnessed by Herennius in his lib. de vita Calu.
Ioannes Here^nius (a Caluinist Minister) who was present at Caluins death.

Now in this last place to descend to Beza; who in teaching God to be the
Author of Sin, wholly comparted with Swinglius; for thus he writes: Beza in
his display of popish practices poenglished and prin-1578. pa. 202.
God exci^th the wicked will of one Thief to ill another; guides his hand and
^eapon, justly enforcing the will of the Thief. But to leave many of his other
confessed erroneous doctrines, and to rippe a little into his course of life; I
will only rest upon one point (and here I may say with the Poet, ex vno
discite omnes) to wit, his Sodomiticall sin with a yo^g boy called
Andebertus, and his fornication with his woman Candida, whom he kept diverse
years as so says Conradus Slusselb. in Theolog. Caluinist. lib. 1. fol. 92.
Concubine, before he married her: who comparing the one Sin with the other in
certain verses, at last preferred the sin with his Ganymede the boy, before
his sin with Candida. His verses I will here set down in latin, though for
very shame* I forbear to English them. These then they are.

Abest Candida Beza quid moraris?
Andebertus abest, quid hic moraris?
Tenent Parisij tuos amores,
Habent Aurelij tuos lepores.
Et tu Veselijs manner pergis?
Procul Candidula, amoribusque:
Immo Veselij procul valete,
Et vale Pater, and valete fratres;
Nam Veselijs carere possum,
Et carere parente, and his and illis;
At non Candidula, Andebertoque etc.
Then follows.

Sed vtrum, rogo, praeferam duorum?
Vtrum inuisere me decet priorem?
An quenquam tibi Candida antepona^?
An quenquam tibi praefera^ Andeberte?
Quid si me in geminas sece^ ipse parts,
Harum vt altera Candidam reuisat,
Currat altera versus Andebertum?
At est Candida sic auara, noui,
Vt totum cupiat tenere Bezam;
Sic Bezae est cupidus sui Andebertus,
Beza vt gestiat integro potiri,
Amplector quoque sic hunc, and illam,
^t totus cupiam videre vtrumque,
^ntegris frui integer duobus.
Then he thus concludes.

Prefer artamen alterum necesse est.
O duram nimium necessitatem!
Sed postquam tame^ alterum necesse est,
Priores tibi defero Andeberte;
Quod si Candida forte conqueratur,
Quid tum? basiolo tacebit vno.
This Epigram is extant in Beza his Epigrams, and bears this title; Theodorus
Beza de sua in Candida and Andebertum beneuolentia. That Beza did write this
Epigram, is auerred by the former Slusselburge, the famous Protestant; who thus
writes heerof Sluss. in Theolog. Caluinist. lib. ^ fol. 9^.
Constat and hoc, Bezam obscoenissimos versus scripsisse ad germanum Andebertum
Aureliae electum, and eumdem tanquam Adonidem a Beza factum esse. As also by
Heshusius (the Protestant) saying: Tilmanus Heshusius in his book entitled
Verae and sanae Confessionis.
Beza nefandos amores, illicitos concubitus, scort^ jones, foeda adulteria
sacrilego carmine decantauit orbi. As also by D. Sparks in his answer to D.
Albin printed 1591. pa. 400.
M. Sparks, D. Sutcl ff in Turca-papismo printed 1599. lib. 3. cap. 10. page
204.
D. Succliffe, and D. Morton in his Apolog. Cathol. part. 1. lib. 2. cap. 21.
page 355.
D. Morton; though but weakly excused by these three last.

And thus far of these four chief Pillars of Protestancy: of whom I
acknowledge, that I have not set down the tenth part, of what is confessed
(even by other Protestants) of their sensuality, and most wicked carriage.
Notwithstanding what is here set down, I hope it is not impertinently alleged,
considering how highly most Protestants of these days do prise (through a
forestalled prejudice of judgment) the said four chief broachers of the
Protestant Religion. And therefore though the judicious Reader may perhaps
censure part of this Chapter, as ^n Apostrophe, or digression; yet he may
withal well esteem it (the times wherein we live considered) as a conducing,
and progressiue digression.

The Nonentity of Protestancy proved, from that our Adversaries cannot agree,
what doctrines be Protestancy; and what Professors or sorts of men be members
of the Protestant Church. CHAP. XV.
ANother Medium which affords sufficient proof for the Irreality of
Protestancy, may be taken from this ensuing consideration: to wit, in that the
Protestants amongst themselves are not resolved, what doctrines necessarily
concur to the making up of Protestancy, or of what several sorts of
Belieuers the Protestant Church consists. Now if the Obiectum, circa quod, or
Materia, circa quam (as the Logicians speak) of any science or knowledge, be
not agreed upon before hand, what in particular it is: the^ doubtlesly it from
thence rises, that such a presumed Science or Knowledge is but an Imaginary
knowledge, wholly deprived of all Reality and Entity. For not only Philosophy,
but even the force of Natural reason teaches us, that of all things, the
subject, or matter in every Science or kind of knowledge, is first to be
enquired after, and with a mutual consent on all sides to be acknowledged. The
like we may confidently affirm of Protestancy, and the Protestant Church That
our adversaries cannot be brought to any atonement, touching what is the
subject of Protestancy, or who be the Members of the Protestant Church, is
proved; in that several Protestants exclude such persons to be of the
Protestant Church, (and consequently do exclude their faith from Protestancy)
which themselves at other times (at least other Protestants) do embrace for
good Protestants* and perfect members of their Church, and their faith and
doctrine for perfect Protestaney. For such men, who are admitted, or excluded
from the Church of the Protestants, are admitted or excluded only by reason of
their faith and doctrine, being the same, or different from the Protestants
faith and doctrine.

Here then I will first show, within what narrow limits our adversaries
confine Protestancy, and the members of the Protestant Church; and then after I
will set down (such is the fluctuating and wavering judgment of our aduerries
herein) how they are content at other times to extend and enlarge those bounds,
by affording Protestancy, and the members thereof a greater space or compass,
as I may say, to expatiate, and walk in.

And to begin. We first find, that the poor Papist Papists rejected.
is wholly exterminated from this holy Society of Protestants: in proof whereof
to be luxuriant in authorityes, were but lost labor, it being a thing so well
known and generally confessed: therefore the testimony only of D. VVhitakers
shall serve, who thus writes: D. Whitak. lib. contra Duraeum. ^. sect. 2.
I will not allow the very name of a lawful Church, unto the Roman Church,
because it has nothing, which a true Church ought to have.

To proceed. The Protestants ^xile the Anabaptists Anabaptists.
out of their Church, as being no members ^hereof; nor their doctrine,
Pro^estancy. This is evident out of ^he Confession of Ausburg, thus ^eaching:
Cap. 9.
We condemn the A^abaptists who disallow the baptis^e of Infants, and think
them to be ^aued without Baptism. To which Confession, the Confession of
Switzerland in these like words ^ubscribeth: Cap. 20
We condemn A^abaptists, who deny Infants to be ^aptized. In like manner they
ex^lude from their faith and Religion, the doctrine of the Arians, Arians.
according to the Confession of Ausburg in this point, saying: Act. 1.
We condemn all Heresies, rising against this Article (meaning the Article of
the Trinity) as the Manichees, Arians, Eunonians etc.

To come to Heretics Heretics.
in general; they also by reason of their particular Heresies, houlden
severally by them, are exempted out of the members of the Protestants Church,
and this even by the judgment of the Sacramentaries, and the Lutheranes: And
first touching the judgment of the Sacramentaries passed on this point.

We find the Confession of Basil, thus to teach: Art. 24
We drive away all, whosoever dissenting from the society of the Holy Church,
do either bring in, or follow strange and wicked doctrines. And Calvin in like
manner says: Instit. l. 2. cap. 15. number. 1.
Rightly Austin denies Heretics to have the same foundation with the godly,
albeit they preach the name of Christ. D. Sucliffe: In his first book of the
Church. cap. 1.
Heretykes are not of the Church. Finally D. White: In his way to the Church
page 10.
All Heretics teach the truth in somethinges; yet we deny them to be of the
Church of God.

The same doctrine is fully maintained by the Lutherans. For thus teach the
Centurists: Cent. 6. in the praeface.
Neither Heretykes, nor deuysers of fanaticall opinions are of Christ; but they
are of Antichrist, and of the Devil. etc.

Which point is also fully taught by Luther himself, in these words: Lurh.
in his exexplication of the Creed.
Neither Gentill, Jew, Heretyke, or any sinner is saved, unless he make
atonement with the Church, and in all things think, do, and teach the same.
But the Protestants rest not heerewith, Schismatikes.
but also do banish Schismatikes from the Church. And to begin with the
Lutherans, Melancthon his judgment herein is this: In his book against
Suenkfeld tom. 2. p. 301.
Neither is there more then one Church, the spouse of Christ; neither does this
compamy consist of diverse sects. Which doctrine he borrowed from Luther thus
writing: Luth. in his great Catechism. tom. 5. p. 628.
I believe, that there is on earth a little Congregation of Saints, agreeing in
all things, without sects, or Schisms.

To come to the Sacramentaries herein. Caluins words are these: Calvin in his
Treatise of the necessity of reforming the Church.
We do profess the unity of the Church (such as is described by S. Paul) to
be most dear unto us: and we accurse all them, that shall any way violate it.
D. Field: Of the Church. 1. cap. 7.
The name of the Catholic Church (he meaning his own Protestant Church) is
applied to distinguish men, houlding the faith in unity, from Schismatikes. D.
Whitaker: Controuers. 2. q. ^. cap. 9.
It is false, that Heretical and Schismatic Churches are true Churches.
Finally to omit infinite others for breuity, D. Fulk thus discourses: D. Fulke
of the Succession of the Church.
What skilleth it, whether one (being drawn by Heresy or Schism from the
body of Christ) be subject to eternal damnation?

Thus far to show how our Adversaries do coarct and straiten (and in some
sense rightly) the true faith and Church of God; and consequently in their
judgments, their own Protestant faith and Church; seeing they admit not in
these former testimonies, any other faith and Church to be true, but only
Protestancy, and their Protestant Church.

Now, in this next place shall appear the wonderful Protean-like mutability
of the Protestants (who are only constant in Inconstancy) in crossing their
former Judgments, by affording a far greater Circumference to the
Professors of Protestancy and to their Church, then in the former passage they
have done; so true it is, that Innouatours are carried spiritu vertiginis, now
affirming one thing, presently after (and al with one breath) recalling and
contradicting the point before affirmed or maintained.

For now you shall find, that the Protestants most courteously grant, that
almost all the former kinds of men (and some others more bad) are members of
the Protestant Church, and consequently their doctrines true Protestancy; since
a man is styled a member of a Church, in regard that his faith and doctrine is
consonant and sorting to the faith and doctrine of the said Church, and not in
any other respect.

And to begin. The Protestants (out of their bounty) include the Papists, as
members of their Church: Papists admitted
for thus does Luther say: Luther* in epist. cont. Anabaptist.
In the Popery there is true Christianity, yea the kernel of Christianity, and
many pious, and great Saints. And the Confession of Ausburg, confess thus of
themselves, and the Papists: In praefat.
We are all Soldiers under one Christ.

To descend to others confessing no less: His Majesty deceased thus speaks
of this point: In his speech to the Parlame^t. An. 1605 Nouem. 9. being put
forth in print.
We do justly confess, that Papists, especially our forefathers, laying
their only trust upon Christ, and his merits, may be, and are somtymes saved.
And M. Hooker thus acknowledges the Papists for his brethren: Lib. Eccles.
pol. 3. c. 128.
we gladly acknowledge them of Rome to be of the family of JESUS- Christ. M.
Bunny: In his Treatise of Pacific. sect. 18.
We are no several Church from them (meaning the Papists) nor they from us.
And the foresaid M. Hooker particulerly touching the faith of the Papists, thus
further pronounces: Eccles. Pol. p. 128
Touching the maine points of Christian faith, wherein they constantly persist,
we gladly acknowledge them to be of the family of Jesus Christ. D. Whitgift:
In his Answer to the Admonition p. 40
The Papists believe the same Articles of faith, which we do. For breuity D.
White shall conclude this point, saying: In defense of the way. cap. 38.
In the substa^tiall Articles of faith we agree with the Papists. Now by these
Testimonies and confessions we see (most differently from their former
writings) that Papists are members of the true Church, and consequently (in our
adversaries censure) of the Protestant Church: and that the articles of
Papistry, are but the faith and doctrine of Protestancy.

In the next place (according to the Method above) come in the Anabaptists,
Anabaptists.
whom the Protestants admit to be of their Church, and their doctrine no way
prejudicial to their own doctrine of Protestancy. For first of this point
Oecolampadius thus writes: Lib. 2. Epist. page 363.
Baptism is an external thing, which by the law of Charity may be dispensed
withal. And Controu. 4 9. cap. 2. p. 716.
VVhitakers judgment is, that we may abstain from Baptism, so there be no
contempt or scandal following.

Finally, D. Morton thus brotherly acknowledges the Anabaptists: In his
Answer to the Protestants Apology. lib. 4. ca. 2. sect. 10
We Protestants judge the state of the Anabaptists, not to be utterly
desperate. Touching the Arians, M. Hooker tells us in these words: Eccles.
Pol. lib. 4. page 181.
The Arians in the reformed Churches of Poland etc. he heerby insinuating, that
those Protestant Churches in Poland did acknowledge the Arians, Arians.
as members of their Church: though I fully presume, that M. Hooker himself
was of a far different opinion. And M. Morton peremptorily maintains, that
his Protestant Church is one, and the same with the Church of the Arians, and
gives his reason thereof in these words, In his book of the Kingdom of
Israel, and the Church. page 94.
Because the Aria^s hold the foundation of the Gospel.

They further proceed, and incorporate within the Protestant Church even
Idolaters. Idolaters
For M. Hooker thus affirms: Eccles. Polic. l. 3. page 126.
Christians by external profession they are all, whose mark of recognizance
has in it those things, which we have mentioned; yea although they be impious
Idolaters, wicked Heretykes, persons excommunicable.

And this point receaueth its further proof from the Protestants comportement
toward the Catholics. For we well know, that the Protestants at other times
both by writing and in their Sermons, with most tragical Exclamations charge
the Catholics with Idolatry committed in their adoring our Savior Christ in
the most blessed Eucharist, and in their worship exbited to Images and Relikes.
And yet above we see, the Protestants teach, that the Protestant and Catholic
Church are but one, and the same Church. Now if the Papists be members of the
Protestant Church, and that they be Idolaters, (as the Protestants do dream)
the^ are Idolaters members of the Protestant Church.

But the Protestant does not limit his Church with in these former Cancells or
bounds; for he also comparteth and interleageth even with the Infidels,
Infidels.
admitting them to be members of his own Church, and teaching that they be
capable of salvation. For Act. Mon. page 495.
M. Fox relates of a Protestant Martyr (by him for learning and virtue much
magnified) who thus taught A Turk, Saracene, or any Mohammedan whatsoever may
be saved, if he trust in one God, and keep his law. And Bale Cent. 6. p. 404.
Bale warnes us to be wary, that we condemn not rashly any Turk. But this
point is further most amply taught by Swinglius and other Protestant deuines,
as above in the sixth chapter of this Treatise, is manifested; to which passage
for greater expedition, I refer the studious Reader.

But what? has Protesta^cy yet received its due circumscription, as I may say,
and confinement? No: for the Protestants charity is so great and immense,
Antichrist
as that they are content to admit and indenize even him, whom they mantaine
(by their own writings) to be the true Antichrist, for a member of the
Protestant Church. O most strange Church, consisting of such Heterogeneous
members! That this is so, I thus prove: The Protestants (I mean the greatest
part of them) confidently teach, that the Pope is the true Antichrist,
deciphered in the holy Scripture. Now mark, what Protestants nevertheless
confess in this point D. Whitakers thus writes: D. Whit. in his Answer to
the first demonstration. of D. Sa^ders.
I will not say, that from the time, that Papistry began to be Antichristianity
the Popes themselves have been all damned. And yet the said D. Whitakers
elsewhere D. Whit. in his answer to the last demonstration. of D. Sa^ders.
auerreth most co^fidently, the Pope to be Antichrist* I will adioyne heerto
the like charitable censure of M. Powell: who taught the Pope to be Antichrist,
and yet thus writes: M. Powel de Antichristo cap. 33. p. 338.
I will in no wise say, that all the Popes from the time wherein Papistry was
first revealed to be Antichristianity, are damned. Thus far of what persons are
truly acknowledged by the judgment of the Protestants for members of their
own Church. But Musculus, the Protestant, is more lavish herein, and
proceeds yet one step further, by enlarging the Protestant Church; his words
are these: Musculus in loco com. de coena p. 552.
I embrace all for brethren in the Lord, howsoever they disagree from me, or
amongst themselves; as long as they mantayne not the Popish Impiety. O most
Serpentine and devilish rancour and malice! Thus far of this Subject in
general. But now to reflect upon the premises, and to draw from thence an
unavoidable deduction.

If so then on the one side, every Faith, Religion, and Church are to have
known and explayned (as their chief and first Theoreme) what doctrines
concur to the making up of the same faith and Religion, and what kind of men
are the members of the said Church; and if this be not first known, that then
it follows, that such a faith or Church is but merely Intentionall: and
Irreall: And if on the other part, Protestancy, and the Protestant Church be so
irresolute, divided and distracted in judgment (a necessary Attendant of Error
and falsehood) that at one time, they will wholly exterminate from their faith
and Church the Papists, the Anabaptists, the Arians, Heretics in general, and
Schismatikes; and at another time (or perhaps at the same time, and by the same
Protestants) will incorporate and admit into the fellowship of their Religion
and Church, not only the said Papists, Anabaptists, Arians, Heretics, and
Schismatikes, but also supposed Idolaters, Infidels, Antichrist, and every one,
who in any sort impugn the Church of Rome; if all this I say be true (as is
proved to be in this Chapter) what other infere^ce can be made, but that
Protestancy and the Protestant Church (for want of knowing and acknowledging
what doctrines are Protestancy, and what sorts of men are Protestants) are in
themselves but mere empty and aerie conceyts; and for want of all true and real
subsistence, but a Nonentity.

The Nonentity of Protestancy demonstrated, from that, every Protestant either
in himself, or in his Predecessors, originally departed, and came out, from
the Roman Catholic Church. CHAP. XVI.
AN other Medium, to prove that Protestancy is a mere Irreality, or Nonentity,
may be this. If it can be proved, that Protestancy is more late, and young then
the Catholic Religion is; then follows it, that Protestancy cannot have any
true and real Subsistence. Fot if our Catholic and Roman Religion had a being
before Protestancy; and that Protestancy did appear long after, and consists
only in the denial of most of the Articles of the Catholic Religion; then
follows it unavoidably, that Protestancy is but an imaginary Conceyte, or
Fabric of the imagination without any foundation of Being: for seeing the
Catholic Faith, and the Protestant Faith are directly contradictory and
oppositly repugnant, both of them cannot enjoy a real Being: for if they
could, the^ mere Contradictories (and this is denied, that it can be performed
even by Gods Power) should enjoy a true and Real Being together.

Now that Protestancy is more late, or of a newer date, then the Roman
Religion, I thus prove? There cannot any one Protestant be alleged (speaking
of such Protestants, as are out of Co^trouersy, and acknowledged for such both
by Protestant and Catholic) who was not either in himself; or in his
Forefathers, first a Catholic; and who by dogmatizing some Protestant Opinions
before never generally taught, did separate himself and depart from the Cath.
Church then before in Being. Of which sort of men these words in S. John are
understood, Exieru^t ex nobis. 1. Joan. 2. The very stamp or signature of
Innouatours in doctrine.

Let us exemplify this in the first and chiefest Protestants. I will begin with
Ochinus and so ascend higher. This Ochinus (who was a chief man in
disseminating of Protestancy in England in King Edwards days) was first a So
says Sleidan l. 9. at anno 1547. fol. 297.
Monk, and forsaking his Monastical life, began to preach Protestancy.
Osiander Cent. 16. l. 1. c. 33.
Bucer was at the first also a Moke, and upon his reading of Luthers book of
Vows, forsook his Monastery and married a woman. Swinglius So says Hospinia^
in hystor. Sacram. fol. 22.
was first a Catholic Priest, and public Preacher at Tigure in Switzerla^d.
Luther was a Priest, and an In his Epist. to his Father extat tom. 2.
Witte^berg. printed 1568. fol. 269.
Austin Friar; and upon his first revolt from the Papacy, took to wife
Caterine Bore, as the whole world knows.

Now that there was no other Church in Being before Luthers Apostasy, then the
Roman Catholic Church, appears from the liberal acknowledgme^t of the
learned Protestants. For M. Perkins thus writes: In his Exposition upon the
Creed. p. 400.
We say, that before the days of Luther, for the space of many hundred
years, an Universal Apostasy so ouerspread the face, of the Church, that is
was not then visible to the world. And Doctor Jewel, confesses no less,
saying: In his Apolog. of the Church. pant. 4. c. 34.
The truth was unknown at that time, and unheard of, when Martin Luther and
Hulderick Swinglius first came to the knowledge and preaching of the Gospel.
Yea Luther himself even Thrasonically contesteth this point in these his words:
Luther in epist. ad Argentinens. anno 1525.
Christum a nobis primo vulgatum audemus gloriari: so clear it is, that Luther
was originally a Catholic, and that at his first rising there was no
Protestant Church in the world. But to proceed further. Husse was a Catholic
Priest before his revolt, and wholly till that time embraced the Catholic
Faith, as In Colloq. de Antichristo.
Luther and In Apocalip. c. 11. p. 290.
M. Fox do testify. Jerome of Prague was first a Catholic, and after became an
Heretic; who being at the Council of Constance, renounced openly his
heresies; but after apostating the second time, he lost his life. VVicleff was
first a Catholic Priest, and Parson of Lutterworth in Licestershyre, and first
abandoned his Religion, because he was deprived of a Benefice by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, as In his Annals of England. printed 1591. pa. 425.
Stow records.

VValdo was a rich man of Lions in France, and originally a Catholic, of whom
D. Humfrey thus writes: In Iesuitism. part 2. rat. 3. page 270
he did forsake all things, that being poor, he might better follow Christ,
and the Evangelical perfections. The Waldensis (who were derived of VValdo,
and thereupon so called) were an Order of begging Friars, and did profess (as
the said D. Hunfrey writes) vbi supra.
a kind of Monastical life. And of the Waldensis doctrine in particular
Calvin thus writes: Epist. 244.
The form of the Confession of the Waldensis does inuolue all those in
eternal damnation, who do not confess, that the bread is truly become the
body of Christ. They also ever taught seven Sacraments, Vows, single life,
and Purgatory, In tractat. de Eccles page 124.
as (u) Morgensternensis (a Lutheran) writes.

The Albigenses were the same men with the Waldenses, and therefore were
originally Catholics; for thus D. Abbots writes thereof: In his second part
of the defense. printed 1607. pog. 55.
Thus Lyonists, or poor men of Lions, and Waldenses, or Albigenses were the
same men; but diversely, and upon diverse occasions termed by the Romish
Synagogue.

Berengarius was Archdeacon of Angiers in France, and therefore it follows,
that he was Catholic till his denial of the doctrine of Transubstantiation:
and yet after he abandoning his Heresy, dyed As witnesses Fox in Act. Mon.
page 13.
Catholyke.

Now to rise to higher times The like may be said of the ancient Nouelists,
broaching some points of Protestancy: As Aerius, denying prayer for the dead;
Manicheus freewill; Iouinian, teaching Virginity to be no better the^ marriage;
Donatus, denying the Visibility of the Church, and all others of those times
without exception. From which men are descended the Aerians, Manicheans,
Iouinians etc. taking their denomination from the former men, according to
that, Chrpsost. Homil. 3. in act. Apolog.
Prout Haeresiarchae Nomen, ita Secta vocatur. All which men were originally
Catholics, and most of them Priests, and upon their broaching of these their
particular opinions of Protestancy, did depart from their known common Mother,
then in Being.

That these men, and all such others of those times, were originally
Catholykes, and departed from a more ancient Church, by forging these their
Innouations, thus appears: First, because every one of them taught but one, or
two points (for the most part) of Protestancy, believing al other points of
faith with the then Roman Catholic Church: for if they had maintained any other
Positions of Protestancy, then those with which they are charged at this day;
then would S. Austin, Epiphanius, Jerome, and other orthodoxall Fathers of
those times (all which Fathers, Luth. lib. de seruo arbitrio printed anno 1551
page 454.
Luther, and other The Archbishop of Canterbury in his defense of the Answer
to the admonition page 472. 473. D. Hunfrey invita Iew^lli printed at London,
page 212. D. Whitakers contra Duraum lib. 6. p. 413.
most eminent Protestants hold for absolute and gross Papists, as they term
them) have as well registered their other supposed Articles of Protestancy for
Heresies, as well as they have recorded these few, of which, all sides confess
they stand rightly charged. But no such Relation of any other points of
Protestancy in the^ do we find in the Fathers writings, or otherwise recorded
in any Ecclesiastical History of those times. Secondly the same is evident,
even from the confessed Inuisibility of the Protestant Church in those days:
and sortably heerto it is, that Sebastianus Francus (an eminent Protestant)
thus writes: In Ep. de abroga^dis in vniuersu^ omnibus statutis Ecclesiast.
For certain, through the work of Antichrist, the external Church, together
with the faith and sacraments, vanished away presently after the Apostles
departure; and that for these fourteen hundred years, the Church has not
been external, and visible. To whose judgment agrees D. Fulke, saying: In
his answer to a cou^tefaite Catholic page 35.
The true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles days. Within which
circuit of time of the Protestant Churches Inuisibility, Aerius, Manicheus,
Iouinian, and the rest did live Thus we see, that not any one Protestant before
the revolt of Luther can be insta^ced; but that it may be showed, that the same
man was primatiuely a Catholic either in himself, or in his Predecessors.
But the case is far otherwise with the Catholic Church: for it is confessed
by our learned Protestants, that our Catholic Church never departed, or came
out of any other more ancient Church before in Being: A truth so undeniable,
that D. Sutcliffe confesses so much (though sleighting the force thereof) in
these words: In his answer to the supplication fol. 2
It is not material, that the Romanists never went out of any known Christian
Society. But M. Bunny deals more ingenuously and plainly heerin, who thus
writes, touching the departing of the Protestant Church from out the
Catholic: In his pacificacion page 119. and p. 26.
It was evil done of them, who first urged such a separation; for that it is
great probability for them (meaning the Catholics) that so we make our sel^
answerable to find out a distinct and several Church from them, which hat^
continued from the Apostles age t^ this present; or else must acknowledge (...)
that our Church has sprung up o^ late, or since theirs: so fully this
Protestant grants, that the Roman Church did never depart, or go out from a
more ancient Church

But now to wind up the conte^ts of this Chapter in few words thus I infer.
If on the one side it be proved, that every Protestan^ did originally come out,
and depart (by his venting of Protestanticall Positions) from our Catholic
Church, before enjoying a Priority of Being: and that on the other side it be
confessed, that our Roman Church never departed from out any more ancient
Church before in Being (both which points are in this Chapter above proved) what
other Inference then can be made, but that Protestancy (as being later in time,
and merely contradictory to our Catholic faith) wants all true Entity and
Subsistence? for seeing the Catholic faith (for many hundred of years
confessedly) had its being before; and seeing the Protestant Faith is but a
mere Contradiction of the Catholic faith: the Protestant faith therefore has
no Reality of Being, since Contradictories cannot subsist together, or enjoy
several Beings. Thus far of this point: where (besides, that the Nonentity
of Protestancy is from hence necessarily euicted) the Contents of this Chapter
minister a must choking demonstration, for the proof of the Catholic
Religion in general; seeing God is more ancient then the Devil, and Truth
then falsehood.

That the Protestant denies the Authorities of all those Affirmative, and
Positive Heads, from whence the Catholics draw their proofs. CHAP. XVII.
THough this Chapter does not immediately conduce to the proving, that
Protestancy is a Nonentity: yet I hold it not altogether to be Parergon, or
impertinent; since in it, it is laid open, how the Protestant still continewes
the Protestant, that is, how he is wholly devoted, and (as it were) become
thrall to Negations. ^n diverse of the former passages it is showed, that the
Protestant in reference to his faith, rests only upon Negations; Now here it
shall appear, that whereas the Catholic draws out his proofs in defense of
his Religion (as so many great pieces of Artillery, to batter down the walls
of Nouelisme) from certain Affirmative real, and Positive heads; the
Protestant in lieu of withstanding these forces by dispute, is constrained to
retire himself to his accustomed sanctuary of Negations: so fugitive and
fleeting he is in answers; thus betrampling (with a bare denying) the weight
and strength of all those Affirmative Classes, or kinds of proofs.

1. For example; if the Catholic insist in the Authority of Miracles (and so
to descend by degrees to other Proofs) for defense of his Religion; in the
patratio^ whereof God for his approbatio^ of the said Religion, even disiointeth
the settled frame of Nature: The Protestants in answer heerto, deny the force
of miracles, tearming the^, but So the Centurists call them. Cent 4. col. 1445.
and Cent. 5. Col. 1486. And Osiander. Cent. 10. 11. 12. etc.
Antichristian wonders, and lying signs: and further saying, that they deny So
says D. Morton in his Apolog Cathol part. 1 l. 2 c. 25. and D. Succliffe in
his Examinat. of the Survey of D. Kellison.
that any miracles were wrought, since the Apostles days.

2. If the Catholic allege diverse passages of Scripture, as out of Toby, the
book of wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, the Machabees, etc. The Protestants with
full voice and cry, deny these books to be This appears in that in the
English Translations of their Bibles, they usually in the beginning of a leaf,
containing the names of the books of Scripture, do call these books, and some
other, Apocrypha.
Canonical Scripture, and style them only Apocryphal.

3. If healledge such parts of Scripture, which are acknowledged for Scripture,
on all sides; the Protestant denies the Translation of the said Scripture to be
true and sincere; auerring, that it is adulterated and corrupted by false
versions of it. This appears from that, which is above delivered, touching
the Protestants reprehension both of the translations of Scripture made by
forrayne Protestants, as also of our English Translations. But if the
Protestants do reject their own brethrens Translations, the^ much less will
they stand vnappealably to our Catholic Translations of the Scripture.

4. If the Catholic proceed further in insisting in the Originals of both the
Testaments. The Protestants deny, that the originalls of them are the same in
all passages, as they were first penned by the Prophets, the Evangelists, and
the Apostles. Thus for example in the new Testament, where in Matthew c. 10.
S. Matthew, it is said, (...), the first Peter; Beza in his Annotat. upon the
new Testament, set forth anno 1556
Beza denies the Original herin; iustifiing (though it be thus read in all
Greek copyes extant at this day) that the word (...) primus, was added by some
one, enclining to the defense of the Popes Primacy. In like sort Beza vbi supra.
Beza denies, that the Greek Original in Luke 22. is at this present, the
same as it was first penned by the Evangelist; mantayning that it is corrupted
in favor of the Real presence.

5. If he insist in such passages of Scripture, whose Originalls and
Translations therein are on all parts accepted for true; and tell his Adversary,
that the whole Church of God in her Primitive, and purer times ever interpreted
the said passages of Scripture in that sense, in which they are at this present
by the Catholics alleged; The Protestant absolutely So does D. Whitakers l de
Eceles. contra Bellarm. controuers. 2. q. 4. p. 223. Perkins in his Exposition
of the Creed. p. 400. Jewel in his Apology of the Church of England. part. 4.
cap. 4. and most other Protestants.
denies that infallible authority of the Church of God, in interpreting the
holy Scripture but disclayming from it appeals to his own Private spirit
interpreting the same.

6. If forbearing the written word of God, he allege in warranting of his
faith, the unwritten word of God, I mean Apostolical Traditions; the
Protestant denies peremptorily the Authority of all such Traditions. Thus for
example, where S. Chrysostom says: Chrysostom in 2. Thessal. hom. 4.
The Apostles did not deliver all things by writing, but many things without,
and these be as worthy of credit; as the other. D. VVhitakers reiects this
authority touching Traditions, in these words: D. Whitak. de sacra scriptura
page 678.
I answer, That this is an inconsiderate speech, and unworthy so great a
Father. And Cartwright in depressing the weight of Traditions maintained by S.
Augustine, thus writes: See Cartwright in whitgifts defense, p. 103.
To allow S. Austins saying, is to bring in Popery again

7. If leaving the word of God, he descend to humane authorities, (yet so
humane, as that they have the peculiar promise of Matt. 18.
Christ's assistance therein,) I mean to the grave authority of General
Counsels: the Protestants deny all authority of them. For D. VVhitakers openly
professes, that General Councels L. de Council. contra Bellar. q. 6.
may and have erred. But Peter Martyr more fully dismasketh himself, in
denying the authority of General Counsels, for he thus plainly writes: Pet.
Martyr. lib. de votis. page 476.
As long as we insist in General Counsels, so long we shall continue in the
Popish Errors.

8. If he produce the Testimonies of particular Fathers of the Primitive
Church: Mark with what contempt and indignity the Protestant denies them: for
Luther thus depresseth them: Luth. de seruo arbitrio, printed 1551. page 434.
The Fathers of so many ages have been plainly blind and most ignorant in the
Scriptures; they have erred all their life time, and unless they were amended
before their deaths, they were neither Saints, nor pertaining to the Church.
And another (though no Lutherane, yet of Luthers descent) in this his
scurrilous Pasquill thus traduceth the Fathers: D. W^itak. con^r contra
Duraeum. l. 6. page 413.
Ex Patrum erroribus ille Pontificiae Religionis cento consequutus est. The
Popish Religion is a patched cloth of the Fathers Errors sowed together: see
how impudent and petulant Nouelisme in faith is, in expecting precedence, and
taking the wall of Reverend, and hoary Antiquity.

9. If in such points, which concern matter of fact, as touching the supposed
change of faith in the visibility of the Church, the vocation and mission of
Pastors, and the uninterrupted Administration of the word and Sacraments, all
which are to receive their proof (or else not to be proved at all) from the
Authority of ancient and most authentical Histories; If (I say) the Catholic
do in proof heerof produce the ancient Histories of those Primitive times, D.
VVhitakers thus by denial aleniateth and lesseneth the Authority of all
Histories; D. D. Whitak. contra Duraeum. l. 7. page 478.
Sufficit nobis etc. To us it is sufficient by comparing the Popish opinions
with the Scripture, to discover the disparity of faith between them and us: And
as for Historiographers, we give them liberty to write what they will. And
accordingly, touching the Imaginary change of Rome in her faith, he thus
concludes: Whitak. vbi supra. page 277.
It is not needful to us, to search out in Histories the beginning of this
change.

10. To conclude, if in the last place for most demonstratiue and Affirmative
Notes and marks of the true Church, the Catholic do rest (as in nube Testium,
to use the Apostles phrase) in universality, Visibility, uninterrupted
continuance, unity, Succession of Pastors, Holiness of doctrine, Conversion of
Kings and Nations, of the Gentiles etc. The Protestants (besides, that they will
not admit any Historyes in proof of them) deny and discarde the testimonies of
all these Positive Heads of proofs, by erecting the Preaching of the word, and
Administration of the Sacraments, for notes; and by this means, they reduce to
their own judgments, which is the true Church; seeing they will not
acknowledge the word to be purely preached, or the Sacrament^ to be rightly
administered, but when and where their Private spirit out of its Pythagorean and
controwling Chair vouchsafes so to pronounce.

By all this now we may see, how wholly Negative, the Protestant is (and indeed
so Negative in all points, as that it may be feared, he in the end will deny his
own being:) for as here above we have showed, that his Religion consists in
pure denial of our Positive and Affirmative Articles; so in this Chapter, we
have laid down how he labors to othrow (by his like denyalls) the authority
of all such Affirmative and Positive Heads and principles, from whence the
Catholics for the fortifiyng of their own faith and Religion, do draw their
proofs. In which kind of proceeding, the Protestant deals no otherwise with
the Catholic; then if a man, not being content, to seek to deprive another of
his state and living; should no less labor with all sedulity and care, to
preclude and forstaule the true owner, of all means for his regayning, and
recovering his said state.

That Sundry of the most learned Protestants (as not houlding a Negative faith,
to be any real faith at all) agree with the Catholics, in believing the
Affirmative Articles of the Catholic faith. CHAP. XVIII.
(...) Id est Secundae cogitationes, prudentiores.
says the greek sentence; to which may well seem to allude in sense, (though
not in words) that other saying: Praestat retrosum currere, quam male currere.
(...). The meaning of which two sentences diverse of our learned Adversaries
have thought good to incorporate in their own writings. Who upon their later
and more retired thoughts; and houlding it a greater honor, rather to return
well back in their judgments, then to proceed badly forward, have wholly
disclaimed from this their Negative faith: For many of the^ there are, who well
weighing the emptines of their own Religion, as consisting only of Positions,
which is (as is above made clear) but an annihilation of all Positive and true
Faith, and counting it altogether unworthy, that such a nakedness of Religion
should for ever have a working influence over their judgments, have therefore at
the length (upon their la^er, and more mature deliberation) ^n diverse weighty
points wholly re^ected this Negative Religion, and ^n place thereof have fully
imbra^ed and entertained the contrary Affirmative Articles of faith, ever
ma^tained by the Church of Rome. ^ will insist in twenty principal Articles of
our Catholic Religion, (and consequently almost in the whole body of the
Catholic faith) ^o which the more grave, impar^iall, and dispassionate
Protestants do give their full assent, believing them be most true and
com^onant to Gods sacred word. To ^et down the Protestants own words in
proof heerof, it would be needless, and ouer-laboursome in regard both of the
multiplicity of the Protestant Authors affirming so much; as also of the great
variety of the Affirmative Catholik^ Articles mantayned by the^. Therefore to
take a shorter cut, I will se^ down (only by way of Reference) the places in
the Protestants books, in which the said Catholic doctrines are by them fully
taught, and defended.

1. And to begin. The doctrine of the Real presence, in the holy Sacrament
of the Eucharist to the bodily mouth, is affirmed not only by Luther, but by
all the Lutheranes without exception; they taking their name of Lutheranes from
him, in regard of such their defense, and belief of the said doctrine;
therefore it is booteles either to set down the particular names of them, or
to make reference to such places of their writings, wherein they teach and
justify the said doctrine; they chiefly differing from the Catholic in the
manner of the Presence.

2. The Real Presence, not only of the efficacy and virtue of Christ's body,
but also of the body it self, after a wonderful and incomprehensible manner
to the mouth of faith, is justified by In^tit. lib. 4 d 18. sect. 7. and 32.
Calvin, by In his Eccesiast. policy l. 5. sect. 67 page 174. and 177.
M. Hooker, by Contra Duraeum page 169.
D. VVhitakers, by In Script. Anglican. page 548. and 549.
Bucer, by In his ^riedly caveat in the third leaf.
M. Ryder, and finally by the In the English Harmony page 431.
Confession of Belgia: but contradicted for Popish doctrine by Swinglius, and
almost all other Sacramentaries, and particulerly by Ludouicus Alemannus, who
thus writes: Neque etiam per fidem, seu incomprehensibili modo, vt vocant,
quia hoc totum imaginarium, and repugnat apertissime Dei verbo.

3. That Sacraments do not only signify, but confer Grace, where a true
disposition is in the Receauers, is mantayned by In epi-tom. Colloq
Montis-Beigar. p. 5^. and page 42.
Iacobus Andreas, Contaa Duraeum l. 8. p. 662.
D. VVhitakers, In his true difference, part 4. p. 539.
D. Bilson, by In Enchirid. Co^trouers. quas Aug. Confes^hu^e^ cum Caluinianis.
p. 272.
Osiander, In his Ecclesiast. policy l. 5 sect. 57. p. 127. and 128.
M. Hooker, and finally by In ca. 4. epist ad Romanos.
Melancthon, who thus writes of this point. Repudiandaest Swinglij opinio, qui
tantum civilly modo iudicat de signis: scilicet Sacramenta tantum notas esse
professionis etc.

4. That Christ after his passion descended in soul into Hell, is affirmed by
In his special Treatise of that title printed 1592.
D. Hill, by Alleged by D. Hill vbi supra.
Aretius, Melancthon, and M. Nowell; they being alleged by D. Hill to the same
purpose. Add heerto that Lymbus Patrum (whereunto we Catholics believe, that
Christ did descend in soul after his death) is affirmed by In Lib. Epist.
Swingl. and Oecolamp. l. 1. p. 19.
Oecolampadius, In lib. ep. Swingl and Oecolamp. l. 3. p. 590. and 561.
Swinglius, In his com. places in Engl. part* 2. cap. 18. page 221.
Peter Martyr, and In his Decads fol.
Bullinger.

5. Purgatory is taught by Tom. 1. VVittenb. in resolut. de Indulg. Conclus.
15. fol. 112.
Luther, in disputat. Lypsicacum Eckio, and by M. Fox. Acts Mon. p. 1313.
Latimer. That temporal punishment is reserved by God, to satisfy his Justice
for sin already committed (which is the ground of Purgatory) is taught by
diverse Protestants; to wit, by the Public page 229.
Confessios in the Harmony, by In Symbolum p 8.
Iaspar Oleuianus, and by In his Answer against the Adversaries of Gods
praedestination. pa. 215. 216. 217.
John Knox.

6. The visibility of the Church at al times, is affirmed by In l^c. ^^m. ^dit.
1561 C. ^el ^e^^s
Melancthon, by In Jesuit. sin. part. 2. ^a. 3 p. 240.
D. Humfrey, (...). of the Church c. 10 page 5.
D. Field (...) his ep annexed to his Comm. places in Engl^ p 15^
Peter Martyr, and In his so^eraigne Remedy against Schi^me. p. ^^.
Enoch Clapham, and diverse other learned Protestants for breuity here omitted;
though contradicted for Popish by In the tower d^^putat. with Edmund Ca^pian,
the second days Conscience.
D. Fulke, In his Synops. p. 4^.
D. Willet, and many others.

7. Invocation of Saints, maintained by Luth. n purgat. quorundam Art.
Luther, who thus writes hereof: De intercessione Sanctorum, cum tota Ecclesia
sentio; and iudico Sanctos a nobis honorandos esse atque inuocandos: vy
certain Protestants Of this see Hafferenferus, in locis Theolog. l. 3. stat.
4. loc. 5. p 463.
in Polonia, by Vide Fox Act. Mon. 462.
Thomas Bilney, by Act. Mon. pa. 1312. and 1315.
Latimer, and by Orat. in Chryso. de Iuuentio and Maximo.
Oecolampadius. And (as the ground heerof) Intercession of Saints is auerred by
Oecol. vbi sup.
Oecolampadius, and Fox Act. Mon. p. 1312.
Latimer.

8. Freewill, taught by Snecanus, and Hemingius, as In his Synops. printed
1600. p. 808.
D. Willet acknowledges; and believed by diverse Protestants, mentioned in
Act. Mon. p. 1533.
Fox his history.

9. The power of Priests not only to pronounce, but to give Remission of sins
(and consequently, that Confession of sins is allowed; seeing how can the
Priest know, what sins are to be remitted, and what sins to be retained,
according to the words of the Scripture, whose sins you remit etc. and whose
sins you retain etc. except he know particulerly the sins of the
penitent?) is taught by the English Communion book, in the visitation of the
sick, where the Priest says: And by his Authority committed to me, I absolve
thee from thy sins etc. In his disp. Theo. p. 301.
Lobechius Doctor and Professor in the University of Rostock, by In Council.
loco rum scripturae repugnantium. lin. 194. fol. 218.
Andreas Althamerus, by In loc. com. tom. 1. de potestate Eccles. f. 305.
Sarcerius, by In his Margarita Theol pa. 116. and 117.
Spandeb urge, and finally by In Swenckfildio Caluinis. p. 55.
Iacobus Helbrunerus. And hence it is, that Absolution is affirmed by
Mela^cthon, to be (as his words are) Melancth. in Apol. Confess. Aug. Art. 13.
de numero and vsu Sacramentorum, fol. 161.
properly a Sacrament.

10. The Indifferency of Communion under one, or both kinds, maintained by
Luth. in Ep. ad Bohemos, and l. de vtraque specie Sacram.
Luther, by Melancth. in Cent. Ept. Theol ep. 74. p. 252.
Melancthon, and Bucer in the Confession of Ratisbon.
Bucer. Luthers words are these: Luth in cap. ^^. ab^. c. a^ Eucharistia.
They sin not against Christ, who use one kind, seeing Christ has not
commanded to use both, but has left it to the will of every one etc.

11. That there are certain unwritten Traditions to be observed, is confessed
by In his treatise of the Church. p. 2^9.
D. Field; of the Baptism of Infants, by l. epist. Swingl. and Oecolamp. p.
301.
Oecolampadius, and by to. 2 l. ac Baptis. fol. 90.
Swinglius, and in like manner by our In his defense. p. 539.
Doctor Whitgift: of the Tradition of Easter, by D. Couel in his Answer to
John Burges. p. 139.
D. Couell: of the Tradition of the use of the Cross, and the name D. Couel in
his examination of the Plea of the Innocents. page 104.
Archbishop, by Hooker Eccles. Pol. l 2. sect. 7. page 118.
M. Hooker, who answers diverse Authorities out of certain Fathers usually
alleged by other Protestants in behalf of only Scripture. And finally by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, touching Apostolical Ordination, in the Conference
before the King. page 11.

12. That the Commandments may be kept, and are not impossible; taught by M.
Eccles. Pol. lib. 2. page 113.
Hooker, by D. Lib. de perfest. obedient. legis Dei.
Castal^o, by M. In his reformed Catholic page 26. and 51.
Perkins, and In his defense of M Hoker art. 7. page 54.
D. Couell.

13. That there are Evangelical Counsels, which are such as that a man in
performing them does more then he is by God commanded; is taught by In assert.
art ^0
Luther, Eccles. Pol. lib. 3. sect. 8. pa. 140.
M. Hooker, and In his defense of M. Hooker art. 8. page 50.51.52.
D. Couell. Ad heerto, that our good works proceeding from faith, and in
regard of Christ's passion and promise, are Meritorious, and deserving, is
maintained by In loc. com. de bonis operib. circa me^^um.
Melancthon, by the Public Page 495. and 27^
Confessions in the Harmony, by In Margar. Theol. p. 48. and 50.
Spandeburge, by Eccles. Pol. l* ^. sect 72. page 208.
M. Hooker.

14. Peter's Primacy, maintained by As he is alleged by D. Whitgift in his
defense, page ^73. and 469.
Calvin, by Whitgift vbisupra.
D. Whitgift, by Musculus so alleged by D. Whitgift vbi supra.
Musculus, and by D. Bridge. In his defense of the government etc. page 445.446:
D. Bridges Bishop of Oxford.

15. Prayer for the dead, defended by as witnesses Vrbanus Rhegius in prima
part operum in formula caute loque^di cap. de Sanctorum cultu.
Luther, and Vrbanus Rhegius, by In his scrip^a Anglicana. p. 450.
Martin Bucer, by Fox Act. Mon. page 149.
William Torpe, and Printed 1549. fol. 116. and 140.
by the Communion book in King Edwards reign.

16. Touching universality of grace, and that Christ dyed for all with
intention on his part to have all men saved, if so they will accept of his
grace, which doctrine overthrows the Protestants doctrine of Reprobation,
being but a mere Negation to the doctrine of the Universality of Grace: Now
this doctrine of Universality of grace, is taught by In lib. Epist. Oecol. and
Swingl 1. page 274.
Swinglius, by In his treatise of prayer in general for all mankind.
M. Smith, by In method. descript page 430.
Snecanus, by In his Questions upon Genesis page 118.
M. Gibbons, by Enchiridion clas. 3. page 220. and 221.
Hemingius, by In method. Theol. lib. 2. p. 431. 435. 436.
Hiperius, by Eccles. policy l. 5. page 104.
M. Hooker, by Upon the Apocal. in English f. 79
Bullinger: and finally, by most of the learned Lutheranes, and diverse other
learned Caluinists, as witnesses In his Theses, p. 159. 163. 194. 166. and
167. and sequent.
Huberus: as also by diverse learned Bishops of England, and other English
Doctors; all who are thetefore at this time styled Armanians by their
Adversaries.

17. Worshipping of Images, defended by certain Protestants of Germany (as In
his respons. ad acta colloq Montis-Belgar. part altera page 23.
Beza witnesses) by Bilney a Protestant, as Act. Mo p. 462 and 464.
M. Fox confesses. And answerably heerto, the bowing and reverence given at
the name of Jesus (seeing this is the same to the ear, which the Image is to
the Eye) is taught by Queen Elizabeth's Art. 25
Injunctions, by In epist. Pauli ad Philippens. Coloss. Thessal. in Philip. ca.
2. v. 10 f. 12^. col. 2.
Za^chius, by In his defense, page 742.
D. Whitgift, by In his summons for sleepers p. 30.
M. Leonard Wright, by In loc. co n p 59.
Musculus.

18. That Christ was from his Nativity full of knowledge, and free from
Ignorance, taught by Alleged by Beza, in respons, ad Act colloq. Mon^isbelgar.
part. 1. p. 147. and 148.
Iacobus Andreas, In Enchirid Co^trouers. printed Tubi^ge, 1630. p. 146. 147
by Osiander, and finally by most Lutheran Protestants, whose names and
References were ouer-laboursome to set down; Yet is this doctrine contradicted
by In resp. ad Act. colloq. Montisb. part. 1. p. 147.
Beza, by In his reuiew of D Kelli-Suruey printed 1606 p. 55
D. Succliffe, and by In his Synops. p. 599. and 600. As also gainsaid by most
of the Puritanes.
D. Willet.

19. That Christ is God of God, and has his Substance of his Father, as the
whole Catholic Church holds; maintained by In Apoc. p. 474.
M. Fox, by In disp. ^0. Theol. p. 49
Lobechius, by In his Confut of Atheism p. 37.
D. Dove, by In loc. com. an. 1561. p. 24.
Melancthon, by Eccl. pol l. 5 p. 113
M. Hooker, by In his defense of M. Hooker p. 16. and 17.
D Couell, and finally by the page 34.
Confession of Belgia, in the Harmony. But contradicted by In his explicat.
persidiae Valent. Gentilis. extant in his tract. Theol p. 771
Calvin, Contra Heshuti^.
Beza, Contra Camp^ra^. ^.
D. VVhitakers, and many others.

20. Lastly, that Antichrist is yet to come (and consequently that the Bishop
of Rome is not Antichrist (which position of the Protestants is but a Negation
of the Bishop of Rome being Christ his Vicar upon earth) is taught by In epi.
Pauli ad Philip. Coloss. Thessalon page 216.
Zanchius, See the book entitled An^ichristus, sieve Prognostica sinis mundi,
page 74. 75 79. See also Fran. La^bertus upon this point in his Comment. upon
the Reuelat.
Franciscus Lambertus, and according to D. Dove in his sermon of the second
coming of Christ, thus says. Some Protestants make a doubt whether Antichrist
he yet revealed or no.
D. Dove his judgment, by diverse other Protestants: yet contradicted by most
Protestants and Puritanes of these days.

Hitherto of these twenty Affirmative Cath. points, taught by learned
Protestants; in teaching and believing of which, it follows, that of
necessity, the said Protestants must disauow and reject the contrary Negative
Tenets mantained by other Protestants.

Certain Porismata, or Resultancies, rising out of the several passages of
this Treatise. CHAP. XIX.
IN the precedent Chapters and passages of this Treatise, my undertaken task
in proving Protestancy to be an Irreality and Nonentity, is (I hope) fully
accomplished: I will in this place extract from the same passages certain
Resultancies, by inferentiall deductions.

1. The first of these shall be, that since Protestancy is in it self, but a
privation or denial, of faith, and a mere Nothing; that therefore God, who is
not the Author of Priuations and defects, did never make or institute
Protestancy, nor will be worshipped with such an empty, and imaginary Religion.
For how can it enter into any brain, but to ween, that he, from whom stream
the different welsprings and sources of all things, for he is Psalm. 55
fons vitae, Eccl. 1.
fons sapipientiae, Hier. 2
fons aquae viuae: he who being immutable, alters all things; ever works,
yet ever quiet; often changes his actions, yet never changes his
determinations; Malac.
Ego sum Dominus and non mutor: he, who is more ancient then all Eternity; more
large and diffuse, then any magnitude; more strong, then all Power: He that is
above all, yet lower then all, so becoming to the whole universe both the
Circumference and Center: He, who is the origin of al things, being the
Efficient cause of All, the Form of All, and the End of All: He, who as a
Sun (placed in the midst of the whole world) casts forth on each side
innumerable beams of his vneclypsed radiancy and power, by the which beams he
creates, produces and conserueth all things: To conclude, he, whom truly to
describe, all tongues are but dumb: Tertul. de Trinit.
A deloquendam Dei Maiestatem, omnis eloquentia muta est. Now, here I first
demand: can it enter into I say, any brain to imagine, that this most pote^t,
and most wise God, should institute a faith and Religion, by the which only he
will be truly honored, and by means whereof the soul of Man shall arrive to
its eternal beatitude, the Terminus ad quem, for which it was created; which
Religion is (as above is proved) but a Chimera, and Irreality?

Secondly, I demand, whether this wise, potent, and Just God, who in infinite
places of his sacred As in Psalm. 9. and 10. God shall rain snares upon
sinners, fire and brinstone, and blasts of storms, the portion of their Cup.
And again Ecclesiasticus 40. death, blood, contention, edge of sword,
oppression hunger, contrition etc. all al these are created for sinners. And
yet more. Psalm. 91. All they that work iniquity shall be confounded. Besides
innumerable oth^^ places.
Word, has thundered out his most dreadful Comminations and threats against
Sin, and the commiters thereof, will take delight in that Religion and faith,
whose many Articles, Principles, or Tenets do even exhale and breath forth (as
an ordure or stench out of a filthy and pudled Cha^nell) into the belieuers
will, improbity, sensuality, Injustice, and all dissolution whatsoever in
conversation and ma^ners? But such are the Protestants Articles of denying
Freewill, denying the possibility of keeping the Comandements, denying of
Purgatory, denying Justification by works, depressing of Virginity, Poverty,
and Obedience, and such other Protestanticall Tenets above discoursed of; so
true it is, that Faith is of a specular nature, ever in its operation,
reflecting back upon the understanding and will.

2. The second Porisma, issuing out of this discourse, may be this. We all
know, that the Protestants do in their pulpits and else where with great
clamor and noise vociferate, and cry out, that the Pope is Antichrist: Now,
here I ask, whether in a solid, and not preoccupated judgment, it is not more
probable, that the Protestants are the Precursours and forerunners of
Antichrist, (as playning and cauening the way against his coming) then that
the Pope is Antichrist. My reason is this: In this Treatise it is abundantly
proved, that the Protestant denies most points of our Christian and Catholic
Religion; so as Protestancy essentially rests in such Negations. This being
so, how fitly does this kind of denyalls and Negations sort to Antichrist, who
at his coming shall by his denying of Christian Religion, and all the Articles
thereof, seek (what in him lies) to annihilate and overthrow the said
Christian Religion; and for such his proceeding some so writes Hyppolytus
Martyr, in orat de consumma^ione munde.
Fathers do conjecture, that his name shall be (...), signifying Nego: and this
both by reason, that this greek word makes: up the number, to wit Apocal. 13.
666. which is ascribed peculiarly to Antichrist, as also in that Antichrist
and his Ministers shall at his coming, both in their denyalls and works,
labor mightily to euert Christian Religion. And if S. John says truly, that
every one, who in any sort denies Jesus to be Christ, may figuratively be
termed Antichrist; Joan. 1.
Quis est mendax, nisi qui negat Iesum esse Christum? and hic est Antichristus
etc. how fully, simply, and absolutely then shall the true Antichrist at his
coming deny Jesus to be Christ? And consequently shall deny all the particular
mysteries of Christianity.

3. My third Resultancy respects the Protestants several different
Translations of the Scripture, and their several different settings forth of
their Common Book of Prayer (as is above showed;) and yet even at this day,
they are neither content with the last Translation of the Bible, or last
publishing of the Book of Common Prayer, though all corrected and reformed by
way of Negatiues; but charging the^ with many untruths, corruptions, and
blasphemies; and most earnestly thirsting after a new Translation, and a new
composition of the Communion Book if so they could obtain it. From whence we
conclude, from their own pens, that hitherto the Protestants never enjoyed the
true and uncorrupted Scripture, and a form or common Book of Prayer, free
from Errors.

Now this being granted by the^, how mightily are the Protestants foiled
thereby? For first whereas their own doctrine is, that the Luth. so teaches
praefat. Assertionis suae. Calvin. lib. 4. Instit. c. 9. Kemnit. in Examen.
Council. Trident. sess. 4. Melancthon locis. de Ecclesia.
Scripture is the sole Judge of Controversies in Religion, they are heerby, by
their own implicit confessions, even as yet deprived of this Judge: seeing
themselves do grant, that the pure and uncorrupted Scripture, and not as it is
abastarded with deprauations, ought to be this Judge. Again, to be deprived of
the true Scripture) as themselves by acknowledging all former Translations to
be impure, and false, must consequently grant they are) is to be deprived of
one of Gods chiefest pledges of man's salvation; the Scripture of God, and the
necessary deductions out of it, being the spiritual meats, wherewith (with
reference to his salvation) the understanding of man's soul is chiefly fed and
nourished: Joan 6.
Verba quae ego locutus sum vobis, Spiritus and vita sunt.

And as touching the want of a true Communion Book of Prayer (the which the
Protestants by their former excepting against al Communion Books hitherto
published, do acknowledge to want) the Protestants do heerin potentially grant,
that hitherto they have not known how, and in what manner they ought to pray;
which how great a spiritual detrime^t it is, who sees not? since by Prayer we
overcome him, who is invincible; prayer indeed being the mother and daughter of
tears; by which tears (seconded with the help of the Sacraments) the
blemishes and spots of our souls are washed out: Psalm. 50.
Lauabis me, and super niuem dealbabor.

4. The fourth. It is in the former passages proved, even from the frequent
Confessions of the learned Protestants; that the Protestant Church has for
many ages been Invisible, or rather during those times utterly extinct. Now
this confessed disparition and vanishing away of their Church out of the sight
of all men, does necessarily inuolue in it self, that the Protestant Church is
not, nor can be the true Church of God, since the true Church of God must at
all times enjoy a continual and vneclipsed splendor of its own visibility. I
will enleauen this my Assertion, both with the authority of holy Scripture, and
the volu^tary acknowledgme^ts of our learned adversaries. And not to ouercharge
the Reader, with a needles surplusage of many testimonies; some few (and those
pertinent) shall serve. And first we thus read to be prophesied of the Church
of God: Isa. 60
The Isles shall wait for thee, their Kings shall minister unto thee, and thy
gates shall be continually open; neither day, nor night shall they be shut,
that men may bring to thee the riches of the Gentiles. And in the new Testament,
it is said of our Savior. Ephesians. 4.
He gave Pastors and Doctors to the consummation of Saints etc. till we all
meet in the unity of faith: that is (as is else where in this Treatise showed)
even by the Protestants scholia, D. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament in
Ephesians. 4
for ever. Now, these former divine Oracles proving an vninterupted visibility
of the Church of God, are atte^ded on with the like acknowledgments even of the
Protestants: for Melancthon (after he had alleged certain places of
Scripture, in proof of the Churches ever visibility) does thus write:
Melancthon in lotis com. edit. anno 1561. cap. de Ecclesia.
Hi and similes loci etc. These, and such like places of Scripture, non de
Idaea Platonica, sed de Ecclesia visibili loquuntur. And D. Field accords
thereto, thus saying: D. Field lib. 1. of the Church. cap. 10.
It is true that Bellarmine labors in vain, in proving that there is, and
always has been a visible Church etc. for all this we most willingly yield
unto. Finally D. Humfrey thus seals up the truth hereof: D. Humfrey in
Iesuitis. part. 2. c. 3.
Oportet Ecclesiam esse conspicuam, Conclusio est clarissima. It is a manifest
Conclusion, that the Church is to be conspicuous, or visible. Now here above is
delivered; first, that the Protestant Church has for many ages been Invisible:
Secondly, (as proved both from the Scriptures, and from our Adversaries
doctrine) that the true Church of God must at all times be visible, and
conspicuous. If the^ you will mingle these two Ingredients together, you shall
find, that the Compound made of them, will be this: That the Protestants
Church for want of a continual visibility at all times, is not the true Church
of God. The same deductio^ of proving the Protestant Church not to be the true
Church of God, may be made from the confessed want of administering the word and
Sacraments in the said Church. For seeing the Administration of the word and
Sacraments are the essential Notes of the true Church in the Protestants
judgments; and seeing withal by their own Confessions above expressed, their
Church has wanted for more the^ a thousand years together, this so necessary
Administration of the word and Sacraments; it then ineuitably follows, that
the Protestant Church (for want of these Esse^tial notes of the true Church) is
not the true Church of God, even by their own doctrine.

5. The fifth is to observe, the above confessed Truth of our Catholic
Religion in all the chiefest Articles eue^ from the Adversaries pens. This is
the greatest and most conuincing proof that can be desired; for here mark,
what both the Fathers and the Protestants speak of this kind of proof.

First then ( Irenaeus lib. 4. c. 14.) thus writes heerof: It is an
unanswerable proof, which brings attestation from the Adversaries
themselves. With whom conspires S. Austin (lib. contra Donatistas cap. 24.)
saying, the truth is more forcible to wring out Confession, then any rack or
torment. To both which Fathers D. Whitaker (contra Bellar. l. de Eccles
controuers. 2. q. 5. c. 14) subscribes in these words: The Argument must be
strong and efficacious, which is taken from the Confession of the Adversaries:
And I do freely acknowledge, that the truth is able to extort testimonies even
from its enemies. Thus D. Whitaker. Now, that these Protestants (maintaining
our former Catholic Articles) were persuaded, that the said Catholic points
received their warranted proof from the sacred Scripture, appears evidently
from this one Consideration; to wit, because all the former alleged
Protestants (some four or five only excepted) do wholly reject the doctrine of
Traditions; confidently and unanimously teaching, that nothing is to be
believed, as an Article of Faith, but what has its express warrant and
authority from the written word of God.

6. The last resultancy is, that the many Negative Reformations of Protestancy
do finally end in Iudaisme, Turcisme, and an utter abnegation of Christian
Religion. The most deplorable and disconsolate state of sundry eminent
Caluinists preaches the truth of this my Assertion: for diverse of them never
stayed in the endless progress of refyning their Religion by Negations, till at
the close of all, they denied all Articles of Christian Religion, and the
supreme mystery of the most Blessed Trinity; and thereupon apostating from
Christianity, they became most blasphemous Jews, or Turks; so true it is,
that Turcisme, and Iudaisme is the last color, dye, or tincture, that
Protestancy takes. Some few Examples hereof among many, I will in this place
retaile; And first David George, who was a markable Protestant, and once
Professor at Osi^ad. Cont. 1^. part. 2. p 641. says of David Geo^ge vtebatur
publi^o verbi Minister^o Basiliensi.
Basil; did (after many Negations) wholly deny the Christian Faith, and became
a devilish See Historia Dauidis Georgij printed at Antwerp. 1568. published by
the Divines of Basil.
Apostata. Again Andreas Volanus (an eminent Caluinist) not only became a
Turk, but corrupted diverse others with his pestilent writings In Pa^anesi.
against the B. Trinity.

Ochinus also, who with Peter Martyr, first planted Protestancy (by his denying
of many Articles of our Catholic Religion) here in England in King Edward the
sixth his days, did finally become a Jew. This is witnessed by In his book de
tribus Elohim.
Zanchius, In Theolog. Caluinist. lib. 1. fol. 9.
Conradus Slusselburge, two Protestants, and Beza in Poliga^. page 4.
Beza who terms Ochinus, impurus Apostata.

Laelius Socinus (once brought up in the school of Geneua) forsook his
Christianity, and did write a book against the B. Trinity; of whom Beza thus
speaks: Beza epi. Theol. epist. 81.
Mihi quidem videtur omnes Corruptores long superasse. In like sort Alama^nus,
a Swinglian, and once dear to So witnesses Conrad. Slusselb. in Theolog. Calu
l. 1. art. 2.
Beza, in the end denied the Christian faith, and became a Jew; of whom Beza
thus co^plaineth: A lamannum affirmant ad Iudaismu^ defecisse. Lastly Neuserus,
who was chief Pastor of Heidelberge in the Palatinate, in the end abnegated
all Christian Religion, and becoming a Turk, caused himself to be
circumcised at Constantinople, as Osia^der Cent. 16. part. 2. p. 818.
Osiander the Protestant does witness, thus writing of him: Adam Neuserus
Pastor Heidelbergensis etc. prolapsus in Turcismum Constantinopoli circumcisus.
But I will close up this Scene with the Testimony of this Neuserus, who thus
writes of himself, and of other Caluinists, denying the Blessed Trinity:
Osia^der relates, that Neuserus did write these words from Constantinople
(being there circumcised) to one Gerlachius, a Protestat Preacher at Tubinga.
vid. Osiander in epitom. Cent. 16. page 209.
None is known in our times to be made an Arian (but an Arian is not much
inferior to a Turk, or Jew) who was not a Caluinist, as Seruetus, Bla^drata,
Paulus Alchiamus, Gentilis, Gebraldus, Siluanus, and others; therefore who
fears to fall into Arianisme, let him take heed of Caluinisme. Thus Neuserus.

And thus far of these former Porismata; and concerning this last, we here
see, how the many small rivers (as I may term the^) of our Negative
Reformations never cease running, till in the end they all disgorge themselves
into the main Ocean of Apostasy, and Infidelity: So certain it is, that a
Caluinist, being lastly sublimated and refyned by Negations, becomes an
Arian, Turk, or Jew.

That the Catholic Church, and the Protestant Church, are not one and the same
Church: though some Protestants teach the Contrary, for the supporting of their
own Church. CHAP. XX.
SVch is the refractory co^tumacy of Innovation of faith, that when it is
driven to the greatest straytes by way of dispute, yet before it will
acknowledge its own Errors, it will labor to take sa^ctuary, though in the
midst of its own enemies. According heerto we find, that when the
Protestants are irrepliably, and most dangerously pressed with the
Inuisibility, or want of succession of Pastors in their Church: and that for
such want their Church cannot be true Church of God; They then as being
deprived of all other euading means, are content, out of the immensenesse,
forsooth, of their own good will, (but indeed for the better supporting of
their Church) to acknowledge, that the Protestant Church, and the Catholics are
both but one, and the same Church. But do the Catholics accept of this their
kindness? No, Virg. Aenead.
Timeo Danaos, and dona ferentes. Their Calumny here rests, in that without
such their Tenet, their own Church evidently appears to come to utter ruin
and dissolution. The truth of this point is so clear, as that M. Hooker thus
writes hereof: lib. 3. Eccles. Pol. p. 130
We gladly acknowledge them of Rome to be of the family of Jesus Christ. And
D. Couell: D. Couell in defense of Hooker
I cannot but wonder, that they of Rome will ask, where our Church was before
Luther? As if any were of opinion, that Luther did erect a new Church. But M.
Bunny (no vulgar Protestant) dismasketh himself more openly, touching this
point; and withal shows the reason, why himself and his brethren so
greedily beg this so much desired reconciliation; for thus he writes: Bunny
an his Treatise
We are no several Church from them, nor they from us etc. All the diffirence
between us, is concerning the truer members. And again, Ibid. page 109.
It was evil done of them, who first urged such a separation. And then after
he gives his reason in these plain words: Ibid. p. ^60
It is great probability with them (meaning with the Catholics) that so we
make our selves answerable to find out a distinct and several Church from the
Apostles age till this present; else needs we must acknowledge, that our Church
is sprung of late, or since theirs. Thus these Protestants, for the vphoulding
of their own Church, are forced to teach, that the Catholic Church and the
Protestant, are but one and the same Church.

Now if any Protestant seeking to redeem his Church from such dangers, as are
in this Treatise threatened to fall upon it; as (besides Inuisibility, and want
of Succession of Pastors) the blemish of being an Irreality, and Nonentity
etc. should for his last despairing refuge, answer with the former Authors,
that the Protestant Church and the Roman Church are but one, and that seeing
the Roman Church has ever been in being, and Visible; that therefore the
Protestant Church (as being the same Church with the Roman) is heerby freed
from all those spots and blemishes of Inuisibility, want of Succession,
Irreality, want of true subsistence etc. here in this Treatise above enforced:

Therefore to prevent all such poor and needy tergiuersatio^ (for falsehood
would gladly shroud it self under the wings of truth) I will here discover the
absurdity of this their supposall, by demo^strating, that the Catholic Church
and the Protestant Church cannot be one and the same Church: so certain it is,
that there is no Communion between Christ, and Beliall.

And first: If we take into our consideration, what it is, which makes the
true Church (for speaking of the Church of God, we must needs understand
thereby the true Church; seeing God has no false Church) for that sentence of
S. Cyprian Cyprian lib. de V^ita. ^ Eccles.
is true: adulterari non potest sponsa Christi, incorrupta est, and pudica.

To this is replied, that men professing the truth of Christian Religion, make
this Church. Well then, if so it can be proved, that the Catholics and the
Protestants do maintain such contrary Articles of faith, as that of necessity
the one part must be false, and consequently not to be believed by the Members
of Christ's Church; the^ follows it, that these different Professors of them
(I mean the Catholics and the Protestants) cannot make One, and the same
Church. And to come to this point* (though such disparity of faith has been
proved to be eue^ among the Protestants themselves above in this Treatise;) But
if one Protestant think another Protestant to be (for his supposed false
faith) no member of Christ's Church, but an Heretic; then with much more reason
we may pronounce the same between the Catholic and the Protestant.

Now, this point takes its more evident demonstration of proof from this one
consideration; to wit, that the Catholic and the Protestant do not believe
one and the same Creed. If then they both do not believe one and the same Creed
(and yet the Creed is but an abstract or Compendium of the true faith of
christ) can it be possibly conceived, that the Catholic and Protestant do
make one and the same Church? But to descend to the Creed. It is true, that the
Protestant and Catholic do in words recite one and the same Creed; but seeing
it is the intended sense of the holy Ghost in every Article thereof, and not
the words, which make the Creed; it follows that if the Catholic, and
Protestant do believe the said Articles of the Creed in a different, or rather
contrary sense, that then they do not believe the Creed; for to believe the
Creed in a false sense, is not to believe it all: The Creed in this respect
justly challenging to it self that privilege, which the holy Scripture does;
of which S. Jerome thus writes: S. Jerome in epist. ad Paulin^e^a.
Scripturae non in legendo, sed in intelligendo consistunt.

That this they do, I will exemplify in some Articles threof: And to begin
with that first Article I believe in God. The Catholic belieues, that his God
no way formally cooperates with man to sin; the Protestant belieues, that his
God Beza in his display of Popish Preachers. page ^02. Swingl. tom 1 de
provident. c. 6. fol. 365. Calvin. Instit. l. 1. c. 18.
cooperateth, forces, and impelleth a man to sin, as is above in this
Treatise showed. The Catholic belieues that God will not punish man for the not
observing of such precepts, which are not in man's power to observe; the
Protestant belieues, that it is not in our power to keep the Ten
Commandments; and yet withal belieues, that D. Reynolds in his second
Conclusion, annexed to his Conference. p. 697.
God will punish man with everlasting Torments, for his not keeping of the said
Ten Commandments.

Briefly, the Catholic belieues, that his God gives sufficient grace to all
men, that they may be saved; The Protestants God decrees diverse men, without
any respect or preuision of their works, to eternal damnation: for thus
Calvin writes: Calvin Instit. l. 3. c. ^2. See Willet Synops. p. 554.
affirming the same.
God does ordain by his Counsel, that among men some be borne to eternal
damnation from their nothers womb. Touching the Article, of Judging the quick
and the dead; The Catholic belieues, that Christ at his coming to Judgment
will so judge man, as that his good works (receiving their force and virtue
from Christ's passion) shall be rewarded: The Protestant belieues, that Calu. in
Antid. Council. Trident. Kemnitius in Exam. Council. Trident.
Christ will reward only a bare and naked faith.

Touching that, I believe the Catholic Church; The Catholic belieues this
Church to be a society of men, professing the present Roman faith, of which
some are predestined, others reprobated: The Confess. August. art. 7. Luth l.
de Council. and Eccles. Calu. l 4. Instit.
Protestant belieues, that his Church consists only of the Elect and
faithful, and not of other sorts of men.

Touching the Article of the Communion of Saints; The Catholic does believe
such a Communion to be between the souls in heaven, the souls in Purgatory,
and men living in this world; as that the souls in Purgatory may be helped by
the prayers of the living and the living may be helped by the intercession of
the Saints in heaven; The Protestant denies Brennus in Confess. VVittenb. c.
de Purgat. Calu. l. 3. Instit. c. 5. sect. 6.
al such Communion between these several parts of the Church.

Concerning the Article of forgiveness of sins; The Catholic belieues, that
actual sins are forgiven by the Sacrament of Penance, and that thereby the
soul of man becomes truly Just in the sight of God; obtaining by this means
a true and Inherent Justice: The Protestant acknowledges not any Sacrament of
Penance; neither does he acknowledge any real and Calu. l. 3. Instit. c 12.
Kemnit. ^n Exam. Council. Trident.
Inherent Justice in man, but only an imputative Justice, which is the Justice
of Christ imputed unto us.

Thus far to show that the Catholic and Protestant do not believe one and
the same Creed; and consequently, that one and the same Church cannot consist
of Catholics and Protestants.

Secondly, the authority of General Counsels condemning several particular
doctrines for Heresies, and the like authority of particular Orthodoxall
Fathers of the Primitive Church, touching their like condemnation of many
Protestanticall Tenets for Heresies, do sufficiently euict, that the Protestant
Church and the Catholic Church, cannot be one and the same Church; for if
they could, then would it follow, that the former old Heresies above displayed
in the tenth Chapter, and now houlden by the Protestants, should be no
heresies; for if the Professors of the Roman faith, and the maintainers of the
said strange doctrines, could be members of one Church; then great wrong was
offered by the Fathers and Counsels, to brand such men in those former times
for Heretics, and their doctrines for Heresies.

We may add heerto, that if the ancient learned Fathers did teach that a man by
holding only one error or heresy did cease thereby to be a member of Christ's
Church: as for example, Iouinian for teaching that Virginity and Matrimony were
equal: the Manichees for taking away Freewill etc. what would the said Fathers
conceive, (if they had lived in our days) and should observe the Protestants
to incorporate and ingrosse in their faith and religion, almost twenty distinct
heresies, condemned in those ancient times (as is above showed:) would these
Fathers (think you) be persuaded, that the Roman Church, and these men could
make one and the same Church? From this then it follows, that either General
Councels and particular Ancient Fathers did err, and commit great oversight in
conde^ning of strange opinions for heresies which were not heresies; or that
the Protestants and the Catholics cannot be members of one and the same
Church; since certain it is, that the true Church of Christ cannot profess
any one Heresy.

Now, that heretics are not Members of Christ's Church, and therefore that the
doctrines and innouations mantayned by such men, cannot be taught and believed
by the Members of Christ's Church) shall appear from the great dislike, and
auersion, which both Christ's Apostles, and the ancient Orthodoxall Fathers did
ever bear against such men. And first may occur that divine sentence: ad
Titum c. 3.
A man that is an Heretic after the first, or second admonition; avoid,
knowing that he, who is such, is subverted and sins, being condemned by his
own judgment. And again the same Apostle: epist. ad Galat. c. 5.
The works of the flesh be manifest, which are fornication, uncleanness,
impurity, dissension, So it is translated in the English Bible of the year
1576.
Heresies etc. They which do these things, shall not obtain the Kingdom of
God. To come to the Fathers, S. Austin says, Aust. in ^. 11. in Marchaun.
He is an Heretic, who belieueth falsely touching any part of Christian
doctrine. Which Father in another place thus fearfully censureth of an
Heretic; Aust. l. 4. contr. Donatist. c. 8.
If a man be an Heretic, certainly no man doubts, but for this alone, that
he is an Heretic, he shall not possess the Kingdom of God.

Cyprian: Dominus noster etc. Cypr. l. 1. ad Mag.
when our Lord Jesus Christ did testify in the gospel, that those were his
Enemies, who were not with him, he noted not any one Heresy; but he manifestly
shows, that all Heretics whosoever are his Enemies etc. I will conclude with
Ambrose thus saying: Ambrose l 6. in Luc. c. (...).
Heretics seem to challenge Christ to them: for no man will deny the name of
Christ; nevertheless he indeed denies Christ, who does not confess all points
of faith instituted by Christ. Now from these testimonies I conclude, that both
the Catholics and Protestants cannot make one and the same Church of God,
seeing their disagreements in matters of Religion are so great, and
irreconciliable, as that the one part (as houlding mere contrary doctrines in
faith to the other) must needs therefore be taken for Heretics in the
judgment of the other party; and consequently not taken as the Members of
Christ his Church.

My last argument, which here I use, shall be ad hominem (as the Logitian calls
it.) The Protestants (we know) do call, in the foam of their impure language,
the Pope Antichrist, and Catholics the Members of Antichrist. Now if
Protestants and Catholics be in one and the same Church, then follows it (if
for the time we admit the former dream for true) that Antichrist and the
Members of Antichrist do make the head and the members of Christ's Church.

How absurd this is, and incompatible with common reason, I refer to any
judicious man to censure; and the rather, considering the Protestants
themselves do thus teach: Propositions and Principles disputed in Geneua. p.
245.
In Babylon (meaning thereby the Church of Rome) there is no holy Order, or
Ministry indeed, but a mere usurpation. Thus far to demonstrate, that for
the freeing and clearing of Protestancy from the former scars of being
Invisible, an Irreality, a Nonentity etc. it cannot be justly replied, (if any
such reply should be suggested) that seeing the Protestant Church and the
Catholic Church are both but one Church; and seeing the Catholic Church
cannot be charged with the spots Inuisibility, or being a Nonentity etc. that
therefore neither can the Protestant Church be so charged. Thus our Adversaries,
we see, labor to make the splendor of the truth of Christian faith to cast
its beams indifferently upon Protestancy, and the Catholic Roman faith:
notwithstanding the great dissentions touching faith between these two
Religions, which is as difficult to justify, as to mantayne, that the sun can
at one and the same time, shine upon us, and our Antipodes.

THE CONCLUSION.
LEarned Protestants, for whose sake this my labor was first attempted; Here
now my pen (as performing, I trust, what it did assume) stays it self: yet
before it gives its last stop, it is to make bold (by turning it self toward
you) to expatiate a little in discourse. You have seen (by perusing of the
former Treatise) Protestancy to be fully and punctually dissected; and for the
Catastrophe and closure of all, it is found to be empty of all Reality, and but
an Intentional Name, or Word. And since it is a Non-Ens, it consequently then
may be inferred, that Protestaancy and its Religion is false; for if Philosophy
teaches us, that Ens, and Verum conuertuntur, (as you well know) then by force
of reason, and law of contrarieties, it follows, that, Non Ens, and Falsum
conuertuntur. You are instructed also (as being learned) by Philosophy, that,
Quae habent vltimam dispositionem ad Introitum, and Non Esse, desinunt per se
Esse. And so (by Analogy) we may here say of Protestancy, that Protestancy by
several reformations, and all by Negations and Priuations (as by so many
several dispositions) does in the end even of it self euaporate and vanish
away into Nothing. Which being so, how then can any Christian dream, that the
soul of man, which enjoys the noblest kind of Being, should arrive to its
supreme felicity, by professing of that, which has no Being? No. For the faith
of a Protestant is (as I may term it) but an Imputative faith (as the
Protestants speak of Imputative Justice) seeing it wants all true Inherency
in the belieuer.

Now then, all this being most true, and undeniable, why will you (whom God
has enriched with elevated Wits, and whose Judgments are able to penetrate and
pierce through the greatest difficultyes) with a blind and unexamined assent,
thus enthrall yourselues to this Nothingnesse, so to term it, of Protestancy?

Think of the worth and dignity of a soul, which is the Antitypon of the
Deity, for it is written Genesis 1.
faciamus hominem ad imaginem nostram. It is, you know, immortal; It must then
enjoy (according as in this world, it belieues, and acts) for all eternity,
Heaven or Hell: the thought whereof is able to appale and strike the strongest
down through fear, and make him with good Tobias, Tob. 2.
manducare panem cum luctu and tremore. What then remains, but that every one
of you gather himself together, the better to with-stand such forces, as may
undermine the hope of his salvation? Lut. 18.
Porro vnum est necessarium. This is the business, why we were sent into this
world; and of this, each of us must render an account, at the day of our death.
Let not then neither the predominancy of the times, nor the stream and sway of
Authority, nor expectation of temporal preferments (being but glorious and
gilded miseries) nor any humane illaqueations whatsoever, win ground so upon
your wills or judgments, as (till your lives end) to persevere in a Religion,
which has but the word Religion, plead for it. Man. 1.
Quid proderit homini, si lucretur mundum totum, and detrimentum animae suae
faciat? Therefore now then, begin to espouse your labors to your own souls
salvation. Implant your selves with an immovable resolution in our
Affirmative, and Catholic Roman faith and Religion, which is not only
warranted for truth by the Protestants themselves, as appears from the
precedent Chapters: (so deservedly may here take place those words, Dea^ 32.
Our God is not as their Gods are, our Enemies are even witnesses.) But also it
is that Religion, which (contrary to Protestancy therein, being torn with
intestine disagreeme^ts) in regard of perfect Union in doctrine, both among the
members thereof, and with reference to the Head, is much honored by Gods holy
word; his Church in this respect being Romans 11. Came. 6.
One body, one spouse, and one sheepfould. And therefore not without just
reason did S. Hierome (that great light of Gods Church) acknowlede his Union,
and submission to our Roman Catholic Church in these words: Hier. in ep. ad
Damasum.
I do unite my self in Communion with the Chair of Peter, I know the Church
to be builded upon that Rock: whosoener does eat the Lamb out of this House,
is become profane. And with this, Judicious men, I close up this short
Treatise, committing you to his holy Protection, who was content to erect this
Church, by the shedding of his own most precious blood: and battering at your
ears with my incessant prayers, that you would cast of and abandone (for your
Souls eternal happiness, this imaginary faith, which you call Protesta^cy: it
being in it self, (besides that it is a compound made of the Ingredients of
several negative condemned heresies) but an empty sound of a word, an
Irreality, a Phantasme of the brain, an Annihilation and wast of all true
Faith, a Platonicall Idaea, an Ens Rations, a Fabrike only of our Imagination,
an Intentionality, a bare Notion of the understanding, finally, a Nonentity.
My pen lights short to delineate it in words: for since words are invented
to express only Things; how can they express Protestancy, it being Nothing?

FINIS.

