THE HISTORY OF TWO THE MOST NOBLE CAPITAINES OF the world, Anniball and
Scipio, of their diverse battles and victories, excedyng profitable to read,
gathered and translated into English, out of Titus Liuius, and other
authoures, by Antonye Cope esquier.

ANNO. M. D. XLIIII.

THO. Bertheleton this history.
WHO so ever desires for to read
Marciall prowess, feactes of chivalry,
That may him profit at time of need,
Let him in hand take this history,
That shows the sleyghtes and policy,
The wyly traynes of wyttie Anniball,
The crasty disceites, full often whereby
He gave his puissaunt ennemies a fall.
Of worthy stomach, and courage valiant,
Of noble heart, and mannely enterprise,
Of ientlenesse, of mind sure and constaunt,
Of governance prudent, ware, and wise,
Shall find according unto his divise
This prince Scipio, this mighty Romayne,
Which all fon pleasure ever did dispyse,
Jn Continence a lord and souueraigne.
Lo thus may men plainly here behold,
That wyly wit, power, guyle, nor policy,
Could Anniball ever still uphold,
But that by Scipios worthy chivalry,
His manhood, virtue, and deeds knyghtly
He was subdued, there is no more to said,
And yet to speak, as truth will verifye,
There was never sound a better captain.
TO THE MOST MIGHTY AND VICTORIOVS PRINCE, AND HIS most redoubted sovereign
lord, Henry the.viii. by the grace of god king of England, France, and
Irelande, defender of the faith, and of the church o^ England and also of
Irelande in earth the supreme head: his right humble subject and servant
Antony Lope, prays and wyssheth all honor and perfect felicites.
THat all humain acts ought to be measured by time, most excellent prince,
and my most redoubted sovereign lord, we are sufficiently taught by nature,
by reason, by learning, and by experience. The first is declared by the
ordinate course of the heavens, and the sterres, as well fixed, as also the
planettes mouable, in the same heuens placed, with their sundry disposicions:
by whose diverse operacions, the earth brings forth her fruits of all
kinds in due season, which first grow to a ripeness, and than follows the
decaie of the same. So that all things vary according to the time. Now
pleasant summer, thanne wythered winter. Now plenty full abundance of
things, an other time baraine scarcity. etc. Reason also affirms the same:
in so much that wise philosophiers put, that the generation of one thing is
the corrupcion of an other: and that nothing may long endure in one state,
but either increases, or is empeired. Of learning we have authoritees
manifold. Emonge others Solomon says, that all things have time. There is
(says he) time of peace, and time of war: time to be merry, and time to be
sad. By experience also it is manifest, that who so does not take time in
time, and according thereto tempre dispose and conueigh all his procedynges,
shall no more bring them to effect, with prosperous success, thanne the
song shall be allowed, whereof the syngers keep not their true time, but some
do run away therewith, making ouermuche haste, while some other dragge,
coming slowly after. The mutabilitie of time is so variable, it passes away
so swiftely, and at length (...) such violence, that old poets willing to
descriue ti^e lively, according to the veraie propretie thereof, do set it
forth in the figure of a man, having wings, wherewith to fligh, and having
also a great sith in his hands, to mow or cut down all things in their
appointed seasons. And as it deuoureth and consumes all things by long
process: even so it manifests all things, be they never so hydden and
secret. Wherefore VERITY is called the daughter of time, He has also a
sister called OCCASION, whom the said sage poets (under whose words, as
under a veil are hidden many deep mysteries) willing to descriue, do feign
to have wings on her fete, to declare thereby her swift passing away. And also
they feign her to have all her hear growing and hanging long down on the
forpart of her hedde, the hinder part being smothe bare and ^alde: signifiyng
thereby, that as she comes toward a man, he may take sure hold of her, by her
long hears. But in case he mysse to take than his hold, suffryng her to
pass by him: than is there no hold to be taken of her behind, but that she
runs away without recovery. There is also iuigned unto her a compaignion
called REPENTANCE, which is nothing so light of foot as is the other, whom
Occasion after her escape from a man, leaves behind her, to keep him
compaignie. Whereby is meant, that if occasion be not taken, when she offers
her self to any manne: the party that refuses her offer, shall after not
cease, during his life, to forthynke his folly, in suffryng her departure.
Wherefore sens it is apparent, that the obeiyng to time is so necessary, wha^ I
behold the manifold injuries, done to your maiestee, and to your subjects of
this your realm, by your unnatural and unkind enemies on sundry parties,
diverse and many ways, which ye have long suffered, and nevertheless daily
they are renewed: it is manifest and evident, that your highness is driven to
geat by the swoorde that, which by force is deteyned from you, and with power
to revenge wrongs wroughte of malice and untruth, onelesse ye should be
thought, not to regard the honor due to the imperial majesty of so high a
prince, where Solomon in his book entitled Ecclesiastes, upon consideracion
(as I suppose) of such like matier as this, says: There is time to love, and
time to hate, time of peace, and time of war: which sentence the said wise
man, endued by god with sapience* would never have left unto us, if war had
not in some case ben both laufull and expedient. Wherefore well ponderyng the
time of war to be now in hand, as a thing so much needful for many
consideracions, I (for my poor part) thought, that I should do, not only to
your highness acceptable service, but also to all noble men, and ientilemen of
the realm great pleasure and commodity, if gatheryng to gyther out of Titus
Liuius, and other autours, the lives, the policies, and the marciall acts of
two the most worthy capitaynes, of the two most renoumed empires of the
world, that is to say, of Anniball of Carthage, and Scipio of Rome, I would
bring the same into our english tongue: whereby, beside the pleasant
bestowyng of time, in the readyng thereof, men also may learn both to do
displeasure to their ennemies, and to avoid the crafty and dangerous baits,
which shall be laid for them. The one of these capitayns, after many
countries of Spain brought under subjection, to seek honor, and to exercise
him self, with his men, in feats of war, passed the terrible mountains to
enter into Italy, through many peryllous streightes and unknown passages,
there vexyng and spoylyng the country with contynuall war, by the space of
xvi. years. During which time he had many noble victories sleyng many Roman
legions with their valyant capytaines. The other, that is to wete, Scipio the
Romain consul, being a man of no less courage than his ennemie, leauyng him
with his power in Italy, sailed over into Africa: where vanquyshynge many
friends of the Carthaginenses, at the last he brought Carthage to such
extremity, that the princes thereof were driven (for their only refuge) to
call Anniball home again to succor them: where in battle sore foughten,
Scipio overcame Anniball and all his power, put him to flight, and made the
empire of Carthage to be under tribute to Rome. The one of these capitaines was
crafty, politic, peynfull, and hardy: and by subtle trains wrought his enmies
much disple sure: The other was wise, chaste, liberal, and valiant: and by
his virtuous courage, mixed with temperaunce, raisedvp the banner of fame and
honor of Rome, which before was brought low, and almooste to utter
desolation. And as these notable princis, with many other men of noble hertes,
have heretofore travailed, to seek honorable renou^e: even so, many learned
men, willing to auaunce them to their desires, have in writing set forth
their noble acts, to their immortal fame, and to the comfort of all that
shall here or read the same. yea the peinters have not forgoten nor omitted on
their parts, to set forth before men's eyes, their noble acts, thereby to
stiere and to enkendle the hertes and minds of the beholders. For who is he,
that does not much rejoice, in beholding Hercules peinted on a wall, cl^thed
in a lions skin, by his mighty hand spoiled, and drawing after him Cerberus
that hell hounde, with iii. hydous heddes, whom he had brought from the
dominion of Pluto? Who does not rejoice to hear the conquest of the golden
fliece, by Jason in the Isle of Colchos? Thus it appears, that who so done
vertuousely enbrace honorable travail, deserve to have immortal fame. Among
which most victorious conquerours, although your most excellent maiestee
may without all controversy or doubt most worthily challenge and take the
chief place, yet would not I, before your majesty's own face, offer my self
to be a setter out thereof, oncles the express veritee of your graces
procedynges did so manifestly publysshe and declare the same, that I may not
by my so doing possybly encurre any manner suspicion of flattery or adulation,
as by comparyng the noble deeds of the forenamed great princis, unto your most
worthy acts, shall appear manifest. Anniball, by the help of the frenchemen,
passed the mountains, and after in Italy fought three or four notable
battles, to the great ruin of the Romans: but they were achieued rather by
crafty sleightes and policies, than by strength. In them also he had the
assured aid of the french men. The city of Tarent he wanne by treason.
Capua, and many other cities, wyllyngly yielded unto him, whose assistence
after, was much his auauncement. On the other part, Scipio arryuyng in
Africa, found there king Massanissa his old friend, by whose help,
valiantness, and conduite, he prevailed against the Carthaginenses, and
subdued king Sypbax. These things seemed than to men so notable, that among
others, my chief author Titus Liuius, to auaunce the renoume of them, wrote
thereof a noble and goodly history. But who so beholds the conduite of your
gracis wars, in Spain, France, Britayne, and Scotland, and in every of
these more then ones or twice achieued without the aid of any forain prince,
the dangerous and strong cities and castelles scaled, the power of France in
one day overthrown: And about the same time a like victory of Scotts
inuadyng this realm, with their king slain in plain field: shall find the
triumph thereof much more worthy of glory, thanne any that ever Liuius wrote
upon. For it is not unknown, that things now be much harder to be achieued,
than they were in those days: the artillary more perilous, the armor more
sure, and the castelles more strong: In so much that the winnyng of Ti^wyn or
Morlace, is much more to be esteemed, than the winnyng of Capua or Carthage. I
will omit to rehearse, that the emperor Maximilian, hearing the fame of your
highness power and excellence, desired to be of your majesty's band, and
under your baner in the field against the frenchemen. I will also leave to
rehearse the wise and worthy conquest of the realm of Irelande, whereof at this
present your maiestee wears the Diadem. Neither will I tarry to declare the
sundry and most lucky victories, that your hyghnes has of late had against
the promise breakers the double dealing Scotts. Furthermore, partly for
brevity, and partly for that the thing being so lately dooen, neither the
brute nor the memory thereof can not but be so fresh, that it were much
superfluous here now to recite the same, I have thought best wholly to omit
the long recital of your late most noble, politic, and mighty conquest of
Bollayne, never heretofore by any prince subdued, no scarcely by any approached
unto, but left as a thing inuin^ible, and therefore called the maiden town,
the hystory whereof requires the length of a long volume, if it shall be
fully chronicled. But sens of all others that ever were, Hercules is accoumpted
most worthy the crown of honorable praise, as the chief daunter of
monsters: I will now with his conquestes compare your most famous subduynge
of the Romayne monster Hydra, whose heddes were so many, and the lest of them
so pestylent, that it is to be thought, he could never (without the great
assistence of the divine power) have been subdued. Those his heddes, by the
most circumspect wisdom and providence of your highness, be almost clean
cut of, and mortified, the venomons styng of ignorance plucked away, and his
power suppressed: so that the walls of his den of Rome tremble, beholding
your cristall shield of prudence: which conquest I may well call so much
more worthy of renoume, than those of Hercules, by how much the soul of
man is to be esteemed above the body, or any earthly gooddes. Hercules only
delivered countries from the bodily vexation of monsters and tyrants: your
majesty does ease your subjects both in body and goods, but chiefly in
their souls, by the true knowledge of god and his most holy word. So that in
my heart I wyshe Liuius to be on live again, not doubting, but he that took
such pain to descriue the acts of your inferiors, Anniball and Scipio,
would much more now trauaille, to blow forth your mighty magnificence and
virtuous enterprises with the loud trumpette of immortal fame and memory.
Furthermore the acts of Hercules be most set forth by poets, who (as it
is thought) have feigned many things more than the truth was: but of your
highness acts, that ^r our english Hercules, no man does or can doubt, they are
so well known, even of your ennemies to their peines. Wherefore I trust, when
time shall come, god will not faille to provide an excellent chronicler, to
set forth the most glorious acts of your royal majesty, that are his
very true champion: rewarding your worldly conquestes here, with perpetual
renoume and glory, and after this life (which almighty god grant for our
benefit, to be veraie long) remuneratyng your graces godly mind, intent, and
travails in his causes, with the incorruptible crown of immortality and
felicitee eternal both of soul and body.

THE TABLE.
THe description of Anniball, and at his first exercise in war. ca i. Of
Annibals first wars and victory. Cap. ii. Anniball be^^^geth the Saguntines,
and how he was there foore wounded. Cap. iii. The coming of the Romayn
ambassadors to Anniball and Carthage, and what answer they had of him and
them. Cap. iiii. How Sagunt was cruelly conquered. Cap. v. How the Romain
ambassadors sent to Carthage, and from this into Spain, spedd^. Cap. vi. How
Anniball renewynge the war conducted his army into France, to pass the
mountains. Cap. vii. How Anniball passed the river of Rhodanus, put the
frenchemen to Night, refused to fight with the consul of Rome, and with what
words he couraged his soldiers to pass the mountains. Ca. viii. How and
with what labor, peyn, and excedyng great desigier, Annibal and his army
passed over the high mou^tains Alps into Italy. cap. ix. How both the armies
of Rome and Carthage approached, and the oration that P. C. Scipio the consul
made to encourage his men to fight. ca. x. With what exaumples and words
Anniball exhorted his soldiers to fight valyantly. Cap. xi. How Scipio and
Anniball met by chance, and fought together and how the consul was hurt,
and Anniball victour. Cap. xii. How Anniball fought with Sempronius the
consul, and by what means he put the Romans to f^yght. Cap. xiii. Anniball
intendyng to take a certain called by ^^eithe, was encountered by the consul,
wounded, and put to the wurse, and after a great slaughter of the people he
won (...). And how Cn. Scipio in Spain ouerthrewe Hanno in battle. Cap.
xiiii. How Anniball passed the dangerous fe^n^s near to the river of Arnus,
to the great loss of his men and cattall, where the fenny air caused him to
lose one of his e^es. And of the haste that Flamminius the Consul makes to
give him battle. Cap. xv. Of the battle of Trasymenus, with the death of
the Consulie Flamminius, and many other Romans. Cap. xvi. How Anniball by a
^eafty deceit escaped the straites of Formiana, wherein he was enclosed by Q.
Fabius Maximus. Cap. xvii. (...) Scipio fyghteth with Hasdruball and Himilco,
on the sea, upon the costs of Spain, dryueth them to land, takes and
distroi^th. xxv. ships, with a great number of the Carthaginenses. Ca. xviii
How (...) Spaniard, by (...) the pledges of Span^^^ the Carthaginenses, and
delivered them to the Romans. Ca. xix. Fabius being at Rome in displeasure,
Minutius master of the horsemen fyghteth with Anniball, puts him to the
w^^s, and therefore is made half rular of the host with Fabius, he fyghteth with
him agayns, and is put to flight, and reseued by Fabius. Cap. xx. Of Lucius
(...) Paulus, and C. Tetentius Vatto consulles, and the oration of Q. Fabius
Maximus to Paulus, before his departing from Rome toward his host. Capit.
xxi. Of the perilous battle of (...), and the victory that Anniball had
there of the Romans. Cap. xxii. How Anniball ordered his buisynesse after the
battle, and how young Scipio used him self for the saving of the ^^en
wealth. ca. xxiii. The oration of the captive prisoners made to the senate for
their redemption. Cap. xxiiii. The sore answer of T. Manlius Torquatus to the
captives oration, wherein he dissuaded their redemption. Cap. xxv. How Pacuuius
by craft became chief rular of Capua, and of the yeldyng of that city to
Anniball. Cap. xxvi. The news that Mago brought to Carthage of Annibals
victories in Italy, and the oration of Hanno a se^atour of Carthage made unto
the same. Cap. xxvii. Of the battle between Marcellus and Anniball before the
city of Nola, and of Anniballes wyntrynge in Capua, in delycate pleasures,
whereby he withdrue the hearts and courages of his men from all warrely^e
fascion. Cap. xxviii. Of the long siege and wynnyng of Cassilinum, with the
death and destruction of the consul Posthumous and his host in the wood of
Lytana by the craft of the Frenchemen. Cap. xxix. Of the victory of the
Scipious in Spain. Cap. xxx. The oration of the Sa^^^tes and the Harpines to
Anniball, desiryng his help agayste the Romans with the order of Marcellus
and Anniball about Nola. Cap. xxxi. The exhortation of Anniball to his
soldiers, the batayl between him and Marcellus, and the victories of the
Scipios in Spayn. ca. xxxii. The oration of Quintus Fabius Maximus, touching
the election of the consulles in that dangerous season. Cap. xxxiii. The
battle between Hanno and Gracchus, with the reward and also the punyshement
awarded by Gracchus to certain bondemenne of his host. Cap. xxxiiii. The
cities of Sagunt in Spayn, and Arpos in Italy at won by the Romans, king
Syphax is become friend to the Romans, and is overcome in battle by
Massa^^ssa. Cap. xxxv. Anniball through the treason of Nico and Philo^^enes,
wynneth the city of Tarent. Cap. xxxvi. Fuluius Flaccus the Romayne consulle,
wynneth the camp of Hanno, sleeth and takes a great number of men with a
rich pray. Mago sleeth Titus Gracchus, and many Romans, through the
treason of Flauius a Luca^. Cap. xxxvii. Centeniu^ Penula and C^^ius Fuluius
with their two armies be discomfyted and slain by Anniball in several
battles. Ca. xxxviii. The city of Capu^ is besieged by the two consulles,
Anniball comes to the succor of the citezens, gives the consuls battle,
from the^ goes to Rome ward with his ho^ste, to the intent thereby to dr^^^
the consuls from the siege of Capu. Cap. xxxix. The oration of Virius Vixu^^
concerning the yeldyng of Capua, the Romans receive the town, slay the
senators, and convert the ground thereof to the profit of the city of Rome.
Cap. xl. Marcellus wynneth the city of Syracusa in Sicilia, P. Scipio and
Cu^ius Scipio are slain in Spain with a greatte noumbre of Romans. Cap.
xli. L. Martius is chosen captain of the Roman army, he makes an oration
to his soldiers, and in one night and a day vanquisheth two hosts of
Carthaginenses, wins their camps, and a greatte pray. Capit. xlii. How
Asdruball being enclosed in the straites beside Mentissa, escaped the danger
thereof by mockyng his ennemies: and of the chosing of young P. Cor. Scipio to
be capitain in Spayn. Capi. xliii. The oration of Scipio to his soldiers in
Spain, after his coming thither. Cap. xliiii. The city of new Carthage in
Spain is won by the Romans, with a great pray of gold silver and all other
necessaries for the wa^^e, with the pledges of the noble men and cities of
Spain. Cap. xlv. Of the ientilnesse of Scipio in restoryng a fair young virgin
vnde^iled to Luceius, unto whom she was ^^aunced. Cap. xlvi. Anniball sleeth
Cn. Fuluius, with. xiii. M. Romans, beside Herdonea: Marcellus the consul
chaseth Anniball through Apulia, making many skyrmyshes with him. Cap. xlvii.
Marcellus gives battle to Anniball, in which his men be put to flight,
whereupon he makes them a sharp oration, he renews the batta^^e on the
morrow, puts Anniball and his host to flight, with loss of many of his
men. Cap. xlviii. How Q. Fabius Maximus recovered from Anniball the city of
Tarent. Cap. xlix. Scipio fyghteth with Asdruball beside Betula, dryueth him
from his hill, sleeth. viii. M. of (...) host, takes. xii. M. prisoners, with
Massus neuew to Massanissa, and a great pray in the camp. cap. l. Marcellus
the consul is slain by an imbushment laid by Anniball, C^^spinus the other
consul, and Marcellus son be sore hurt. ca. li. Anniball craftily sends
letters to Salapia, sealed with Marcellus sy^net, Asdruball passes the
mountains with his army, to mete his brother Anniball. capi. lii. Of the great
battle between Asdruball and the consulles, in which Asdruball was slain
with. lvi. M. men, beside many that we^e taken, with a great spoil. Cap.
liiii. Scipio in diverse battayles discomfiteth the Carthaginenses, takes Hanno
on live, drives Asdruball and Mago, with all their power, clean out of
Spain. cap. liiii. M. Liuius. and C. (...) the consu^^es, enter the city of
Rome in ^riumph. A praise of Annibals gouernyng his army. Cap^. lv. Scipio and
Asdruball arrive both in one day in Africa, and be l^dged both together in
the ^alays of (...) Syphax. cap. lvi. Massanissa speaks secretly with
Scipio, and enters in leage with the Romans: Mago sai^eth into Italy to join
with Anniball. ca. lvii. Scipio comes to Rome, and is create one of the
consulles, he desires to have license, to sail into Africa with an army.
cap. lviii. The oration of Fabius, disswadyng Scipio from saylyng into Africa,
and wylling him to defend Italy against Anniball. cap. lix. The oration of
Scipio, wherein he answers to Fabius. cap. lx. The complaynt of the Locrenses
to the siuatours of the cruel governance of Q. Pl^^^nius. cap. lxi. King
Sypha^ ma^^th Asdruball^^ daughter, he writteth to Scipio, wyllyng him not to
war in Africa: Scipio arriueth in Africa, to whom comes Massanissa. cap.
lxii. Scipio in the night ^urneth his enemies (...), pu^^teth Syphax and
Hasdruball to flight, with great loss of their men. cap. lxiii. Syphax (...)
the battle, where he is taken prisoner. Massasnissa takes the city of
Cirtha, and marieth king Syphax wife. cap. lxiiii. Syphax is brought to Scipio,
Massanissa send the to Sophonisba poison, which she without fear dry^keth.
capi. lxv. Lelius with king Syphax and other prisoners comes to Rome:
Massanissa is made king of Num^dia. cap. lxvi. Mago is discomfited, and (...),
of which wound he dies. Anniball being commanded of the sen^ce to have
Ita^y, sayieth toward Carthage, making great do^^ for his departing. cap.
lxvii. Anniball arriueth in Africa, de^i^^th to speak with Scipio, who
grants him, and they mete together at a place appointed. cap. lxviii. The
witty oration that Anniball made to Scipio, before the battle between them.
cap. lxix. The answer of Scipio to Annibals oration, with the battle had
between them, wherein Anniball was vanquished and put to f^^ght. ca. lxx. The
conditions of peace (...) to the Carthaginenses by Scipio, and the ratifiyng of
the same by the (...). ca. lxxi. Scipio retour^eth to Rome with great triumph
and joy of all the people. cap. lxxii. Anniball f^^^th to (...) king of Si^ia,
(...) moves war^^ to the Romans L. Cor. Scipio (...) unto Asia, and
vanquisheth him, grants him peace upon conditions, and returns to Rome. ca.
lxxiii. Anniball flies to (...), the (...) how he ^^ded his life. capi.
lxxiiii.

Thus ends the Table.
THE DESCRIPTION OF HANNIBAL, and of his first exercise in war. Cap. 1.
AFTER MANY GREAT AND PFrillous batailes fought between the Romans and the
Carthaginenses, at the last a peace was taken for certain years: during which
time Amilcar than captain of the army of Carthage, warred five years
continually in Africa, with the cities and countries adioynynge to Carthage.
And from thens he passed the sea with his army into Spayn: where he abode.ix.
years, in which time he meruaylonsely increased and enlarged the dominion of
Carthage. This Amilcar was father to Hanniball, which at his saylynge into
Spain, was but.ix. years of age: but yet his heart and courage was such, that
he never ceased, till he had with fair and pleasant words opteined license
of his father, to goo with him into Spain. And at his departing on a solemn
day when his father did sacrifice in the Temple, according to the use and
ceremonye than used, young Hanniball being there present, layinge his hands
on the holy altar of the Temple, swear and auowed, that from thensforth he
would become a deadly ennemy to the Romans, and that he would utter the same
his malice on them as soon as he were able. This oath and vow pleased well his
father Amilcar. For his intent was shortly after to move the Carthagine^ses to
war with the Romans, but he dyed soon after: whose death, with the tender
age of his son Hannibal stayed that enterprise, and caused the peace to
endure between them.viii. years longer. During which time one Asdruball, that
married the daughter of Amilcar, governed the army, a man of great wisdom and
policy. For he by his gentle entertainyng of princis, and friendly handlyng of
his neighbors, more than by battle, brought many cities under the obedience
of Carthage. Whose facion, in gettyng of friends, when the Romans perceived,
they sent unto him: and renewyng their old amity, entered into a new league,
for the more sure and stable conservation whereof, they determined to set metes
and bounds of both their empires. Wherefore they agreed, that the river of
Iberus (...) depart their two seig^lories. Further, that the Saguntines (a
people that dwelled between both their dominions, and were then in amity and
league with the Romans) should continue in peace and be at liberty, not
troubled nor oppressed by war of another party. This peace being concluded,
Hasdruball, that heartily loved Hanniball, sent his letters, and for his sake,
caused the counsel of Carthage to be moved, to license Hanniball, being than a
fresh young man, to exercise him self in war to the intent, when he were of
lawful age, he might obtain, both the rule and richesse, that were his
fathers. Whereunto the most part of the Senators agreed. Whereupon Hannibal
was incontinent sent into Spain, to be Captain there under Asdruball. At his
first coming he gate the favor of all the army, and so resembled his father
in all points, that the old soldiers supposed Amilcar that was dead, to be
restored ageine to them alive. And in short space he brought to pass, that his
father was not to be compared unto him, in wynnyng the hearts of people. He
excelled so in wisdom, policy, and feats of war, that when the Captain
would have any weighty matier enterprised, he would to him above all other
commit the charge thereof. He so ordered him self, both in obeying his
capitayn, and rulyng his soldiers, that it was hard to know, whether he was
better beloved of his capytayne or of his hooste. He was of an high courage in
icopardynge on any peril, and of no less counsel in avoiding the same. His
body and mind could with no labor be weried or ouercomme: he could as well
sustain heat as cold: of meats and dryakes he used none excess, but that
would suffice nature: he prescribed no time to rest or sleep by night nor by
day. And when he might from busynes conveniently rest, he desired neither soft
beds, nor quiet slepes, but being covered with a short cloak or soldiers
garment, he would repose him upon the hard earth. He was not curious in
garments: In pleasant horses and sure armor was always his delight. Among all
the army on horse back and on foot he was found the best, he would be ever
the first and the last in battle: Which his noble virtues lacked not diverse
vices to accompany them. For instede of mercy and pity, he used extreme
cruelty, mixte with vnfeithfulnes, he regarded not the obseruyng of his oath,
which was to his great dishonor.

Of Hannibals first wars and victory. Cap. ii.
WHEN THIS YOUNG capitayn had thus exercysed him self under Asdruball the
space of.iii. years, it chanced that one of that country (whose master
Asdruball before had slain) suddenly ran on him, and slew him. Whereupon
being taken he another changed countenance nor feared any punyshement that
should come to him therefore: but with smilyng countenance received his death.
Than the soldiers of the army after the loss of Asdruball immediately by one
consent chose Hanniball to be their governor. And he appoynting to war
against the Romans, and Italy to be his province, thought he would not long
stay or tracte the time in ouermoch deliberating thereon: lest thereby it might
chance unto him, as it did unto his father and Hasdrubal, to be oppressed by
some other myschance, intended to move war to the Saguntines before rehearsed.
And to color his intent, he first led his army into the costs of Olcades, a
people of Spain beyond the river of Iberus, neighbor to the Saguntines, to
the end it should seem, that he of purpose or by any pretense of war did not
seek to invade the Saguntines, but wynning the countries adioynyng together, he
should also take Sagunt with him as it lay in his way in order with the other.
Among these he wanne the city called Carteia that was very rich, which
city being subdued, the small towns adjacent wyllyngly submitted them
selves to be under tribute. This done he for the winter time withdrue his army
to a city in Spain called new Carthage. And with distributing largely to his
soldiers the pray before gotten, and welpaying of every man's wages that was
behind, he won the hearts of all the host. So that they holly agreed the
next summer following to war upon the Vacceis. Which wars brought to
pass and ended, as they returned, not far from the river of Tagus, the
banysshed people of the countries aforesaid, assembled together, and raised
the Carpetanes, by whose help they were to the number of a hundred thousand,
and trustyng to their great multitude, came newly upon the Carthaginenses.
Anniball perceiving that great power coming upon him, absteyned from battle,
and privily in the night conveyed his (...) over a fourde, and from thense
withdrue his people a good space of: so that his enemies might have place to
come over the river. Than set be xl. elephantes alonge the river side, that
they might be ready to oppress them at the entryng of the water. Also he
commanded his horsemen, that as soon as the footmen were entered the water,
they should fiersly assail them. The Carpetanes with the Vacceis and Carteians
thynkyng their ennemies for fear to be fled from them, and intending to
pursue them, without any foresyght or order, with all speed, making great
clamor, every man rashely took his next way through the water. Hannibals
horsemen perceiving that they were entered the fourde, violently ran on them,
and with litell pain ouerthrewe a great number of their fotemen in the water,
which thing was easy to do, for a footeman in the strength of the stream
could in no wise sustain the force of a horseman, only the rushe of the
horse, though the ryder be unarmed, is able to overthrow any foteman: so feeble
is the stay of his foot in the water. Thus some were drowned, and some other
that passed over the river, were oppressed with the elephantes, so that in
short space they were all utterly discomfyted and overcome. For before that
those, which last entered the river (though they escaped the danger of the
horsemen) could recule back again tolande, and assemble together, and set
them self in array, Annibal with a fresh band of men entered the water, and so
quyckly followed and chased them, that few escaped. Whereupon shortly after he
conquered all the Carpetanes, and broughtthem under subjection of Carthage. And
tha^all the borderers beyond the water Iberus, holly became tributaries to
Carthage, saving only the Sagu^tmes, with whom as tha^they had not meddled, but
diverse quarrels were pycked by their neighbors, to get some occasion to war
ageyuste them. And that perceived well the Sagantines. Wherefore to prevent the
matter, they sent messangers to Rome, to require succors in the wars that
they undoubtedly looked for.

Anniball beslegeth the Saguntines, and how he was there soorewounded. Cap.
iii.
THe same year that the Ambassadors were sent to Rome, Publius Cornelius
Scipio, and Titus Sempronius Lo^gus were consuls, and wha^ this matter was
waied in the senate house with many other, concerning the common wealth, Publius
Valerius Flaccus, and Quintus Fabius Pamphilus, were chosen ambassadors to go
to Anniball, with gentyl persuasions to withdraw him from wars with the
Saguntines their friends: which if they could not do, that than they should
go to Catthage to Hasdruball the captain, chargynge him upon pain of the
truce breakyng, to cesse and take up the wars.

Whiles the Romans prepared their legacies, and ordered their affairs,
Anniball forslowyng no time convenient to his busynes, with his army spoylyng
and wasting the countreye, approached and fiercely assailed the city of Sagunt
on three parts. This city was named the rychest that was beyond the river of
Iberus: It stood not passing a mile from the sea: and was in short space so
mightily increased by reason of the commodities of the water, the fruits of
the land, and multitude of people, that they excelled all the cities and
countries about them both in number and richesse. When Anniball had
cyrcumspectly viewed the walls, he found a corner, from the which did
extend a fair plain valeye, unto the which corner he laid his siege,
reysynge up certain engyns of defense, for the safeguard of his people, till
they might approach the walls, and caryenge other ingyns to give assaute and
to beat down the walls. But because the fair plain without that corner,
made that side to be in most ieopardye: the citezens therefore had builded the
walls on that part higher than the other sides. There was alsoo builded at
that coruer a mighty high tower, the strength whereof let Anniball to lay his
siege to the town as he would have done: Hot withstandyng he by reason of his
engyns, gave so sharp assault, that the cytezens being upon the walls were
greatly abashed, who at the same assault, not only defended their walls
manfully, but also courageously issued out of the town and assailed their
ennemies, and breakyng down their munimentes and fortifications, entered the
town ageyn welnere to as great loss of their ennemies as of their own
people. Which thing when Anniball perceived, he suddenly with out aduysement
approached to the walls, and was stryken with a barbed iauelyn in the thygh, so
that soore wounded he fell to the ground. When his people saw him fall,
there was such fear and clamor among them, that they clean gave over the
assaute, so that they suffered the town to be in rest till their captain was
healed. During which time of rest from battle, the citizens were not
unoccupied. For they fortified them self the more strongly, for that they
perceived the assautes to come should be more fierce and perilous. When
Hanniball was cured of his wound, the siege and war became more deadly and
terrible than before. The Carthaginens daily increased, they were to the
noumber of Cl. M. who with their engines bet down the walls of Sagunt to the
ground in diverse parts: so that they seemed sundry times to have won the city:
but they within, where the walls lacked, with strength of men defended it.
And thus sometime hope, and sometime despair enforced both parts to do their
uttermost.

The coming of the Romayne ambassadors to Hanniball and Carthage, and what
answer they had of him and them. Capit. iiii.
IN the mean season of this long continued war, very doubtful and variable
on both parts, word came to Hannibal, that the Romain Legates were come: Unto
whom he sent a messanger, to show them, that there was ieopardy in passing
through so perilous and doutfull battayles of strange and wild nations: And
him self was so intricate with business, that he could not attend to speak
with them, or to here their legacy. The ambassadors heryng this answer
departed toward Carthage, as they were commanded. Which thing Hanniball
perceiving, sent letters to the senate and princes of Carthage, that were
friends, willing them so to induce the people, that they should in no wise
show favor to the Romans. So that it came to pass, that as they could not
be received of Hanniball, even so their embassage was void at Carthage. For
when Hanno, a man of great authority, had opened in the senate, the peril and
ieopardy of the truce breakyng, and the vengeance which might follow upon the
same: and persuaded, that it should be necessary, that Hanniball, should be
yielded to the Romans, for amends of the truce breaking: His oration being
fynished, the hole senate, more inclynynge to the unjust enterprise of
Hanniball than to any reasonable persuasion to the contrary, esteemed him to
have spoken more unfriendly than the legates of Rome. Whereupon they answered the
ambassadors, that Hanniball had done nothing but justly, and that the Romans
did wrong in taking part with the Saguntynes against them of Carthage, being
their old friends. And thus whiles the Romans sent their ambassadors to
and fro, Hanniball ceased not, but when his weary soldiers releued them
selfs of their peines and travail, to encourage his men against his ennemies,
sometime with hope of victory, sometime with hope of the rich pray: so that
they were in such wise encouraged and stered, that they thought nothing able
to resyste them. And contrarywyse the Saguntines were no less careful and
diligent to repair their broken walls, and to provide things to make
resistance. Hanniball, who never cessed, but being still occupied with
invention of subtlety and craft, commanded a high tower of timber so to be
made, that it might be removed to every part of the walls at his pleasure.
Which when it was fynished, he furnyshed with crossebowes and other ordynance,
wherewith he bette the defenders from the walls. Than incontinent he sent.v.
C. Affricanes, with pike^xes and instruments to undermine and break down the
walls, which was very easy to bring to pass with such tools. The walls
were of the old rude making, not laid with lyme and sand, but with clay and
black mortar. Wherefore they had soon overthrown a great part of the walls,
at which breach the Carthaginenses entered, and came to a high place of the
city, which they garnyshed with all kinds of ordynances, and made a wall
about the same, making it as a castle or fortress for them within the city.
Not withstandinge the Saguntines, with as great shyfte as might be, made
countermures in the town, and defended them self: and saved those parts
that were not gotten as it might be. But in short space they were so beaten,
that they wyste not where to defend. Thus the Saguntines defendyng the inward
parts of their town, lost daily more and more of their city. Vitayles also
failed them sore, by reason of the long siege. Again, the expectation of
their succors was in vain, because the Romans, their only hope, were so
far of. Not withstandyng they were alyttell comforted, by reason that Annibal
was so suddenly sent for to go against the Oretanes and Carpetanes, which than
were raised again, and began to rebelle, but their war in the mean time
seemed nothing the less, by reason of one Maharball, Himilcos son, who kept
the siege so straightly, that it seemed the captain was not absent.

When Anniball was returned from the Carpetanes and Oretanes war, the
battle began more strongely than before. Duringe which time, two
soldiers, one named Alcon a Sagu^tine, and the other called Alorcus a
Spaniard, having some hope of peace, determined to move Anniball to the same.
Alcon the Saguntine was brought before Annibal, who showed unto him, what they
should do, if they intended to have peace. Which conditions of peace seemed
unto Alcon very unreasonable. Wherefore thinkyng that the Saguntines would in no
case agree unto the same: he remained there still, and would not return
again to his city, affirmynge, that he were worthy to dye, that under such
couena^tes would treat of peace When Alcon had denied, that the Saguntines would
receive any suchetruce, Alorcus aforesaid, being a soldier of Annibals, and
an old friend to the Saguntines, supposyng that their minds might be
persuaded to receive the conditions of peace, seeing their walls so weak, and
their town so easy to be won, promised to declare unto them the contents of
the truce. He delivering his weapon to the capitaynes of their ennemies, was
brought to the Praetor Saguntine: and so into the senate, where, when the
multitude of the commons was a little withdrawn, thus he began his oration.

If your citezyn and messanger Alcon, that came to Anniball to require peace,
had likewise brought from him unto you the conditions of the same, my coming
now had been in vain. Which thing if he had done, I should another as Annibals
orator, nor as a fugityue, have come unto you at this time. But seeing that he,
either through his own defaute, or else by yours, tarieth with your ennemies
(lest you should be ignorant, that there are certain conditions offered both
of peace and safeguard) I for the old frendshyp and hospitality that has been
between us am come to you: and first I would ye should persuade your selves,
that for your wealth and none other cause, I speak to you those words, which I
will declare, and this you may well perceive. For as long as you were able with
your own power, to make resistance, or trusted to have succor from the
Romans, I never made mention to you of peace. Now seeing there is no hope of
succor from the Romans, and your own strength and walls do fail you, being
unable any longer to resist: I bring to you peace more necessary than ryghtuous
or just. Of the which peace there is yet some hope, if, as Anniball being
conqueror, does send it, so you as people subdued, will receive it. For you
must consider, that you being conquered, must of the conqueror receive that
which of his goodness he will give you as a reward. The conditions of peace are
these: He will take the city (which he has broken for the most part, and
almost won) from you. He will leave to you the fields, and also assign a
place, where you shall build a new city. He commands also your gold,
silver, and other goods, public and private, to be brought to him. He is
contented to suffer your selves, your wives and children to pass in safe
guard, if ye go out of the city unarmed, taking with you only double apparel
for your bodies. Those things your victorious enemy Anniball does command
you, the which your sorrowful chance and fortune does persuade you to
accept. Truly I doubt not, when ye have accomplyshed all these his requests,
but that some of these conditions shall be remytted unto you. I think better,
you should rather suffer these injuries, than your selves to be slain, your
wives and children taken and violently led away before your faces, by the
extreme laws of war.

How Sagunt was cruilly conquered. Cap. v.
Vhan Alorcus had ended his oration, the chief rulers of the city departed
sodaynely from the rest of the multitude, and gathered all their gold and
silver from the publyke and private places, into the market place: and before
any answer was given unto Alorcus, towchynge his message, they cast it all
into a fire, that was quyckly made for the same purpose, and many cast them
self headlonge after. When the fear the trembling and the quakyng for this
busynes had passed through the city, annother rumor was afterward heard. A
tower of the city, that had long time be bruised and shaken, fell down to the
earth: at which place a company of the Carthaginenses entered. Anniball in
such a chance thynkyng not mete long to deliberate, with great violence
entered the town, and incoutinent commanded, that all the youth should be
slain, a cruelle victory, notwithstanding it was known in that case almost
necessary. For which of those should be spared, that either being enclosed
with their wives and children burned their houses over them: or else being well
armed, would determine no end of the war but by death? The city was taken
with a great pray: of the which much goodly householde stuff was sent to
Carthage. Some write, the.viii. month that the war began, the city was won,
and that Anniball for the winter, returned again to new Carthage. During
which time the ambassadors that went to Carthage, brought word to Rome, that
the Saguntines were overcome and distroyed, and their city taken: Which
tydinges heard and known for truth, brought such heaviness and sorrow
together to the Romans, What for pity of their fre^des unworthily lost, and
for shame that they had not succored the^ in due time, that thereby they
conceived as great displeasure toward the Carthaginenses, and also fear of
loss of their own country and goods, as though the hole power of their
ennemies had been present at hand. Thus being troubled at one time with
diverse motions of the mind, they seemed rather to quake and tremble than to
take counsel: and good cause why. For there never warred against them a
more cruel ennemy, nor more vehementely given to all kinds of war: another
their citezens never so sluggysshe and unmeet to warfare as then. When they
had long bewailed this sorrowful chance, they prepared all things as meet
and necessary for the wars as they could. Some were sent into France, some
into Africa, and likewise into all other places, where they had wars.

How the Romayn ambassadors sent to Carthage, and from thens into Spain,
spedde. Cap. vi.
ALL the foresaid busynesses prepared and set in good order, Quintus Fabius,
Marcus Liuius, Lucius Aemilius, Caius Lucinius, and Quintus Bebius were sent
into Africa, to in quere of the Carthaginenses, whether Hanniball distroyed
the city of Sagunt, by the assent of the publyke counsel or no. And if they
would grant and defend, that it was done by the holle counsel, than to
declare unto them, that they would revenge their wrongs in battle. After the
Romans were come to Carthage, and that Quintus Fabius had in the senate
enquered of the senators of Carthage, according to his commandment, a prince
of Carthage answered on this wise.

Oye Romans, your first legacy (when ye came and required Anniball to be
delivered unto you, as one that had besieged Sagunt of his own mind without
our counsel) was void and of none effect: How than should this your cruel
legacy take place, wherein ye require of us a confession of the trespass, and
amends for the same? I think it ought not to be inquired, whether Sagunt was
distroyed by our public or private counsel, but whether it was done
ryghtfully or wrongefully. For your question and consyderation, as concerning
our cytezen is, whether he enterprysed the syege and battle by his own
mind, or by our accord: and our controversy with you is, whether it might be
done, the truce being observed, or no. Therefore sithe it must be determined,
what rulars may do by the common counsaylle, and what of their own will: Ye
must understand, that the truce that was taken between you and us, was given
by Luctatius, than being your consul: in which it was contained, that both
our friends should be spared, no mention being made of the Sagu^tines, for as
th^n they were not your fre^des. But verily in the truce, that was taken with
Hasdruball, the Saguntines were excepted, against which I will say nothing, but
that I have learned of you. Truly ye refused to observe the truce, that C.
Luctatius your consul did decree and make with us, because it was not done by
authority of the fathers conscripte of your senate: than if you do not observe
and keep your bands and truce, onelesse they be constitute and made by your
authority and commandment: We also will not observe the truce taken by
Hasdrubal, whereof we were ignorant. Wherefore leave now to speak of Sagunt and
Iberus: and declare boldly that which you have long time consultynge,
devised. Than the Romayn Legate advanced forth him self, and said: Here we
bring unto you peace or war: take whether you will. Whereunto they fiercely
answered, that he should give whether he would. And when he again setting forth
his commandment, had showed them that they should have war, they answered
all: that they would accept it, and with no less courage prosecute the war,
than they had received it.

When the Romain ambassadors had proposed the war as it was commanded
them, they went from thense into Spain, with fair behestes to win and
allure the chief cities thereof to their favor, and to turn from the
Carthaginenses. First they came to Bargusies, who received them gentilly,
because they were weary to be under the dominion of Carthage, sturring much
people with desire of the new wars. From thense they came to the Volcians:
whose wise and quick answer shortly known through Spain, turned the resydue
of the people from the frendshyp of the Romans. Thus the eldest of them in
counsel answered.

Dye Romans, how may ye for shame require us to accept your frendshyp before
the frendshyp of the Carthaginenses, when they that so did (the Saguntines) ye
more cruelly betrayed than their ennemies did destroy. Therefore I would
counsel you, to go seek your friends, where the destruction of Sagunt is not
known. For as their destruction was an heavy and pitiefull thing to the
Spaniardes: so is the same a great warnyng and teaching, that no man should
trust to the promise and frendshyp of the Romans. With this answer they
were commanded shortly to depart from the Volcianes, another could they after
get any better frendeshyp of any of the counsel of Spain. And so when
they had in vain travailed through Spayn, they came into France where when they
had before the nobles and great multitude of the people, magnified and extolled
the renoume and power of the Romans, they desired, that the Carthaginenses
should have no way through France, to lead their army into Italy. At which
request there arose such a laughing among them, that (as it was said) scarsely
the youth could be pacified of the ancient men and rulers. Their desire was
thought very folyshe and unreasonable, that the frenchemen should not suffer
the Carthaginenses to lead their army through France: but they for other
men's pleasure should turn the war to them selves, and hasarde their
country to be distroyed. When the noise was appeased, answer was made, that
the Romans were at no time so friendly unto them, nor the Carthaginenses so
great foos, that they would either hold with the one, or war against the
other. They said more over, that the Romans had driven diverse of their
country men out of Italy, and caused other to pay tribute, with many other
injuries. Such answer for the most part they received through all France,
nor other news of peace or frendshyp they scarsely heard before they came to
Massilia: There they had knowledge by certain of their friends, that Anniball
had obtained the hearts of the frenchmen before, and that he had corrupted the
princis and rulers with money, whereof they were most covetous and desirous of
all nations. So when the Romans had wandered through Spain and France, at
last they came to Rome, not long after the Consuls were gone to the
provinces, and they found the city holly bente on the expectation of war.
For it was evidently known, that the Carthaginenses were passed the river
Iberus.

How Anniball renewyng the war, conducted his army into France to pass the
mountains. Cap. vii.
AFter Sagunt was won, Anniball (as afore-is said) went to new Carthage for
the winter, and there heryng what was done and said both at Rome and Carthage,
and that he was not only the captain of the wars, but also the chief cause
thereof: partyng and deuidyng the residue of the pray, and thynkyng to lose no
longer time, called the souldyours of Spain together, and exhorting them to
war, said on this wise:

I suppose that you my friends do know, seingal Spain is peasyble and at
rest, that either we must fynysshe the warfare and send home our soldiers,
or else begin wars with some other nation. If we seek renoume and victory in
other countries, our own nation shall not only flouryshe in goods,
tranquillity, and peace of their own at home, but also enjoy the richesse,
the iewelles of the spoil at our conquest. Wherefore seeing ye must travail
far from home, and uncertain it is, when ye shall return again to se your
houses, and those whom you love, if any of you will go se his friends, I shall
give him spending for a season, but I warn you all, that ye be here again
with me at the spring of the year, at which time I intend to begin the
wars, by the goddis favor, with great hope of wynnyng and praise. Every man
was glad of the liberty that Anniball of his fre will had given them, to go
se their countries and friends. The rest from travail which they had all the
winter season, made them strong and lustye in their bodies and courageous to
endure the labors and peynes that were to come. And at the beginning of ver
they assembled together, as it was commanded.

When Anniball had taken the musters of all nations that came to aid him, he
departing from Gades, accomplished his vow made to Hercules: and bound him
self with new vows, if his other enterprises did prosperousely succeed.
Wherefore prouydyng as well for to withstand invasions, as to invade by war,
lest while that he iourneyed by land, through Spain and France toward
Italy, he should leave Africa open and naked to the Romans from Sicilia, he
determined to leave there strong garrisons in all places. And for that cause
he sent for a bend of Affricanes, namely of those that use to throw darts,
and were light harneysed: which number of Affricanes he lest in Spain, and
than sent he a great number of Spaniardes into Africa to keep that country,
to the intent they being each of them far from their countries and friends,
should (as though they were pledges each for other) play the good soldiers,
and stickyng together, defend in that they might the one country of the other.
After he had ordered and assigned strong garrisons to every part and region, as
to Carthage, Spain, and Africa, remouyng his army from Gades to new Carthage,
led them from thens to the river of Iberus, and to the sea cost. There (it was
said) he saw in his sleep a young man of a heavenly shape, which said he was
sent from Jupiter unto Anniball, to conducte him into Italy, showing to him
before the destruction of Italy: and that he should proceed in his vyage, and
search no more? for the destenies were hid and secret. When he had seen and
herd these things, he conveyed his host, divided into three parts, over the
river of Iberus. Diverse of his friends he sent before him, to win the hearts of
the frenchemen with gifts, through whose cuntry he must needs pass: and also
to view the passages over the mountains. He conducted.lxxx. and.x. M. fotemen,
and.xii. M. horsemen over the foresaid water of Iberus. Than subdued he diverse
towns and dominions therabout, which lay at the foot of the mount of Pyrene,
and there he appointed Hanno with.x. thousand footmen, and a thousand
horsemen to remain to keep those passages and straites, which lay between
France and Spain, when they began to approach nigh to the foresaid high and
dangerous mountayns, and that it was openly known, that the war was taken
against the Romans, three thousand of the Carpetanes footmen, suddenly
departed from the host, and forsook him: not for fear of the war, but for
the long journey, and perilous passage over the mountayns, almost unable to
be passed. Anniball seeing he could not change their minds, and that it was
doutfull to keep them by violence, lest it should stere the fierce minds of the
resydue and make them weary, sent after the^ above.vii. M. other more, such as
he supposed to be weary of the warfare: fay^ing that he had also licenced them
that were first stolen away, to depart home, because of the tedious journey:
this did he to the intent the rest should have none occasion to leave or forsake
him. And than lest by prolongyng the time, he should hinder the minds of the
resydue, he led his host forth with speed, and passing the mountains of
Pyrene, pitched his tents before a town, called Illiber. The frenchmen
although they herd that the Carthaginenses were come to war upon Italy, yet
because the fame went, that the Spaniardes on the other side of the hill of
Pyrene, were by them subdued, and strong garrisons therefore there left, being
afraid of servitude, armed them, and much people assembled at a town called
Ruscino. Which thing when Anniball herd, fearyng more delay of time, than
war, with as great haste as might be, he sent orators to their rulers,
desyryng to speak with them: showing that he came not as an ennemy, but as a
guest or friend to France, and that he would not, if it pleased them, draw
his sword, before he were passed France. The frenchemen hering this,
incontinent removed to Illiber, and with good will came to Anniball, which
wan^e them with gifts, to suffer him to have free passage through their
towns and countries.

How Anniball passed the river of Rhodanus, put the Frenchmen to flight,
refused to fight with the consul of Rome, and with what words he couraged his
soldiers to pass the mountains. Cap. viii.
THus Annibal either with fear or with money winning the countries as he
went, brought his host to a field of the Volcanes, a strong kind of
people, which inhabyted on both sides the water of Rhodanus, who doubtyng the
power of the Carthaginenses, and mystrustynge their own strength, conveyed
all that they had over the river, and formoste kept the part thereof, that
the river should be as a munyment or defense to them: The residue of the
inhabitants, that remained there (because they were glad to rydde the
country of such a huge number of men of war) were such contented to be
retained by Anniball for rewards to make botes nd ships, to pass over the
river: so that in short space they had gotten and new made a greatte nauye
of ships, and of small cockebotes. The frenchemen began to fasshion botes,
hewynge trees and making them holowe, after the right fasshion: And than the
souldyours them selves, both for the plentye of timber and also the easynes
of the craft, every man hewed his tree, and made a boat to carye him self and
his stuff over. When all thing was made redye to pass over, the great
company of ennemies on horseback and o^ foot, that were on the other side,
abashed them sore. Which to drive away, Anniball sent Hanno Bomilcars son
with a strong company namely of Spaniardes, in the beginning of the night,
commaundyng them to keep up the rivers side a days journey, and as soon as be
could to convey his company over privily, that they might be ready wha^ time
required, to set upon their ennemies behind. Certain frenchemen were appointed
to guide and convey them up alonge the river side: Who conducted them the space
of.xxv. miles up the stream to ^^^tell I Will, where they felled trees, and
spedyly made bote^, in the which they might convey them selves, their horses,
and their necessary stuff over. The Spanyardes throwyng their clothes upon
botels, and sittynge on their sheldes fastened above thereon, passed the river,
the rest of the host, ioynyng botes together, passed over, and pitched their
tents on the other side of the river, where after their nyghtes journey, and
weary days labor, they rested all that day and night to refreshe them. The
next day they removed from thens, and with bournyng made a smoke, to signifye
that they were passed the river, and they were not far of. Which thing when
Anniball perceived, lest he should lose the time, gave a ^ygne to his host to
pass over. The footmen with their baggage passed over in botes: the horsemen
shypped such horses, as at their landyng they must needs occupy, the rest of
the horses they tied to small botes, and caused them to swymme over. And to
assuage the rage of the water, as well for the ease of the small botes, as of
the horses that swamme, they set the great ships and botes between the
stream and them. The frenchemen saying this, ran to the banks with great
shoutyng and synging ^^ter (...), knocking their sheldes over theyrheades,
(...) their weapons in their ryghthandes: not withstanding it was a terrible
bashement unto them, to behold such a multitude of ships, to here the huge
noise and rushe of the water: the diverse cries and clamours of the mariners and
soldiers, that endeavored them to overcome the rage of the water: the
exhortations that they that were landed gave to the other.

Thus being in great fear of the tu^^ltuous rufflyng before them, behynd them
arose a more (...) clamor, that Hanno had taken their camp, and (...) on them
at their backs: they fled every man what way he might soonest get. When
Anniball had co^^eyed the rest of his host over, nothing regardyng the
Frenchemen, pitched his tents. The Romans had sent P. (...) Scipio with
(...) army to ^ere with Anniball, and was a little before arrived at Massilia,
and had pytched his tents on the side of the river of Rhodanus. When Annibell
knew thereof, he sent.v. C. Numidian horse men, to view the Romans camp,
their order, and also the ^^^ber of them, who being espied were encountered
withal ^^y.iii. C. Romans, which after great ^^aughter on both sides
opteyned the vyctorye, and perforce put the Numidians to flight. Publius
Cornelius Scipio, being consul and capitayn of the Roman army, looked for
none other thing but that Anniball should gyne him battle. And like it was,
that he would so have done, had not the legates of the Boios, and the ruler of
France (which offered them selfs as co^panyons in the journey) turned his
mind: aduisynge him in nothing to mynysshe his power till he were come into
Italy. When Anniball was fyrmely fyxed to goo forth, he began to exhort and
encourage his souldyours, which were almost dyscouraged with fear of the
doubtful passage over the high mountains, which they should pass, showing
unto them, that before they came out of Spain, they had brought all those
people and realms which were enclosed with two several seas, to be under the
domynyon of Carthage: And that it were shame for them to depart, seeing they
had already passed the ieoperdous passage over the river of Rhodanus, and also
overcome so many Frenchemen, that prohybyted them that peryllous passage.
Moreover he said, the (...) hyghmountaynes were in their sight, which on the
one part joined to Italy. He showed them also, that the said mountain were
not so dangerous, as they supposed them to be. For they were but high hills,
and that men and beasts did inhabyte upon them, which hills whiles they did
not touch the sky, might be overcome by man's labor. Also saying that
trauaylers paste over with their stuff wives and children, much more
souldyours, having but their armor and weapons, might go over them: ye may
(said he) well perceive, that such as in times past went over these hills,
had not wings to ^^ee over them, wherefore either ye must give place both in
hardynesse and virtue to the Frenchemen, being so oftentimes overcome of us,
which by their strength and manhood conquered these mountains in old time,
orels let us trust, that the end of our journey shall be the great field
lyenge between the river of Tiber, and the walls of Rome.

When he had with these exhortations encouraged them, the next day he removed
from Rhodanus, and took his way through the myddell of France, not because
that was his next way, but for that he would not mete the Romans before he
came into Italy. Wherefore he went the further from the sea, and brought his
host into a little I Will. The inhabitauntes whereof were called Allobroges, a
kind of people, that in honor and richesse might not lyghtely be matched in
France. Among them was great discord, by reason of two brethren that strove
for the land. When Anniball was entered the said land, the determination of
the contention was committed wholly to him: who in short space set and
establyshed the elder in possession of the inheritance. Which done, the said
land aided him with men, vitayles, clothes, to defend them from the cold of
the mountains, and other necessaries, and so he departed to go to the
mountains, not holdyng the right way, but held on the left hand stylle
without interruption until he came to a floudde called Druentia, this was in
all France the daungeroust river to pass over. For not withstandyng that the
water was swyfte and of great strength, yet could it bear no ships, because
it was enclosed with no sure banks: so that it made now here d^ye ground,
now there deep trylle hooles.

Beside this (...) stones, so that there (...) to (...) over.

After (...) from the river of (...) within.iii. days came to the camp where
(...) they were gone, and that he could not easily (...) them, he went to his
ships, thinkyng to mete them ^s they descended from the mountains into
Italy, and so the better to meddle with them there. And because Spain fhulde
not be left without defense, he sent thither (...) Scipio his brother with a
great part of his host, against (...), to the intent not only to help his
friends and get (...), but also to daine Hasdruball out thereof, if hemyght: he
him self with a small army went to (...), and with the host, that lay about
the river of Padus, he intended to ^^pe Italy.

How and with what labor, (...), and (...) great (...) his army passed (...)
the (...) into Italye. Capit. ix.
HAnniball came from Druentia most part by the plain fields and valeys (by
the sufferance of the Frenchemen being inhabitauntes there) to the Alps or
high mountains: ^^d as the fame went, so it was found: The tops of the high
hills were myngled with snow, that almost touched the sky, and full ^^de
houses were set upon the rocks, the beasts and labourynge cattle being
wethered for cold, the men naked, v^shanen, and vnrounded, all the beastis and
people werehardned and drawe^togither with frost: with other things more
fearful and filthy to be seen than spoken, which when the hooste saw nere
hand, did renew and increase their dr^de. As the army marched up betwyxt the
rocks, they might perceive the mountain men assembled on the hills over them
to defend the passage. Annibal caused his standerdes to stay there, and sent
the Frenchmen to view the passage. And when he understood, that there was no
going that way, he pitched his tents in the playnest valey that he could find
among the (...) stones and cragges. And perceyuyng by the Frenchemen, who knew
almost their language, that the besert passages were kept on the day time, and
that on the night every of them would repair to their cotages or houses. The
next morning he gatte up on the hills, making semblance as though^ he would
attempt to win the passage by force. Thus he ^pent the hole day, dissemblyng
to do one thing, and intendyng an other, till it was night: than he withdrue
him to his camp, where he before rested. But so soon as he wist, that the
mountain men, and those that watched the passage, were gone to their rest: he
made many great fyres, and leauyng all the carriage and stuff, with the
horsemen and most part of the fotemen in his ca^pe, him self with a great
number of light and valiant men, quikly passed the straites, and gate the same
hills, that the other kept before: The next day the host and stuff began
to come after. In the morning the mountain men assembled to go to their places
as they were wont to do. But when they saw their enemies had gotten their
castles and places above their heads, it feared them sore, and caused them to
stay for a season. Afterward, when they saw so great fear among the host
in the streites, and that they were almost confounded with their own noise
and trouble, the horses trembling for bread: they thought to put them to
further trouble, and to work them more displeasure. Wherefore they came down by
the hills side along the rocks, being used thereto, where none other could
escape: And now here, now there, invaded the army, so that what for the
dangerousnes of the passage, and also by their ennemies they were meruaylously
encumbred. But above al other troubles the greatest was, that when they saw
them selves thus in danger by reason of their ennemies and of the passage: than
strove the one with the other, who should first escape the danger thereof, by
passing first the said straites, fyghtyng more with their own company than
with their ennemies. Their cattle being also stricken and hurt by the derth of
the mountayns, roryng and yellyng, hurt and ouerthrewe many of the hooste, some
armed, some unarmed down the high mountains, with stuff and baggage, that
pity it was to behold. When Anniball was in formed thereof, he descended with
a great number with him and at his first coming, he disparkled and put his
enemies to flight, so that afterward he had not only leis^re to convey his
army, but also silence and quietness. Th^n he took the castle the chief place
of all that region, and other their villages. And with the captives cattle he
found his army three days. Departing from thense he came to an other sort of
mountain people, which not by battle, but being taught by the destruction
of their neighbors, with craft subtilty and wyly deceytes, wrought him much
displeasure. Certain of the eldest and chiefest of the castelles came to
Anniball, showing him, that they being admonyshed with the harm of their
neighbors, would rather have his frendshyp and amity, than provoke the wrath
of the Carthaginenses, offering to obey his commandments, and to aid him
with vytailes, and to conducte him and his people on their way, and for the
assurance thereof, they offered to deliver him pledges. Anniball as wise and
taught in such rusynes, neither gave to their words over hasty credence, nor
despised their gentle offer: lest thereby he should have made them his manifest
enemies, but sobrely received their hostages, and used their aid upon the way:
whose guides he followed not neglygently, but in good order and array. The
elephantes and horsemen were set before, and Anniball him self came after with
the strength of his footmen in good array, wisely ouerlokyng all thing. When
they came to a more narow way, having an high hylle on the one side, the said
barbaryke people suddenly set upon them both behind and before, rollyng down
great stones among the host: The rerewarde was by them soore troubled: so that
if it had not ben surely defended, many of them had been destroyed. In this
trouble and peril remained they all the day: till the night caused the
enemies to withdraw. On the morrow they were nothing so vexed as the day
before. For their assaults were but skyrmyshes, sometime before, sometime
behind. Wherefore they passed the streytes, and came to the top of the
mountains, within the space of.ix. days, not without great ieopardy and
slaughter, but more of the beasts than of the men. There Anniball caused the
army, being weryed with labor, travail, and fighting, to rest them the
space of two days. During which time there fell such abundance of snow,
that it reuewed their sorrows, for the snow fyllyng every place as the army
should pass in the morning, made them almost desperate. Anniball perceiving
their great discourage, got before the s^anders, and went up on a hylle, from
whence he might see far and wide, where causyng his army to stay a little,
he showed to them Italy, and the fair fields that lay about the river of
Padus, adioynynge to the mountains: and he said unto them, that after they
had passed these mountains, they had already scaled the walls not only of
Italy, but also of the very city of Rome, showing them, that all other
passages were plain, easy, and nothing dangerous: and that within two or
three battayles at the most, they should attain Rome, which was the head of
Italy. With that the host began to set forewarde without any interruption,
except it were by small invasions, as it were of robbers, and such small
skyrmyshing: But the way to descend was than more dangerous than it was at
the ascendyng up of the same: for it was so narowe, stipe, and slyppy, that
they could not save them selves from falling. And when one slode, he
ouerthrewe him, that went before him, so that men and cattle were in ieopardy
of their lives. After that came they to a much more strayte rock, the clysses
thereof were so high and stype, that with greatte pain, the ligier souldyours,
by taking hold of the shrubbes and trees, that grew on the rock side,
could descend down. The place, which was before of his own nature
pytchelonge, by sudden breaking down of the earth, was made a thousand
foot stype right down to the bottom. The horsemen stayed there, as thought
they had been at their iourneyes end. When Anniball inquired, what caused
them to tarry, it was showed him, that no manne could pass the danger of
the rock. Than went he to see the place him self: and it seemed to him, that
by the paths and ways, which appeered to have been unused, by leisure and
long compass, he might well enough convey his army about the rock, but
all was in vain, for upon the old yse and frosen snow there was the night
before new snow fallen of a small thyckenesse, which after a little going
upon, thawed and gave some what again, and became so slyppy, that skarsely
upon their hands and knees could they sustain them selves. Their horse^
(...) in the (...), and were sore cut on their legs with the (...): so that
it was great pity to here the (...) that the people made in every part. To
appease all this noise, and to comfort his people, Hanniball caused the^ by
palyc^ to make a place to pytche they^ tents on. First he caused the snow and
use to be dug up and stricken away, which was not done without great labor
and trau^^le. Than had he invented a propre divise to break the rocks, and
through them to make a reasonable passage, he caused his company to cut down a
great number of trees that grew on the hall over them, which he caused to be
tumbled down the hylle unto the said troublesome rocks, and thereof to make
great pyles of wodde upon the said great rocks, and when the wind was
bygge, he caused them to be set on fire. Than caused he great plentye of
vinegar to be powered on the stones that were before burned and wasted with the
great heat of fire, whereby they were made much more gentle to be broken and
hewed, and than with bars of iron and other instruments they broke and
bruised the rocks and made them away so plain, that not only the cattal might
pass through, but also their elephantes and their carriage. About this work
they continued.iiii. days, in which time their c^ttall was almost f^^ished,
for on the hills was nothing but snow to be gotten. Wherefore they sent their
beasts to the valeis parts to grase, wherethey also rested.iii. days, and
than they came to the plain countries, which were occupied with husbandry,
and were fertile. After this manner they came into Italy, the fyft month after
they set forth from new Carthage: And as some writers say, they passed the
mountains in.xv. days. What number of men Anniball brought into Italy, the
writers do not agree. Some say he had C. thousand fotemen, and.xx. thousand
horsemen: sum write of more, and some of less.

How both the armies of Rome and Carthage approached, and the oration that P.
C. Scipio the consul made to ^ncourage his men to fight. Capit. x.
AT Anniballes coming to those parties, he found much for his purpose, the
Taurines and Insubres warryng one against the other, but he could not arm
his host to help the one part, for their bodies were so weary of labor,
their clothes so foul and fylthy, that some desired to rest after their
travail, some sought for vitayles after their hunger, some tarried to change
their apparayle and make clean their garments: they were so soore handled in
passing the mountains. Which thing P. Cornelius Scipio the consul perceived
well, and that caused him to make the more speed with his army to the river of
Padus, that he might fight with them er they were refreshed of their great
labor, or could have time to furnishe their army. Scipio had received of
Manlius and Attilius, an host of new soldiers, not much exercised in wars,
and such as were strangers to him. When he was come to Placentia, Annibal was
removed and had taken and destroyed the chief city of the Taurines, because
they would not willyngly yield them: and had won to his amity all the
dwellers about Padus, had not the coming of the consul feared them. By that
time that Anniball was a litel removed from the Taurines, the two hosts were
almost met, and also the capitaynes. And as another of them was as than known
to the other, so they were stryken with a certain admiration the one of the
other. For Anniball, by the wynning of Sagunt was drad of the Romans: and like
wise he supposed Scipio to be of no less fame and worthynesse, for that he was
chosen of the Romans to be capytayn against him. Than Scipio passed over
Padus, and removed his camp to a river called Ticinus: Where before he would
give battle, to exhort and encourage his men, this he began his oration unto
them.

If I had (loving soldiers) the same army, that I had in France with me, I
would not speak unto you that, which I intend at this present time to say.
For what should it need to stere and encourage those horsemen, which at the
river of Rhodanus so valyantly ouerthrewe their ennemies: or those legions,
with whom I followed this our fugitive enemy. Now for because that host was
sent by the senate of Rome into Spain, there to make war under my brother
Cneius Scipio, to the intent you should have both a consul and captain
against Anniball and the Carthaginenses, I wyllyngly took upon me this war.
A new capitayn to new soldiers should use few words. Notwithstanding lest
ye should be ignorant in this kind of war, and not know with whom ye shall
fight: ye shall understand, that with these ye shall have a do, whom in your
last wars, ye subdued both by land and sea, of whom ye took truage
perforce the space of twenty years: from whom also you won Sardinia and
Sicilia as a prey of war. Therefore in this battle ye must have the same
hearts and minds, that is wont to be in conquerours: and in your ennemies
must needs be such hearts as happen to men overcome. And they do not now give
battle of their own hardynesse and courage, but because they can not chose:
onelesse you think, that they, which having their hole army fresh and lusty,
withdrewe them and durst not encounter with us in battle beyond the
mountains, and which lost two parts both of horsemen and footmen in
passing over the same mountains: should have now more hope and trust than
before. And those few that be left of them, have lost both hearts and
strength: so that they are now images, yea rather shadows of men, than men in
deed being clonged together with hunger and cold, feynte and febled emonge
the rocky hills. Besides this, their synewes and veins are shronke together
with cold of the snow, their members wythered with froste and yse, their
harnies shaken, rusty, and broken, their horses feeble and lame. With these
enemies you must fight, ye they are the leuynges of your ennemies, and not your
ennemies. And I fear nothing more, than before you shall fight with your
foos, it shall be thought, that the mountayns have first overcome the^, and taken
the honor from us. But so it is perchance necessary and mete, that the goddis
without man's help, and without battle, should overcome them, that are truce
breakers. And we that be violated and disceyued, should next after the goddis
(as their mynisters) bring them to utter confusyon. Peradventure many of you
will suppose, that I speak these words proudly and hyghly, only for your
exhortation and comfort, and that I should think otherwise my self: Therefore
ye shall understand, that I was sent into Spayn to mine own province, whether
I was now going with mine host, where I should have used both the fellowship
and counsel of my brother in all peryls and ieopardies, and should have
fought rather with Hasdrubal being less of power, than with Hanniball: and so
should I have had less to do. Not withstandyng when I arrived with my ships
beyond the costeo of France, landyng I heard great brute of Anniball, and
sendyng a certain horsemen before, pitched my tents at Rhodanus: and there my
company ouerthrewe and put to flyghte those, with whom it was their chance to
mete in battle. Than because I could not with footmen overtake mine ennemy,
which fled before me, I returned to my ships, and with as good speed as I
could make, sailing a great compass about, arrived here, to mete him in the
front of the mountains, to the intent to give him battle: And to prove
whether the earth has brought forth suddenly, within the space of these.xx.
years, other Carthaginenses, than were wont to be bredde there or no. For if
these be of the kind of them, that warred at the yles of Egates, I remember
well, that they were sold from Erix for.xviii. d. a piece come who would. Also I
long to prove, whether this Anniball be the follower of Hercules in his
journey, as he says that he is, orels a tributary, a stipendary, and a
servant to the people of Rome, left by his father. We have to show the bands
of truce, written with the hand of his father Amilcar: who being commanded by
our captain, withdrewe his garrison from the city of Erix, who lamentyng and
frowning received the grievous laws made against the Carthaginenses subdued,
who couenanted with the Romans to depart from Sicilia and to pay tribute.
Therefore soldiers, I would have you fight not only with so good a courage
as ye were wont against other ennemies, but also with such an indignation
and displesure, as though you saw your servants armed to fight against you.
We might if we had would, when they were enclosed at Erix, with very hunger
(the hardest and soorest punyshement among men) have destroyed them. We might
allabours so (if we had would) have sailed with our victorious N^uye into
Africa, and it: short space with out battle, utterly have destroyed
Carthage. We pardoned them, we made peace with them after they were subdued,
and took them into our protection and defense when they were sore grieved with
the wars of Affrike. And for these our benefits showed unto them, folowinge
this furious young man, they come to conquer our country. And would to god
this battle now were for honor, and not for the health and safety of us
all. We fight not now for the possession of Sicilia and Sardinia, for which
we stro^e in times paste: but now we must fight for Italy. Nor there is none
other army behind us, which will withstand them if we be overthrown: Another
be there any mo mountains, over which whiles they were passing, men might
provide new succors. Here we must resist them eue^ as we should fight before
the walls of Rome. Every man must think that he with his armor covers not
and defends only his own body, but also his wife and small children. Nor let
no man care only for his own house and family but let him likewise have in
mind, that the senate and people of Rome beholds this our conflict and
battle, and upon our fortune at this present time depends the prosperity
o^ the city and hole empire of Rome.

With what examples and words Anniball exhorted his soldiers to fight
valiantly. Cap. xi.
Whiles Scipio the consulle in this manner exhorted the Romans, Anniball
thynkyng first to encourage his men with deeds, before he would exhort them
with words, disposed his army in compass as it were to behold a fight, and
thanne he brought in the mids of them the mountain men ^^nnde, whom he
before had taken prisoners: and laid also in the same place the armor of the
Frenchemen, which he had overcome, and caused one, that could speak the
language, to inquere of those prisoners, which of them, if they were losed out
of their bonds, would take horse and armor, and fight for their lines. When
they all had desired armor and battle, he caused lottes for them to be
cast, and according to the lotte losed a great number of them, who with
leapyng and skypping after their manner, every of them shortly took his armor,
being as joyful and glad to dye with honor, as to live with shame and in
capti^itie. Than incontinent he called his soldiers about him, and made to
them an oration in manner and form following.

If ye have any mind or remembrance of the example of the strangers fortune
not long passed, ye should have the same even now, in wayinge your own
fortune and chance. We have overcome in battle those our captives. Wherefore
ye must think, that all these your prisoners, now showed before you, were not
showed as a spectakle for you to behold, But as a certain resemblance of your
own chance and condition, in case ye be now overcome and taken? And I can
not tell, whether fortune has given greatter bands, and more urgent
necessity to you, than it has given heretofore to these captives. Two seas
do compass you both on the right hand and on the left: and ships have
you none to escape away withal. The water of Padus is all about us, more
violent than the river of Rhodanus, and at our backs are the high mountayns,
which ye passed with so great peyn and peril. Wherefore loving soldiers, ye
must either over come your ennemies at the first encounter, or else be slain.
And the self fortune, which has brought you now into such necessite, that
needs ye must fight or die: the same fortune shall give you such rewardis, if ye
subdue your enmies, as no mortal men can desire greatter of the immortal
goddis. If we should by our valiantnes recover again but only Sicilia and
Sardinia, which were won from our forefathers, it might be thought a
sufficient reward. But in case we speed well now what so ever the Romans have
gotten with so many victories and triumphs, and all the dominions, which they
now possess, shall be all ours, with the princis, lords, and rulers of the
same. To win so rich a preye with favor and help of the goddis, arm your
self, and set forth boldly. Ye have hitherto long enough chacynge
beasts on the wide and large mountains of Lusitania and Celtiberia, found ^o
worty pray nor reward to recompense so many your and perils. Now it is time
to get your rich prays measuryngly our great rewards according to the
deserts of your travail, enterprysing this so great a journey, passing over
so many mountayns and ryuers, and by so many kinds of armed people. Here
fortune has given you an end of your travail: Here fortune will reward you
according to the costs and charges that you have been at. Nor ye should not
suppose the vyctory to be so hard, as the battle is of great name.
Oftentimes a small host has made a great and a doutful battle: agaynl noble
people yea and kings have been over come in a little moment. For take away the
terrible sound of the name of Rome, and what are they to be compared to you?
Your great wars this.xx. years, with your manhod with your good fortune I
speak not of: I will only remember things of late done. Ye are come hither
from the pyllars of Hercules, from the Occean sea, from the furthest part of
the world, passing through and conqueryng so many fierce and cruel nations of
Spain and France. You shall now fight with young and untaught soldiers, of
late beaten and overcome by the Frenchemen, and as yet unknown to their
captain, and he unto them. Shall I that was born and brought up in the noble
house of my father, that has been the chastyser of Spain and France, that have
conquered not only the people of the mountains: but also all the passages,
which is much more: compare my self with this weak capytayne of a
fourtenyght old, wandrynge from host to hooste: to whom if a man this day
would show the army of Carthage and the army of the Romans together: he can
not tell of which host he is governor, but only by the banners and badges.
Surely worthy warriors, I esteem not this a little, that there is none of you,
before whom I have not done some worthy feate of war. At that time ye did
extolle and laud me, and thought me worthy of gifts and preferrement. And
now I shall more like a father than a capytayne, before you all enter into
battle against these people, that another knows us, nor any of them
knows other. Where so ever I cast mine eyes, I see nothing among you but
hardynesse and strength, the most aunciente and famous footmen, the most
noble armed and unarmed horsemen, and you most faithful and hardy
Carthaginenses and fellows, shall both fight for your country, and in a just
and ryghtuous quarrel. We bring war and banners dysplayed into Italy noisome
to the Romans: And so much more boldly we may fight, in how much the hope
and courage of us that invade, is stronger than theyrs that only defend.
Besides all this their wrong, and unworthy dealyng toward us, both kendle
and encourage our minds. For first I being captain was required, and than
all you that were at the destruction of Sagunt, were in likewise required to be
delivered to the Romans to be put to death. This most cruel and proud
nation does all things after their own brain and judgment: they will
determyn with whom we shall have war or peace. All thing that they do, they
think it ryghtefull. They will appoynte hills and fluddes to be bounds and
meres, which we may not pass, yet will not they observe the places and
terms, which they have set and prescribed them selves. Thou shall not (say
they) pass Iberus, lest thou make the a do with the Saguntines, Sagunt is at
Iberus: Therefore you shall not move thither from your appointed place. They
esteem it but a litell to have taken from us our most ancient provinces,
Sardinia and Sicilia, but they woll have Spayn also. And if they win that,
than they will have Africa. I may well say Africa also, For they have sent
two consuls this year, one into Africa, and an other into Spain. There is
nothing left to us, but that that we must be feign to win again with the
sword. If fear compelle them, like cowardes to flee here from us, they have
places enough to receive them, they know the countries and ways whereby to
escape: It behooves you to play the valyant men, and setting all at six and
seven, either to vanquyshe, or else if fortune frown, rather manfully to dye
in battle, than to be slain in fleyng away, If this that I have said, be
fast fixed in your minds, I say to you for certain, you have all ready the
vyctorye.

How Scipio and (...), and fought together, (...) how the (...) was hurt,
(...). Cap xii.
Vhan by these exhortations the men of war on both parts were kendled and
stered to battle, the Romans pitched their tents ^t Ticinus, where they
began to make a bridge, and first they made a tower upon the same, for the
safegarde of the bridge whiles it was workyng. But while they were occupied
about their work, Hanniball sent Maharball, with a wynge of the Numidies of.v.
C. horsemen, to destroy the fields of such as were friends to the Romans,
chargyng them to spare the Frenchemen: and to stere the princis to forsake the
Romans amity. When the bridge was made, Scipio con^eied his army over, and
pytched within.v. miles of Anniballes camp. And when the Romans host
approached, Maharball was called back. When Anniball (who could never enough
stire his soldiers to battle) had promised them gifts, rewards, ye and
fredome, with lands also other in Africa Spayn or Italy at their own
pleasures in case they might obtain the upper hand, he did sacrifice unto
the goddis, holding a lamb in the left hand, and a ^^ynt stone in the right
hand, desiring Iupyter and the goddis all, so to slay him as he did the lamb,
if he would weak promise with them. And than every of them receiuynge a sure
hope, desired the battle. The Romans made no such haste, because they were
feared with strange tokens and fyghtes a little before. For a wolf was se^e
to come into their camp, which rent and tore those that he met, and him
self escaped without hurt. Diverse other such tokens very strange, were
showed among the Romans. When Scipio had sought deligently what they might
sygnifye: he went with certain horsemen with him, to a lytte^l hill ^ere
adioynyng, to view the number and demeanor of Annibals host: where by chance
he met Anniball, and certain horsemen with him, that was also ridden forth
to view the countries about. When they were almost met, with great care and
diligence they set them selfs in array to fight. The battle was strong for
a season and doubtful. But in a while the Romain fotemen fled back to their
battle, where being myngled with the horsemen, they caused great confusion:
but when the Numidian horsemen, which were on the wings, came on them also,
than fled they on all parts to their camp. In this conflict was the consul
Scipio soore wounded, whom with great peyn his horsemen carried out of the
field to their great discomforte. Wherefore the night following, the Romans,
making as litell noise as might be, that their ennemies should have no
knowledge, remeued from Ticinus to Padus: and came to Placentia, before that
Anniball wist that they were departed from Ticinus. Mago with the Spanyshe
fotemen swam over the water quyckly, and Anniball by the higher part of the
river, passed over his host with as great speed as might be. And within a few
days he came and pitched before Placentia, and on the morrow after, in the
sight of his enemies, he ranged his host, and set them in array ready to give
battle. The night following by reason of a sedition that arose in the Roman
army there were many Frenchemen slain, of those that came to they raide,
whereupon two thousand fotemen and two hundred horsemen of the Frenchemen,
sleinge the watchemen at the gates, fled unto Anniball, whom he gentilly
entertained and ke^dled with hope of exceeding great rewards, and sent every
man home to his own city, thereby the more to allure and turn the minds of
the commons of their country unto him. Scipio demyng this slaughter to be a
token, that all the Frenchemen would forsake him, and that they being touched
with this yuell deed, as a madness were fallen upon them, would run to
harneys, not withstanding his wound grieved him soore, yet as pryuily as he
might in the night time, he removed his hooste to the river Trebia, and
pytched in higher places, and on little hills ylle for horsemen. Anniball
having knowledge thereof, sent first certain Numidians after, and thanne all
the horsemen: which should have put the rerewarde to great trouble, had
not the Numidians for covetousness of pray, turned to the void tents of the
Romans, in which season they escaped.

How Anniball (...) with (...) the co^sul, and by what means (...) put the
(...) to ^^^ght. Cap. xiii.
DVryng this time was Sempronius the other consul going to Sicilia with his
army, but in his journey he received letters from the senate, of the entering of
the Carthaginenses into Italy, requiring him to aid the other consule as soon as he might. Which when he perceived, he laid garrisons in diverse places, to
defend the provinces, and came him self with a strong power into Italy, to
keep the costs. Thus when the two consuls were met together, all the power of
Rome was there assembled against Anniball. Not withstanding the one consul,
being ab^ted by his first battle and sore wound, would rather prolong the
matter than fight. But the other being fresh and lusty, and therefore more
fierce, would have no delay, thinking it great honor unto him, if he might
recover again that the other consul had lost. Wherefore he said, that there was
no man would defer the battle, but only he, who being more weaker in his
heart than in his body, for the remembrance of his wound, did refrain to
fight. And also that the time ought not to be prolonged with sick folks.
Shall we tarry and lose time? For what third consul, or what other army shall we
abide? The Carthaginenses have pitched their tents in Italy, and weluere in
the city of Rome: who seek now neither Sicilia, nor Sardinia, that were
before conquered from them, nor Spain beyond Iberus, but they are come to
drive and expel the Romans out and from their own land and native
country. O (say the he) how much would our fathers, who were wont to war
before the walls of Carthage, lament, if they saw us their children, ye and
two consuls, with their two hosts, trembling and quakynge in Italy within
our own camp, and that the Carthaginenses had won all the feldis between the
Alps and Apenni^u^. These words spoke he to his hurt fellow in the Pretory.
And also the choosing of officers at Rome, provoked him to make haste, lest
that the taryinge for his fellow being hurt, might be occasyon of their loss
of preyse and victory: and lest the war might be committed to new consuls,
whose election was than at hand. Which thin ges considered, they prepared for
the battle in haste. Annibal although he thought, that nothing shalde be done
unawarely, sens the two co^suls were met together, and that the war should
be cruel and strong: yet did not he mystruste good fortune, because of his
first battle. He was also the more busy and intentive to do battle, whiles
he thought the soldiers his ennemies were young and raw in the wars, and
whiles one the best consul was yet not hole of his wounds: and whiles the
Frenchemens hearts of his army (of whom he than had a great number) were
strong and hardy, whose courage he thought and knew well would rather
dyminyshe than increace, when they should be brought any further from their
own country. These things considered, he sent certain Frenchmen abroad the
country as spies, who showed him, that the Romans were all ready to fight. Than
Anniball went to see and provide a place for disceyte. There was in the mids
between the two hosts, where the field should be, aryuer which was closed on
both sides, with greatte and high banks, be set about with the wiedes of
the fennes, which almost covered all the ground, with young wyllowes and
shrubbes, and also with high busshes and thorns: which when he had serched
and perceived it to be a place obscure and dark enough, to hyde an
inbusshement of horsemen in, he said to his brother Mago: This place shall
thou keep, and thou shalt (said he) chose unto the one thousand of horsemen,
and oone thousand of fotemen, of the best of mine army, to lie here in these
covert places: and when time shall require, to do as I shall show you what thereto
appertains: and be ye sure, that ye shall have ennemies blind in these feats
of war. When Mago had a M. horsemen, and a. M. fotemen delivered to him,
Anniball commanded the Numidian horsemen, the next morning to pass the water
of Trebia, and ride up and down before the gates of his ennemies camp: and
when they had with castyng and throwyng into their tents and stations,
provoked them to issue out to batail, alluring them to pursue after, that then
they should by litell and litell recule back again over the said river. The
residu of the capitayns he comanded, that they should cause al their men to
dyne and refreshe them selfs, and after to be in a redynes, against they should
be called to the battle. Sempronius bearyng the rumor of the Numidies,
brought all his army (being very desirous of battle) to the river, whereunto
the other reculed back, as was appointed by Anniball. The weather was
extremely cold, and it showed fast. The soldiers had taken no sustenance
before, nor made any provision to strength and keep their bodies warm from the
cold frost and snow. But in all haste following the Numidians, their crafty
enemies that fled before them, entered into the river. Now was the water
risen that night, by reason of that snow, as high as their brestis. When they
came out of the water, their bodies were so stark and benommed with cold, that
scarsely they could hold their armor upon them: and also toward the mids
of the day, they began to faint for hunger. In the mean season Anniball
caused great fyres to be made before his soldiers tents, that every man
might warm him: and also to put oil in their gloves, which should souple
their joints and members. When they heard that their ennemies were passed the
river, being lusty both in body and heart, every man took his weapon and went
to battle. Anniball ordered his battayles circumspectly: first he set forth
his throwers of darts, which were of the yles called Baleares, than his light
harneysed fotemen, to the number of.viii. M. and after them the other footmen:
he also bestowed in the.ii. wings.x. M. horsemen, in whom rested the great
strength of his battle, and into these wings also he departed his
elephantes, putting them craftily before the fight of his ennemies horses,
which were not wont to them, so that for strangenes of the sight, and the
unaccustomed savor of them, they scattered abroad, and than the battle by
the footmen was maynteyned for a season: But ^none, what by reason of the
horsemen and elephantes, and also through the sudden coming of Mago with the
Numidians, that fiercely assailed the Romans at their backs, they were
stryken with such fear, that they fled on all parts: Some ieoparded to
take the water again, and escaped to their tents, but of them were but few,
for either they were drowned in the deep water, or else slain of their ennemies
in the chase at the water side. Many took the right way to Placentia, and
thereby were saved. On the other side the Carthaginenses were so beaten with
the rain myxte with snow, and with the intolerable cold, that the beasts,
elephantes, and men, were almost peryshed. The river of Trebia caused them to
return from the pursuit of the Romans: so that almost dead for cold they
came to their camp, with very small joy of their victory. The next night
Scipio conveyed his host over the river of Trebia, and so to Placentia, unware
to the Carthaginenses: who by reason of the vehement storm of rain that fell
that night, could not here the remouyng: or else for pain of their wounds
and werynes of labor, dyssembled the matter and took no head there of. Thus
were the Romans conveyed peasibly to Placentia, and from thens they passed over
Padus to Cremona. When the chance thereof was known at Rome, there arose such
so dayn fear among them, as though their ennemies had been come already with
baners displayde before the gates of Rome: Neither had they hope of any further
succors, whereby they might defend their enemies from their gates and walls:
The one consul being overcome at Ticinus: and the other called from Sicilia to
help him: and now both being together overcome, and their two hostis. What
other capitayns, what other legions had they more left to with stand them?

Hanniball intendyng to take a certain castle by stelthe, was encountered by
the consul, wounded, and put to the worse, and after a great slaughter of the
people he won Vicu^nias. And how Cn. Scipio in Spain ouerthr^we Hanno in
battle. Cap. xiiii.
When Sempronius by chance had escaped the great danger of his enemies, he
returned to Rome, to the chosyng of the new co^suls, at which parliament Cneius
Seruslius and C. Flaminius were created consulles. Which thing done, he came
to Placentia, thynkyng to pass the winter quietly in that place, but the
Romans had not quiet so much as the winter time. For the Numidians and other
of the host of Anniball were sparkled abroad in the co^^es, so that they were
troubled on every side. There was a certain market town and castle, not far
from Placentia, very rich and strongly fensed. Thither went Hannibal with his
horsemen, and such as were light harneysed, thynkyng to win it by assa^^ in
the night. But the watchemen perceiving his intent, reised such a cry, that
it was heard to Placentia. Than the consul in the next morning, with his
horsemen before, and his legions in good order following after, came thither,
and gave them battle, in the which Anniball was wounded: Whereby the
Carthaginenses were in such fear, that they gave back, and the peace lasted
whiles Anniballes wound was in healynge. And ere he was fully cured, he went
to a place called Vicunuias. That place was surely kept by the Romans, who
being a great number, what of the garrison, what of the towns me^, also by
reason of the assemble of the people of the country, who being afraid of the
Numidians, which roued abroad: fled thither for succor: these people (I
say) being many in number, hering of the noble defendyng of the castle,
adioynynge to Placentia, thynkyng to do a great feate, with a great route of
people, without any order, ran to armor, and came forth to encounter with
Anniball. But because they were an unruly company, without a capytayne or good
order, the other, being but a few in number, and good men of war, having a
good capytayn, unto whom they might trust, did discom^te of them.xxxv.
thousand, and the next day took the town, and made such a slaughter and
destruction among them, as was not heard of a great season before. These
were Anniballes vyctories during the wynterseason, after which they rested
the deep of the winter: And as soon as spring time of the year came,
Sempronius the consul, who was than returned from Rome, prepared to give
battle to the Caathaginenses, and the first day that they met, the Romans had
so good for tune, that they not only won the victory in plain field, but
also drove them to their tents, and endeavored them selfs to win their
camp. But Anniball, setting certain of his fotemen to defend their gates or
entrees of their camp, and causing the rest, as well fotemen as horsemen to
recule, did set them in array within the camp, to the intent to be in a
redines to rushe out upon their enemies, so sone as he made to them a sign.
The Romans seeing they could not win the camp, blewe the retreite. When
Anniball saw, that the bataile was slakid, and the Romans began to recule back
from his camp: he set forth the horsemen, some on the right hand, and some on
the left, and him self with the fotemen, came after from the camp, and gave
them a strong battle, puttyng them to much dysplesure. But anon the night
departed them with like loss and slaughter on both sides.

Whiles these things were done in Italy, Cn. Scipio, being sent into Spain
with his host, partly by force, and partly by amity and old frendshyp, he
brought all the countries from Lusitania, to the river of Iberus, under the
obedience of the Romans. And also the fame of his gentil entertayning of people
brought the inhabitauntes on the mountains, and the wild nations to be his
assured friends. So that they were all ready with their armor and succors to
aid the Romans to the best of their powers. Hanno, whom Anniball had left
for the defense of these regions, knowing these acts of Scipio, after his
arryuall, and fearyng lest he should be by him put from the possession of all
that countreye: appointed to fight with him before the matter were ouerfar
gone, and pytched his camp not far from the host of the Romans. Scipio
knowing that if he did long tarry from battle, he should have to do with him,
and also with Hasdruball, who were both left for the defense of the country,
thought it better for him to mete with them and their hosts severally, thanne
to match with both the hosts together. Wherefore he made speed to mete first
with Hanno and his company. In which battle there were slain.vi. thousand
of the Carthaginenses, and.ii. M. taken with their capytayn Hanno, and all
their tents, with a certain town also nere unto the camp called Stissus.
Hasdruball, before he herd of the discom^iture of his fellow Hanno, was passed
the river of Iberus with.viii. M. fotemen, and one thousand horsemen,
intending to mete the Romans at their first coming: But when he heard
of the overthrow of Hanno and his people, he turned toward the sea, where by
chance he met with many Romans, that were left in the ships not far from
Tarracon, wandryng abroad upon the sea costis, taking no head to their
ennemies, as people mystrustynge nothing, but being neglygent by reason of
their late prosperous success. Of these negligent persons many he (...) the
rest he drone to their ships with great fear. (...) the less him self
being afraid of Scipios coming, ^urste not long tarry in those parties, but
with his army passed the river of Iberus, and distroyed the fields of the
Illergites, bryngyng them to his subjection.

How Annibal passed the dangerous (...) ^^re to the river of Arnus, to the
great loss of his mean and cattall, where the fenny ^yre caused him to lose
one of his eyes. And of the haste that Flaminius the Consule makes to give him
battle. Cap. xv.
AS soon as the spring of the year did appear Annibal goinge from the place,
where he wintred: because it was said that Flamminius the consule was come to
Aretium: not withstandyng that there was a more easy and better way: Yet
because it was further about he took the next way over the greatte peryllous
fennes, where as at that time the river of Arnus had ouerflowed more higher
than in times past, he commanded the Spanyardes with the Affricans, and the
most part of the old soldiers with their stuff to go before, lest when
they were constrained to stay in any place their necessaries should be wantyng:
next them he set the Frenchemen, because he would have that host in the
myddell, in whom he had lest trust: last of all he commanded the horsemen to
come, giving in charge to Mago with certain of the best Numidians, to come
behind, and to bring forth the army, specially the Frenchemen, lest that
other wearynes or fear of the long way, should cause them to stay or to slyp
away, as they are very faint and fearful people in such busynes. The first
company walowyng in the thycke mudde and the deep waters, skarcely saving them
selves from drownyng, followed their standards and guydes. The Frenchemen that
followed them, could another save them selves from falling: another when they
were down well arise again, another could their hearts comfort their bodies,
nor hope comfort their hearts: some drew their weary members with pain after
them. Some other, where they ones fell, their hearts being ouercomme with
wearynes, were constrained to dye. The watch that they suffered.iiii. days
and.iii. nyghtes, without any sleep, was the chief cause of their confusyon.
When they could find no dry place, where they might rest their weary bodies,
the water coueryng all the earth, they heaped their stuff and baggage in the
water, one pack on an other, whereupon they rested and saved them selfs. The
heaps of dead cattle, which were dead in all the way, was instead of beddis
to many that were faint and feeble, which eased them for a little space.
Anniball him self having sore eyes, by reason of the intemperate spring time
of the year, that changed now to heat and now to cold, being carried upon an
elephant (which only remained) because he should be high from the water: yet
through his great watch and cold, and by reason of the fenny air being
noisome to his head, and because there was no place nor time to heal him, he
lost one of his eyes. And when he had passed the fennes, not without great
loss both of men and of beasts, as soon as he came to dry ground, he
pytched his camp, having certain knowledge by his espies, that the Roman
host was about Aretium, a country as pleasant and fertyle as was in all Italy.

The consul was than fierce and cruel, for the joy and the pride of his new
office. And he not only little feared the law and dignity of the fathers of
the senate, but also he wanted the fear of the immortal goddis. Fortune also
had nouryshed this his foolyshe hardynes with prosperous success, as well in
the civil busynes and affairs at home, as in certain foreyn batayles: so that
it appeared, that he went about all things cruelly and over hastily: another
counsaylynge with the goddis, nor with men. And how much more redye he was to
follow his own folly, so much the busyer was Anniball to provoke and stere him
to the same. Wherefore leaving his ennemies on the left hand, he went toward
Fessula, intendyng to distroy the fields of Hetruria, where he showed the
consul as great waste, destruction, and spoylynge of his friends as he might,
both by robbynge, slaughter, and burning: to the intent he should thereby the
rather be provoked to battle. Flamminius of his own nature was given to be
busy, although his ennemy would have been quiet and in rest, but when he saw
the goods of his friends carried away: and his neighbors bourned before his
face: thinking it dishonor unto him, to see Anniball wander through the
mids of Italy, taking his pleasure without any resistance, he determined
incontinent to give battle, although many of his men persuaded him, that he
should tarry the coming of his fellow the other consul, so that they should
with both their counsayles and hoostes together, proceed unto their enterprise
against Annibal: and in the mean time with the horsemen, and light harneysed
footmen, to let him from his robbynge and destroyinge the country. But he
contrary to the advertisement that was given him, being angrye, rushed forth
of the counsel house, and quikly caused the baners and standerdes to be
dysplayde, and lepte him self upon his horse: but incontinent the horse
suddenly fell, and cast the consul to the earth: which unlucky beginning
caused those that were present, greatly to fear the success thereof.

Of the battle of Trasimenus, with the death of the Consul Flamminius, and
many other Romans. Cap. xvi.
ANniball this while distroyed and wasted, by cruel war, all the fields
that were between the city of Cortona, and the lake of Trasimenus, thinking
the hearts of his enemies the sooner to be moved to redress the injuries of
their friends: And they came to a place meet for treason and disceyte, where
as the great lake or fenne of Trasimenus did almost join unto the hills of
Cortona. There was at that place one only strayte and narowe way to enter in,
but afterward the fields waxed a little brother and larger: Over that plain
the hills arose of a great heyght. In the same fair and plain place Anniball
pytched his camp, where he only with the Affricanes and Spanyardes did rest.
The rest of the light harneysed men of the army: he brought about the back of
the hills. And he disposed the horsemen nere to the mouth of the narowe
enter, where the hills might secretly cover and hide them: commaundyng, that
as soon as the Romans were ones passed the straytes, the horsemen should appear
at their backs, so that they should be enclosed and hemmed in on all parts,
having no way to escape, by reason of the hills and greatte lake.

Flamminius following his ennemies, was come about the setting of the son to
the lake: And the next day early in the morning, when it was scarcely day
light, he with his host were passed the straytes. And when his people began to
stray abroad into the larger field, they saw all the place before them occupied
with their enemies: And than they aper ceyued treason both behind them, and
over their heads. When Anniball knowing: his ennemies to be enclosed with the
lake and hills on the one side, which he desired, and also compassed about
with his army on the other side, he gave a sign to his men sodeinly, to invade
their ennemies: which his commandment they anon with all diligence executed,
ru^nyng down from the hylle and assaylyng the Romans on all parts. One thing
much amassed the Romans by the sudden and strange change thereof: there
arose from the broad lake a myste thycker and darker than the hills in
appearance, which let them of the sight and true knowledge of the manner of
their ennemies inuasyon. The noise of the sudden affraye arose among them,
before they perceived them selves to be betrayde and hemmed in: And the
battle was begone both before and on both sides, before that they could
be put in good array, or take their armor and draw their swerdes.

The Consul Flamminius, when all his people were thus oppressed with fear, he
him self as a man of great courage and little affrayde, ordered his troubled
company, and set them in order as well as the time and place would serve him,
still exhortyng them by all the means he might, to abide and to fight,
showing them, that it booted them not to pray and call on their goddis, or
to make vows them for their delyuerance: There was now no way to for them
to escape but by strength and hardynesse, there was no way than to be made,
but with the swerd: and the less fear they did take, the less ieopardye
and peril should they be in. But the noise was so greatte, that the words
and counsaylle of their Captain could not be heard: And they were so
dismayde, that they skarsely knew their standerdes and places to repair unto.
They had scante hearts to draw their weapons: their harneis was rather a
burden to them than a defense, They might hear much noise and clamor of
those that were wounded, but little could they see. Some fled, and in the
fleing happened to fall into companies of Romans that fought earnestly, and by
them were stayed from further fleinge. Some were coming toward the battle,
and by the discomfyture of such as they met, which fled away, were
discouraged and fled also. But at the last, when they perceived no way to
escape, than fell they earnestly to fyghtyng, not keeping order oraray, but by
companyes, as it happed them to fall together. Than began the battle to
be fyerce in all parts, and endured almost three hours, and every where very
cruel, but most dangerous about the consul. For the strength of the host
followed him: And on what so ever part he saw his men in danger, quyckly and
diligently he rescued them: And he being very valiant, both myghtyly assailed
his ennemies, and defended his citezens, until one of Insubria, called
Ducarius, knowing both his horse and his face, said to his company: Here is
the Consu^^* that not long agone confounded our legyons, and distroyed both
our cities and fields: now shall I send his soul to the company of our
friends, that he all ready has slain: and hyttynge his horse with the spurs,
he ran violently through the thyckest of his enemies route, sleinge a
squyre, which met him vnhappyly in the way. And afterward with his spear,
ran the Consul through the body, and had spoiled him, had not the strong
company of the Romayne knights withstand him. After his death began the
Romans to flee on al parts, and than another hills nor lake could let
them: they wandered as blind men through the straites and over the rocks, some
falling one over an other. And when they could find none other way, they
took the next way through the fennes, runnynge into the water over head and
shulders, and were for the most part drowned. Thus was the dangerous
battayles at Trasymenus.xv. M. Romans were slain in the bataile, and.x. M.
sparkled abroad by diverse ways, came came to Rome. A. M. and.v. C. of the
Carthaginenses were slain in that battle, and many died after by reason of
their wounds, which they had. Anniball delivered all the prisoners of Italy
without ransom, but the Romans he kept in prison. Than commanded he the
bodies of his company that were dead, to be disseuered from the other, and
buried. He sought the body of Flaminius with great diligence, to have buried
it, but he could not find it. When the news of this great slaughter was
first known at Rome, the people assembled with great fear and rumor in the
market place, gatheryng into companies, to know the troth thereof. And a litel
before the son setting, Marcus Pomponius praetor said: With great bataile
wear overcome: and although the people herd him say no more of certainty, yet
by receiving the news one of an other, they filled the hole city with
tidingis, that the consul, with a great part of the host, was slain, and that
few were left on live, but were other chased abroad, or taken of their
ennemies. The women chiefly made either great joy for their friends that
escaped, or else great sorrow for the death and captivity of them that were
slain and taken. It was said, that one woman when she herd sodeinly, that her
son came home escaped from the battle, for joy dyed at the gate of the
city. And an other, to whom it was showed falsely, that her child was slain,
she abode in her house very sorrowful, but when he came home to her suddenly,
she at the first sight of him for great joy dyed. The Pretours kept the
Senate for certain days from the son rysynge, to the son set,
counsaylynge what capytaynes, and what hooste they might have to withstand the
Carthaginenses: but before they had made any certain determination of their
busynes, they had tidings of an other new slaughter, which was, that.iiii.
thousand horsemen, which were sent by Seruilius the other consul to
flamminius, under the gouerna^^e of one C. Centronius. After they herd of the
battle of Trasymenus, they returned back, and in Vmbria were betrayed by
Anniball, and distroyed. Which thing troubled the minds of the people
meruaylously. They were in great trouble and fear, the consulle and head
officers being absent, unto whom they scarsely durst send their letters for
fear of the Carthaginenses, who were almost spredde over all Italy.

Wherefore they made Quintus Fabius Maximus Prodietator, that was ruler of the
commons, and Marcus Rufus Minutius master of the horsemen, to these it was
given in charge by the Senate, to establysshe and make sure the walls and
towers of the city, and to fortifye such places, as they should think
convenient. Also to break the bridges, that were over the waters, and to
provide for the keeping of their horses and city, seeing they could not defend
Italy.

How Anniball by a crafty deceyte escaped the straites of Formiana, wherein he
was enclosed by Q. Fabius Maximus. Cap. xvii.
ANniball came in the mean season by Vmbria to Spoletum, distroyeng and
burning all before him. Than began he to lay siege to the town but he was
driven thense with great slaughter of his men. Wherefore supposing the city of
Rome to be of a great strength, seeing that little town was so strong, whose
strength and power he than not very prosperously had assayde, he withdrewe
his army to the plentyfull country of Picenus, and from thens to Pelignes, to
Arpos, and to Luceria, a country adioynyng to Apulia, still robbynge and
spoylynge the countries abroad in the way as he went.

When Fabius, whom the Romans had chosen high officer, had set all thing at a
stay in Rome, he (taking with him the army, that before was with Seruilius the
consul, and also.ii. other new Romayn legions for the encreasyng of his army)
went with the master of the horsemen Minutius, to mete with Anniball, and to
stay him from the destruction of the country. Fabius committing nothing
rashely to fortune by easy iourneis and good espies, came into the feldes of
Arpos, pytchyng his camp not far from his ennemies. Anniball soon after his
coming, brought his people into the fields in good array ready to fight: but
Fabius all that day kept his men in their camp, whereupon Anniball rebuking the
feeble courage of the Romans, withdrew his people into their tents, fearyng in
his mind the sobrenes of Fabius: which was a captain chosen, far unlike
to Sempronius or Fla^minius. Nevertheless to prove the fascion and conduicte
of Fabius, Anniball very oftentimes removed his camp, and ever spoiled the
countries of the friends of the Romans as he went: Sometime he would suddenly
convey his army: and than secretly turn out of the way, and lie in awayte,
if by chance he might take his ennemies at auantage: but Fabius ever led his
host by the high places of the countries still keeping his ennemies in syghte,
so that he would not be far from them: yet intended he not to give them
battle, his men went never out of their camp, but only for the prouisyon of
things necessary. And when they lacked vytailes forage, or wood, he sent a
great number together, that they might walk surely. And also those that went
therefore, he suffered not to stray far from the host. He had ever his
horsemen and light harneysed footmen in a redynesse and in array, for fear of
sudden invasions of his enemies. And also to the intent they should be ready to
oppress his foes, that at any time should roue abroad for spoil or for
vitailes, he minded never to ieoparde the hole estate of the empire in open
battayl, but he remained still as a stay to weary his enemies. Which his
sobrenes was no less displeasant to Anniball, tha^ it was to Minutius, the
master of the horsemen. For he being rash, and desirous to put all in
adventure, first pryuily, and than openly dyspraysed the slacknes of Fabius,
calling him both slow and fearful. Anniball often removing, came from Arpos
to Samnium, wastyng the fields of the Beneuentanes, and there he took the
town of Tilesia, trustyng by the show of so much displeasure, to cause
Fabius to give him battle. There camme to him the same time three gentylmen of
Italy, whom Anniball had before at the bataile of Trasimenus taken
prisoners, and delivered to liberty without ransom. These men showed him,
that in case he would convey his army into Campania, they would help him with
small pain to win the noble city of Capua. To this their motion Anniball
at length agreed, sendyng them to Capua before him, to stere the minds of the
rulers and of the communes thereto, and to return, bryngyng him the certainty
of their speed. Than commanded he his guide to lead him the next way to the
field of Cassinus, having knowledge by diverse expert men of the same country,
that if he were ones master of the hill and strayte there, he should stop
the Romans from bryngyng any succors to their men, but that he should at his
pleasure distroy them. But the guide mistaking the name of the country, took
Casilinus for Casinus. Wherefore leadyng him a wrong way, he conducted him by
the countries of Alifinus, Calatinus, and Calenus, to the fields of Stellates.
When Anniball beheld that country to be on all parts enclosed with
mountains and ryuers, he inquired of his guide, in what region he than was? He
answered again, that the same day he would bring him to Casilinus. Whereat
Anniball being displeased, caused him to be sore beaten with rods, and after
hanged for the example of other. Than seeing that he was so far from his
purpose, he thought in reuengyng of his malice, to bourne and spoil that
plentyfull country about the river of Vulturnus.

By this time was Fabius come by the hills, to the top of Massicus the
mountayn: where the Romans might behold the Carthaginensis lodged in the
fair playnes under them, who ceased not to spoil the fields of Falernus,
and to burn the houses of Simessa. This displeasure entered ernestly into the
heart of Minutius: who above other maligned at the cowardice of the dictatour
Fabius. And by an oration full of great inuectiues, set the hartis of the most
part of the host against him. But all their murmuring Fabius little estemyng,
continued the rest of the summer in his old fascion, ever keeping Anniball
from battle, the thing that he most desired. When the winter began to draw
nere, Fabius perceiuyng the country not to be able to sustain the host of his
ennemies any long season, and that there was none other way for them to pass
out of the fields of Falernus, but only by the same strayte ways, by which
they before had entered, he sendyng sufficient power of Romans to the hill of
Callicula, and the town of Casilinus: him self, with the master of the
horsemen, kept the narowe way, by which Anniball must needs pass. Anniball
wylling to prove the manner of keeping of that strayt, came thither, and there
made a skirmishe with the Romans, somewhat to his loss, and was feign to
recule back. And he perceiving the Romans to have the Samnites and the
Campanes their friends at their backs, ready to succor them with all
necessaries, and that he and his host were so enclosed, that he was like to
winter among the stones of Formiana, and the sands of Linterni: he forgatte
not than to renew his accustomed subtlety and craft. He invented a deceyte
and mockery, very fearful to men's sight, whereby he might pass the straites
by stelthe in the night. he caused rotten styckes and dry pieces of wood, to
be gathered together in the fields, and fagottes of young rods and bows to
be made, which he caused to be tied to the horns of oxen and kyne, which he
had before taken at a pray in the country, some being wild, and some tame.
There were.ii. thousand beastis, that should be thus ordered. And the charge was
committed to Hasdruball, that he should in the beginning of the darkness of the
night, set the faggottes on fire, that were on the horns of the beasts: and
than to drive them to the hills and straytes, specially above the way, which
the Romans kept. Than in the beginning of the night, secretly he caused his
men to remove their camp, driving the oxen a little before the standerdes. but
when they came to the foot of the hill, and to the narowe way, he commanded the
fagotes on the beasts horns to be set on fire. Which done, the fear of the
flaming fire about their heads, and the heat coming to the quick and lower
part of the horns of the beasts, caused them to run, as though they had
been mad. With which sodeyne running the young rods took a burning, even as
though the woddes and hills had been on fire: and the moving of their heads,
causing the flame to sprede abroad, showed like as it had been men running
abroad with fire. When those that were set at the entryng of the passage saw
the fire on the high hills above them, supposyng that they had been betrayde,
left the place assigned them to keep, and fiedde to their succors, sekyng
their best way by the top of the hills, by which the great flame and blase
did shine, where they chanced upon certain oxen strayed from their flock.
And when at the first they saw as it were living things, breathynge fire and
flames, they stood as astonyed with the sight. But after, perceiving the
craft to be made and conveyed by men, than supposing that there was treason,
with great noise and rumor they took them to flight. Fabius also, saying this
mockery, fearing deceyte, kept his people within his camp till it was day.
Thus in the night, while they were astonyed with this strange ^yght, Anniball
passed the strait passage with his host without danger, and pitched his camp
in the field of Alifanus.

Cneius Scipio fyghteth with Hasdruball and Himilco on the sea, upon the
costs of Spain, dryueth them to land, takes and distroyeth five and twenty
ships, with a greatte noumber of the Carthaginenses. Capitu. xviii.
AFter this hard escape out of danger, Anniball led his army as though he
would have gone toward Rome, by the fields of the Samnites, robbing and
burning unto the Pelignes, and from thens returned toward Apulia. And Fabius
set his tentys between the city of Rome and his ennemies, another going from
them, nor gyuinge them battle, till in short space after he was called to
Rome, for because of the sacrifice that should be done to the goddis. Before
his departing, he not only exhorted Minutius, master of the horsemen, whom he
left with his army, but also streyghtly commanded him, that he should in no
wise have to do with his ennemies, for any occasion that should be given him:
and that he should better trust to counsel than to fortune: and that he should
rather follow his advise, being his capytain, than use the trade of Se^pronius
and Flaminius, showing the dangers of it by examples. Also he declared to him
^e disceite of their ennemies. And when he had given him these exhortations in
vain, he departed to Rome.

In the beginning of summer, whiles those things were done in Italye, great
war begun in Spain. Hasdruball delivered unto Himilco.xl. sail, well
furnished for the war, and him self with a great number of ships, also
departed from Carthage, and sailed into Spain, where after he was arrived and
landed his host, he set his ships at the shore, nere to the land, and
pitched his camp on the land, being ready to fight with his ennemies, where
so ever he found them on land or water. Scipio, after he came from the
wintrynge, thought to have gone on his enemies upon the land, but when he
heard of their succors, that were comme to them, he durst not mete them on
land, but chose a noumbre of good sowldiours, and made ready.xxxv. sail for to
meet them on the water, thynkyng to assail them sodeinly, er they should be
able to ordeyne all thing for their defense. When Hasdruball had knowledge of
their coming, by reason of high towers made in diverse places of Spain, from
whens they may see far of on the sea, there arose a great noise and fear
among his host in their tents. for such as were on the land, and thought
little to have had battle that day: He commanded to make haste to their
ships, which they did obey, and him self came hastyly after. And when they
came to the water, the sowldiours so troubled the shipmen, and the shypmen the
soldiers, that none of them could array them selves, and set in order
things necessaryly for their busynes. Whiles this rumor lasted, the Romans
not only were at hand, but also ready to fight. The Carthaginenses no more
troubled with their enemies than with their own rumor, were shortly overcome
and fled: and at the first conflyct the Romans took two ships, and
drowned.iiii. And although the Romans saw all the shoore occupied with men of
arms, yet were they not aferde, but followed their ennemies ships fleing, in
so much that of.xxx. sail they took and distroyde.xxv. And with this great
pray went again to the sea, and landed at Tarracon, where Scipio tarried not
long, but that his brother P. Scipio arrived there also, sent by the senate
with a great navy, to the number of.xxxv. ships, and.viii. M. soldiers,
with great store of stuff and ordynance.

When the two brethren were assocyate together, there was nothing that did
withholde the wylles and hearts of the people of Spain from the frendshyppe of
the Romans, saving they feared the trespass should be revenged on their
chyldernes bloudde, which were left as pledges by Anniball at Sagunt.

How Acedux, a Spanyarde, by treason conueyde the pledg^^ of Spain fro the
Carthaginenses, and dely^^^ed them to the Romans. Ca. xix.
THan was there in Sagunt a noble spanyard, called Acedux, who before that time
had been very faithful to the Carthaginenses: but than (as it is the facion of
many of the common sort of men) when fortune failed, his faith likewise
changed. He imagined with him self, what way he might best attain the
frendshyp of the Romans. After many sundry imaginations, he thought soonest to
bring it about, if he might find the means, to deliver them those noble men's
children, which were left at Sagunt as pledges and suerties. For by that
means he thought the Romans might best win the hartis of the pricis of
Spain. But this enterprise he thought he could not compass, unless he might
obtain the favor of one Bostar, who lay encamped without the city upon the
shoore of the river, with a good number of Spaniardes, for the sure keeping of
the city, and to stop the Romans the enter that way from the haven, without
whose commandment he knew well the kepers of the pledges would nothing do.
Than Acedux thought with craft to assay Bostar, and went to the camp where he
lay, desyryng secretly to speak with him: And first he began to show him
the danger that the country was in, consyderyng the strong army of the
Romans, which was than at hand. He showed him also, that the Spaniardes had
so long continued in the frendeshyp of the Carthaginenses, for fear more than
for love. And all by cause the Roman army was so far from them: but now
syns they were come over Iberus, it was to be feared, lest they would all
yield them selves unto Scipio. Wherefore he desired him to work wisely therein.

When Bostar demanded of him, what he would have him to do for remedy thereof,
he answered: I would advise you, to send the children of the noble me^, whom ye
have as pledges in this town, to their parents friends and cities: so shall ye
get all their hearts and loves by this kyndnes showing, which ye can never get
with fear. For when they find, that ye put trust in them, ye shall the more
bind them to be faithful. And I my self will gladly take the pain to deliver
again the pledges to their friends: and so work, that I will get their hearts
to you much more than ye now have. Bostar, meaning all truth and playnnes,
was anon persuaded to the same purpose, and granted him the conduite of the
sureties. Than went Acedux priuyly to Scipio his tents, and there declared
unto him the good will that he bare toward him and the Romans: And appointed
with him the time and place of delyuere of the pledges. Than went Acedux again
to Bostar, of whom he received special co^mandementes and tokens to the kepers
of the pledges, to go with him, taking with them the pledges, when he would
require them. Than showed he the kepers of the children, that he would depart
from the city in the night, to thintente the better to escape the danger of
the watches of the Roman host. Wherefore he wylled them to be ready to ride
with him, when he called on them at an hour certain in the night folowinge:
They as innocents in the matter, made all things redye to depart at the
hour appointed, at which hour he failed not to come. Thus departed he from
the city, both with the children and also their kepers, and ^re they were
ware, he led them among a number of Romans, that by his crafty
appoyntement were laid in imbus^hementes for the same purpose: where they were
all taken, and brought to Scipio, who delivered the pledges to their cities and
friends: whereby he gate the love of the more part of the cities in Spain: so
that they were ready to take armor to the aid of the Romans, when so ever
Scipio commanded them. These things were done in Spain, the second year of
the battayl between the Carthaginenses and the Romans.

Fabius being at Rome in displesure. Minutius master of the horsemen fights
with Annibal, puts him to the worse, and therefore is made half rular of the
hooste with Fabius, he fyghteth with him again, and is put to flight, and
rescued by Fabius, Ca. xx.
Now let us return to Fabius, who by his wise absteining from battayl had
saved many of the Romans from death: Never the less it was thought at Rome by
many, that his heart failed him, and that he trifled forth the time, only to
the intent his empire and rule might the longer continue, and that he cared not,
what cost the city were at, infyndyng so great an army, so that he might be
at rest with honor. Thus had he gotten many enemies at Rome. And to increase
their malice toward him, Anniball wrought a meruaylous subtyltie: he sent a
number of his men to spoil the country, and commanded them in any wise to do
no hurt to the lands of Fabius: of which he gate the knowledge by certain
that were fled to him from the Roman army. This did he, to the intent it
should be thought, that some secret bargayn or conspiracy was made between him
and Fabius. Which crafty act of Anniball caused Fabius to be the more suspect
tothe senate of Rome. But to take away that suspection from him, Fabius sent
his son, and sold the ground or feldes, which were not violated by
Anniballes subtlety. Now fortuned it also to increase Fabius evil will at
Rome, that after his departing from the host, Minutius, the master of the
horsemen, being left to guide the army, caused the camp and tents, which
were by Fabius set safe in the high hills, to be brought down and pytched
in the low valeys: And there they were disposed after the discretion of the
capteyn, thynkyng either to make a skyrmishe with them that went abroad to
rob, or else to invade the^ that were left behind in the te^tis

Anniball, knowing that he should keep war with a captein much unlike the
other, and that his ennemies would order their busynes more quyckly than
wisely, and perceyuyng his enemies to draw more nere unto him: he sent the
third part of his soldiers to rob and wast the countries, the other.ii.
parts he kept within their tents. Than removed he his camp more nere to the
Romans, and abode upon a certain hill, where as the Roman host might pceiue,
that they were ready to succor their robbers, if any assaut were made on the^.
This did he of purpose, to entise the Romans to batail. Than could Minutius no
longer forbere, but sent a good number of horsemen, to assail the robbers, who
distroid many of them that were sparkled abroad seking their pray. Than came
Annibal to the rescue of his men. But fortune so served the Romans, that as
they were most busy in fighting: One Numerius Decimus, a capytain of the
Samnites came to the succor of the Romans with viii. M. fotemen, and.ii. C.
horsemen, by whose help they bet Anniball to his ca^pe and slew.vi. M. of his
men. which glad tydinges Minutius (although he had lost in the same batell v.
M. of his own men, sent in his bosting letters to Rome, wherewith the city was
much comforted. Not withstanding Fabius (when all the city was merry, would
another believe the news, nor the letters. At the last he said, if al were
true, he rather feared their prosperous adventure, than reioysed therein.
Which saying caused him greatly to be hated of the citezens, and Marcus
Metellus openly rebuked Fabius therefore, saying, that he kept his men in their
camps, more like captives and prisoners, than men of war. Specially it was
not to be suffered that he being present, would not only suffer nothing to be
done valyantly against his enemies, but now also being absent, held against the
thing that was well done by his master of horsemen. Fabius answered but few
words, for he thought they should be evil hard: but he said, that where.ii.
years past, the city had sustained great harms and loss through the folishe
hardynesse of the governors, he douted not, but if he might bear rule and
have his mind, he would make it evident to all men, that fortune could
little do or work against a good captain: but that wisdom and reason should
have the dominion over al her chances. He said further, that he had saved his
host from a cruel enmy, in all this perilous time without harm or shame: which
he thought, ought more to be praised, tha^ to kyl a great nu^bre of enmies. But
in conclusion, the determination of the senate was, that M. Attilius Regulus
should be consul in the plabe of Fla^minius: And that Minutius, the master of
the horsemen (who so nobly had governed his army) should be half ruler of the
host with Fabius, and the gouerna^ce thereof to be parted between the^.

With these displesant acts of the senate Fabius returned to his army,
trustyng, that although Minutius should have half the rule with him, yet
should he want the policy and manner of ordryng his part of the army to him
committed: which policy by exercise and great tranayle he had obtained.
Minutius perceyuyng him self to be had in such estymation at Rome, as well
with the senators as with the commons, where he was before a little proud, he
than began to take much more on him, bostyng him self, that in their great
calamity, he alone was found out a captain able to match Anniball. And than
began he to divise of the parting of their empire or rule. He would have had it
so parted, that one day or one weke he should have ruled all: And one other day
or weke, Fabius to rule al, and so to take the hole governance by turn. That
would Fabius none of: but would have the army parted between them, with the
ordynances and other necessaries. Sayyng, that in case he could not by his
counsel save the hole host: yet he would assay to save the half thereof, as
well as he might. And on that point they agreed, and thereupon divided their
companies or legions, and also their camps. This debate and order of the
Romayn capytayns was known to Anniball by espyes, as were all other things
that were done in the tents of his ennemies, which tidings brought to him
double joy. One was, for that he thought to vanquishe the foolysshe hardynes
of Minutius even as he would himself. The other was, for that half the
strength of Fabius was dymynysshed, by reasone of the partynge of the host.
Thanne was there a hylle between the hooste of Anniball, and the host of
Minutius, which hill who so ever had gotten, should be able to do much
displeasure to his enemies. Annibal desired not so much to take it without
battle (although the occupation thereof should be to him very necessary) as to
make it an occasion of batail to Minutius: whom, he wist well, would ever run to
withstand his enterprise in the attaining thereof. A field there was in the
myddell between him and the said hill, which field was very plain and fair,
and appeered much unmeet for treason, to hyde any embushement in, because it
was another covered with wood, shrubbes, nor busshes. It seemed therefore a place
rather mete to descry treson than to hyde it, for that in a plain and bare
valey no such deceyte might be feared. But than Anniball espied, that in the
bottom of the said hill were diverse caves and holowe places in the rocks, of
which some were able to receive and hyde.ii. C. soldiers armed. In these
dark caves Anniball hid.v. M. footmen and horsemen: not withstandyng lest
the noise or the bryghtnes of the harneys might happen to discover his
disceyte, he sent a few in number the next morning to take the foresaid hill,
whereby he withdrew the eyes of his ennemies from lokyng to that place of
embusshement. When the company that went to the hill, were apperceyued by the
Romans, to be so few in number, they set naught by them, and every man
coueted to go to drive their ennemies from that hill. And also the Capytayne no
less foolyshe than they, called his men to harneys, thretenynge his enemies
with vain words. First he sent light harneysed young men: than he sent forth
horsemen, which were a great company: last of all, him self comes with his
hole army. And as Anniball saw occasion, and the battle increase, he sent
ever of his men both fotemen and horsemen, to succor his people, so that the
battle was furnyshed on both parts, and waxed very strong. The Romans were
thought to be of a great boldness and courage, and should have done well, if the
battle had been equally handled, they were so encouraged with their late
victory: but suddenly came those that were hid in the caves forth on them,
making great clamor and rumor on their sides and backs, so that they
surprised with fear, had another hearts to fight, nor hope to fly. Than Fabius
first hearing the noise, and after seeing the host troubled afar of: Fortune
(said he) has caught their folly, no sooner than I feared it would: now he that
is joined with Fabius in the empire, has found Anniball ouerhard for him, both
in power and also in Fortune. But it is not now time (said he) to chyde, I will
refer that, till more opportunity. Than caused he his men to display their
baners beyond the valey, and in good array came forward to the help of his
fellows, that some were fled, and some ready to flee, so that they all
thought, that he came as it were one sent from heaven to their succors. And
before he should come to the casting of darts or to handestrokes, Anniball
called back his men from chasyng any further their ennemies that fled, and
sodeinly withdrewe him to his camp, saying, that he had overcome Minutius, but
that he was also overcome of Fabius. Than many of the Roman army, that by
fleing were scatered and sparkled abroad, ran to the hooste of Fabius: many
other that did flee before their ennemies, turned again to their company: so
that there was almooste one battle of them that were overcome, and of them
that ran to their succors. When the most part of the day was spent under
the variable standerde of Fortune, and that the hosts were come to their own
tents, Minutius (his soldiers being gathered about him, said:

I have oftentimes, loving soldiers and friends, heard Minutius oration.
say, that he is most wise, that can give counsel, and tell what is to be done
in his busynes. And that he is next wise, that can obey him that gives good
counsayl: but he that can not her give good counsel him self, nor obey other
men's counsel, is of all other most abiecte and foolish. Now therefore, seeing
that the first of these gifts fortune has denied us, let us keep the second,
and whiles we learn to rule, let us purpose with our selfs to obey them that
be wise. Wherefore let us join our tents with Fabius: And when ye shall here
me salute him as my parent and father, you likewise shall salute his soldiers
as your noble patrons, by whose strength and hardynes this day ye were
preserved. Thus incontinent they removed their camp, and went to the camp of
Fabius, whereof he marueyled not a little. When the two legyons were met
together, and salutations had, after long protestation made by Minutius to
Fabius, they took either other by the hands, and the souldyours likewise
entertaynynge gentylly the one the other. There Minutius submytted him and his
men to be under the protection of Fabius, resigning clean the authority of
the empire and rule into his hands, which he accounted to be to him a burden
rather than an honor: desyryng him that he might be again in the office of
the master of horsemen, as he was before. When this was known at Rome, and
affirmed to be true, not only by the letters of the capitaynes, but also of the
soudiours of both partis, the praise of Fabius was eleuate to the heavens, and
he had no less praise of Annibal and his host who as than felt, that they had
to do with the Romans, and that they kept war in Italy. For the two years
past, they so little did esteem both the capytayne of Rome, and also the
souldyours, that they could scarsely believe, that they fought with those
people, whom they had heard of their fathers, were so much to be doubted.
And it was said, that Anniball going from the battle did say, that than at
the length the cloud, which satte so long on the high hills, sent down
his peryllous storm.

Of Lucius Aemilius Paulus, and C. Terentius Varro consulles, and the oration
of Q. Fabius Maximus to Paulus, before his departing from Rome, toward his
host. Capitulo. xxi.
NOt long after, Lucius Aemilius Paulus, and C. Terentius Varro were chosen
consulles. And after that all other officers were chosen, the army was
augmented, to every legion a thousand footmen, and one hundred horsemenne.
What the number was of the new host is scarsely agreed among writers. Some
hold, that they were of the Romans.lxxxvii. M. CC. when the battle was
holden at Cannas. C. Terentius, before he departed the city, openly made
diverse orations, wherein he declared, that the war in Italy was through
certain of the noble men of the city, which war should long time
continue among them, if they should have many such captayns as Q. Fabius was.
For if he had done his deuoyre as a good capytayne, Anniball had been subverted
long before. but he promised, that he would end the war the same day that
he should first meet with his enemy. And the next day before they departed
out of the city, Lucius Aemilius his fellow made also oone Oration to the
people, which was more true thanne thankful unto the Cytezens: In the
which he spoke nothing against Terentius Varro his fellow, but that he
meruayled, how any Capytayne being in the city, should know, what he should
do when he were armed in the field, before he knew other his own hooste, or
(...) a good number of men to gettethem come and cattall. but as they roued
abroad vnauysedly, the Romans invaded them, and slew a. M. and.vii. C. of
them, with the loss of.C. of their men. Than would the Romans have followed
the rest in the chase, had not Paulus the consul commanded the contrary, whose
turn was to rule the host that day. For it was before agreed between them, to
govern the army, the one, one day, and the other, the next day, and so by
turn. Than were the souldyours very angry toward Paulus, saying to Varro
their capytayne, that if he had not let them, they had not failed to have
beaten Anniball from his camp, and also out of Italye. Anniball was not so
sorye for the loss of his men, as he was glad, that the Romans were in
such delight and joy of their small vyctorye. Wherefore he esteemed the angry
consul to beredy to take any bayt that he would lay for him.

Of the peryllous battle of Cannas, and the vyctory that Anniball had there
of the Romans. Cap. xxii.
THe next night he removed his host on the further side of a great hill, nere
adjoining, There he set his footmen in array on the left hand: on the right
he set his horsemen: all the carriage he put in the mids between them. He left
his camp stored with much stuff and baggage, to the intent that when the
Romans were busy in spoylyng the tents, he would suddenly and unawares oppress
them. And to cover his craft the better, he made great fyres about the camp,
before he went, that it should be thought, that they would not have the Romans
ware of their stealing away, till they were passed far out of their danger.
And as he thought to begyle, so had it happed in deed, had not Paulus stayed
his men from ru^nyng thither in such haste: and also had not two prisoners,
which were taken before by the Carthaginenses, escaped the same morning, who
came to the Consuls, and declared unto them, that the holle army of the
Carthaginenses abode in arraye on the other side of the hylle, redye to
battle. When Anniball perceived his diuyse to be known, he returned again
to his tents, where he tarried but a short space for lack of vytailes, and
for bareynnes of the country. Wherefore he returned toward the country of
Naples, a more warm and plentiful country, pytchyng his camp nere unto
Cannas. In pytchyug of which his camp, he wisely considered the wind to be
in the north east, that naturally in dry ground dryueth the powder and duste
into the air, making it troublous dark and cloudy. Wherefore he so encamped
him self, that his back was toward the wind, to the intent when he should
have to do with his enemies, the duste should blind their eyes, so that they
should be much hyndered thereby. The consulles following the Carthaginenses
were comme to Cannas: And when they apperceyued their enemies in their sight,
they pytched their camps, every Consul by him self, and dyuyded their armies
to every consul his part. There was a river called Aufidus, rounnynge beside
both Camps, at the which both the hoostes, not without fighting and
skyrmysshyng as they had time and space watered their horses and cattall.
Anniball liking the place well for the horsemenne to fight in, wherein
rested his most trust and chief strength, thought to provoke the consulles
to battle, and to stir them thereto, he came toward them in good arraye,
and caused the horsemenne to rounne to and fro almooste to the tents of the
Romans, bidding them base. By reason whereof, there arose greatte dyscorde
among the Romayne host, and the Consulles also. For Paulus, not minding to
fight with them at their pleasures, did obiecte unto Varro, the foolysshe
hardynesse and lack of discretion of Sempronius and Flamminius. Varro
contrary wise laid unto him the exaumple of Fabius, whom he reckened among
the fearful and slow Capytayns, professynge to the goddis, and alsoo to
men, that it ought not to be laid unto him, if Anniball should take
Italye, and hold it as his own: Seeing that he, and alsoo his sowldyours,
being most desirous to fight, were wythholden therefrome by his fellow.
Paulus likewise professed, if any evil did happen to them and to their
souldyours, that he would be clear and innocent of the trespass, saying (...)
on foot, the wynge of the Numidian horsemen, whereof Hasdruball was capytayne,
joined also with the Romans right wynge of horsemen. The battle was strong
on both parts, but the Carthaginenses used great subtyltie, for at the first
encounter about.v. C. of the Numidian horsemen, having swerdes secretly hid
under their harneys, besides those that they did use to occupy, tourning their
targettes behind their backs, making as though they had forsaken their host
and fled from their company, ran to their ennemies, and leaping besides
their horses, cast their swerdes and other apparent weapons at the fete of the
Romans, as yielded persons, whereupon they were received first into the myddell
of the Roman host, and anon they were brought to the utter and hyndermost
ward, and there commanded to stand till the end of the battle. And when the
battle began on all parts, they stood still without fighting, but after
when they saw that every man was busyed and occupied with fighting, than
drawyng forth their swerdes from under their harneys, they took the sheldes of
them that were slain in the field, and russhed on the backs of the Romans,
and so hewynge on their backs and hammes behind, they made a great slaughter.
And whiles that some part conceived fear and fled, and some other
maynteyned the battle with small hope of victory, Hasdruball sent a greatte
part of the Numidians to chase and distroy the Romans as they fled. Paulus
the consul, although he was deadly wounded before, yet many times with his
company restored and renewed the battayles, with the help of the Roman
horsemen, who at length alighted from their horses, and fought on foot, the
Consulle for feebleness and bledynge, being not able to govern his horse. Than
the Carthaginenses, saying that their enemies had rather dye in the field,
than flee: incontinent slew those that they could not make to flee: some they
took, and the other that were overcome, being than sparkeled abroad, took such
horses as they could get, and began to flee. C, Lentulus a Tribune, leadyng
an empty horse in his hand, as he fled saw Paulus the consul, fyttyng on a
stone, all covered with blud, to whom he said: Lucius Aemilius, whom the
goddis should take and esteem as innocent of this cruel slaughter, take this
horse, whiles any strength is left within the, And I being thy friend, shall
lift the up, and keep the on, lest thou make this battle doleful and
sorrowful through the death of a consul, without which verily there is
cause of weping and mournyng enough. Whereunto the consul answered: C.
Cornelius, be thou increased in virtue, but beware lest whiles thou do
bewail this chance, thou have small time to escape thy self: Go thou
therefore, and bydde the senate, that they make strong the walls of Rome, and
strength it with succors, before the conqueror come: And secretly show unto
Quintus Fabius, that Lucius Aemilius Paulus does fyrmly remember his precepts,
ye and lives in them, and finally dies in them. And I pray the, suffer me to
pass the life among these company of my dead knights, lest by lengar
living, I become an accuser of my fellow, defending mine innocence by the
trespass of an other, and yet at length dye, taken as fauty of this deed.

The company of them which fled, trod the Consul under foot, and after his
enemise, not knowing who he was, did ouerpresse him. There was slain at that
battle fortye thousand footmen, and two thousand and seven hundred
horsemen, in which company was slain one of the consulles, with four score
Senators, and such as had borne great office in the city, which voluntaryly
gave them selves to that battle. Furthermore.xxi. that had borne office of
Tribunes, besides that in that battle were taken.iii. thousand footmen,
and.iii. hundred horsemen. Of the Romans that escaped by fleinge.vii. thousand
came into the smaller camp, and.x. M. fled to the greater camp. And when
the bataile was fynyshed, those Romans that were returned to the greatter
camp, sent to the other, which were in the less camp, to repair unto
them in the night, while their ennemies, being weary of travail, and
joyful of their victory, were given to take their rest, but they doubted to
take on them that enterprise, saying, that it were as meet that they of the
greatte camp should come to them: but that for the danger of passing the
host of their ennemies they were afearde so to do. Thus the most refused to
goo out of the camp, not withstandyng such as were hardy and valiant, by the
great and noble exhortation of P. Se^pronius Tuditanus, a tribune, issued out,
and came through their enmies in the night with their sheldes on the right side
toward the host of the Carthaginenses: whereby they passed by them, receiving
the arowes and darts that were shot at them, upon their said shieldes: and
so came to the great camp, to the noumber of iii. M. vi. C. and from thens,
taking with them money of the other of that company, escaped at their pleasure
to Cannusium. The other consul, with.l. horsemen, fled to Venusia.

How Anniball ordered his busynes after the battle, and how young Scipio
used him self, for the saving of the commen wealth. Capit. xxiii.
THe battle thus ended, diverse of the army came to Anniball, and wylled him
to rest all that day, and the night after his great labor: but Maharball was
therewith nothing contented, saying: You should now incontinent with your
horsemen, follow the Romans to Rome in such speed, that they shall know ye be
already come, before they hear of your coming: And thus doing, the conclusyon
will be, that within five days ye shall like a conqueror dyne in the capytoll
of Rome. Than said Anniball: The way is long, and we had need of counsel or
we undertake so great an enterprise. At length he allowed the heart and noble
courage of Maharball: but he said, he would deliberate upon that enterprise.
Than answered Maharball: The goddis have not given all things to one man: thou
canste well overcome thine ennemies, Anniball, but when the vyctorye is given
to the, thou canste not use it. And it was thought, that the same one days
rest and slacknes, was the cause of the sauegarde of the city of Rome, and
also of all the whole empire.

Anniball, after that he had rested the first night, sent his people to the
field, to see whether any of their enemies should reuyue again, and as they
saw or perceived any like to recover, he was incontinent slain: and he
proceeded and took the camps, and all them that were in them. Wherein was a
great number of men, for being afraid to follow their company, they remained
still in their camps. And he was contented, that the captines should be
raunsomed, every one after his degree, the Romans.iii. C. pieces of silver:
other that came to their succors and of Italy. ii: C. and their servants
for.i. C. Which money being ones paid for their redemption, they should have
liberty to go to their cuntreis. This done, he caused the dead bodies of his
own host to be searched and buried, which were to the number of.viii. M.
among which he caused the body of the Consulle to be buried.

There was a certain woman of a noble kynred called Busa, which succored the
Romans that were fled to Cammusium, both with meat, drink, clothe, and
other necessaries, for which deed, the war being fynysshed, she was had
with the Romans in great honor. There were that timein Cannusium.iiii.
Tribunes, which were Fabius Maximus the younger, and Lucius P. Bibulus. P.
Cornelius Scipio, and Appius Claudius Pulcher, they al, by the assent also of
the other souldyours, gave the whole rule and governance of the whole company
of the Romans, which were there, to P. Scipio, being than very young, and to
Appius Claudius: To whom, when they were consultyng among other for the
profit of the commonwealth, P. Furius Philius said, that their counsel was
but in vain, for to restore and bring again that, which was utterly lost:
And that the common wealth was deserte and clean subverted: aduysyng the
noble young men to follow the purpose of Lucius Cecilius Metellus, and to take
him as their gouernoure, who was ready, with many other with him, to depart the
city in haste, taking their ships, which were purposely ordained for them,
and by the sea to flee over to some prince or king for succor. Which cruel
counsel suddenly given after their great loss and mysfortune, made them very
fearful and in great doubt what they should do: in so much that many,
being there present, thought to deliberate on the matter. Which deliberation
young Scipio (elect by desteny to fynyshe the same wars against the
Carthaginenses) denied and despised. We must (says he) be bold, and valyantly
enterprise things in so great a myschiefe, and not stand long consultyng
upon them. Wherefore he commanded, that so many as would have the common
welthe safe, should go with him armed. And than he with a few following him,
went to Metellus lodging, where finding an assemble of young men in
coniuration upon the dyuise of Furius Philus, before declared, he held his
naked swearde over their heads, and said: With my whole mind and will, I
swear that I shall never leave the common wealth of the city of Rome, nor
shall suffer any citezen of Rome to leave it. And if I wyllyngly be false, than
I pray the mighty and omnipotent Iupyter, to distroy my house, my familye, and
all my goods, with most vylest destruction. Which oath I require of the
Lucius Cecilius, and of all other that are here present. And he that will not
swear the same, let him know, that my naked sword shall pass through him.
All they being no less feared with his words, than if Anniball had been
present, took the same oath, and committed them selves to the tuition of
Scipio.

While these things were done at Cannusium, there were gathered together
about.iii. M. horsemen and fotemen, and were come to Venusia, where the
consulle Varro was, with which company the consul came to Cannusiu^, and
having so great a number about him, thought him self able to defend them
selves and the city from Anniball.

Of this great loss in the battle news was brought to Rome, without any
mention of saving of the said number, that were with the consul: but that
every man was slain, and no Roman left on live. Which news caused as great
fear and rumor in the city, as ever was heard there before: In so much
that it was bruted abroode, that another capitayn nor soldier was left in the
Roman camps, and that almooste all Italy was yielded to Anniball. Wherefore
they looked every hour, when their ennemies would come to besiege the city of
Rome. Whervppon the senators prepared at Rome all things necessary for the
succors of the city. Than they ordained their legyons and officers. Marcus
Iunius, by the whole consent of the Senate, was chosen Dictator, and Titus
Sempronius master of the horsemen. There was also by the same auctorite
chosen. 4. legions, and a thousand horsemen of young men, of the age of.xvii.
years, besides that they sent to their friends in other places of Italye, that
they also should prepare sowldyours of the same sort, with horse, harneys,
and all other necessaries.

The city thus being in extreme fear, letters came from the Consul
Terentius to Rome, certifyenge the Senate of the loss of the battle, and of
his fellow the other Consul. And how he with the leauynges of the hooste, that
escaped at the battle, were at Cannusium, to the noumbre of ten thousand
men. Which news somewhat comforted the hearts of the citezens.

How let us return to Anniball, who being busyed about his prisoners,
suffered ten of the Romayn captives, in the name of all the other, to go to
Rome, to see if the fathers conscript, or any of their friends would redeem
them, and their company that were prisoners: desiring of these ten
messangers none other suerties for their return, saving their oath. With
whom he sent a noble baron of Carthage, to the intent, that if it should hap
them to entreat of peace, he might bring the condycions thereof with him:
The price of the redemption of a Romayne horseman was five hundred pieces of
silver, called Quadrigati, so named for that the coygne bare in it the prynt of
a charyote: The price of a Roman cytezen was three hundred: the price of a
servant was one hundred. All other prisoners of Italy, that camme to the help
of the Romans, he let go free to their countries without ransom. And when
it was showed the council, that they were come to Rome, a messanger met this
baron of Carthage, whose name was Carthabo, and showed him, that the Dictator
commanded, that he should depart from the bounds of Rome, before the night.

Sone after the Senate or parlyament was holden for the captyues messangers,
where one of them, that was of most authority, thus began to say and openly
pronounce his oracion.

The oration of the captive prisoners made to the senate for their redemption.
Cap. xxiiii.
IT is not unknown to you all (Fathers conscript) that there was never more
wretched and vile prisoners to any city, tha^ have been to this our city. Hot
withstandyng unless we stand very much in our own conceit, there were never
Romans taken prisoners in war, which were less worthy to be dispysed unto
you than we be now. For truly we did not yield up our harneys and wepons in
battle, for fear as cowardes, but when it drew toward night, standing upon
heaps of dead bodies, we withdrewe from the battle, and went to our tents,
where as we being both weary with labor, and soore wounded, kept our selves
in sauegarde the residue of the day and night following. The next day, when
we perceived that we were enclosed and constrained with the hooste of our
ennemies, wantynge also water, and saying no hope of escapyng through the
thycke hooste and company of our enemies, and considering that it were
wisdom, and not soundynge to dishonor, seeing that fifty thousand were slain
of our company, that some should be left of our souldy ours at this battle
alive: We than in conclusion agreed with them for our raunsom, that we might be
delivered. And than we yielded up our weapons, which could little prevail
us. We have heard, that our elders were redeemed from the frenchmen, ye and our
fathers being most fires and hardy, were glad to send to Tarent for
conditions of peace, because of redeming their captives, but in Italye with the
Frenchemen, and at Heracleam with Pyrrhus, both the batayles were accounted
wretched and full of infamy, because of the cowardice and fleing of our people,
but so was it not with us. The dead bodies do ouersprede the fields at
Cannas, another had we escaped the death, but that for our enemies, for
wearynes in kyllyng and sleinge, lacked both strength and weapons. There be
many of us, which never came to battle, but being left to keep the camp;
when the tents were yielded, they likewise came under subjection to their
ennemies. Verily I do not envy the estate or fortune of any citezen, or of my
felawe in war another would I, that my fame should be extolled and raised by
the infamy of other: but truly they ought to have little reward or praise,
unless it be of the agilitie and swyftenes of their fete, which being unarmed
for the most part fleinge from battle, never ceased till they came to
Venusia or Cannusium: yet do they prefer them selves before us justly and not
without a cause, as they think. Ye and they rejoice and boste, that there
remains in them more succor and help to the common welthe than in us. But
we would ye should receive and take them as good and strong men. And also to
think us to be hereafter more prompt and wylling to maynteyn our country, by
how much we may be redeemed and restored into the same by your benefytes. Ye
have taken the muster of all your people of alages and sorts, and I here say,
ye have chosen.viii. thousand of your bondemen to the war, and there is of
us no less a number, another will our redemyng cost any more than their bying
will cost. Truly if I should compare them, being servants and bond, unto
us citezens and free, I should greatly dishonor the name of Rome. But this I
would ye should remember fathers conscripte, in such a council, if ye will be
so hard hearted, as to refuse us (which if you do, you shall do without our
deseruyng) to which of our enemies will ye commytte us: to Pyrrhus? or else
to Anniball? in whom it is hard to be judged, whether does remain more
cruelty or avarice. If ye did see the bands and chains, with which your
citezens are bound, the filthynes and deformity that they are in: certes it
would no less move and pity you, than if ye saw your legions lying dead,
coueryng the feldes of Cannas. Ye may behold the sorrow, the heaviness, and the
tears of our friends and kynsfolke standing at the porche of the senate,
tarying for your answer. And sens they be so sorrowful for us and for them that
be absent in prison, what minds would you suppose those prisoners to have,
whose life and liberty is in dout, and hangs now in balance? Certainly if
Anniball, contrary to his own nature, would be meke and gentyl to us, yet never
the less would not we desire to live, in case we shall be thought of you, our
noble fathers, unworthy to be redeemed. Should I desire the return into my
country, if being a citezen I should not be esteemed by you worth.iii. C.
pieces of silver? Let every man do as he will fathers conscripte, I know my
body and life to be in doubt: but the ieopardye of our name and fame both more
move and grieve me, that we should be reckened unto you as abiectes and castes
away. for there is no man that will suppose you to spare our redemtion for
cost.

When he had made an end of his oration, there arose a great noise and
weeping among the people, both men and women, that were friends unto the said
captives, who held their hands toward the Senators, desyryng them to
restore their brethren and children. After many and diverse contrary opinyons
had in the senate: sum supposing it mete, that they should be redeemed
with the common treasure, and some contrary. T. Manlius Torquatus, a man of
over hard and cruel nature (as it was thought to many) being desired to
show his sentence and judgment, began thus to say.

The sore answer of T. Manlius Torquatus to the captives oration, wherein he
dissuaded their redemption. Cap. xxv.
IF the legates, that were sent hither for the redemption of our captives, had
all only made petition for those, who are taken prisoners, that they might be
restored, I would have showed my mind brefely, without rehersall of any of their
feats, for of what ought you rather to be admonysshed, than to observe the
custom, left by your fathers, as concerning busynes of war by example
necessary. But now, because they almost rejoice and glory, that they yielded
them selves to their ennemies, and think it meet they should be preferred
not only before those, which were taken prisoners in battle, but also before
those that escaped to Venusia and Cannusium, ye and before Terentius Varro the
consulle: I shall declare unto you fathers conscripte all that was done there,
ye and I would to the goddis, that these things, which I am about to show
unto you, might speak at Cannusium before the host. Which would be a sure
witness of every man's cowardyse and sluggysshenes, and also of their
hardynes and virtue: or else I would that Publius Sempronius were here present,
whom if they had followed, they had be now in save guard in the Roman tents,
and not captives with their enemies. For when their enemies were weery of
fighting, and alsoo reioycynge of their vyctory, and the most part of them
returned to their tents: they might have had the night free without
interruption to have escaped. Verily.vii. thousand armed men might than have
escaped through their enemies, taking so little head to them, but truly
another would they enterprise this thing them selves, nor follow them that
would take on them that adventure. All the night long almost Sempronius
ceased not to admonyshe and exhort them, that they should follow him as their
capytayne, whiles there were but few of their enemies about their tents,
whiles every man was at rest and scilence, and whiles the night did cover and
hide their purpose: Showing them, that they should come into sauegarde, and
to their friends before the day, as by the memory of our grandfathers, Publius
Decius did in Samnio, and as Calphurnius Flamma, when we were but young men,
did in the first wars Punicke, to.iii. hundred that wyllyngely followed him.
When he had brought them to take a hylle which was in the myddell of their
enemies: Let us here dye sowldiours (said he) and let us through our death
deliver our legyons and army, which are enclosed and besiged by our ennemies.
If Publius Sempronius had spoken such words to you, and if none of you had been of such hardynes to consent to him, he might have supposed you neither to
be men, nor Romans: but he showed you a much more easy way, which would
bring you as well to glory and praise, as to health and profit. He made him
self a capytayne and guide to bring you to your country to your fathers, to
your wives, and children: But you lacked audacitie to follow him, what would
you have done, if he would have moved you to have dyed for your country? Fifty
thousand citezens, and of your friends lay dead about you that day in the
field. If the examples of hardynesse and virtue of so many noble men, would
not move you, there is nothing that ever shall move you? If such slaughter of
your friends does not cause you to have small estymation of your own lives,
nothing shall ever move you thereto? You should have desired your countreye,
whiles ye were free, safe and sound, yea you should have desired it, whiles
it was your country, now do ye desire it to late. Ye be clean separate
from it. ye are utterly alienate from the right of the Cytezens. Ye are now
made servants unto the Carthaginenses. Will ye be redeemed srome thense
whither you wyllyngly went with cowardyse, slowenes and wyckednes? you would
not here Sempronius your citezen commaundynge you to take harneys and to follow
him. but soon after you heard Anniball, commandynge you to yield your armor
and your tents? Why do I accuse (Fathers conscript) their slouthfulnes and
cowardice, when I may rather accuse their wicked and abominable fact? they
did not only refuse his counsel which was profitable: but also they went
about to withstand him, and to constrayne him to forsake the common welthe:
unless noble men with their naked swerdes had put them from their purpose.
Publius Sempronius was driven (I say) first to escape by manful courage through
those his fellows and citeze^s, and after through the myddell of his ennemies.
And should this city and country desire the restitution of such citezens,
whom if the residue of their fellows, who were at Cannas, had followed and been
like there had no citezen ben left us of those, which were at the battle?
of.vii. M. men there were.vi. C. that adventured to escape and return free
with armor to their country, another did the host of their enemies, which
were xl. M. men let or hinder them: how safe than might the two armies being
joined together have passed think you? which if they had done fathers
conscript, ye should have had now.xx. M. strong and hardy soldiers at
Cannusiu^. but now how can these be accounted for good and faithful citezens
(as for bold they will not call them selfs) which had rather to lie lurkyng
in their tents, and tarry both the day and their enemies, than to endeavor
them selves with their company to escape away in the night? but seeing that
their hearts would not serve them to avoid their tents, was it like (trow
ye) that they should have hardynes to co^serue and keep the same te^tes? They
say, that where they were besyeged for certain days and nyghtes they defended
them selves, and at the length, when they had suffered the extremity, when all
the necessaries to their life did fail them, than they being ouerpressed with
hungre, could no longer susteyn battle. And they say they were rather
overcome for lack of humayne necessities than with battle. This great war
that ye speak of, lastyng two days, was ended in two hours. Annibal came to
the tents before the son arose to whom without any battle given or
resistance made, they yielded up their weapons and them selves. When they should
have fought in the battle, they fiedde to their camp, and when they should
have defended their camp, they another profitable in the battle nor in their
tents, yielded up camp and all. Should such a sort be redeemed? I think them
(fathers co^script) no more worthy to be redeemed, than I think them worthy to
be yielded to Anniball, which escaped from their tents through the myddell of
their ennemies: And through their great hardines restored them selves to their
country. When Manlius had fynyshed his oration, al though many of them were
of the kynrede and alyance to the senators, yet the answer was given them,
that they should not be redeemed. And that for two causes, the one was for the
old exaumple of the city, that had ever little favored the redemption of
captive prisoners. An other was, the great sum of money that must be paid
for them. whereof their treasure had been before made bare with manyfolde charges
of war. And also they were loath that Anniball, than being nedy of money,
should with their substance be so greatly enryched. Than began a new
mournyng for the loss of the cytezens. They followed the legates with great
weeping and sorrow to the gates. One of those ten Romayne messangers, that
were sent from Anniball, after that his company departed toward Rome, feigned
that he had left some thing behind him, and so returned to his tents, and
in the night ouertoke his company, by which fraudulent return, thynking him
self quytte and discharged of his oath, went home to his own house. And
there remained still, not returnyng to Anniball: but when his untruth was
known, he was taken and sent to the tents of the Carthaginenses, to do with
him their pleasure.

How Pacuuius by craft became chief ruler of Capua, and of the yeldyng of
that city to Annibal. Cap. xxvii.
ANniball after the battle at Cannas, with as greatte speed as he might, went
from Apulia to Samniu^, and to Cossa, and so to Naples, but the strength of
that town made him afraid to give assaut thereto. Wherefore he went from thens,
and came to Capua, which as than flouryshed in pleasure and abundance by long
felicity and favor of fortune. Than was there in Capua one Pacuuius, a noble
man, saving that he gat not his goods and riches by honest means. This
Pacuuius bare great office in the city the same year that the Romans lost the
bataile at Trasimenus: And now thynkyng to make a discord between the senate
and the common people, who long had used great license and liberty without
reason, and thereby to increase both his authority and substance, devised a
great and perilous enterprise, which was, that so sone as Anniball should come
thither with his army, he would cause the commons to slay the Senators: After
whose death, he might at his pleasure yield the city to the Carthaginenses.
Yet at the last he considered, that better it were for him to rule and govern
a common wealth flourishing in all things than to rule a city, that were
utterly subverted and distroied (which he accounted to be, if the noblemen and
ancient counselors thereof were slain) he than imagined a way, that he might
both save the senate and counsel of the city, and make the counsel of the
same, to think them selves bound to him and to the commune people. Whereupon he
called a counsel, wherein he showed the senators, that to receive the
Carthaginenses, and to leave the Romans friendship, did nothing please him,
considering that he had married Appius Claudius daughter, and also that Liuius
had married one of his daughters: saving that necessity did require it,
because there was other matters in hand much more to be doubted, which was,
that the commune people were pourposed first to slay them all that were of
the Senate house, and after to yield up the city to Anniball. Never the less
he said, he would undertake that he would save them from danger, if they
would commytte them selves wholly to him: wherewith he made them greatte
assurance by oaths. When they all, being overcome with fear, had consented to
him, I will shut you (says he) into the senate house, as though I were of the
commons council, and did allow their deeds and purpose: but after I shall
find a way to conserve and save you. And when they were agreed to the same,
he enclosed them in the capitol, so that none could come to them, another they
get furthe, unless it were by his license. And than he called the common
people together, and said: My friends, now have you power over the detestable
and wicked senators, whose death ye have so long desired, and that ye have
now without stroke stryking. For behold, I have them enclosed in yonder
house above unarmed: And what sentence ye will give of them, or any of them,
that shall they suffer, according to their deserts. but before all things, I
would you should have respect to your health and profit, before the execution
of your wrath. For senators I am sure, ye will have to govern the city.
Therefore now have we two things to be done together, that is, to put down
the old senators, and than to chose new. I will well, that you shall judge
what punishment the old shall have: but first you shall choose a new valiant
wise senator in every of their places. Tha^ set he down and causid their names
to be put together in writing into a pot and as their names were severally
drawn forth of the pot, he caused them to be called in order, and he that was
first named he caused to be fetched out of the senate house, wherein they were
enclosed. And when the commons herd his name, they all cried, that he was
wicked, and worthy of punishment. Than said Pacuuius, I here well what you say,
let him be cast out for ^ought, and an other chosen in his place. Than were
they at the first put to silence, because they wanted a better to be chosen in
his place. And when any man would take upon him to name any other man: there
would arise a greater rumor and noise at his naming. Some saying, they knew him
not, and some reprehending his birthe, some his manners, some the vileness of his
craft and living, with such other like objections: and much more the noise was
for chosing of the second and third: so that they al agreed, that it was rather
better for them to suffer the old noughty senators to remain, which they
knew, than to have such new, as were worse and unknown. so that they
commanded to let the old senators go free, and use their romthes. After this
manner Pacuuius gat the rule of the common welthe, peasybly making the senators
much more bound to him for sauinge their lives, than to the commons of the
city. And by this mean by all men's consent he had the hole governance of the
city. Of this came the loss of the dignity to the senators, forgetting their
liberte, doing nothing in the counsel house with out the commons advise. The
city was always prone and given to lust and pleasure, not only by the
noughtynes of their minds, but also by the abundance of pleasures, riches, and
other delytes, and of all fruitefulnes both on sea and land, and wared want
on through the flattery of pryncis, and ouermoche liberty of the people,
following their pleasures and lust beyond all measure, so that they despised
both the senate and other magistrates, and also all rule and law. And than
after the battle of Canuas, they that had a little shamefastness before,
were not ashamed to despise the empire of Rome. And in short time after, they
consented to yield up the city to Anniball, and to leave the amity of the
Romans: yet before they would send their legates to Anniball, they sent
messangers to Rome, to desire that one of their city might be ever one of the
consuls at Rome, if they would that they should help them in their business.
Whereupon there arose great indignation and anger, for that they that were
before in amity and as subjects, should require such equality of honor
with the Romans. Wherefore they commanded, that the legates should be brought
out of the senate house, and further they sent an officer, who should conueye
them out of the city, and to charge them to depart out of the limyttes and
bounds of Rome. The same legates incontinent upon their return home, were
sent to Anniball, who received them, and granted them all the conditions of
peace, according to their askyng, so that no ruler or magistrate of Carthage
should hereafter claim rule or dominion over any citizen of Capua, another
should any of them be enforsed to go in the wars, but at his own pleasure.
Again, that they might keep stylle their own laws, with their rulers and
magistrates. Amongst which requests, they desired.iii. C. Roman captives to
be delivered unto them, which should be changed for other.iii. C. of their
horsemen, that kept war in Sicilia, which was not denied them. To this
agreement, Decius Magius, a man of great authority (saving that the commons
were not agreeable to him) dydvtterly withstand: first willing that no legacy
should be sent to Anniball. And as soon as he heard, that the agreement was
made, and that Anniball would send his men of arms to Capua* be showed them
for an example, the proud raygnynge of Pyrthus: and the miserable servitude of
the Tarentines, crying alowde, that if they would here him, Anniballes army
should in no wise be received: And if they were all redye received, that they
should be put forth again.

As soon as these things were showed to Anniball (as they were not secretly
spoken) he commanded, that Magius should be taken and sent unto him: but than
he fearing the displeasure of the people, sent word to Marius the Praetor,
that he would be at Capua the next day following. Marius incontinent assembled
the people, and showed all men of Anniballes coming, commandynge them to be
ready with their wives to meet him. And when he was coming, and all the
city went to mete him, only Decius, with his son, and a few of his
friends, would not go with them: but walked openly and stubburnely in the
market place. As soon as Annibal came to the city, he called a counsel,
minding in his anger to do cruel execution of his adversaries, not
withstandyng the rulars of the city desired him, that he should do nothing as
that day, but be merry and celebrate the same in the worship of his coming. To
whose request (although he was of a sudden inclination to wrath and anger) he
was conformable: and spent that day in vewyng the city.

Pacuuins Calauius, of whom we spoke before, who was chief of the city, and
chief causer of the yeldynge thereof to the Carthaginenses, brought his son,
being a young man, thither, whom he took from the company of Decius, with whom
the young man stood fyrmely against the bands and frendshyp made with the
Carthaginenses: another could the citezens, being enclyned to that part,
another the authority of his father, move the young man to the same: unto whom
his father, with great intercession, made Anniball good lord and friend.
Anniball being overcome and appeased with the request of his father, caused the
young man, with his father, to be sent for to supper: at which supper there
was none of Capua, saving those that were lodged in that house, and one
Iubellius Taurea, a noble warrior. The souper was begun before the night, the
feast was sumptuous, and not after the manner of fare in war time. This
yongeman, another by the provocation of the rulars, nor by the chering of
Annibal him self, could be persuaded to be merry, but he showed his father,
that he was diseased, and that his mind was soore troubled. And when his
father heard that, he departed out of the feastynge chaumbre before the son
was set: whom his son followed. And when they came to a gardeyn, at the
end of the house, which was secret: Father (says he) I have divised now
away, whereby we shall not only purchase our pardon of the Romans, for that we
have forsaken them and chosen Hanniball to be our governor, but we shall
stand now from hensforth in much more dignity and grace with them, than
ever we were before. When his father (meruaylyng what it might be) had
inquired of him that divise: he cast his gown from him, and showed his side
being gyrte with a sword: Now will I (said he) establysshe and sanctifye
the bands betwyxte the Romans and us, with the bloudde of Anniball: Of this
counsel father, I thought to make the priuey before, for because I knew
not, whether thou had rather be present, whiles the deed were doing or
not. Which diuyse when the old manne heard (as though he had be present
at the doing of that which was spoken) with greatte fear he began to
adhorte and persuade his son to the contrary: layinge first the greatte oath
and promise made to Anniball by all the whole city: and also showing the
danger of the act to be such, that he could never escape alyne. I being
thy Father (said he) have won Anniball to be thy good lord, and shall not I win my son to be friend to Anniball? And after that he had with long
prayer, weeping, and great intercession ouercomme his son, and dissuaded him
from his enterprise: the young manne said these words: O countreye, receive
thou this sword, with which I being armed, would have defended this city
and castle, sparyng nothing, nor Fearing mine own death, but only being
overcome with my fathers perswasyons. And when he had so said, he cast his
sword into the plain over the gardeyne wall, and than because he should not
be suspecte, he went again to the feast.

The next day the senate was holden, in the which Annibals first oration was
very gentle, gyuyng thanks unto the citezens, for that they preferred his
amity and frendshyp before the Romans: and among other high promises, he
promised them, that Capua should in short space be the head of all Italye:
And that the Romans, with other cities of Italy, should seek unto Capua for
their right and law: but he said, that there was among them one named
Magius Decius, who was noothynge agreeable unto the amytie between the
Carthaginenses and them of Capua: who (he said) was no citezen, nor ought to be
so called nor reputed. Wherefore he required, that he might be yielded vntohym,
and that also in his presence his cause might be debated before them of the
counsaylle. To which request every manne granted, although sum thought
he was a man much unworthy to sustain such myserye, and that their
liberty began to mynysshe not a little in the beginnynge. The senate was
holden in the temple. Magius was commanded to be taken, and brought to show
his mattier, and he anon denied it to be lawful for them, to break the
truce taken with the Romans. Wherefore he was commanded to be bound with
chains, and led to the camp of the Carthaginenses. In this leadynge
thither, as long as his face was not covered, he went cryinge to all them,
which were gathered together to see him: Now have ye, men of Capua, your
liberty, which you desired: In the markette place, and in the day light, and
in the presence of you all, I being chief and most ancient of Capua, being
bound, am drawn to death. What could have been done more cruel and
violente, if Capua had be taken? when he could not be stayed, but continued
crienge after this manner, because the commune people were thought to be moved
with his words, his face and head was covered, and he was led quyckely out
of the gates into the tents of Anniball, and from thense in haste sent
toward Carthage by ship, lest there should be any sedytion moved for the
same among the Cytezens: but in saylynge thither, the ship was driven by
tempeste to Cyrenas, where Magius fled to the pycture of Ptholomeus the king
for his sauegarde. Whereupon he was brought by the kepars of the town to
Alexandria, before Ptholomeus. And when he had declared unto the king, that
Anniball had sent him bound, contrary unto the league and bands of the
truce taken with the Cytezens of Capua: he was delivered from his bands, and
had liberty to goo whyther he would to Rome, or to Capua. To the which he
made answer, that Capua was not a place very safe for him: and he said, that
Rome, whiles there was war between the men of Capua and it, was rather an
habitation of vacabundes than of friends and old guestes. Wherefore he said, he
had not so great desire to live in any place, as in his kingdom, by whom he
was restored to his liberty.

The news that Mago brought to Carthage of Annibals victories in Italy, and
the oration of Hanno a senator of Carthage m^^e unto the same. Cap. xxvii.
Whiles these things were done in Italy, Mago the son of Amilcar, not sent
from the army by his brother, but ocupied a certain space, in receyuynge the
cities of the Brusians, which yielded them selves willyngly to the
Carthaginenses, brought tydinges to Carthage of the victory at Cannas. When the
senators were for him assembled, he declaryng the acts done by his brother in
Italy, said: that he had foughten with six capitayns, of the which iiii. were
consuls, the fyste Dictatour, that is chief rular in the common welthe of the
city, and the syxte master of the horsemen. He said also, that he had
overcome.vi. consulles hosts: so that there was slain by him.ii. C. M. and
above fyfty. M. taken. and also he had slain.ii. of the four consuls, and the
third was sore wounded: and the fourth having lost all his host, fled
scacely with.l. men. And that the master of the horsemen was overcome and put
to flight: so that the Dictator, which at no time durst come to battle,
remained only their head and captain. Furthermore, that diverse places in
Italy were turned to Anniball, as the Brucians, the Apulians, part of the
Samnites, and the Lucanes. In so much as Capua, which was not only the head
of Campania, but also of all Italy, ever sens the Romans were so overthrown
at Cannas, had yielded them selves to Anniball.

And for the more credence of these so joyful news, he caused rings of gold
to be powered before the senators, which of many men were reported to be to the
quantity of three busshels, and a half: but most authors write (and that
seems to bemost agreeable to verity) that they were above the mesure of a
busshell. And moreover because it should be a token of a more notable slaughter,
he said: that no man did wear any of the saydiewels, but horsemen, and men of
iiobilitie.

The sum of his oration was, that the greatter the hoope was of the
wholevyctory, so much rather Anniball should be aided with great help and
succor, signifying to them, that the war was far from thens, in the myddel
of their enmies land: and that a great quantity of grain and much money was
spent. He said also, that as the number of their enemies with so many battles
were slain and diminysshed, so their host also was partly mynyshed and
slain. Wherefore it was mete (he said) to send money grain and other
necessaries to sowldiours that so well had set furthe the name and honor of
Carthage.

For these tydinges of Mago, every man being merry, Himilco, a man of the
faction of the Barchins, thought to find an occasion to check Hanno. What
now Hanno (says he) does it forthynke the of the beginning of the war
with the Romans? Command Anniball to be delivered now unto them: or forbydde
in this so fortunate time thanks to be given to the immortal goddis. Now
let us here a senator of Rome speak in the senate house of Carthage.
Whereunto Hanno answered.

I was determined fathers conscripte, at this time, in your so great and
co^monioy, to have holden my peace, and to have spoken nothing, which should
have been displeasant to you: but I can now no less do, but answer the
senator that inquired of me, whether it forthinketh me of the war
enterprised against the Romans, or no. Therefore mine answer shall be this to
Himilco, that I forthynke me yet of the war taken, and shall stylle repent
it, nor shall at any time seace to forthynke it, and blame our victorious
capytayne, until I see the war taken up and ended by some tolerable way and
condition, another shall any other thing cause me to seasse from the desire of
the old ancient peace, save only a new peace made. These goodly news,
which Mago has blased abroad, are very joyful to Himilco and other Annibals
friends and servants: yea they may be also joyful to me, for our prosperity
in war, if we take our good fortune when it comes, shall cause us to have
better and more profitable peace. But if we let pass this time, in the which
we may be thought rather to grant peace, than to crave it: I doubt, lest
this joy will deceive us, and come to nothing. Now let us discuss this
matter seriously, and ye shall perceive what this great joy is. He says, the
army of our ennemies is slain: yet he commands soldiers to be sent him.
What other thing would a man desire, if he were overcome. He says also, that
the Camps and tents of both hosts of our enemies are taken, with a rich
pray and spoil: yet he commands, that we shall send him grain and money.
What other thing could a man desire, if he were robbed and driven from his
own tents? But now I have answered Himilco to his demaundes, I would that
other Himilco or Mago would answer me unto that I shall ask of them. If the
field fought at Cannas was to the utter subuertion of the Roman empire, and
death of the hole host, and all Italy like yield them, and forsake the Romans?
First whether any of the people of Rome come fleinge to us, and forsake the
Romans? Moreover, whether any of the.xxxv. tribes have fled, and come to
Anniball? Which both things when Mago had denied to be done: It must than
follow (said he) that we have many enmies yet left at Rome. But I would feign
know, what courage and hope that multitude of our ennemies has? When Mago had
said, he could not tell. There is nothing more easy (said Hanno) to be known.
Did the Romans send any legates to Anniball for peace? or whether had ye
any knowledge, that the Romans made any mention of peace at Rome? When he
also had denied that: Than have we (said he) as greatte war even now in
hand, as we had the first day that Anniball entered into Italye. There be
many of us alive, that do remember yet, how varyable the vyctorye was in the
first wars that were betwyxt Carthage and Rome. Our wars and busynes
(both by sea and land) were thought never to be more prosperous, thanne
before Caius Luctatius, and Appius Posthumous were Consuls: But yet in their
time we were ouercomme at the Isles of Egates. Likewise now, if Fortune do
turn (as she is always varyable) which I pray unto the Goddis may not
happen: Would ye than hope to have peace, when we are overcome, the which now
we can not get, although we vanquysshe and overcome the Romans? If any
mention of peace were made, either to be given to our enemies, or else to be
taken of them: I could tell thanne right well what to say. But in case ye
will only commen of the demaundes of Mago, I think, if our people have so
vanquyshed our enemies as has been declared, it is not nedefulle to send
them that which Mago desires. And if they would mock us with their vain
report of vyctorye, when none such is had in deed: I think than they
ought less to be succored at our hands.

With this oration of Hanno very few were moved to be of his opynion. For the
envy and hatrede, that they bare unto him, and alsoo the greatte kynrede of
the other, caused him to be the worse heard. Again, they were so reioysed
with the sudden and present joy, that they would hear noothynge, that
should hinder the same: Supposing the wars should soon be fynysshed, if
they did send any help now at this time into Italye. Wherefore by the hole
consent of the Senate it was concluded, to send to Anniball forty thousand
Numydians, to his succors, and fortye elephantes, and a greatte sum of
money. And the Dictatoure of Carthage was sent into Spain, with Mago, to hyre
twenty thousand footmen, and four thousand horsmenne, which should
fournyshe again the armies both in Spain, and also in Italy. But these
things were forslowed and done by leisure (as commonly it happeth in
prosperity. But beside the natural industry of the Romans, Fortune also
wrought much for them: for they happened that year upon a Consul, that sought
all means possible, to further all such things as should be thought
necessary to be brought to pass by him. And Marcus Junius, being Dictatour,
besides the Legyons, which were appointed before, and the bondemenne of the
City, with other succors such as he could gather together of diverse
countries adioynynge, to fournysshe the army: He lepte than besides his
horse, saying: All such as have committed any manner of crime worthy of
death, and they that are condemned to prison for money, if they would be
sowldyours with him, and go to the war, he would pay their dettes, and lose
them from their hands and punyshement. Thus had he of that sort.vi. M.
souldyours, whom he armed with the armor that C. Flamminius took from the
Frenchemen, and than he went out of the city with.xxv. M. harneyst men.

Of the battle between Marcellus and Anniball before the city of Nola, and
of Annibals wyntryng in Capua, the delycate pleasures, whereby he withdrewe the
hearts and courages of his men from all warrelyke fascion. Cap. xxviii.
AFter Anniball had taken Capua, he assayed many and diverse ways to have gotten
Naples, which when he could not bring to pass, he went from thens to the
fields of the Nolans, assayeng by many ways to win the town of Nola. The
senate, and namely the chief, stacke surely to their old friends the
Romans: The co^munes being (as they are wont) desirous of news, inclyned all
to Anniball. Wherefore the senate, fearyng to strive with the commons openly
(against whose power, yfnede required, they were not able to resyst) priuyly
dissemblyng, found means to prolong the time, saying, they were content to be
yielded to Anniball, but they knew not after what manner and condition they should
yield. During which time of delay, they sent ambassadors to Marcellus the
praetor of Rome, being than at Cannusium, showing him the circumstance of the
matter: wylling him to come to them if he intended that they should keep the
town. Who perceiuyng their stedfastnes, greatly praised the senate of Nola,
desiring them to persevere in their purpose: and use such subtlety in
prolonging of time, as they before had done, until his coming to them, which
should be shortly: In the mean season, he willed them, not to be aknowen of any
succor that was coming. Than straight he made him ready, and with his army
took the way to Calacia, and over the river of Vulturnus, and so to Nola.

Anniball before the Pretors coming, went from Nola to Naples, very desirous
to win some town that lay on the sea costs, to which the ships might
have free and safe passage from Africa. But when he understood Naples was
defended by a Roman capytayne (the Neapolitans had gotten thither M. Iunius
Syllanus) and should as well be kept out there as he was at Nola: he went and
laid siege to Nuceria, which at last, using many ways, he caused them by
famyne to yield. Marcellus was by that time in the town of Nola, and was no
surer of his own souldyours thanne he was of the pryncis of Nola: but he
feared the commons, and above all other he dradde a young man, very hardye, and
of a noble lygnage, whose name was Lucius Bantius, who was much desirous to
yield the town to Anniball. for being found among a heap of dead bodies
and soore wounded in the battle at Cannas, Anniball caused him to be healed,
and sent home with large gifts: for which gentle deed, he would feign that
Nola should be yielded to Anniball. Marcellus perceived this Bantius to be
troubled in his mind with such study, so that he must either with punyshement
be refrained, orels by benefit reconciled: he sent for him, and so beninglye
with words, promyses, and gifts entertained him, that there was none in the
city so sure after to the Romans as he.

When Anniball was come from Nuceria (which he of late had taken) before the
gates of Nola, Marcellus was entered the city, not fearyng to keep his camp
abroad: but lest his taryinge without should be an occasyon of betraying and
yeldyng up the city. Than began small skyrmyshyng between the city and the
Carthaginenses: at which time the pryncis of Nola showed Marcellus, that the
common people had secret metynges and communication in the night, with the
Carthaginenses: in the which it was purposed, that when the Romans were gone
out to fight, they would take their stuff and carriage, and shut the gates:
and so when they had gotten both their stuff and goods, they would receive
the Carthaginenses into the town instead of the Romans. Wha^ they had showed
these conspiracies to Marcellus, he praised their fidelity greatly, and
thought to assaye what he might do by battle, before any such trouble
should be within the city. First he ordered his host being divided in three
parts, at the.iii. gates, which opened against his enemies. He commanded
the stuff and baggage to follow a pretty space after. And at the middel gate he
set the strength of the Roman legions, the new soldiers and other that came
to their succors, he set at the two other gates, straightly commaundyng,
that the Nolans in no wise should come on the walls, nor nere the gates. He
sent also certain soldiers to awaite on the carriage and stuff, lest when
they were busy in battle, the Nolanes might spoil and take it. When all
things were thus put in good order, they stood still within the walls,
without making any show.

Anniball standing in array in the fields a long space, as he was wont,
meruailed that he saw another the hooste come to the fields, nor no man armed
on the walls: Than he supposed, that their counsel was known, and that for
fear the commons of the town were constrained to forsake their promise.
Wherefore he sent part of the soldiers to the tents to fetch ordinance and
all things necessary to assault the walls, thynkyng that if he went on them,
whiles they abode in this stay, that the common people of the city would make
some rumor on the walls. Incontinent whiles every man, as the commandment
was, ran to his business, touching the assault, and the host went to the
walls: the gates were sodeinly opened. Marcellus commanded to spread the
baners, and the trumpettes to blow, and the footmen first, and after the
horsemen to run on their ennemies. Some authors say, that there were slain
at that skirmysshe.ii. M. iii. C. Carthaginenses, and but one man of the
Romans: whetherthe victory were so great, or whether it were less, the act
was great, and the conduicte noble. Anniball having no hope of opteynyng the
town, went than to Acerras, and Marcellus straight caused the gates of Nola to
be shut, lest any manne should pass furthe: and made anon straight and
dilygent examination, who they were, that would have betrayed the town. He
beheaded.lxxx. of them, and caused their goods to be dystributed among the
commons. And after he had committed the charge of keeping of the town to the
senate, he removed with his hole host beyond Suessala.

Anniball, after he had won Acerras, came to Cassilinum, where they so
valyantlye defended them selfs, that Anniball, being half ashamed, left the
siege, and went to winter at Capua. And there he kept his hooste in houses
for the most part of the winter, who of long time before had endured against
all kinds of peynes and travail, having small knowledge of pleasure or ease.
And they that could not before be overcome with any kind of misery or pain,
were than lost with unmeasurable pleasures: wherein they were wholly drowned,
so gredy they were thereof, after their accustomed peynes. Thus took they al
their delight in sleep and wine, in bankettes, hauntynge of harlottes and
bathes, with daily rest and ydelnes, which delycate fashion withdrewe both
their courage, and also their strength from their bodies and minds: so that
afterward their joy comfort and strength was more by remembrance of the
victories, which they had opteyned before, than in their present strength: In
so much that to let his soldiers thus follow their lusts, was thought
among expert warriors a greater hynderance unto him, than that he did not
lead his host to Rome straight after the battle of Cannas. For that tarienge
and doubting was thought but only a prolongyng of the victory, but this fault
made them unable afterward to overcome. So that when he removed from Capua
after the winter, it seemed that he led furthe a strange army, other than he
brought thither, they observed none of their accustomed sort of war, sum
returned to their harlottes: many other, as soon as they began to feel
pain, travail, and hardenesse of war, and that they were feign to be
covered with skynnes, they were so werye, and the war seemed to them so
tediouse, that they wanted both their strength of body, and hardynesse of
mind, which they had before. A greatte part of the host without their
wages, stole from their capytaynes, another had they any other den or
receptable but Capua.

Of the long siege and winning of Cassilinum, with the death and destruction
of the consul Posthumous and his host in the wood of Lytana by the craft of
the Frenchemen. Cap. xxix.
When it drew toward the summer, Anniball removed again to Cassilinum,
where without assaute gyuynge but only by contynuall siege keeping, he brought
the inhabita^tes thereof almost to extreme ponertie and famyne. The dictatour
in this season was gone to Rome, to search by diuinations the fortune that
should happen. Titus Sempronius was left as ruler of the army. Marcellus being
at Nola would have succored them of Cassilinum, save that the citezens of Nola
would in no case suffer him to go from them, fearing lest after his
departure, the inhabitants of Capua would have invaded them. The river alsoo
of Vulturnus was risen so high, that he could not well pass over, but in
great ieopardy. Gracchus was left with a certain men of war, to lie about
Cassilinum, who moved not, nor brought them any succor, because he had in
commandment of the dictatour, that he should move no battle in his absence:
yet heard he such news from Cassilinum, which would have moved a man to
have broken his commandment. For it was showed him, that some being not able
to sustain the greatte hungre and famine, without aduysement, distroid them
selfs: And some desyryng the death, would stand on the walls without armor,
to the intent they might be slain with the shot of their ennemies. Gracchus
seeing that he durst not help them by battle, because of the contrary
commandment of his dictatour, And there was no remedy to bring them
sustynance, for that in no case could be done without battle. Than he
gathered in the fields as many kinds of corn as he could, and therewith
filled a great number of vessels or barelles, and sent a messanger to the
rulars of the city, certifying them, that he would the next night send the
vessels with grain down the water, warning them to be ready to receive them
at the coming of the tide. The night following, every man went to the river to
tarry the coming of the grayn, according to the promise of Gracchus, at the
last they might see the tounnes come swymmynge down the myddell of the
stream, which they received gladly and diuyded it equally among them. Thus
they continued by the space of.iii. or.iiii. nyghtes, so long they disceyued
the watchemen of their ennemies: but at the last the water arose much higher
than it was wont, by the reason of a continual rain that fell, so that the
stream was more swyft than it was wont to be, whereby the vessels were driven
to land on that part where the host of Anniball lay, and many were found
styckyng among the wyllowes, that grew on the banks of the river, which was
showed unto Anniball, who afterward, with greatter dilygence, watched the
river of Vulturnus, lest he should by such means be eftsoon deceived. Yet was
there such like deuyse made by sendyng of nuttes down the stream, in barels
till it was also espied. At length they were brought to such poverty, that
they were constrained to take skynnes, strings, and the couerynges of
shieldes, which they made soft in warm water, and so eat them: another
refrayned they to eat myse and such kind of vermyn, and all kind of herbs
and roots, which grew without in the field adjoining to the walls. Thus
also perceived Anniball: wherefore he caused the ground to be plowed up, where
all such herbs and roots did grow to his ennemies succor without the wall.
In which new plowed grounds the men of the town sowed pasnepsede, whereat
Anniball cried, Shall I tarry at Cassilinum while these seeds be grown up able
for their food and sustynance? Whereupon where before he would here of no
communication of truce, he than was contented to covenant with them for their
redemption. The price of their redemption was.vii. ounces of gold for every of
them. When the couenantes were made, they yielded them selves. And they were
kept in prison, until all the money was paid. And after sent with good
leave to Cumas. There came from Preneste to the garyson of Cassilinu^.v. C. and
seventy soldiers, of which the most part were slain and famyshed, the
residue went to Preneste with their captain Manicius: Cassilinum was given to
the citezens of Capua, and kept with.vii. C. of Anniballes soldiers, lest
when they were departed from thens, the Romans should take it again. The senate
of Rome appointed double stypende to the soldiers of Preneste, and also gave
them five years license, to be absent from the wars, for their great
fidelity. Than were the Romans busy in chosyng new soldiers, to supply
their places that were slain in the battle before. Lucius Posthumous, and
Titus Sempronius were chosen consulles. The dictatour, when the officers were
chosen, went to Theanu^, where the army wyntred: he left the master of the
horsemen at Rome: who anon after he had received the office, counsayled with
the fathers, about chosing and ordeyning of their armies for that year. And
when they were most diligent about their bulines, tidings was brought to
the city of a new slaughter and loss, that was than happed unto them, oone
euylle chance that year coming after an other. The truth was, that Lucius
Posthumous and his army was dystroyed in France by this mean. There was a
great wide wood, called by the Frenchemen Litana, through which he should lead
his host, of the which wood the Frenchmen had so cut all the trees on
both sides the way, if they were not moved, they would stand stylle: but
being any thing moved, they would anon fall. Posthumous had in his host five
and twenty thousand men. The Frenchemen had bestowed their company round
about the compass of the wood, and when the army of the Romans was well
entered the wood, they cast down the farthest part of the trees, growing in
the borders of the wood, which when they were moved fell one upon an other
through the wood, having no stay, throwyng down and sleing the Romans as they
passed, both men and horses, so that scarsely ten men escaped, the most
part were almost paste breathe and dead of the hurtes of the trees falling
on them, the residue, that escaped, and would have fled, being amassed with
the sodeyne chance, were slain by the Frenchemen, who being armed, beset tho
wood round about. There were a few taken, which sought to goo over a bridge,
which the Frenchemen kept, but anon they were compassed and beset about with
the Frenchemen. There the consul Posthumous, who in no wise would be taken of
his enemies, manfully and nobly dyed. They brought the ornaments of his
body, and his head, being cut from the body, to the chief temple in that
country, with syngyng and much myrthe. They pourged and cleansed the skull
within and without, and covered the brain pan over with gold, using it to
drink therein, when they did sacryfice at any solemn feast: and also it served
the priests and bishops of the temple, as a cup at the sacrifice. The
pray was no less to the Frenchemen thanne the victory, for although the most
part of the cattall was slain, with the falling of the trees, yet they lost
nothing of the substance that they had about them.

When this slaughter was known at Rome, the citezens were in such sorrow and
trouble for a great space, that they shut their wyndowes and shoppes, as
though it had been in the night: but within short space the senators charged
the officers, to go about the city, and cause the shoppes and doors to be
opened, and to cause the citezens to leave their sorrow.

Than Titus Sempronius called a senate or court, in the which he exhorted and
counseled the fathers conscript, that they, whose hearts were not over come
for the great destruction and loss of the battle at Cannas, should not now
suffer them selves to be vanquyshed with this much less sorrow and calamity:
admonysshynge them, that as concerning the Carthaginenses and Anniball, all
was (as he trusted it should be) very well. And as for the wars with the
Frenchmen it might be deferred for a season: for at all times the reuengynge of
their harms was in the power of the goddis and the Romans. Furthermore he
showed them, that they ought chiefly to counsel and work against Anniball
circu^spectly, preparyng with what number of men he might be resisted, and he
first reasoned what number of footmen and horsemen, of citezens and other
their friends of Italy, were in the host of the dictatour. Than Marcellus
declared what nu^bre was in his army, that he had charge of: And thus after
they had ymagyned and decreed, what number should satisfye the two Consuls
hosts, they agreed, that the war against the Frenchemenne should be omytted
until an other time.

Of the victory of the Scipions in Spain. Cap. xxx.
VVhyles these things were done and prepared in Italy, the Romayne capytaynes
in Spain were not ydell, but as than had the vpperhande of their ennemies. P.
Scipio and C. Scipio his brother parted their army betwixt them, so that
Cneius should have the land, and Publius the sea, There was great war in
Spayn between the Scipions and Hasdruball: but when it was known in Spain,
that Hasdruball should go with his host into Italy: a great number of them
turned their hearts to the Romans. Wherefore Hasdrubal sent letters to
Carthage, certifieng the Senate, how dangerous his departing out of Spain
should be: And how that before he were passed the river of Iherus, the more part
of Spain would turn to the Romans. Which letters although at the first they
moved the senate much, not withstandyng because their hole minds were given
toward the charge and business of the affairs of Italy, they changed not their
purpose, conferryng the sendyng of Hasdruball into Italye: but in his place
they sent Himilco with an host fournysshed to keep the seas and the land, and
also the country of Spain: who when he had all thing necessary provided for
him, with as great speed as might be, passed the country of Spain, until he
came to Hasdruball. And as soon as he had showed him the commandment of the
senate, and that Hasdruball had likewise informed him, how he should demean
him self in the wars of Spain: he returned again to his tents with
speed. But Hasdrubal, er ever he removed his camp, caused taxes of money to be
raised of all countries that were under his obeisance: knowing well, that
Anniball had bought certain passages of the Frenchemen, and that without
their help, the enter into the Alps or high mountains, was hard to be
optained. When he had gathered great sums of money, he went down with speed
to the river of Iberus.

And when the purpose of the Carthaginenses, and Hasdrubals journey was known
and showed to the Scipions, they setting all other busynes aparte, with both
their hosts together, set forward to mete him, and prepared to let his
enterprise: supposing, that if Hasdruball, being a capitayn and that great
new host of the Carthaginenses, were joined to Anniball (whom alone Italy was
scarsely able to withstand) that than the empire of Rome should soon be at
an end. Thus they being troubled with care of this busynes, brought their
hooste to Iberus. And when they had passed the river, consultynge long,
whether they should pytche their camp near to their ennemies, or else
ouerrunne and subdue some of the Carthaginenses friends, thereby to stay and
prolonge their ennemies purposed journey. At last they determined to besiege
the city, called Ibera (of the water, which was nere it) the rychest of the
country at that time. Which thing when Hasdruball knew, instead of bryngyng
succor to his friends, he went to besiege a City, that was lately yielded to
the Romans: so than the Romans left their liege, and turned the battle wholly
to Hasdruball. There was betwixt the two hosts, for the space of certain
days, the space of five miles, during which time they were not without small
skyrmyshyng. At length, as it were pretended of both parts, at one time both
the hole hosts descended into the plain, ready to give battle. The Roman
host was divided into three parts, part of the footmen were set before the
standerdes, and part behynd the horsemen, kept the sides or wings. On the
other part Hasdruball set in the myddell battle the Spaniardes, and in the
right wyng the Carthaginenses, and in the left winge the Affricans, with the
hired strange sowldiours: And he put the Numidians to the footmen of
Carthage, the residue of the Affricanes he set before the wings: another did
he set all the Numydians in the right wyng, but those, whose qualities were
such in lyghtnes and nymblenes, that rydyng upon one horse, and leadyng a
spare horse in their hands, when the one was weary, they would among the
thickest of their enemies leap armed on the other fresh horse, their agilitie
and quycknes was so great, and the horses of kind so gentil and well taught.
Thus stood they in array, and litel difference there was, other in the number or
kinds of soldiers of either host. Not withstandyng the soldiers hearts
were not like. The Roman capitayns, although they fought far from home, yet
might they easyly persuade their soldiers, that they should fight for their
country, and for the city of Rome. Wherefore by that doubtful battle they
purposed, other to overcome, or to dye, trusting thereby to have short return
home to their country. The other hooste had not so stern valiant and hardy
men. for the more part of them were Spanyardes, which had rather be overcome
in Spain, than winning the victory, be conducted into Italy. Therefore at the
first metynge, when the darts were scarsly thrown, the middell ward fled,
and gave place to the Romans: who came upon them with great violence, not
withstanding the battles were nothing less in the wings, for on the one
side the Carthaginenses, and on the other side the Affricans came on them
boldly, and fought egerly. but when the Roman host had gotten in to the
myddell together, they were strong enough to put away the wings of their
ennemies. Wherefore being in number and strength best, they shortly put the
other to the worse. There was a great number of men slain, and unless the
Spaniardes had fled away, so thick before the battle was begun, there
had scarsely any of them remained vnslayne. There was no bataile between the
horse men. for as soon as the Mauritaynes and Numidians saw the myddell ward
overcome and put to flyghte, they dryuynge the elephantes before them,
suddenly departed and fled: leaving both the wings bare. Hasdruball
remainyng till the last end of the battle, fled with a few with him. That
battle caused the hearts of the Spanyardes, which doubted before in the
frendshyp of the Romans, to be wholly given to them. And it did not only take
the hope from Hasdrubal of leading his host into Italy: but also that there
was scarce tarieng for him in Spain. Which things after they were certified
to the senate at Rome by the Scipions letters, they were not so glad of the
victory, as that Hasdrubal and his host were prohibited the enter into Italy.

The oration of the Samnites and the Hirpines to Anniball, desiring his help
against the Romans, with the order of Marcellus and Anniball about Nola. Cap.
xxxi.
VVhyles these things were done in Spayn, the Romans ordered their business
wisely in Italy. Titus Sempronius and Quintus Fabius Maximus were chosen
consuls. Marcellus than lay at Nola, and he made diverse out runnynges with his
army into the fields of the Hirpines and Samnites, and so dystroyed all with
the sword and fire, that he renewed the memory of the old destruction of
Samnium: and than straight ways both the nations sent their messangers to
Anniball at ones, who spoke to him after this manner.

We were (O Anniball) ennemies to the Romans of our selves, as long as our
weapons, our harneys, and strength were able to maynteyne us. Afterward when
we had small hope and trust in them, we fell into amity with Pyrrhus, of
whom we were forsaken, being not able to defend us, we took truce and peace
necessary, for that we were unable to withstand the Romans. And we have
endured in the same peace the space of fyfty years, unto thy coming into
Italy. Sens which time thy only gentylnes toward our cytezens (which being
taken, thou sendest to us again) as well as thy virtue and fortune, so has
won us unto the, that if thou our friend be safe and in good health, we not
only would not fear the Romans, but also if it were laufull to be spoken, we
would not fear the goddis. But verily not only thou being safe and sound, but
also present where as thou may also behold our houses burning, and here the
waylyng of our wives and children, we are so spoiled, and our goods wasted and
dystroyed, that it may be thought, that Marcus Marcellus has overcome at
Cannas, and not Anniball: and also the Romans may rejoice, that thou only as
it were at one battle, art strong and valyant, and at the next wethered and
faint. we kept war with the Romans the space of one hundred years, being
succored by no man, saving that Pyrrhus the space of.ii. years, did increase
his strength and power with our men, rather than defend us by his power. We
will not rejoice of our prosperity, when we subdued.ii. Consulles with their
hosts at one time and brought them into our subjection: but omytting all such
prosperous chances that we had, we might show those things that happed
infortunately to us at that time, if there were any with less shame than we
may now declare those that be chanced to us. There did invade the costs
of our countries at that time.ii. noble dictatours, the masters of horsemen,
and two Consulles, with two consulles hoostes, having all thing provided for
them necessaryly, or they would adventure to rob and dystroy our country.
But now we be almost a pray to one little host, being left for the
succors of Nola. Now they being but a small noumbre, after the manner of
robbers, overcome our countreye with less fear, thanne if they were in the
Romayne fields. The cause is, that another thou doeste defend us, and also
that all our lustye young and valiant men, which without doubt, if they
were at home, would defend us, are with the, and under thy baner: neither had
we known the, nor thine host, had not it happed, that through thy might
there were so many Romans slain and put to flight, to whom we may suppose it
but a light thing to suppress our robbers, ronyng abroad in the fields
without order, runnyng whyther as foolysshe and vain hope of a pray does
lead them, whom a few of thy Numidians would utterly confound. And I
doubt not, but thou will send us some sure help and succor, except thou
judge us unworthy to be defended and helped, when heretofore thou thoughtest us
not unworthy to be taken as thy friends and companyons, receyuyng us into thy
amity and frendshyppe. To this their lamentable oration Anniball answered,
that the Hirpines and Samnites did show their ruin and loss, requyryng help
therein, and also did complain, that they were left without succor and
vnholpen, and all at ones: where as they should first have showed their cause,
asking succor in their myschiefe, and afterward, if they could not have
healpe, than to complain, that their suite was in vain. Never the less he
promised them succors and help, not that his army should come into any of
their grounds, but that he would invade their neighbors, which were friends
to the Romans: whereby he should draw the Romans from vexyng of them, making
them glad to defend their friends. And as concerning the war between him
and the Romans, if the battle at Trasimenus were nobler than that of
Trebia, and the battle at Cannas more noble than that of Trasimenus: he would
make the fame and memory of the victory at Cannas, but obscure and nothing to
be esteemed, in comparison of a more noble and triumphant victory, that he
trusted to have of them. With this answer and great rewards he sent them
home: and leauyng a little company at Tisatis, he took his journey to Nola. At
the same time Hanno came to him from the Brusians, with stuff sent from
Carthage, and with elephantes.

When Anniball had pytched his tents, not far from Nola, he found all
things otherwise than it was showed him by the legates of the Samnites. For
Marcellus so ruled him self ever and all his men, that he committed nothing
to fortune, another left any thing rasshely in danger of his enemies: for when
he went about any spoil of the country, or to get any pray, he did it as
prouidently, as though he should have done it, Anniball being present. And when
he perceived Anniball to become: he kept his host within the city. Whereupon
Hanno approached nygh unto the wall, calling furthe Herennius Bassus and Herius
Petreius, who by the license of Marcellus went furthe to talk with him. Than
unto them by an interpretour he began to extol the virtue and fortune of
Anniball, and despised the nobility of the Romans, which (he said) decayed
together with their power and strength: which nobility and power if it were
like as it was in old time, not withstandyng knowing the hard and cruel
empire and governance of the Romans, and the great gentylnes of Anniball
toward all the captives of Italy, the friendship and amity of the
Carthagine^ses was to be preferred before the amity of the Romans. And if both
the Consuls with their hoostes were at Nola, they were no more to be compared
to Anniball, than they were at the battle of Cannas: much less one praetor
with a few new and unskilled soldiers, was able to defend Nola. And that
they rather than Anniball, ought to care, after what manner Nola should come to
Anniballes possession: other taken by violence, or yielded. for there was no
remedy but have it he would, as he had Capua and Nuceria. He said further, that
he would not divine, what should happen to the city being taken, but durst
rather promise and undertake, that if they would yield Marcellus and the city
to Anniball, that no man, but they them selves, should prescribe the bands
and laws of the frendeshyp that should be between them.

Whereunto Herennius Bassus answered: that the amity between the Romans and
the Nolanes had continued many years, of the which another of them did
forthynke. He said furthermore, that if they should have changed or broken their
faithes, when their fortune failed or changed, that now it were to late to
change: for that other changed a long time agone: And that it had been folly
for them to have sought succor of the Romans if they had been minded to have
yielded the town to Anniball. Wherefore their minds were, that with those,
which came to their succors, they were in all things joined and surely
knitte together, and to the death should be. Which answer took from Anniball
the hope of optayuynge the city without battle: Wherefore he besette the
city round about, intending to give assault thereunto on all parts.

So soon as Marcellus saw that his ennemies approached the walls, he ordered
his hooste wisely within the walls, and than suddenly issued out to battle,
making great noise. Some at the first encountrynge were driven back and
slain: but when the armies joined together, the battle began to be very
fierce on both parts: And no fail it had bena soore sight, had not a huge
tempest and rain departed them: whereby having both egre minds, the one was
driven into the town, and the other to his camp or tents, and little hurt
done, where (being both desirous of battle) they abode all the next day,
so great was the violence of the storm. The third day Anniball sent part of
his soldiers, to rob and spoil the fields: which when Marcellus knew, he
straight ways brought his host forth to the battle, and Anniball on the
other side was nothing behind. There was almost a mile between the town and
the camp, where the two hosts met together. The cry that was raised on
both parts caused the company to return to battle, which were before sent
a spoiling, and the Nolans with their power were ready to increase the Romans
host: whom Marcellus (greatly praysynge for their good wylles and courage)
commanded to stand in array ready to their succor, and to convey them, which
were wounded, out of the battle. And that they should in no wise fight,
until he commanded them. The battle was strong, the sowldiours fought
with all their myghtes, and likewise the Capytaynes provoked them to the same.

Marcellus badde them boldly withstand those that were ouercomme not three
days before, and that not long agone fled from Cuma as vacabundes, and the
year before were driven from Nola, he being capytayne. And to comfort them
the more, he said, that all their enemies were not in battle: some were a
rouynge in the fields, and those that fought in battle, were wethered with
the pleasure of Capua, with wine and hauntynge of harlottes. And that the
strengthes, courage, and might of their bodies and hearts, by the which they
passed the greatte mountains called Alps, and the hills of Pyrenes, was
clean goone. He said alsoo, that those were the leauynges of the foresaid
sowldyoures, scarce able to bear and sustain their own members and harneys,
showing, that Capua was as hurtful and displeasaunt unto Anniball and his
men, as Cannas was to the Romaones. for there (said he) they have left all
their strongthe, virtue, and good feats of war, yea and have left there not
only all their glory and fame of the time past, but also hoope of victory in
time to come.

The exhortation of Anniball to his sowldiours, the battle between him and
Marcellus, and the victories of the Scipions in Spain. Capitulo. xxxii.
ANd when Marcellus with such words to his ennemies reproach had encouraged
his sowldiours, Anniball likewise with no less rebuke and blame to the Romans
called on his men, saying, that he knew them to have the same armor and
standerdes, which they had at Trebia, Trasymenus, and at Cannas: what
means it now (says he) that ye scarsely are able to withstand one legate
Romayne, and the battle of one legyon or wynge: where two Consulles hoostes
were never able to withstand you? Shall Marcellus with his new and untaught
souldyours, and the succors of Nola yet again provoke us, and we not revenged
upon them? where are my souldyours that drew Flamminius from his horse, and
struck of his head? Where is he that slew Lucius Paulus at Cannas? are your
swerdes blunte? or are your right hands astonyed and wearye? What a
monstrouse thing is this? that you, the which were wont, when that ye were
but a very few in noumbre, in short space to overcome a great meyny, now
you being many, suffer a few to stycke in your hands: you bosted as bold
men with your tongues, that you would win Rome, if any man would bring you
thither. Behold now your business here is much less. I would ye would prove
your strength and hardynesse here by wynnyng of Nola, a city of the country,
set in the plain fields, being compassed with another fludde nor sea, and
than I shall other lead or follow you, being laden with so rich a pray, to
what place so ever you will.

Notwithstanding, neither these reproaches, nor his entisynges could prevail
to strength their hearts: they were beaten back on all sides. The hearts of
the Romans did increase, not only by their capytaynes exhortinges, but also
by the Nolanes steryng and kyndlyng their courage to battle. At length the
Carthaginenses fled, and were driven back to their tents. And Marcellus
brought his soldiers to Nola with great joy and thanks of the people, whose
hearts before were most inclined to the Carthaginenses. There were slain that
day above a. M. of their ennemies, and one thousand.vi. C. taken, of
standerdes and baners.xx. and.iiii. elephantes slain in the battle: There
were not a. M. Romans slain. The next day truce was taken, which they
spente in buryinge the dead bodies. Marcellus made oblation to Vulcan with the
spoil of his ennemies. within three days after, either for displeasure, or
hope of more wages. M. ii. C. lxxii. of Numidian horsemen and Spanyardes fled
from Anniball to Marcellus, whose faithful strong help and aid the Romans
used in that bataile often times after. Than Anniball sent Hanno again to the
Brusians, with the host which he brought before with him from thens: and went
him self for the winter to Apulia, and lay about Arpos.

So soon as Quintus Fabius hard, that Anniball was gone to Apulia, and that
he had brought corn as much as he thought necessary to serve them for the
winter, from Nola and Naples to the camp at Suessula, leauyng a sufficient
garry son there, he moved his camp nygh unto Capua, burning and spoylyng their
fields: so that they of Capua were constrained) trustyng lyttel to their own
strength) to come out of the city, and encampe them selves before the walls,
fortifyeng them with munimentes without the gates. They had.vi. M. soldiers
armed, they could better skylle on horseback than on foot. Wherefore the
horsemen ever provoked their enemies by skyrmyshyng. Soon after Quintus Fabius
the consul removed his tents back from the Campanes, that they might till
and sow their ground; another did he come thither again to distroye any of
the fields of the Campanes, before the new corn was come up of a good height,
and able to be fother for their cattall. Than he came thither again, and
caused it to be gathered and brought to Claudius tents above Sucssula, where
he provided for the winter, co^maundynge Marcus Claudius, that he leaving a
necessary garrison at Nola for the defense thereof, should send the residue of
the sowldyours to Rome, lest that they should be both a charge to their
friends, and a cost to the common wealth.

In the end of summer, when all these things were done, came letters from the
Scipions, what great and prosperous acts they had done in Spain: but all
their money grain and clothing for their soldiers, and sea men was spente.
Which being pondered in the Senate, all things necessary were ordained and
sent to them. And when these stipendes and necessaries were come into Spayn,
the town of Illiturgus was besieged of Hasdruball Mago and Amilcar, the son
of Bomilcar, for anger that they had changed their hearts, and yielded them to
the Romans. Nevertheless thorough all these three hosts the Scipions valiantly
entered into the town of their friends, not without great fight and slaughter,
bringing with them of grain good plentye, whereof they had great need there,
exhorting the citezens so valiantly to keep and defend their town, as they
perceived the Romans to fight for them. Sone after they issued out to assail
the great camp, whereof Hasdruball was capitayn. Thither came to his succors
the other two capitaynes of the Carthaginenses with their two hoostes, for
there they knew well should be the greattest battle and most busynes. And
than suddenly runnyng out of their tents, they met together and fought.
There were of the Carthaginenses at that battle.lx. M. And of the Romans
about.xvi. M. nevertheless the battle was so prosperous, that the Romans
(...) and that our new man has gotten good experience, the year is past, and a
new must be put in his room. How can things prospere, that thus be
governed? Now, because I have sufficiently spoken, what manner of men ye ought
to choose co^sulles: I will speak a little of those, to whom the favor of
this election has inclyned.

Marcus Aemilius is one of the sacred priests, whom we can not send from the
sacrifice, but we shall want the service due and accustomed to the goddis. And
you Octacilius have married my systers daughter, and have children by her:
Nevertheless your merytes and deserts toward me and my friends are not
such, but that I have more respect to the common welthe than to my private
busynes. Every maryner can in caulme wether rule the ship, but when the
sharp storms arise, the sea being troubled, and the ship tossed with the
wind: Than is there need of a man, and a governor. We sail not now quietly,
but are with troublous storms almost drowned. Therefore we must provide with
great diligence, who shall govern the stern or helm: yea we must thereof take heed before. We have proved thy diligence T. Octacilius in lesser busynes,
wherein truly thou dyddest not deserve, that we should commit to the any
greatter charge: For three causes we sent furthe a navy the last year, of which
thou were governor. First that the border of Africa should have been wasted
and distroyed: Second that the havens or strondes of Italy should have been
kept safe for us: And before all things that no succor, stypende or other
necessaries, being sent from Carthage to Anniball, should have free passage. I
am content that ye make T. Octacilius consul, if he can prove, that he did
perform to the commonwealth any of these things to him committed. But if thou
being capytayn of the navy, all that was sent from Carthage to Anniball had as
free passage, as though the sea had been open: And if the borders of Italy this
year were more indaungered than the borders of Africa: what can thou allege
for thy self, that thou should be chosen chief capytayne against Anniball?
it appertains to no man more than to the T. Octacilius, to take heed that
such a burden be not laid on thy neck, the weight whereof will peise the
down. I do admonyshe and persuade you all, that in choosing your consuls at
this time, ye use the same circumspection, that ye would use, if ye were driven
to chose twain to govern your bataile, when ye being in harneys on the
plain against your ennemies, were ready to fight with them. Trasymenus, and
the example of Cannas, are very sorrowful to be remembered: but they are right
profitable, and a good document, to be ware of such an other.

After this oration, the prerogative of the young men was called in again: And
than went they to a new election: in the which Quintus Fabius him self was
created the fourth time consul: and Marcus Marcellus the third time. These were
created without any variance: Another did any man suspect Quintus Fabius of
covetousness of rule and gouerna^ce: but rather they praised the noblenes and
courage of his heart. For that when he saw, that the common welthe did want a
good capytayne, and knew him self without doubt to be one: esteemed the
envy, that he should have (if any should arise of that matter) less than the
profyt of the common wealth.

When all things were ordained with great care and dyligence for the wars in
all parts, the Campanes meruaylyng of the great and exquisite ordynance of the
Romans, which was much greatter than it was wont to be, and fearyng
greatly, lest they would that year begin war upon them: they sent legates
to Anniball incontinent, desiring him to move his army to Capua, showing him,
that the Romans host was chosen and proscribed to besiege Capua, for that the
defection of them was more displesantly taken of the Romans, than of any city
in Italy. And because the matter was so fearfully pronounced unto him, he made
the greater speed to come thither before the Romans. When he had been there a
season, he left certain of the Numidians and Spanyardes to defend the city,
and went him self to the lake of Auernus, under the color to make sacrifyce.
Not withstandyng his pretense was to set on Puteolus, and them that were left
there in garryson.

When Fabius Maximus heard, that Anniball was gone from Arpos, and turned
again to Campania, without restyng night or day, he went to the hest, and
caused T. Gracchus to remove from Luceria to Beneuentum, and made Quintus
Fabius his son to abide in his place at Luceria: and him self came to
Cassilinum, intendyng to besiege it, and the Carthaginenses that were therein.
The same time (as it were a thing appointed) Hanno came from the Brusianes
with a great host of horsemen and fotemen, to Beneuentu^: but it chanced so,
that Titus Gracchus came from Luceria thither somewhat before him, and entered
the town. And when he heard, that Hanno had pitched his tents.iii. miles
from the town, at a water called Calor, and wasted the country, he went him
self out of the town, and pytched his tents a mile from his ennemy, and
there he had an assemble of soldiers, whereof the most part were of bondemen,
that had been in the war the year before. These bondemen thought by their
deserts to be made free, before they would desire it openly: not withstandyng
he perceived a murmr of some ofthem, complaynyng and saying: Shall we never
be free, and do battle like free soldiers and citezens: Whereof he wrote
letters to the senate, as well of their desire, as of their deseruyng, saying,
that he had ever unto that day had their good faithful and strong help, and
that they wanted nothing that belonged to good and just soldiers, saving
liberty. Concerning that matter it was permitted unto him, to do that which he
should think mete for the profit of the common wealth. Whereupon before he would
do battle with his aduersarye, he showed his men, that the time was come, in
which they might opteyne their liberty, that they so long desired and hoped
after. for the next day they should fight in a fair and plain field, where
the battle should be done without any fear of disceyte, with clean
strength and hardynes, and he that then would show the head of one of his
ennemies, stryken of in battle, should straight way be made free: and he that
fled, should be punished with vile servitude for ever. Wherefore now (said
he) every man's fortune lies in his own hands. For the confirmation of which
his words, he said, that he alone was not the auctour of their liberty: but
that Marcus Marcellus the consul, and the fathers conscripte were agreeable to
the same. And thereof he had sent him their letters, which he showed and red
unto them. At these his words there arose a great noise among them, desyryng
battaylle incontinent, if it might so please him. Than Gracchus let the
Convocation pass, and appointed the battle against the next day. The
souldyours were very glad, and in especial those, which supposed their
wages for one day to be perpetual liberty.

The battle between Hanno and Gracchus, with the reward and also the
punyshement awarded by Gracchus to certain bondemen of his host. Capi.
xxxiiii.
THe next day, when the trumpettes blewe to battle, they came together in
good array, and anon upon the son rysynge Gracchus brought his sowldyours
in to battle. And their enemies made no taryeng for their part. There were
of them xvii. thousand footmen, and one.M. ii. hundred horsemen, the battle
was very sharp, and lasted iiii. hours, not knowing which should have the
victory. There was nothing troubled the Romans more, than the heads of
their enemies, which Gracchus had appointed to be the price of their
liberty. Wherefore ever as they had stryken down any of their ennemies, they
would strike of his head, and bear it in their hands instead of weapon.
Which thing Gracchus apperceyuynge, commanded, that every man should leave
the head that he had in his hand, and take his weapon and fight. Than the
battle began more fierce than before, the capitaines on both parts
exhorting their men to fight. Gracchus showed his people, that if their
enemies were not that day put to utterance, they should never look for their
liberty. When the souldyours heard him say so, their hearts were so kyndled,
that they ran fresshe upon their enemies with so greatte vyolence, that
they were not able to sustain their might and courage, but incontinent fled
toward their camp. The Romans following and pursuyng them, made a greatter
slaughter in the flight, than they did before in the battle. There escaped
not of the hole host, above.ii. M. which fled with their captain away,
the most part were horsemen, all the resydue were other slain or taken. There
were not slain of the Romans passing two thousand. When they were
returned in to their tents, laden with their great pray.iiii. ^. of the
bondmen, which had done evil their deuoyre that day in battle, had gotten a
little hill not far from the tents, who were fetched again the day
following by the Tribunes, and came to the convocation or court holden by
Gracchus to the souldyours: wherein he rewarded the old soldiers as he thought
every one had deserved. Than as concerning the bondemen he said, that he had
rather, that both worthy and unworthy should that time be praised of him than
punysshed: Nevertheless, because it had chanced well to the commune wealth and
to them, he commanded that all should be free, at which commandment all at
ones thanking him, desired all wealth to the Romans and to him. Than said
Gracchus: Now have I fully performed my promise of liberty to you all
universally: nevertheless to thentent it may be known, that I will put
difference between well doing and evil doing, between virtuous courage, and
cowardnesse, I will that ye bring me the names of all those, which departed
from the field the day before. That done, he caused them all to be sworn,
that none of them should other eat or drink otherwise than standing (unless
they were diseased) so long as they seryed in the wars. This punyshement
(said he) ye shall patiently take, if ye consider with your selves, that I
could not have noted you with a less mark for your cowardyse than that is.
Than commanded he them to trusse up their stuff: which done, the souldyours
with great praise came to Beneuentum, not like men that came from battle: but
as merry as though they had come from a bankette. The citezens received them
meruaylous thankfully, and desired Gracchus, that he would suffer the
souldyours to feast with them, which he granted.

Whiles these things were done at Beneuentum, Hanniball wasting the fields
of the Neapolitanes, moved his tents to Nola. Which when the consul Marcellus
perceived: he sent for Pomponius the praetor to mete him, with the hosts that
lay at Suessula, intendyng that they both together, would meet him, and he
sent Claudius Nero with a strong company of horsemen out of the town by
night, to compass Anniball on the other side, commandyng him, that when he
saw the battle was begun, he should set upon his ennemies at their
backs. Which his divise Nero could not bring to pass, either because he
knew not the cumbersome ways of the country, or else for that the shortenes
of the time would not suffer him. Marcellus in the morning met with his
ennemies, and gave them battle: in the which he had the victory, and caused
his enemies to flee. nevertheless he durst not follow them, because he
wanted his horseman. Wherefore he caused his men to recule. There were.ii.
thousand of their ennemies slain, and not.iiii. hundred of the Romans. Nero
and the horsemen, labouryng in vain the night and the day, without seeing his
enemies, came home about the son set. for which his vain journey, he was
sore rebuked of the consul, saying, that he was the cause as than, that their
ennemies had not received as great loss, as they gave at Cannas. The next day
the Romans disce^ded into the fields, but Anniball kept him in his tents,
knowlegyng him self to be overcome. And the third day, without hope of
optaynyng Nola, trustyng to have better speed, removed to Tarentum.

Quintus Fabius, the other consul, had his tents at Cassilinum, which was
kept with.ii. M. of the Campanes, and vii.C. of Anniballes soldiers. He
caused Marcellus to come to him with his host, And if that the Nolans thought
them selfs not safe from Annibal, that they should send to Beneuentu^ to
Gracchus, to com to their succors. which thing done, Cassilinum was quyckely
won, and the soldiers that were there, as well of Annibals as of Capua, were
taken, and sent to Rome, and there put in prison. There were taken by Fabius
at that time many cities in Italy, and in them to the number of.xxv. M. of
Anniballes soldiers and friends taken and slain, beside.iii. C. lxx.
vacabundes and runawayes, which were taken and sent to Rome, and there
whypped with rods, and after put to death.

The cities of Sagu^t in Spayn, and Arpos in Italy at won by the Romans,
king Siphax is become friend to the Romans, and is ouercom in batail by
Massanissa. Ca xxxv.
THere were the same year in Spain many batailes between Mago, and Hasdruball
the capitaynes of Carthage, and the Scipions. for before the Roman capitaynes
could pass the river of Iberus, Mago and Hasdrubal had slain a great number
of Spaniardes, friends to the Romans, and had opteyned the utter part of
Spayn, had not the Scipions come in time: whose coming stayed the waueryng
minds of many of that country. And there was betwixt the two capitaines
great and many batailes foughten, in the which the Romans had always the
vpperhand: and in sundry batayles slew great armies of the Carthaginenses and
their friends, wanne diverse towns and castles, brought their enemies to so
low an ebb, that of a long season they were glad to rest, doing no act worth
memory. Than the Roman capytaines, remembryng that the city of Sagunt had been
so long oppressed with the yoke of dominion of the Carthaginenses, they removed
their hooste thither, and wanne the city again, which they restored to the
old inhabitants thereof, that were left on live. Than they invaded the
Turditans, who were the first causers of the war with the Carthaginenses,
whom they wan shortly, and distroyed their cities. These deeds were done in
Spain, Quintus Fabius Maximus, and Marcus Claudius Marcellus being consuls.
Tha^ the officers for the year to come, were chosen at Rome: where Quintus
Fabius the younger, son to the old Consul, was chosen one of the consuls:
and Titus Sempronius Gracchus the other: Than all the other officers in order.
When to every captain was assigned his host and ward: the wars against
Anniball were committed to the consuls: Sempronius went to the Lucanes, and
Fabius to Apulia. The father went as legate to the son, to show him of the
mind of the senate. This young Fabius lay than at the camp above Suessula: who
hearing that his father was come to him as imbassadour from the senate, came
forth to mete him in his royal astate, with his.xii. sergeantes before him:
but xi. of his sergeantes, beholding the majesty of old Fabius, as he came
rydyng, passed by, and nothing said to him. Than the son being consul,
commanded the.xii. sergeant to take heed to his office. He also with a loud
voice commanded his father to descend from his horse. Than incontinent his
father alyghted, and said: I did this son, only to prove whyther thou
dyddest know, that thou art Consul or not. and so proceeded furthe with him,
declarynge as was given him in charge.

Soon after came to the same consul into the camp oone Classius Altinius
with his three sergeantes, from the town of Arpos, promising for a good reward
to deliver to him Arpos. This matter was debated among the counsel, and by the
more part agreed, that this Altinius should be scourged and slain, as an
inconstant traitor and common enemy, consyderyng that first he, after the
battle of Cannas, was causer of the yeldyng the town to Anniball, chaungyng
his fidelity as fortune changed. And now again, saying the power of the
Romans to begin to rise in prosperity, he would begin a new treason.
Wherefore they thought it not to be suffered, but that he should be ordered as an
untrue fellow and a vain enemy.

Against which their determynation spoke old Q. Fabius, saying, that they
ought to consider the peryllous time of war, and so to proceed, that they
lose none of their faithful friends by any occasyon or example that they did
show: but by all means possible, if any of their friends were fallen from
them, to find mean to purchase them again. And when any of them knowledgeth
their offenses, and desires to return to their old amity: with great
gentylnes to receive them. for in case ye will admytte it to be more heinous
for our friends to return again to us, than it is for them to goo from
us, there is no doubt, but shortly we shall see the most part of our
friends in Italye leave our frendshyppe, and alye them selves with Anniball.
Nevertheless (says he) I will not advise you to give much faith to
Altinius, but keeping a good mean, another repute him as an enemy, nor trust
him as a friend: but that he be sent to sum of your cities near
adioynynge, there to be safely kept, till the wars be ended: at which time
we may at length consulte, whether the first his departing from us has
deserved more punishment, than his retourue has deserved pardon. This his
advise took place. He was sent with his company to Cales. And the Consul
determined, to besiege Arpos. Wherefore following his purpose, he pitched his
camp within a mile of the town where he might view the town, and there
perceived on the one part thereof, which was lest used, a low gate and a
narowe. To this gate he appointed certain good capitaynes, and.vi. C. active
soldiers, to bear scalyng ladders about.iii. of the clock in the morning
before day, co^mandynge them, first to assay to scale that tower: which done,
than on the inner part to break down the walls or the gate, and being masters
of part of the town, by the sown of a horn, to give him knowledge, whereby he
with the rest of his hooste might approach to their succor. This his devise
with speed was executed. And the chance was such, that one thing, which was
thought would be a great let of their purpose, best help them, and disceyued
their ennemies: which was, that about the mids of the night, there fell so
great abundance of rain, with so vehement a storm, that the watch men were
of force driven, leauyng their appointed places on the walls, to descend and
enter into their howses: where abydyng a good season, they fell on sleep. In
this while had the Romans scaled the walls, and were besye to break up the
gates. Whose noise was not heard of the watchemen: so rude was the storm, and
such noise made the huge rain. Than blewe they horns, at whose sownde the
consul drew nere, and about the break of the day entered the city by the
broken gate. Than was their enter discried. There was of Anniballes men in that
town.v. M. soldiers, the town also had armed.iii. thousand men, which
towns men the Carthaginenses caused to go in the front of the battle,
mystrustynge to have them behind at their backs. After a littell skyrmyshyng
in the streets, diverse of the towns men of Arpos, and certain of the Romans,
which were before of acquayntaunce, began to common and talk together.
First spoke the Romans, and said: O ye men of Arpos, what do ye mean, to take
part with these barbarous nation against your own country men? Wherein have the
Romans offended you? or what have the Carthaginenses deserved unto you, that ye
should thus trauail to make Italy subject and tributary to Africa? The Arpins
excused them selves, saying, that they were betrayed and sold by their captains
to the Carthagine^sis, and almost utterly distroyed. Their communication stayed
the fyghtyng. And after a certain space, the praetor or governor of the town
was brought by his men to the consul: Where they so well agreed, that
incontinente the Arpines took the part of the Romans against the
Carthaginenses. There were also in the town about a thousand Spanyardes, who
all in likewise turned to the Romans: but first they opteyned of the Consul;
that the garrison of the Carthaginenses might freely depart the town, to go at
their liberty: Which was truly performed. They departed to Salapia, where
Annibal was, and the town incontinent was delivered to the Romans, without
loss of any of their army.

The Scipions in this space had brought their business prosperously to pass
in Spain, both in conseruyng their old friends, and getting of new:
besides this suddenly they had comfort to do good in Africa, by the reasone
of one Syphax a king of Numidia, who as tha^ was become an ennemy to the
Carthaginenses. To this king were sent.iii. legates, that should bring him in
amity with the Romans, and also cause him to make war upon the
Carthaginenses. This message was also very acceptable to Syphax. Whereupon he
reasoned with the legates, that were expert men of war, and perceived many
things, wherein he and his men before were ignorant. Wherefore when they would
have departed, he entreated them, that two of them would return home to their
capitaynes, to desire a sure aliaunce between him and the Romans, and to
ascertayne them of his full mind: and that the third of them might remain
still with him, to be governor of his army, saying that his men were good
horse men, but they were nothing skylfull to fight on foot. To this his
request they agreed, and departed, taking the kings oath and promise, that in
case their capitayns would not agree thereto: that incontinent their fellow,
which was left behynd, should be sent home to them again. The name of him that
remained with king Syphax, was Statorius, who anon chose out a great number of
young and actyue men, whom he taught to follow their baners, and to keep their
array after the Romayne facion: So that in short space, Syphax thought him
self able, both on horseback and on foot, to give battle to the
Carthaginenses. Thus was there a safe band of peace and amytie between the
Romans and Syphax.

When the Carthaginenses were ware thereof, they sent incontinent messangers to
one Gala, king of the other part of Numidia. This Gala had a son of.xvii.
years of age, a noble and wise yongman, called Massanissa. The imbassadours
showed the king, that better it were for him, with their help to overcome
Syphax betyme: than by his means the Romans should have any enter into Africa.

With such words, they persuaded Gala to the war: and much the sooner, for
that Massanissa his son desired to be governor of that army. Whervppon the
army of the Carthaginenses was joined to Massanissa his army. And at the first
battle Syphax was overcome, and.xxx. M. of his men slain: so that with a
few horsemen he fled to the Mauritaynes, that inhabyted nygh the Gades or
pyllars of Hercules, where he gathered a new army of men, thinkyng to sail
over into Spain: but er ever he could take the water, Massanissa, with his
army, camme again on him, and without the help of the Carthaginenses, fought
a noble battle with him, and overcame him.

Anniball through the treason of Nico and Philomenes, wynneth the city of
Tarent. Cap. xxxvi.
ANniball this season ever having hope, that the city of Tarent should, by one
mean or other, be wo^ne, as is before said, made his abode not far from that
city. And to bring his opinion to his purpose, there happed a fortunate chance
by the means of oone Phileas a Tarentine, who long time had tarried at Rome,
as a messanger of the Tarentines. There were than at Rome diverse pledges of the
noble bludde of Tarent, kept in gentyl keeping. To these pledges this Phileas
found the mean to have often recours, and at length he so corrupted the kepers,
that they suffered them to depart out of the city in the beginning of the
nyghti and Phileas went with them to guide them by secret ways. In the morning
yarly the fame of the pledges departing was sprede abroad through the city,
and a great number pursued the^ with speed: so that before they had far
travailed, they ouertoke them, and brought them all back again into the city:
Where for their offenses, judgment was given, that they should be first
scourged with rods naked, and than brought to a high rock: from the top
whereof they should be thrown down to the ground.

This cruel end of those nobles offended much the minds of diverse cities in
Italy and Greece, specially those that were of kynne or by amity alyed to any
of them that were slain: among which sort.xiii. of the nobles of Tarent
conspired against the Romans, of whom the captayns and chief were Nico and
Philomenes. They were great hunters, and used much to issue out of the city
in the night to go on huntyng. Wherefore by the color of goinge on hunting,
they went toward the army of Anniball, intendyng to speak with him, and to
declare unto him their intentes. Wha^ they came nere the camp, they two
leauyng their company in a wodde nere adioynyng, went to the camp: and anon
were taken of the watchemen, and brought to Anniball, as their request was: to
whom they declared their purpose and good will. And he gave them great
thanks, and sent them hoome again looded with fair promyses. And to cover
the better their deuyse, he wylled them to drive with them certain cattalle of
the Carthaginenses, saying, they had gotten that pray of their enemies:
which they were suffered to do without resystence: and brought them home to
Tarent with joy. This used they to do oftentimes: so that it was thought
marvel, that they so often enterprysed such feats, and ever escaped
vnslayne. Thus often they used, and ever when they killed any venyson, or
brought any pray from the Carthaginenses (which they were suffered to do at
all times at their pleasures) they either gave it to the capytayne of the
city, a Romayne, or else to the porter of the gates: so that they had
brought the porter in such a custom, that when so ever Philomenes did but
whistell, at all times of the night, the gates were opened unto him.

When they had brought all things in this good case for their purpose, they
went to Anniball, and agreed with him on this covenant, that the Tarentines
should live ever under their own laws and customs. Also that they should
pay him no Trybute, nor have any army appointed by Anniball to keep the
city, but at their own pleasure. And that they should enjoy all their goods.
Only that the soldiers of the Romans, which were in the city, and their
goods, should be at the pleasure and will of Anniball. Than lay Anniball.iii.
days journey from Tarent, and because he would not have his long abode there,
to be suspecte, he feigned him self to be sick, and caused it to be bruted
abroad, that his sycknes was the cause of his long lyinge in that one place.
But against the time he would have the town, he chose out.x. thousand
horsemen, and of the lightest footmen of his army: and removed from his camp
in the night, making speed till he came within.xv. mile of Tarent, where he
secretly abode, chargyng his men, in no wise to break their array or order:
but that they should beredy to do what their capitaynes did command them, and
none other. But first, er he set forth, to cover the better his removing,
and to the intent that none of the country should descrye his army: he
sent.iiii. score Numidians light horsemen, to go before him, chargyng them to
ouerrunne the country, by which he with his army should pass. And if they
ouertoke any men, to bring them back. And if they met with any, they should
slay them to the intent it should be thought by the inhabitants as they went,
that they were robbers and thieves, and not men of war. The fame of their
robbyng came to the ears of the Romayne captain at Tarent: who took but
small regard thereto, thynkyng sith Anniball him self was sick, and his army
so far of, that he would the next day send forth certain of his men of
arms, to drive away those robbers, and to save the corn and cattall of his
friends. The same night, in the dead part thereof, removed Anniball toward
Tarent, having Philomenes with him, as his guide. When they came nigh to the
town, it was appointed, that Philomenes should enter the town, with a number
of men in harneys, at the gate, where he was wont to enter, bringing his
pray from hunting. When he came thither, he awaked the porter, saying, that
he had brought a great bore that he had slain. At the first call the porter
opened the gates: and first let in two young men of his company: than entered
he, and other his servants, pluckyng in the great boore. at whose greatness
while the keeper was daryng and musing, Philomenes suddenly slew him with his
boore spear or huntyng staff: and incontinent let in.xxx. other men in
harneis, who slew the other watchemen of the said gate: and without noise let
in the rest of the army, and secretly brought them into the market place,
where they abode a space without making any noise. Whiles this was done at one
gate, Annibal, with a great nu^bre with him, came privily toward an other
gate, and a far of he made a great fire, which was a sign or token made
between him and Nico, who abode with other his accomplices, ready within the
town, loking for his coming. Which fire when Nico perceived, he (as it were
answeryng to the same) made him an other fire. And when either perceived other,
incontinent both their fyres were sodeinly put out. And Anniball began to
approach with his army to the gates. Nico also within the city, came to the
porters ward, which he found open, and fyndyng the watch on sleep, slew all
the kepers thereof, and openyng the gates, let Anniball and his company of
footmen enter: for the horsemen were commanded to abide in the playnes
without, to do there as need required. Thus they entered the town, and making
no noise, came into the market place, where they met with Philomenes, and his
other company. Tha^ had he in his company.ii. M. french men, which he divided
in three parts, and sent them to diverse parts of the city. The affricanes and
the Tarentynes he caused to keep the most accustomed streets of the town:
commaundynge them, to slay all the Romans, but in any wise to spare the
Tarentine citezens. And to that purpose he appointed the said young
gentylmenne of Tarent, that were his helpers and friends, to be in the company
of the other his souldyours. So that when they saw any citezens, they should
comfort them, byddyng them, not to be affrayde: for they should have no hurt.
Than began a great rumor and noise to be raised in the town, as is ever,
where so sodeyne chance happeth. The capytayne at the first noise, doubtyng
treason, fled to the haven, and from thens, in a small bote, passed over
into the castle.

When the day appeered, and that the harneys and arms of the Carthaginenses
were perceived, and also of the frenchemen, with the death of so many
Romans: than was it manifest, that Anniball had won the town. Whereupon the
Romans that might escape, fled into the said castle. Than caused Anniball
the citezens to assemble together without armure, to here his pleasure, which
they all obeyed. There did he declare unto them, the love and great affection
that he has ever borne unto them, and the gentylnes that he had showed unto
them at the battle of Trasymenus, and the battle of Cannas, when he sent
unto them such of their friends, as he had taken captives, without any hurt,
impediment, or ransom. And after he expressed, with great inuectiues, the
cruel and proud dominion, that the Romans ever had over them. From the
which he was come to deliver them: wyllinge every one of them of the city, to
return home to his house: and with speed to write his name on the door of
his own house. for incontinent he would send his soldiers to spoil and
distroy such houses, as had not the names entitled on the doors: Chargynge
them on pain of death, that none of them should write his name upon the
door of any Roman: for that was the mark, whereby his men might know the
houses of his friends, from those of his ennemies.

With this exhortation he lycensed every man to depart home, and within a
certain space, he gave a sign to his soldiers, to spoil the houses of the
Romans. Which was done, and good spoil thereof taken. On the morrow he
determined to assault the castle: but when he saw the strong natural site
thereof, being half compassed with the sea, beatyng on the great high rocks,
and on the other half having great dyches and high walls toward the town:
he was loathe to spend his time in the assaultyng thereof, and to leave other
great things not followed. Nevertheless being loath to leave his friends the
Tarentines, open to all inuasyons of the men of arms of the Castle. (For to
the town they might at all times have access at their pleasure) he thought to
make a wall and dyche on the town side, between them and the castelle. And he
had this opinyon, that when the dyche were casting, the Romans would
adventure to make excursion on the laborers, to let his work and purpose.
And he intended, that if they so fiercely would do, so to dispose his men
pryuily in imbushmentes: that such slaughter of them should be made, that they
should not be able after to hurt the town. And even as he thought, so
camme it to pass. For so soon as the work was begun, anon the gate of the
castle was set open, and the Romans came on the workmen and
Carthaginenses, with such violence, that anon they gave back, and sommewhat
the more purposely, to enhaunce their hearts and courage, and to allure them
further from their hold. But anon, at a certain token given, the
imbusshemente brake out, and with such force invaded the Romans, that they
fled back with much speed toward the castelle: but than was the street
so narowe, by which they must pass, and they so troubled with the baggage
of the laborers, that lay in their way, that many more were slain in the
fleinge, than were before in fighting. Thus was the power of the Castle,
left so small, that afterward their works were never let, but that the
deep dyche and wall were made in such wise, that he neded not to leave any
garryson in the town. Never the less for their sauegarde he left a certain
of his soldiers: and he with the rest of his army removed five miles from
thense to the river of Galesus, where he pitched his tents. Soon after he
returned to view the strength of the Castle: and thought it might be won
with a saute. Whervppon he caused all manner of engyns to be made, and set up
against the walls: to the greatte fear of them of the Castle. But suddenly
in the night came a certain of ships of men of war, from Metapontus,
which than was holden with Romans, and entered the haven: by whose healpe they
of the Castle threw down, and burned all the ingynes and munymentes of the
Carthaginenses. Whereby Anniball lost his hope of winning the castelle by any
assault: but than he ymagyned, by contynuall siege to famysshe them. Which
purpose also served him nothing. For they of the castelle had the sea free
on the oone side, where they received vytayles at their pleasure: And the
Romans, being masters of the haven, kept all prouysyon from the city,
that was wont to comme by water. So that they were much more like to endure
famyne, thanne the other of the castelle, whom they besieged. Wherefore
Anniball, mystrusting the strength of the place, called the rulers of Tarent
before him, and said:

I behold the nature, the site, and all the strength of this castle, and I
can not see, that any assault can prevail, so long as our ennemies be lords
of the sea, and have that at liberty. But if we may (said he) have ships,
which may restrain vitailes to be brought to them: either they will depart
thens, or yield unto us. To this the Tarentines agreed well: but they said, that
he must help, that some of the navy of Carthage, which were in Sicilia, might
be caused to comme thither, to keep the said port. Why (said Anniball) have
you no ships of your own. Yes truly (said they) but they lie here in a
littell creke, and so long as our ennemies have the dominion of the mouth of
the haven, how can they ever escape in to the broad seas? Yes said Anniball
fear it not. for many things, that naturally be let, by wit and policy
may be brought to pass. Your city is situate on a plain and even ground,
and your streets and ways be broad, to pass to all parts. Your ships will I
convey through the high way, that leads through the middell of your city,
upon waines and wheles, unto the haven, with small charge. And the sea shall
be ours, that now our enemies be lords of. Than both by sea and by land, we
will compass them: so that shortly they shall be driven to forsake the
castle, or else we shall take both them and it also.

This his wise divise made all men to have wonder and admiration of him, with
also a hoope of a good success of his purpose. Forth withal waynes and carts
were gathered and tied together. Than were engines made, to raise and to draw
up the ships, and the ways made hard, even, and level, that they might the
more easily be drawn on them. Thus with strength of beasts and men, the
ships were brought to the haven, and in few days garnished with men and
all things necessary, and brought round about the castle, castyng their
ankers before the mouth of the haven.

Fuluius Flaccus the Roman consul, wynneth the camp of Hanno, sleeth and
takes a great number of men with a rich pray. Mago sleeth Titus Gracchus and
many Romans, through the treason of Flauius a Lucan. Capitu. xxxvi.
VVhyles Anniball was thus occupied about the business of Tarent, Quintus
Fuluius Flaccus, and Appius Claudius, that were chosen consuls for that year,
were com with both their armies into the parties of the Samnites: and the
rulers of Capua feared greatly, lest they did intend shortly to besiege their
city. Also plentye of corn began than to fail them. for the legions of the
Romans had so invaded their country, that the Campanes durst neither till
nor sow their grounds. wherefore they sent legates unto Annibal, desiring him,
to cause plenty of wheat to be brought to Capua, from the country adioynyng:
before that the consuls did enter their country with their armies. Whereupon
Anniball sent messangers to Hanno, that he should come from the Brusians with
his army into Ca^pania: And to make provision, that the Campanes might have
good plenty of corn sent to them.

Hanno (as he was commanded) leaving the Samnites, and the Consuls, passed
by, till he came within.iii. miles of Beneuentum: where on a mountain he
pitched his camp, and in towns of his friends adjoining, to which great
plenty of wheat the summer before had been carried, he made goodly provision
for the Campanes, and sent word secretly to Capua, what day they should, with
all the waynes and carts that they could assemble in the country, resort to
the said places, for to fette away their said wheat. The Campanes, lightly and
sklenderly foreseing their business and wealth, at the day assigned, came
thither, bringyng with them but.iiii. hundred carts: which their sloth Hanno
greatly rebuked, maruaylyng, that they would no more hedily avoid hunger
which all brute beasts labor to eschew. Wherefore he sent them home laden,
and appointed them an another day, to return again for a much greatter
quantity.

This appointment came to the ears of the Beneuentanes. Whereupon incontinent
they sent ten messangers to the Consulles, certifyenge them of all the
Campanes purpose. And they furthwith agreed, that Fuluius, with his army
should goo to Beneuentum, and enter the town, in the night, keeping him
close therein, till he saw time apt for his purpose. So soon as Fuluius was
entered Beneuentum, it was showed him, that Hanno with a part of his army was
gone forth for wheat: and that.ii. M. wayns were come to the camp with a
great rude sort of people unarmed, where they lay myngled among the
soldiers, keeping no order after the use of men of war. This known, the
consul commanded his men to be ready with their baners and armure: for the next
night he would assail the Campanes, and the tents of the Carthaginenses. They
executyng his commandment made them ready, and about.iiii. of the clock, they
set furthe of the town, and came to Hannos camp, a little before the dawnyng
of the day. At their first coming, with their sudden noise, the
Carthaginenses becam so fearful, that if the camp had be pitched on plain
ground, they had won it with small resistance: but the height of the hill,
with the defe^ses that they had made therabout, was such, that they could no
way get up unto them: but by great steps and climming. In the daunyng of the
day the bataile began to wax strong, the Carthaginenses not only defended
their camp, but also they kept the hill without, ever throwing down the
Romans that strove wondersly to clymme the place. Nevertheless at length by
great pein and travail, and also with great loss and hurt of men, they gat to
the diches of the camp. The consul aduisyng well the mischief that should
fall to his company, in winning the place, callid the tribunes unto him,
saying: that he would no further at that time pursue his folishe enterprise, but
that he would return for that day to Beneuentu^. And on the morrow he would join
his camp to the camp of his enmies: so that the Campanes should not issue out,
nor Hanno have recours again to the^, when he were returned. And to bring this
better and more surely to pass, he would send for his fellow Claudius the
consul, with his army to assist him therein: when the tribune caused the
retreat to be sowned, his soldiers, that were earnestly busy about their
enterprise, would give none care thereto. Among other there was one Vibius, a
capitain of a company of the Pelignes, who straight took his baner in his
hand, and with force threw it over the diche into the camp of the
Carthaginenses. Than said he: Evil might I fare and my company, if mine enemies
shall enjoy my baner. Than by great force he lightly went over the diche, and
clame up, and entered the camp of his enemies: whom his company boldly followed.
While they thus fought within the ca^pe of the Carthaginenses, on an other part
cried Valerius Flaccus: what sluggishe cowardes are we now waxen? shall the
Pelignes win the honor of taking the camp of our ennemies before us Romans?
Whereupon Titus Pedanius a capitayn of a hundred men, took his standerd in his
hand from his standerde bearer, saying: This standerde will I bear in to the
field of mine enemies, follow me syrs as many as would be loathe of the loss
thereof. And anon he and his company were gotten into that other part of the
ca^pe. The consul perceiving their hardynes, changed his mind of calling them
away, and began to comfort them: exhorting the rest, to help their fellows,
that so valiantly fought in the camp of their enmies. By whose hearty wordis,
every man enforced him self to enter, not regarding the darts nor weapons of
their enemies, as people fearyng no peril: And as people that cared not for
death, so they might dye in the camp of their enemies. Thus within short space,
that strong place was wo^ne, and above vi. M. slain, and.vii. M. taken, with
the men of Campania, that came for corn, with all their carts, and a rich
pray that Ha^no before had gotten in the fields of the friends of the Romans.
Which pray the consuls sold (for by that time was Claudius also come thither)
and therewith rewarded their men, specially Vibius and Pedanius. When Hanno
heard of the loss of his people, he fled back again to the Brutianes,
with a few men which he had taken with him, to get in the wheat for the
Campanes.

The Ca^panes, heryng of the loss of their men and friends, sent to Annibal,
showing him, that both the co^suls were at Beneuentu^, within a days journey of
Capua, intending to lay siege to their city. And it was to be feared, lest (if
he did not shortly succor them) that the Romans would win and distroy that
city. They said further, that another the castle of Tarent, nor the town also,
ought to be so much esteemed of him, as Capua. the noblenes whereof he knew well
him self. In so much that he was wont to compare it unto Carthage. Wherefore
they trusted, that he would not leave it undefended, to have it spoiled and
distroyed by the Romans.

Annibal hering this message, showed to the ambassadors, what love he bare
unto their city, promising to be ever a defender thereof. With these gentle
words he sent them home again, and he sent with them also.ii. M. horsemen, by
whose help they might defend their fields from robbing and wastyng.

In the mean while P. Cornelius the praetor, with certain ships, laden with
wheat, came into the haven of Tarent, through the hole power of the
Carthaginenses. He caused also such soldiers as were at Metapontus in
garrison, to come to the castle of Tarent, there to remain for the defense
thereof: by whose coming, they of the castle were than sure from any hurt of
their ennemies. but so soon as the inhabitants of Metapontus were delivered
of the Romayne garrison, they incontinent fell in leage and amity with
Anniball. Whereupon the Thurines, also having a grudge to the Romans, for
sleing diverse of their friends, as is aforsaid, devised a mean, to bring
their city to the amity of Anniball: The kynsmen of them that were slain,
sent messangers to Hanno and Mago, who than were among the Brusians: willing
them to come with their army, to lay siege to the town: not doubtyng, but that
one Marcus Attinius, the ruler of a small company of the Romans, left for
the defense of the town, would anon be brought to issue out, and to give them
battaylle, upon the trust that he had in the young men of arms of the town:
whom before he had armed and instructed in the feats of war, after the Roman
facion. And they douted not, but this sort would do him small pleasure, when he
should have most need of them. The two capitains, hearing this glad tidinges,
with speed entered the fields of the Thurines, diuydyng their company between
them. Hanno with the footmen, with baners displayed, in good array, went
toward the town: Mago with all the horsemen abode in a valey under certain
hills that were nigh the town. Attinius knowing only of the company of
foteme^, put his men in good array, and with great courage issued out of the
town, nothing mystrustyng the myschiefe wrought against him within the town.
The battle was quick on the part of the Romans: but the Thurines stood as
men that gave the lokynge on, not as enemies. Hanno with his men of purpose
gave back, to draw the Romans into the danger of their horsemen. And when
they came nere the hills, than they fiersly assailed the Romans. and on the
other side, Mago with his horsemen came suddenly and egrely upon them: at the
first encountering the Thurines fled into their town, as fast as they could.
The Romans for a season mainteyned the battle: but at the last, being
constrained thereto, they also fled toward the town: The traitors, that
were causers of all this mischief had gotten to the gate with their power, and
against the coming back of the Thurines that fled, they kept open the
gates, and received them into the town: but when the Romans came fleyng, also
thinkyng to have entered with the other, they cried: It is time now to shut
the gates: for else we shall let the Carthaginenses into the town among our
own men, and so lose all. Whereupon they shut their gates, and suffered the
Romans to be slain by their ennemies without succor. Only Attinius the
capitayn, who gentilly had or dered them, while he was ruler there, they
suffered to enter with a few with him: and incontinent they gave him a ship
in the haven, and badde him save him self by the sea. After whose departing
they opened the gates, and received the Carthaginenses.

Now were the consuls departed from Beneuentu^, to assaute Capua, thinkyng,
that they should make their year happy and honorable to them, if they might
win Capua, that was so noble and rich: and revenge them of the injuries, by
them before done. Nevertheless, to the intent the Beneuentanes should not be
left without succors in their absence, they sent to Titus Gracchus, who was
than in the country of the Lucans, commandyng him, with his horsemen and other
light footmen, to come to Beneuentum: leaving with the Lucanes the rest of
his men, under some capitayn, whom he might trust.

The Lucans were than divided, diverse towns were rendered up to Anniball, and
certain abode under the Romans jurisdiction: of the which sort the chief
rular that year was one Flauius, a Lucan. This Flauius suddenly was turned in
his mind to Anniball: and to obtain his favor, he sent to Mago, that was
than among the Brutians, to come speak with him. When they were met, a
composition was made between them, that if he could deliver Gracchus, the
capitayn of the Romain army, the Lucanes should be friendly received in amity
with the Carthagine^ses, and live after their own laws. Tha^ brought he Mago
to a great covert, where he willed him, with a great number of men of arms to
hyde him: appoyntyng him a time, at which he would bring thither the Roman
captain. After this appointment he departed, and went to Gracchus, to whom he
showed, that he had begun secretly a great enterprise, which to bring to
effect, he must have his healpe and assystence. I have (said he) moved and
persuaded all the pryncis of the Lucans, that were gone to the amity of
Anniball, now to return again to the obedience of Rome. I have declared
unto them the increase of the Romans power, which daily we may perceive, and
the decrease of the strength of the Carthaginenses. And I bad them not mystrust
the gentylnes of the Romans, whose nature we have ever tried to be meke and
gentle to such as have rebelled against them, upon humble submissio^ to them
made. With these my persuasions they be all contented to be reconciled: so that
they may here you speak the same, laying your right hand in theirs, as a
pledge of your faith, whereunto they may trust. And I have (said he)
undertaken, that you shall do it, and I have appointed them for that
composition a secret place, well out of the way from our company, for fear of
espies, yet not far from your camp: where, with few words, you may go
through with them in this matter, and by this mean bring all the Lucanes
wholly under your jurisdiction.

Gracchus nothing my strustynge disceite and treason to be in his words, took
his officers and horsemen with him, al unarmed, and so rode to the place
appointed, having Flauius with him as a guide. So soon as they were come
thither, Mago with his army invaded them suddenly. And to make the treason
more evident, Flauius incontinent joined him to the Carthaginenses. Than was
there plenty of darts cast at Gracchus, and his horsemen, and when he saw
no other remedy, he alyght from his horse, and bad his company do the same,
exhorting them, syns they were but few in number, and unarmed, in such
place, where they could by no way escape, that they would not dye like
beasts unrevenged, but that with noble hearts they should assail their
enemies, and dye bathed and besprynkled in the bloudde of their ennemies:
whereby they should end in most honor: But specially above all thing (said
he) let every of us, seek to slay that Lucane traitor Flauius, not
doubting, but who so ever shall send that traitors soul to hell, before he
dye him self, he shall find the oblation thereof, todoo him much comfort and
solace. As soon as he had thus spoken, he threw his clooke about his left
arm, instead of his shield, and ran upon his ennemies, who with their
darts and weapons, slew most part of the Romans. And when they saw
Gracchus without help, they intended to take him on live: but so soon as he
perceived Flauius among his ennemies, he ran through the thickest of them,
with such force, to have slain him, that they were there constrained to slay
him, or else he had done them great hurt. Whose body Mago caused to be
brought to Anniball, and he caused it to be buried with much honor.

Centenius Penula and Cneius Fuluius with their two armies be discomfyted and
slain by Anniball in several battayles. Cap. xxxviii.
IN THIS mean season were the Consulles entered the fields of the Campanes,
their men ouerspreading the country, robbynge, spoylynge and wasting in
diverse places, which being perceived, Mago with his horsemen, by the healpe
of the towns men, issued out sodaynely on them: and or ever they could
gather together in order of battle, slew of them one thousand, and five
hundred. Which loss caused the consuls more circumspectly to work in all
their procedynges afterward.

Anniball heryng of this prosperous bataile of the Campanes in his absence,
drew nere unto Capua with his army, thinkyng that the Romans should be much
less able to endure his power joined to the Campanes. Wherefore the third day
after his coming, he displayde his baners, and set his company in order and
goodly array, ready to fight. The Romans likewise made them ready, and the
horsemen on both sides fought strongly for a season, till both parts
perceived a strange army coming toward them: whereof another of them were
privy. The truth thereof was, that C. Cornelius, than bearing the office of
Questor at Rome, had taken the legio^s, which the year before were under
Sempronius, and was coming to the aid of the consuls. but his coming
unknown made as well the consuls affraide, as Anniball: so that as it were by
agreement, both parts withdrue to their camps, the Romans having somewhat more
loss tha^ the Cartha gine^ses. Than the consuls, wylling to draw Annibal away
from Capua devised the night following to depart away. Fuluius with his host,
went to distroy the fields of the Cumans. Appius with his host went to the
Lucanes. Anniball in the morning, having knowledge of their sundry departing
diverse wais, was a whiles in dout, whether of them he might follow: t the last
he determined to follow Appius, wherein he was much deceived. For he, leadinge
him a great compass about the countries, at his pleasure, returned again an
other way to Capua. Than fortune a while smylyng on Anniball, sent him such
chances, that he was a season stayed in those parties. One was the folishe
hardy enterprise of one Centenius Penula, a gentylman of goodly stature of
body, and of noble courage of mind, correspondent to the same.

This Centenius, being brought into the senate house by P. Cornelius Sulla,
desired of the senators, that he might have delivered him only.v. M.
soldiers, with whose help he doubted not, but that with the knowledge that he
had, both of the countries and also of the crafty feats of his ennemy, he would
with the same subtlety and policies deceive Anniball, by which he before had
deceived the Romans. This his unwise promise unto them, was as unwisely
believed of them. And where he demanded but.v. M. they gave him.viii. M. men:
and he in the countries as he went gathered together almost as many mo, of
such as willyngly went with him, having hope in his courage and promise. With
this noumbre of men he came into the fields of the Lucanes, where Anniball had
rested him and his company, weary of the chase of Appius Claudius. When either
of them saw others army, they incontine^t put their folk in array. The match
was not equal another of capitaines nor of soldiers: nevertheless the
bataile endured more than two hours. Centenius perceiuinge his part to suffer
the worse, and fearing, lest if he should live after his men were slain, he
should suffer great shame and infamy during his life, for the loss of such a
number of men by his folishe enterprise: at the last willingly he entered the
thickest prease of his enemies, where he was shortly slain, and than his men
fled on all parts, but they were so hard chased with horsemen, that of that
great company, there escaped scant one thousand.

One other happy chance fortune sent to Annibal, as it were for a farewell or
leave taking of him, before she thought to depart to the Romans: the occasion
thereof was, that one Cneius Fuluius, bearing the office of praetor, lay than in
Apulia with his host, besiegyng such towns as before were come to the amity
of the Carthaginensis. And in his busynes he had so well sped, and was become
so welthy and rich, both he and his men, with prays which they had taken,
that leauyng all good order of war, or the peynfull pursuit thereof, they
were grown into slouthe and sluggysshe ydelnes. Of their indiscreet order the
Appulians sent word to Anniball by messangers. And he knowing by experience
what would follow the governance of an army by an unwise capitane, whereof of
late he had the trial by Centenius, with speed he removed into the costis of
Apulia. When the Romans had knowledge, that their enemies approached, and were
oven at hand: they were all minded to have displayde their baners,. and to
have run to batail without the commandment of their capitain. The night
following, Annibal perceiving their great have to battle, commanded.iii. M. of
his light men of war, to lie privily hyd in woods bushes and couertes, next
adjoining, gyuing them a sign or token, at what time they should issue out,
and assail their enmies. Than caused he Mago, with.ii. M. horsemen, to lie
privily in the ways, by which he demed the Romans would flee after their
discomfiture. These things in the night time being wisely disposed, yarly in
the morning he came with his host into the fields, putting the rest of his men
in goodly array.

On the other side Fuluius the praetor made no tarying, being much enforced
thereto by the hasty wilfulnes of his soldiers: Wherefore with such aduysement
as they came into the field, with such like aduysement were the batayles
ordered. For every man went to what place him seemed best, and chose his company
with whom he would be: and sometime changed his place again at his pleasure. The
forward and the left wing were first ordered, and that all in length, and of a
small thyknesse. The Tribunes cried to them, to set more strength of men in the
myddell of their battles, or else their enemies might easyly go through them
with small force at their pleasure. But they were so wylfull and hasty, that
they gave no ear to their words. By that time were the Carthaginenses come
in good order ready to join: at whose first cominge with great noise and
brute, the Romans were put to the wors: whereupon the capitayn, seeing all like
to go to mischief, took his horse, and with two hundred horsemen with him,
fled. The rest, that abode, were almooste all slain. for of.xviii. M. of the
company, there escaped not past.ii. M. alive. The tents and stuff was also
taken by the Carthaginenses, which was a good pray. The tydinges of these
great sodayn losses were brought to Rome, which caused the city to be in
great fear and mournyng. Nevertheless by cause both the Consulles, with
their armies were safe, and did somewhat prosper in their affairs, they took
the more comfort to them. And incontinent sent messangers to the Consuls,
wylling them to search for all such as were escaped at these two battles, and
that they should be gathered together, and called unto them: lest either for
fear or for despair, they would yield them to their enmies, which thing with
all diligence they did execute.

The city of Capua is beseged by the two consuls, Anniball comes to the
succor of the citeze^s, gives the co^suls battle, from thens goth to Rome
ward with his host, to the intent thereby to draw the co^suls from the siege of
Capua. Ca. xxxix.
IN the mean season was Capua compassed and besieged by both the consuls, and
great provision of corn made for the same, and laid in garners in the castle
of Casselinus Than sent they to Suessula for Claudius Nero the Praetor, who
leauyng a small garrison there, came him self to them to Capua with all his
power. Thus was Capua compassed with three greatte armies on three parts, and
to enclose the citezens the more surely, they prepared to compass the hole
city with a great diche. And thereupon they made many castles a good distance
the one from the other. The Ca^panes thinking to let their work, issued many
times and fought with the Romans but their fortune was ever such, that they
lost still of their me^, and at the last were constrained to keep them within
the walls of their city. but before the warkes or siege was so strait and
strong, they had sent ambassadors to Anniball, complaynyng, that he had
forsaken them and his city of Capua: and that if he did not shortly succor
them, they must yield them to the Romans. To whom Anniball answered, that of
late he had res^ued them, and raised their siege ones, and that shortly he
would come to help them again, not doubting, but the Romans should be unable
to resist his power at his coming. With this comfortable message they
returned to their city, which they found so compassed with a double dyche,
that with pain could they find the mean to enter into it: neither could
they have entered, had not the letters of P. Cornelius the praetor been, wherein
he aduysed the consuls, before the dyche should be fully finysshed, to
proclaim, that as many of the Campanes as would issue with their baggage and
bags, before a day by him lymitted, should go free where they would, and have
their goods their own. After that day, so many as remained, they would take
and use as their enemies. But this proclamation was so disdainfully taken of
the Campanes, that beside that there would none issue out of the city, they also
spoke proud and opprobrious words in dispite of the Romans. Whervppon the
works of the dyche were ended, and the city fully enclosed.

Anniball, desirous to succor his great friends of Capua, left al his heavy
carriage among the Brucians, and with a great number of chosen horsemen and
light fotemen, hasted thither as fast as he might, and after his hooste
came.xxxiii. of his elephantes. With this army he came to the valey that was
under a mountayn adioynyng to Capua, called Tifata, er the Romans had any
knowledge of his coming. Than sent he spies to the Romans host to Capua,
commaundynge them, so soon as he should give them battle on his part, that
Bostar and Mago, with the horsemen and garrison of the Carthaginenses,
assemblynge also all the power of the citizens, should sodaynely issue out of
the city: and with force assail their ennemies. This divise of Anniball was
executed with so sudden cry and clamoure, that the Romans were in great
fear and danger. Nevertheless with as great speed as they could, they
prepared their battayles, and dyuyded their people. Appius Claudius went to
withstand the Campanes, and Fuluius went against Anniball. Claudius was
strong enough for his ennemies, but Fuluius was hardly handled of the
Carthaginenses and Spaniardes. One company or legion of his men were driven
back, and than a great company of Spanyardes, with three elephantes, had
broken the myddell ward of the Romans, and were come to the trench of the
camp, ready to enter into the tents and camp of their enmies. When Fuluius
saw, what danger his people and camp were in, he cried to Q. Nanius, and
other pety capitaines, exhorting them to assail that company of Spaniardes,
that fought at the diche: showing them what danger all was in, unless they
might sone be confounded, which was easy enough to be done, sens there was of
them no greatter a number. Nanius was a strong man, and of a huge stature. And
when he heard the consulles exhortation, anon he took the standerde from him
that bare it, and commaundyng his company, boldly to take part with him, he
set furthe toward the Spanyardes, with a great courage. As soon as the
Spaniardes saw him draw nere, they threw plentye of darts at him; and
began violently to assail him. But he another being stayde with the
multitude of his ennemies, nor with the darts that were cast at him, with
great force went stylle forward, till by the help of Marcus Attilius, Portius
Lucius, and other, they had slain the elephantes, and made great slaughter also
of Spaniardes.

On the other part, the Campanes were driven back, with the garrison alsoo of
Numidians and Carthaginenses: so that the battle was strong even at the
very gate of Capua, that was toward the river of Vulturnus. This gate was
garnished with Crossebowes darts and other such ingyns, whereby many of the
Romans were wounded by the shot out of the tower of the gate. Among other,
the Consul Appius Claudius was soore hurt on the breast under the left shulder.
Nevertheless the citizens with their helpers were driven into the city with
great slaughter and loss of their company. Anniball seeing the slaughter of his
Spaniardes, and that the Romans so manfully defended their camps, he caused
his people to withdraw them, and made the horsemen to abide hyndermoste for
the defense of the footmen, if their ennemies happed to chase them. The
Romans were very egre, and would have followed them in the chase, had not
Flaccus caused to sound the retreat.

In this battle Anniball wrought one crafty point, he sent diverse of his men
forth, that could speak the latin tunge, into diverse parts of the hooste of
the Romans, which should in the consuls name and behalf declare, that the
Romayne camps were taken and spoiled. Wherefore he wylled every man to save him
self by fleing to the next mountayns, sens by longer tarying, the greater
should be their loss. This crafty deceit made many of them amassed: but at the
last it was espied, to the great slaughter of their ennemies.

After this battle the Romans kept them in their camps, and so straightly
besieged the city, that Anniball saying he could no more draw them forth to
bataile, another through the camps of the Romans have any way to enter into
Capua, fearyng lest his vitayles should be cut from him and his host: he
determined to depart from thens. And than he ymagyned, that he would go toward
Rome, not doubting, but when the Romayn capitaynes did perceive Rome their
head city to be in any danger, that either one or both would leave Capua, and
come to the defense thereof. And than their powers being divided, both parts
should be the weaker: and he trusted, that either he or the Campanes should
have a fair day of some of them. One thing troubled him soore, lest the
Campanas seeing his departing from them, would incontinent yield the city to
the Romans. Wherefore by fair words and great gifts, he had gotten one of
Numidia to go with his letters through the camps of the Romans, as one that
was run away from the Carthaginenses army: and when he should come to the
further part of the host toward the city, than secretly to enter into Capua,
and deliver his letters, which were full of comfort, declaring his departing to
be for their profit, to the intent only to withdraw their ennemies from Capua,
to defend their own city, bydding them not to despair, but to take patience
for a season, trustyng shortly to lose them of the danger they were in. Sone
after he departed with his host, and passed the river of Vulturnus, taking the
way toward Rome. His coming caused great heaviness in the city. The senators
consulted, what was best for to be done in this dangerous case. At length it
was agreed, that Q. Fuluius should come from Capua, with a certain legions with
him, leaving his fellow at the siege with a number sufficient for that purpose.
Q. Fuluius, having this commandment, took with him.xv. M. fotemen, and one
thousand horse men, and followed Anniball as spedily as he could. Now was
Anniball come within.iii. miles of Rome, where he pitched his tents, and made
his camp on a river side. And soon after came Quintus Fuluius Flaccus into
Rome with his army, and consulted with the senators of the affairs that were
to be done touching their enmies. Than took Annibal.ii. M. horsemen with him,
and camme to the walls and gates of Rome, riding from the gate called Porta
Collina, to the temple of Hercules, viewynge the situation of the city, and
the strength of the walls. This bold and high mind of Anniball, in so doing,
Fuluius Flaccus could not suffer: but incontinent sent forth a great number
of horsemen, who with force drove their enemies to their camp. The next day
Anniball came into the field with his host in good array, ready to give
battle. And Flaccus having with him the two new consuls, that of late were
chosen, with their powers, made him ready also to battle. Thus when both
parts were ready to go together, abidynge the chance of fortune, whether of
them should be master of the noble city of Rome: there came suddenly on them
so vehement a storm of rain and hail together, that both the parts were
feign to withdraw them to their Camps. The next day they were likewise
redye to join battle, when a like storm also departed them again. And
after their departure incontynente the wether waxed very bright and fair, and
all the wyndes ceased, which evil chances took away the hearts and courage
from Anniball and his company, for ever to enjoy the city of Rome. Wherefore
having no further hope thereof, he returned back in have to the Brucians: And
the consul Quintus Fuluius returned to Capua to his fellow.

The oration of Vibius Virius concerning the yeldyng of Capua, the Romans
receive the town, slay the senators, and convert the grounds thereof to the
profit of their city of Rome. Cap. xl.
THe Campanes perceiving the return of Quintus Fuluius, and not of Annibal,
iuged them selfs than to be utterly forsaken of him. Wherefore weeping and
mourning the noble men kept them in their houses, loking daily for their own
deaths, and destruction of the city. The hole charge of the keeping thereof was
in Bostar and Hanno, captains of the garrison of the Carthaginenses. They
fering their own estate, sent privily letters to Anniball, somewhat sharply
written, wherein they blamed him, not only for leauyng the city of Capua to
the hands of the Romans: but also that ^e, committing his capitaynes and his
sure friends and soldiers of his retinue into the hands of his enemies, to
suffer tourmentes intolerable, was him self gone to the Brucians, because he
would not see before him the taking of Capua. Wherefore they said, in case he
would come again to them, and return his hole power thither, they with the
hole power of Capua, would be ready to break forth on their enemies, trusting
to win thereby much honor. They said also, that his coming over the
mountains was not to war with the Rhegines, or with the Tarentines, but with
the Romans: and where the Romain legions were, there should the army of the
Carthaginenses also be. And so doing, he had for the most part ever good
speed, as at Cannas, at Trasymenus, and diverse other places, by giving them
bataile valiantly.

These letters were sent by one of Numidia, an espy, that counterfaited him
self to be run from the Carthaginenses army for the hunger that daily oppressed
the city. Other letters also of the same effect, were sent by diverse other
Numidians, but it chanced, that a woman, whom one of the messangers had kept
as his harlotte, feelyng great hunger in the city, ran out of the town
into the tents of the Romain consul Flaccus, and declared unto him of such
an espy, that was in his camp, which had letters to conueye to Anniball. This
man was found out. And when he came before her, hedenyed any part of her
accusation to be true: he denied also, that he knew the woman. But when he
saw tourmentes prepared for him, he confessed the hole truth, and also he
confessed, that many other of his facion were among the Romans, who waited but
their time, when they might escape from the Romayn host with like letters to
Anniball. Thereupon search was made, and above.lxx. of them taken: who were
beaten first with rods, and than had their hands stricken of, and were sent
again into the city, to their captains.

When the capitayns saw that extreme punyshement showed to their messangers,
their hearts began to fail them. Whereupon Lesius that yererular of the city,
called a general counsel: In the which many of the senators moved, that
ambassadors should be sent to the Romayn consuls: but Vibius Virius, who was
the chief causer of the yeldyng of Capua to Anniball, being demanded of his
opinyon therein, answered, that all they that spoke of peace taking, or of the
yeldyng of Capua, ought to remember, both what they would have done, if they
had had the Romans in their power, in like case as they had them, and also
what the Campanes were like to suffer, when they were submitted wholly to their
pleasure.

Let us (said he) remember, how leaving their frendshyp, we submytted us to
Anniball: and not contented therewith, we slew all the Romans left here in
garrison with us. And to have the certain knowledge of their hearts and envy
toward us, let us call before us their acts done of late against us, and
thereby ye shall perceive, what kyndnes we are like to have at their hands.
Anniball a stranger, and their utter enemy being in Italy, and the country on
all parts fulfilled with war: yet they leauyng Anniball, and all other their
business, sent both the consulles with their whole armies, to besiege Capua,
where we by long contynuall keeping of the same siege, are almost famished with
hunger. but for further proof of their ^^^yee toward us, let us consider, that
although Anniball coming to our succors, had almost won their camps,
said many of their men, and put them in great ieopardy of losing all that they
had: yet all that ieoperdous peril of loss never could move them to remove
their siege. Afterward when he had passed the river of Vulturnus, bournynge the
fields of Calenus their fath full friends: yet could not the hurtes of them
call the capitaynes from our miserable siege. Ye than he caused his baners to
be displayed before the walls of the city of Rome, saying: that onles they
would leave Capua, he would take their high city of Rome from them. Yet would
they not leave the siege of Capua, bears, wulues, and all wyld beasts, be
they in never so great a rage and fury, if a man goo to their caves, where
their young whelps lie: anon they will leave all that they are about, and
run streighte to the defense of their young: but the furyous Romans, when
Rome was compassed about with their enemies, another for their wives and their
children (whose lamentable wepinges might be heard almost hither) another for
their houses, the temples of their goddis, nor for fear of violating the
Sepultures of their auncetours, could be withdrawn from the siege of Capua,
so desirous they be to execute on us grievous punyshement: And so sore they do
thyrst to drink of our bludde. And but reason: for happily we should have done
likewise to them, if fortune had deserved us. Wherefore sens it is the pleasure
of the goddis, that needs I must dye: yet will I choose me a death, both
honest and gentle: whereby I will escape the torments and dispites that mine
ennemies trust to put me unto. When Fuluius and Claudius shall solempnely with
triumph enter into Rome, I will not bounden be drawn before them as a spectacle
or wondryng stock, and after put in prison, or being tied to a post, suffer
my body to be scourged, and at last have my head stryken from my body with the
axe of Rome, another will I live to se my country distroied and bourned, or to
see the noble matrons and maidens of Capua ravished and defouled. In the
beginning of the flourishynge of the city of Rome, the Romans distroyed the
city of Alba, and threw it down to the ground: yet had they their original
from the same city, what trow ye than they will do to Capua, which they hate
more than they do Carthage? Therefore friends, so many of you as be desirous to
dye, before ye se these so many and so spiteful miseries, come this day to
dinner with me, your meat is already dressed: and wha^ we be well filled with
wine and good meats, a cup of drink, that I will first drink my self, shall
be borne about to every one of you: and that drink shall deliver the body from
torments, the mind from rebukes, the eyes and the ears from the sight and
hearing of all cruel dispites that be prepared for people that are overcome.
After when we shall be dead, our servants shall be ready to throw our bodies
into great fyres made for the purpose, there to be bourned, and so shall we
never come into the hands of our enemies. This is the only honest and free
way to dye, whereby our ennemies shall marvel and wonder at our noble courage.
And Annibal shall thereby well perceive, that he has forsaken and betrayde his
valyant and faithful fellows.

This oration of Vibius was heard and well allowed of many mo than had hearts to
follow it, or put it in execution. for the more part of the senators said,
that they had often times in wars had experience of the pity and gentylnesse
of the Romans showed to their ennemies in such extremity, not mystrustyng,
but they should find them merciful now to them, upon humble request to them
made: and thereupon determined to send legatis to the co^sul, to yield them up
Capua.

Vibius Virius went home to his house to dinner, whom xxvii. senators followed,
where they dyned, and drunk plenty of wine, to the intent they might have the
less feelinge of the last dredefull drink when it came. At the last they all
received the poison, and went from the table, taking either other by the
hands, and lovingly enbrasyng one an other, lamented their own deaths, with
the destruction of the country. Some remained there, and died, and were bourned
in the fyres made for that intent: some went home to their houses, and there
made their end: so that before the town was delivered to the Romans, none
of them were left on live.

The next day the gates were opened, and the Romans suffered to enter. Than
were all the gates kept by the Romans, that no man should go forth, and first
all the armor and wepons were brought to the Romain capitain: than were the
Carthaginenses of the garrison taken and put in prison. The senators were
commanded to go to the consuls, than being in their tents, from whens such as
were most consenting to the receiui^g of Annibal, were sent to sundry
prisons.xxv. to Cales, and.xxviii. to Theanus, until it was agreed, what
punishment they should have. Their gold and silver was brought in, and
delivered to the officers, called Questores. Claudius the co^sull was much
inclined to take the senators to mercy: Fuluius on the other side would have
them suffer, in example of other rebels and traitors. Wherefore Claudius
remitted all thing to the judgment of the senate of Rome, and sent thither to
know their pleasure therein. Whereupon Fuluius, fearing lest he should be stayed
of his purpose, commanded the tribunes, with.ii. M. horsemen, to be ready to
ride with him at the third blast of a trumpet. With this company of horsemen in
the night he departed from the army, and by that it was day light, came to
Theanus, where causyng the senators of Capua, there being prisoners, to be
brought before him, incontinent be caused them to be violently scourged with
rods, and after to have their heads stricken of. From thens, as fast as he
might he hied to Cales, and there likewise sat upon the judgment of the other
senators of Capua. but whiles they were going to execution, one came from the
senate of Rome, riding in great have, with letters, willing him to stay the
judgment and execution of the punishment of the Ca^pane senators. Than Fuluius
judging the letters to be written for that intent, never disclosed them, but put
them in his bosom, saying to the officers that they should proceed quickly to
the execution according to the law: So were they also whipped, and after had
their heads stryken of. Than the consul drew forth his letters, and read
them, saying they came very late, to let the thing that was already done. From
Cales he returned to Capua and there put diverse other in prison, beside many of
the city that were sold. Tha^ was there great debate in the senate at Rome
whether the city of Capua should be burned and utterly dystroyed, in exaumple
of other rebels or not. Much it moved them so to do, for that it was a
great and a strong city, and a very nere neighbor unto them: which if it
should be an ennemy again to Rome, as it late was, should greatly dysquiete
the Romans. Nevertheless in conclusyon, considering the fertility of the
ground, which was the best of all Italy, they agreed to use it to their
profit, having plowmen laborers and other to manure and till the grounds, and
the houses to be inhabited with rude people, and men of handy crafts: so
that it should be a city of no body politic, nor have senators, or other
commune counsel or rulars, but only a judge yearly to be sent from Rome, to
minister justice among them. By this mean was the city preserved from utter
dystruction, and the profit thereof, with the fields adjoining, employed to
the common profit of the Romans.

Marcellus wynneth the city of Syracusa in Sicilia. P. Scipio, and Cneius
Scipio are slain in Spayn, with a great number of Romans. Cap. xli.
DVringe the business of Capua, and the wars about the same, fortune also
favored the Romans touching their affairs in Sicilia. For Marcellus,
captain of the Romans army there, so wisely and circu^spectly governed him
self and his people, that he wan the noble city of Syracusa. In which he had
abundance of riches, as great as if he had taken the great city of Carthage,
with which (it was thought) in all things it might well as than have been
compared. In the end of the year, when the time of chosing of new consuls was
come, Marcus Marcellus, for his well proved experience, was chosen consul, and
appointed to match Anniball concerning the wars of Italy. And Marcus Valerius
Leuinus was elect the other consul: to whom the end of the wars of Sicilia
were wholly committed: who by his industry, and by the treason of certain
Numidians, wan the town of Agrigentum, whereby he drove Hanno, Epicides, and
all the army of Carthage out of Sicilia: and soon after brought the hole
country into the subjection of the Romans.

While the wars of Sicilia and about Capua were brought to this good pass,
Cn. Scipio and Publius his brother, were as busy in Spain, but not with like
success. They had cou^sailed together, the summer following, so to follow the
wars, that the Carthaginenses should be clean driven out of Spain. And to be
strong enough therefore, they hired.xxx. thousand men of war of Celtiberia.
The power of Carthage was divided in.iii. armies, governed by three capitaines,
Asdruball, the son of Gysgon, and Mago, these two capitaines lay.v. days
journey from the Roman legions: the third, which was Asdruball, the son of
Amilcar, the ancient captain of the Carthaginenses in that countreye, lay
at Anniturgium, more neerevnto the Romans: and had in purpose the summer
following, to pass the mountains, to conueye his army to Anniball. This his
purpose to let, the two Scipios thought first to assail him aloone from
his company, not doubtyng, but they were strong enough so to do. Their
greattest fear was, lest when they had overcome him, that the other Hasdruball
and Mago, hearing thereof, would flee into the mountains and straytes with
their power, and so prolonge the wars in Spayn. Wherefore to make an end of
all their trouble at ones, they concluded to part their armies in twain, P.
Cornelius with two parts should goo against the two capitaines that lay
together. And Cn. Scipio with the third part of their old army, and with the
Celtiberians should assail the other Asdruball, the son of Amilcar. With
these minds they set forth together toward their ennemies. Cn. Scipio when he
came to Aniturgium, rested with his company in the sight of his enemies, having
a river between him and them: his brother went furthe, as it was agreed between
them. Asdruball perceiving the number of the Romans to be but small: and that
all their strength was in strangers late hired, knowing the faccion of the
people, how untrue and unstable they were: by the mean of Spaniardes, that
could speak the language, for great sums of money he corrupted the princis
and rulars of them: so that they were agreed to depart home with their hole
power. They were not desired or hired to undertake the wars with Asdrubal
against the Romans, but only to depart without fighting. Whereunto they were
sone entreated, partly for that they had as large wages as though they should
have foughten: And again for that they were glad to return home to their
countries and friends, avoiding the danger of war. Therefore sodaynely they
with their baners and caryage departed. The Romans meruayling what this
sudden change meant, enquired of them the cause of their departure. They
answered, they were sent for home to defend their own country which was
oppressed also with war. Other answer could they none get: another were the
Romans able to keep them with force. Scipio knowing, that without them he
was nothing able to encounter Asdruball, and also seeing no way how he
might recover the company of his brother: his ennemies being so nere, and
coming on him, was meruaylously astonished: yet he thought best, in no wise to
meet with him on even ground, he was so far ouermatched. Wherefore a
little and a little he with drew him back, sekyng some place of strength,
where he might succor him self and his small company. That perceiving
Hasdruball passed the river with his hooste, and followed after, with as much
speed as he could.

Now was P. Scipio his brother as much troubled on his part, by reason of
Massanissa, a young lusty prince of Numidia, who being than a friend to the
Carthaginenses, was comme with a good power of Numidians to the succor of Mago
and Hasdruball the son of Gysgon, he was fires and of a greatte courage, the
Romans could another goo abroad for vitayles, wood, or such necessaries,
but he with his Numidians was ever ready to oppress them: and diverse times in
the night he would assail them in their camp, as people that were besieged.
There was also tydinges brought to Scipio, that one Indibilis, with seven
thousand, and five hundred Suessanes, was at hand, coming to the healpe of
the Carthaginenses: whose army being joined to the other, he knew he should
be more straightly enclosed. Wherefore, compelled by necessity to search the
compass of his wit, he determined secretly to take the greatter part of his
army to meet with this Indibilis in the night, intending, where so ever he
met with him, to give him battaylle, he left Titus Fonteius, with a certain
with him, to keep the camp. And going on his way about mydnyght he met
with Indibilis and suddenly assailed him. There was a fyerse conflycte for a
season: And by the sudden setting on them, the Romans had put them to
flyghte with greatte slaughter, had not the Numidian horsemenne, who always
awayted on the Romans where so ever they went) on both parts suddenly
assailed them: yet Scipio so pryuily was in the night departed, that he had
thought thereby to have begiled the Numidians watchemen. Than the battle being
renewed again, Mago and Asdruball with their hosts following after, were at
their backs: so that the Romans knew not to which were best to turn them.
Scipio stille comforted and exhorted his men, and ever where the battle was
most strong, thither went he like a noble and valiant governor, till at the
last him self was thyrst into the right side with a spear, so that he fell
dead from his horse. When the Carthaginenses saw the Romayne captain fall,
incontinent they ran abroad in all the parts of the field joyfully cryinge,
Scipio the captain of the Romans is slain. The fame whereof gave heart to
the Carthaginenses, and caused the Romans to flee. but in the flight there
were mo slain than in the batail. The Numidian horsemen were so fierce in the
chase, and the footmen having light harneis were almost as swyft as the
horses. So that if the night had not come on them, few or none had escaped.
The Carthaginenses after this victory slept not nor stayde, but to follow their
good occasyon offered, incontinent took their horses, and went to the other
Hasdruball, the son of Amilcar, not doutyng of good speed there also. After
that both their powers were met together, there was great joy made between
the capiteynes both for their metynge, and also for the news of their late
victory.

On the other side the Romans were stryken with fearful pensifenes, not for
any knowledge that they had of the loss of their company, for there was such
speed made by theyrennemies, that word thereof could not so soon be brought
them: but their fear was as it were through an inward and secret judgment
in their hearts, of sum evil chance that was happed unto them. Again Cn.
Scipio seeing the host of his enemies increased, by the coming of Mago and
Asdruball, meruailed how they should convey their army thither so soon
without battle, unless his brother were slain. He meruayled alsoo, that his
brother, another did let their coming thither, another yet did appear
following them. For he knew, if he were on line, he would make haste to come
and join his army unto his. In this great trouble of mind, he thought to
withdraw him as much as he might. Wherefore in the night he was gone a good
space of ground, but in the dawnyng of the day, the Numidians were ware of
their departing, and followed with their horses, so that long before night they
ouertoke them, assayling them now on the one side, now on the other, and
sometime behind them: but ever Scipio caused them to keep good array, and to
go ever forewarde in their fighting, to be out of the danger of the footmen
of their enemies that followed them: but the horsemen so vexed them on all
parts, that they could not go far. Wherefore Scipio gathered his small
company up to a little hill, the best that he could there espy for his
advantage. There he took this order. their stuff and carriage was brought into
the myddell of the host, and the horsemen set about the same: without them
were the foot men, who saved the other from the invasion of the Numidian
horsemen, till the rest of the Carthaginenses were come. But than Scipio seeing
him self so unable to resist.iii. capitaynes and their great hosts, began to
divise, how he might by any means cast a trenche about his camp, or make
some hedge to defend them from the invasions of their enemies: but tha^ was
the hill so bare, and the ground so stony, that no bushes or thorns could
there be gathered, nor turues dygged, or any trenche made: and the hill it
self was so flat, that they could by no manner of way let the coming up of
their enemies. Than Scipio to make some show of a defense about the camp,
devised to lay his packes and gross carriage in compass of the camp one upon
an other, and thervppon he caused the packsaddels and other fardels to be tied:
whereby he raised the walls of his camp of a good height.

When the hosts of the Carthaginenses were come, they ascended that small hill
with lyttel pain: but than seeing that strange kind of fortifieng the camp,
which they had never before seen, they were amassed, and stayde for a season.
The capitaynes perceiuyng their sudden stop and wondryng, cried on al parts
to them, saying, that it was great shame for them to be so long or they could
pluck down and deface such a fond devise and mockery, wherewith children and
women would not so long have been stayed. Go to it therefore with courage (said
they) for your ennemies lie lurkyng behind those packes. With these rebukes of
the capitaines, they assayed to enter on all parts. And though a great while
they were let and troubled therabout, at the last in diverse partis they
entered, so few in number could no longer endure against so many. The camp was
won, and many were slain, whereof Cn. Scipio the noble captain was one, a
good number sledde into the woods, that were next unto them, and so escaped,
and came into the tents of Publius Scipio, which than were kept by T.
Fonteius. Thus were both the brethren and capytaynes of the Romans in
Spain, slain within the space of.xxx. days: whose death was greatly
lamented, both at Rome and also in Spain. And it was thought at their death,
that the hole army of the Romans in Spayn was utterly brought to confusyon,
and that country thereby brought out of the Romans hands.

L. Martius is chosen captain of the Roman army, he makes an oration to
his soldiers, and in one night and a day vanquisheth.ii. hosts of
Carthaginenses, wins their camps, and a great pray. Capit. xlii.
IN all this peril and ieoperdous estate, one man was found in the army, by
whose wit courage and fortune the honor and welthe of the Romans was saved
and restored. And that was Lucius Martius, the son of Septinius, a fresh
young man and an active. This Martius had long ben in the wars under C.
Scipio, and of him had learned much experience and policy in the governance of
an army. And now, seeing all things almost desperate, he gathered together
such soldiers, as by fleing were escaped from the last bataile, and also
assembled a good number of men of war out of diverse towns and fortresses,
which were under the obedience of Rome. With all these he came to the tents
of T. Fonteius, ioynyng all the Romans power together, and in short space his
name and honor was so exalted, that by the whole consent of the souldyours of
the army, he was chosen to be their captain and guide. Whereupon he
incontinent applied himself busyly to make sure their camp, and also to make
good prouisyon for vitayles of all sorts. To whose pleasure and commandment
all the men of the host gladly obeyed: Nevertheless, when they heard, that
Hasdruball the son of Gysgon, was at hand with his army, minding to
dystroye utterly all the Romans that were left: and also when they saw
their new captain, making ready his people, and auauncyng his standerdes:
they than remembryng their old noble capytaines, and the great power, wherewith
they were wont to go to all batayles, could not forbear to weep and lament
their myshappe, in such wise, that another their pety capitaynes, nor yet
Martius him self, might appease them: yet did they sometime rebuke their
feminine and unprofitable wepinges, sometime stir them to defend them selves
and their country, and also to revenge the death of their old noble
capitaynes of late slain. While they thus were spendyng the time vnprofytably,
their ennemies were at hand, and redye to assail them, and to enter into
their camps, but than the Romans, tournyng their tears to a furious rage,
in haste took their armure and weapons, and not only defended the entries of
their camp, but also issued out fiercely, and ran on their ennemies, which
kept no very good array, so littell they mystrusted any such resistance. This
sudden issuing out of them caused the Carthaginenses to be stricken with a
fear, and also to marvel, how the Roman host was so shortly increased,
which so late was almooste wholly slain and put to utterance. They mused also
of their sudden courage and hardynesse, and what new capytaine they might
have to trust on, the two Scipios being slain. In that fear and dout they
began somewhat to give back, and than the Romans followed upon them, so
that they were constrained to flee, and in that flight many of them had been
slain, or else the folowers had been put to greatte hurt and
dyspleasure, by their fast pursuit, had not Martius him self sound the
retreat, and half against their wylles stayed them from the chase, and
brought them back to their tents, being still hot, fyerse, and desirous,
by slaughter to revenge them on their enenmies. The Carthaginenses fled
fast for a season: but at the last, seeing no manne to follow them, thought
that they for fear durst no longer pursue them. Wherefore they made no
more such haste, but went softely to their camp, and when they were come
thither, they also regarded not greatly the good watch and keeping thereof, but
left all things negligently and vnsurely, nothing mystrusting their ennemies
that were at hand, for that they demed them to be but the remenaunt and
leauynges of two hosts lately beaten, now being gathered together again.
This negligence of the Carthaginenses was known to Martius by espies.
Wherefore he (at the first appearance) seemed rather rasshely than boldly to
enterprise the night folowinge to invade them in their tents and field,
thinking it more easy for him to win the camp of Hasdruball alone, being
suddenly taken and unprovided, than he should be able to defend his own
camp and field, if he tarried till the.iii. capitaines of the Carthaginenses,
and their arinies, were joined together again, Nevertheless before he would
suddenly and in the night time enterprise so high a feate, he thought first to
make his company privy thereof, and also to make unto them an oration, which
he began in this wise.

The greatte love that I have ever borne unto our good capytaynes (loving
soldiers) as well when they were onlyue, as also now they are dead, and
our present fortune at this time is sufficient to persuade any man, that this
greatte authority and rule, which of your goodness, ye have given me, is both
weighty and full of care and troubles. For although my mind be sore troubled
and disquieted, that it can almost at no time find any comfort or
consolation, but only when fear dryueth away the sorrows thereof: yet in my
dolor, I only am constrained to comfort and relieve you all of your sorrows.
Neither when I am deuysynge, by what means I may save and preserve the
leauynges of the two Romans hosts, for the wealth of the country, can I at
any time be quitte and rid of my sorrows. For even thanne the two Scipios
both by day and by night, do vex and trouble me: sommetyme in dreams they
appear unto me, and many times they awake me out of my slepes, commanding me,
not to leave them, nor yet their noble soldiers your companions, nor the
common wealth unrevenged. And for that intent, they will me to follow the rules
and discipline, that they have taught me: And as (whiles they were living)
there was no man more obedient to their commandment tha^ I was: so likewise,
now they are departed, I shall always be as glad to do that thing, which I do
suppose they would have done, if they werehere with us living. And I would ye
should not think it best (worthy warriors) to mourn and weep for them, as
though they were clean dead, sens they live perpetually through the noble
fame of their honorable acts: but when so ever ye shall, going to battle,
remember any of them, I would have you so vahantly fight, as though ye saw
them setting furthe before you with baners displayde, and exhortyng you to win
honor. Such an imagination caused you yesterday so manfully to vanquysshe and
put to flight your enemies. Wherefore I am much desirous to prove, whether
you, that were so hardy for your own pleasure, dare now undertake as much at
the desire and exhortation of me your captain. For yesterday, when I called
you back from the chase of your enmies, I did it not to pluck down your
stomakes, or to quench your noble courage: but only to defer the same to your
more and greatter honor, and also better opportunity: to the intent that you
being prepared therefore, may assail them vnpurueyde for the same, that you
armed, may take them unarmed and a sleep. Our enemies think nothing less,
than to beinuaded of us in their camp, whom they account as people besieged
within our own camp, let us now therefore enterprise that, which no man will
think, that we dare enterprise. And that shall be found most easy, that
seemed most hard to be compassed: I my self will be your guide in the dead of
the night, and lead you so secretly, and with such silence, that we will be
within their camp, er they shall be ware of our coming. I am ascertained, that
they keep no watch nor order. Their camp shall we wyn at the first brunt.:
And than let me see you make the slaughter among them, that you intended
yesterday to have made, wha^ against your wylles I called you back from the
pursuit of the^: wherewith ye were than very angry. This enterprise I know to be
very great and hardy: but in such necessity such counsels are best. For when
occasion is offered, and opportunity serves, it must be taken: or else it will
flee away without recovery. One of their armies is here at hand, and two
other are not far hense. Now if we assail this one host, there may we
find opportunity and have some equal match. Ye have already yesterday assayed
both your own strength and theyrs: but in case we delay it, being contented
with yesterdays honor, it is ieoperdy, lest all the capitayns, with their
powers come together: and than how shall we be able to sustein the power of
three armies with their governors, whom Cn. Scipio, with his army was not able
to withstand? as by diuyding their hosts our two noble capitaynes were slain:
likewise our enemies being divided and severed, may by us be oppressed. Other
way is there none for us to take now: but only to look for the opportunity of
this next night. Wherefore in the name of the goddis go ye now to your restes,
and cherishe your bodies, that when I call on you, you being strong and lusty,
may enter into the camp of your ennemies, with the same hertes and courage,
that of late ye defended your own Camp.

This new counsel of the new capitayn was well heard, and so much the more
joyfully received, by how much the act seemed to be more bold and hardy.
Wherefore they prepared all things in a redynesse for the departure, and rested
them selves the rest of the day, and a good part of the night. Than Martius
caused them to be called up, and set them secretly on the way forward,
about three of the clock after mydnyght. Than was there an other army of the
Carthaginenses seven miles beyond the camp of Hasdruball, the son of
Gysgon, and in the mids of that way there was a holowe valeye, and therein a
little wood. Into this wood had Martius sent an embushement of Roman
horsemen, to receive such as fled from the first camp, and would escape
to the other. And when he demed the said embushement to be come thither, he
with the rest of his company, went to the next camp, where fynding no watch
nor resistance, they entered the tents as easily as they might have done into
their own. Than suddenly they blew up their trum pettes, and made great
clamor and noise: some slew their ennemies slepyng, some set the tents on
fire, many kept the enter or gates of the camp, that none should issue out.
Thus with sudden noise, fire, and slaughter, the other were so amassed, that
they wist not what to do. They that fled to the gates were there received of
armed men and slain, when they perceived the gates so hepte, many to save
their lives lep touer the dyches or closures of the camp, thynking to flee to
the next camp of the Carthaginenses, and they were also received of the Romayn
embushement and slain, so that none escaped. And if any had escaped, they
could not have brought word of the news to the other camp, before the
Romans came them selves: such speed they made to go to the second camp,
after they had so slain and oppressed them of the first field. Thus in the
break of the day, they came to the second camp, where they found all things
more unready, then in the first: some were gone forth for wood, some on for
ragynge, some for vytailes, many walked up and down before the gate of the
camp unarmed, many were laid down to take their rest: the Romans, being
yet fyers of their late victory, slew first such as made resystence at the
enter of the camp, and after they entered and made great slaughter. With this
great noise, many arose and armed them, and came to the defense of their
fyelde, and thereby the battle for a season was cruel and strong: but as soon as they perceived the fresh blodde on the Romans shyeldes, which was a
sign of the death of their company, they were stryken with such fear, that
they fled as many as might sundry ways, so that night and morninge Martius
vanquyshed ii. of the hosts of the Carthaginenses, and flewe.xxxvii. M. men,
and.i. M. and.viii. C. were taken. He wanne also their tents, wherein was a
rich pray. Among other things there he found a helmette of silver,
waying.C. xxxviii. ounces, and therevppon was graven the Image of Hasdruball,
the son of Amylcar: which helmet was sent to the senate of Rome, and kept
long after in the Capitolie, for an honorable monument or remembrance of the
victory of Martius. And after his time it was called Martius helmet, unto the
time of the burning of the Capitolye. After these great harms and losses,
both given and taken on both parts, they ceased warryng for a while in
Spain, neither party being hastye to put al in ieopardye, tylle they were sure
of more socours.

How Hasdrubal being enclosed in the ^^raightes beside Mentissa, escaped the
danger thereof by mockyng his ennemies: and of the chosyng of young P. Corn.
Scipio to be capitain in Spain. Ca. 43.
AFter the subduing of Capua, Appius Claudius Nero the consul, with an army
of.xii. M. fotemen, and.xi. C. horsemen, was sent into Spayn: where receiving
also the host that was before with Martius and Fonteius, he took the way toward
Hasdrubal the son of Amilcar, that lay with his army at a place called the
Black stone, betwe^e the town of Illiturgus and Mentissa, which was a place
so enclosed, that there was no way to issewe out, but at certain streytes,
which streites Claudius Nero at his first coming, caused to be well and
strongly kept, that the other should by no way escape, but at his pleasure.
Hasdruball perceiving him self to be enclosed on all parts, fearyng his
escape from thens, sent incontinente an harrold to the consul, with faithful
promise, that in case he would suffer him and his company to depart out of
that streytes, without further battle or trouble, he would be contented
forthwith to depart out of Spain, with all the army of Carthage, and leave
the country holly to the Romans. This his large offer Nero gladly received,
and the next day following was appointed for a communication to be had between
them, of the conditions of delyuerynge of the castles and fortresses, which
they had in possession, and what day should be appointed for the Carthaginenses
garrysons to depart with their baggage, without gile or fraud, from the said
castles and towns, and the other to be received in their places. When they
were agreed on this communication, all the same night Hasdruball caused many of
his host, with all his gross and heavy carriage, to be sent forth by the said
streyghtes, being then not so streitly kept and watched. Ever forseyng, that
there should not over many depart at ones that night, to the intent the
smallenes of the noumbre, by making small noise, might with their silence
deceive his ennemies, and also the better to escape the narrow and vncasy
ways of the streighte passages.

The day following the consul and he had long communication, and books were
written of things of small importance, till it drew toward night: and then
they agreed to mete the next morning, to fynishe their deuyses. This night
also Hasdruball bestowed, in sending forth many mo of his host, and more of his
carriage then he did the night before. The next metyng also was in like manner in
vain, the time wasted and spente in devises of couenauntes: and ever in the
night he sent of his footmen and stuff out of danger.

Thus in reasonyng and debatyng, diverse days were employed, till all his
footmen and carriage were escaped. And when a great part of his host was by
this illusion escaped, then began Hasdruball more to stay, and be styffe in
the agreing of couenauntes, in so much that he began to dissent from diverse
artycles, whereunto he had before assented. For as his fear was lessed, his
faith also decressed. The next morning there appeared a great and dark myste
upon the ground, as well on the hills as on the valeys, which served well
Hasdruball for his purpose. For he, thinking then his good hour to be come,
sent to Nero the consul, aduertysing him, that the same day was, and ever had been kept bye holy and sacred among the Carthaginenses: so that in the same it
was not lawful for him, to travail about any business. Wherefore he desired
the communication to be deferred till the day following. The consul yet
thynkyng no fraud or deceit to be in the message, agreed thereunto. And then
Hasdruball with speed issued out of the strayte with the rest of his host,
horsemen and Eliphantes, with as small noise as he could make, and was passed
all danger, before the day waxed clear. But when the son began to appear,
the^ Nero perceiving the camp of the Carthaginenses to be void, and knowing
many festly of their departure, with their untruth and his mock and illusion,
he made as much speed as he could to follow his enemies, with a fervent
desire to fight, if he might overtake them. But they were in safegarde, er he
might atteine unto them, without any thing doing, unless it were small
skirmisshes between the tail of the host of the Carthaginenses and the light
foreryders of the Romayne army.

The end of the year drew nere, and the time of chosyng of officers began to
approach: at which election Marcus Marcellus, and Marcus Valerius Leuinus were
chose^ consulles. Then the senate of Rome, with no less diligence delibered of
the affairs of Spain, then they did of the estate of Italy, for the
sauegarde whereof they determined to augment the army, that was there with Nero
the consul, and to send also with the same a new captain, whom they called
a proconsull. But all their doubt was, whom they should assygne to that
office, to succeed in the place of two so noble capitaynes, as were of late
there slain, in the space of.xxx. days. The day was appointed for the
commune election of this captain, by voice of the senators and also of the
communes. Some looked, when many valiant men would have offered them selves
thereto for the wealth of their country: But none was found among them, that
would enterprise to take on hand that great and perilous charge. The citezens
by great assembles met at the day and place appointed for the nomination. At
which day the noble men looked one upon an other, as people amassed and
destitute of counsel in such perplexity, lamenting the sore decay of the
state of the city.

When none could be found among them, worthy for that rome or office: then
sodeinly young P. Cornelius Scipio, the son of him that was before slain in
Spain, being then but xxiiii. years old, stood up in an high place, where al
me^ might well see and behold him, and desired, that the same office might be
given unto him. when he had declared his mind, anon the hole multitude of all
estates gave to him their consent, criyng: Luckie be his empire in Spain.

Soon after his hasty election a sodeyne silence was among the multitude,
and then all men began secretly with them selves to consider their haste in
their nomination, meruaylyng, and also forthinkyng, that they had more favored
the person through affection, then they did consider his youth by their reason,
many mislyked the fortune that had happed to his stock and family in the same
countrei before, and some were sorye to send one of the same kyn and name, to
govern the countreie, where his father and uncle were slain and lay buried.

When young Scipio perceived their silence, and repentance of their hasty
election, he desired them a little to give him audience. And there he made
them such an oration, in the excuse of his age, and concerning the rule and
affairs to him committed, with such an heart and courage, that he not only
enflamed their hertes with more ardent desire and love toward him, but also he
fulfilled them with a certain hope of prosperous success in his empire. For
the young man, beside many his marvelous virtues and good qualities, where with
he was naturally indewed, he had also from his infancy a wonderful counning
or gift in the noble auauncing and setting forth of the same. Sometime among
the commune people he would show certain dreams or visions, that he had in
the night: sometime he would declare unto them things that he was commanded
inwardly by the gods to execute. These and such like his strange words,
with the manner and facion of living after he was first put in authority,
showed such a magnificence in him, that the commune people both had an
opinion, and also publysshed the same, that Scipio was descended of the stock
or kynred of the gods. Inuentyng a like fable of his conception to be by the
seed of a serpent or snake, as heretofore has been feigned of great Alexander:
affyrming, that the similitude of the same has been diverse times seen in his
mothers chamber: but so soon as any man entered her said chaumbre, it did
suddenly glide and vanyshe away.

This feigned invention of his conception, and the superstitious minds of the
people toward him, he would another affirm to be true, another say they were
false and untrue: but covertly left them to dwell still in their own
opinions: whereby all men had such an admiration of him, that they suffered him
to enjoy that great room, that else was full unmeet for that his young age. The
army, that should be under him in Spain, was increased ten thousand fotemen,
and one. M. horsemen: and M. Julius Sullanus was appointed to help him in all
his busy affairs of charge.

With this new army and a navy of.xxx. ships, he departed out of Italy,
making great speed, tylle he arrived in Spain: where he gathered together all
the power that remained there before, and so sobrely handled him self to al
men, that in his words they judged to be both a royal majesty, and a
steadfast faythfulnes. He praised much the soldiers, which he found there,
first for that not withstanding their ii. great losses of men and capitayns,
yet they kept still that country, defendyng manfully their frendis, and many
their cities of the same: and also that they suffered not their ennemies to
enjoy the prosperous fortune, which by the loss of the Romans was ones given
them: Thyrdly, for that they had driven their ennemies to forsake their abode
on this lide the water of Iberus. But above all other, he had Lucius Martius in
great honor and veneration. And anon after his coming, he bestowed his new
men of war, to places where they should remain for the winter season, and
he him self, after all things were ordinately disposed, went to Tarracon.

The fame of Scipio was no less among his ennemies, tha^ it was among his
friends. They also had a certain fear of him, coniecturyng, as it were by
secret divination, the likely success of things that were to ensue. They
feared him before they had cause, and they feared him the more, by how much
the cause or reason of their fear was hid and unknown. And in this
perplexity of mind, they departed their armies, and went to diverse parts for
the winter season. Hasdruball the son of Gysgon, went to the sea, toward the
pyllars of Hercules: Mago kept the myddell of the country, and Hasdruball the
son of Amilcar, lay nigh the river of Iberus, not far from Sagunt.

The oration of Scipio to his souldyours in Spain, after his coming thither.
Cap. xliiii.
IN. the spryng of the year P. Scipio commanded all his ships, furnished with
men vitailes and munimentes of war, to mete him at the mouth of the river of
Iberus: where he with the rest of his host, cominge by land from Tarracon,
met them. And there thinkyng it necessary to him, to declare his mind to the
old souldyours that were left in Spain, after the last great loss and
slaughter of the Romans, he called them together, and made his oration as
hereafter follows.

There was never new capitayn before me, that had cause to give thanks unto
his souldyours, before he had tried their hardines and diligence in bataile:
but fortune has bound me unto you (louinge soldiers) before I knew this
countreye, or saw the place of our Camp. First for the love and obedience
that ye have borne to my father and mine uncle both quycke and dead:
secundarily for that, when the hole country was as lost, by reason of the
great destruction of our people: yet you by your noble virtue and might, have
obtained the possession of the same again, both to the Romans, and also to
me their deputy here, and successor to my said father and uncle. But now,
sens through the favor of the goddis we intend to work, not that we may
dwell in Spain still our selves, but that the Carthaginenses shall have no
dwelling here: Another only to restrain them, that they shall not come on this
side the banks of the water of Iberus: but that we intend to pass the same
floode with our army, to give them battle. I fear, lest it shall be thought
by you, that this my counsel is more hardy (and spoken after mine age) than
wise, considering the late loss that we have had here, whereby the time should
not serve us to undertake such great enterpryses. There is no manne has more
cause than I, to remember our evil fortune in battle in Spain, who have had
both my father and mine uncle slain here, within the space of thyrty days, as
ye would say, to make here a heap of corpse of our family one upon an other.
Nevertheless, as the loss and lack of friends is displeasant to the mind of
men, even so does fortune and noble virtuous courage forbid a man, in such
case to despair, specially sens thorough fatal fortune our chance has
heretofore been, that after we have been beaten and sustained great losses in
the beginning: yet at the last we have ever overcome our ennemies, that before
suppressed us. I will not rehearse the old hystories of our wars with
Porsena, with the Frenchmen, and with the Samnites: I will only remember the
wars with these our ennemies the Carthaginenses, how many nauies of ships,
how many capitaynes, and how many armies lost we in the first battayles, that
we had with them, before the time of this Anniball? And now in his time at
Trebia, at Trasymenus, and at Cannas, what other things did appear, other than
hole armies with their capitaynes and Romayne Consuls slain? Furthermore, how
great a part of Italy, of Sardinia, and Sicilia have forsaken the Romans, to
follow the amity of Anniball? and how nigh the city of Rome pytched he his
camp? ye he him self was seen almost to ride hard to the gates of Rome. In all
the time of this great ruin and hard fortune, the hertes, the virtue and
courage of of the Romans remained still steadfast hole and immovable: whereby
they have been ever sustained and set up again. After the cruel battle of
Cannas, Hasdruball, with a great army was going over the mountains into
Italye, to help his brother Anniball, and to join their powers together:
which if he had done, according to his intent, there had by this day ben
almost no memory or name of the Romans left. But then ye hardy souldyours, by
the governance of my father, withstode them, and by your good fortune so well
sped there, that thereby the euel chances, which before happened us, were well
releued, and now, through the goodness of the gods are daily more joyful and
prosperous. In Sicilia the great cities of Syracusa and Agrigentum, be won
again, and the hole I Will brought unto the obedience of the Romans, and our
ennemies clean expulsed. In Italy Capua is taken, and the Arpines brought again
under the subjection of Rome. And Anniball in great fear fleing from Rome, is
now bryuen into an angle of the country of the Brutians, where the daily
prayer that he makes to the gods above al things is, that he may safe and
sound escape without danger out of the country of his ennemies. Wherefore
friends, there is nothing more unmeet or more contrary to reason, then that
you, who have in all adversity and low ebb, when the gods were them selves
almost on Annibals party, and yet by the guyding of my father and friends,
have sustained and borne up the estate of the Romans: that ye now, when al
things ar merry and prosperous, should shrynke or suffer your hearts to fail
you. Now the immortal gods, the governors of the Romayne Empire, who
wylled the people of Rome, by one assent to elect me unto this great office and
dignity, the same gods by sundry presages signs and dreams in the night
have showed me, that all things hereafter shall have prosperous success. ye
and that I most at this time do regard, my heart gives me, that ere it be
long, al Spain shall be ours, so that as many as bear the name of a
Carthaginense, shall be glad for fear to flee hens, both by land and by
sea. And reason also gives, that the same which in my heart is conceived,
must needs be true. For diverse of their friends, which have by them ben evil
intreted, have of late sent ambassadors to us for socours. Again, there be of
them three captains, which can not agree among them selves. For which cause
they have divided their army in three parts, and are departed far a sundre.
Wherefore the same, fortune that skourged and distroyed us, does now come on
them. For their fellows and friends, in whom they trust be gone from them,
even as the people called Celtiberi, departed and forsook you, when y^hadde
most need of them. They also have divided and severed their hosts, which was
the cause of the destruction, both of my father and of mine uncle. This
discord will not suffer them to join to gether again. And be ye sure, no
one army of them by it self is able to withstand you. Wherefore I most
hertely pray you good soldiers, love and favor now the name of the
Scipions, which am I the son of your old captain Scipio, an impe grown
out (as ye would say) of a stock that is cut down by the ground. And ye
old knights, so work, that ye may bring me a young captain, with my new
army over Iberus into the country, which ye have passed, after many great
acts and prowes showed: and I doubt not shortly to bring to pass, that as
ye now know in me to be a similitude or resemblaunce of my father and uncle,
by my face, countenance, and features of my body, even so shall ye see in me
also an exaumple of their wit faith and virtue: in such wise, that every one
of you shall say: Scipio our old captain is alive again.

The city of new Carthage in Hispayne is won by the Romans, with a great
pray of gold silver and all other necessaries for the war, with the pledges
of the noble men and cities of Spain Capi. xlv.
When he had by these exhortations kendeled the hertes of his men, he left
behind him to keep that countreye, M. Sillanus, with three thousand fotemen,
and three hundred horsemen: with the rest of his army, which was.xxv. thousand
fotemen, and.ii. thousand and.v. C. horsemen, he passed the river of Iberus.
When he was passed over, many counseled him, saying the army of the
Carthaginenses was deuydedinto three parts, that he should assail that host of
them, which was next unto him, saying, It was peril, if they were joined
together, lest he should not be able to resyste them: but he had imagined in
his mind, that he would first assault Carthago Noua, which was then not
only rich of the richesse of the inhabitants of the same, but also rich by
means of the Carthaginenses, who had leyde there their treasure, armor, with
much other apparayll for the war. There remained also in that City, all the
pledges of noble men and citees of Spain. Beside this, the city was situate
upon the sea, from whense it was easy to pass over into Africa.

The haven also thereof was able to receive easily the greatest nauye of any
prince.

Of this his purpose no man was priuye, but only T. Lelius, governor of the
ships and army by the sea, to whom he commanded, so to tempre his course
with his ships, that his army by land, and the other by sea, might both
sodaynely appear at Carthage in one time. Which his charge was dewely put
in execution. For the seuenthe day after their departing from Iberus, they
met at new Carthage: where incontynente the Camp was made, and tents
pytched on the North side of the city.

Now is the syte or sytuation of Carthage on this manier: In the myddell of
Spain, there is a greatte bosom or goulfe, in to the which the sea has his
full course, within the land the length of five hundred passes, and the
breadthe of the sea in the same place, is much of the same quantity. In the
inner part or furthest end of this goulfe, is a hylle, on which the city is
builded: and it is on two parts, that is to say, on the east side, and on
the southe side, enclosed with the sea, which from the said goulfe or
bosom, rounneth in to the land by the one side of the city. Upon the weaste
side, it is defended with a greatte and broad poole, that rounneth up also a
good part of the North side of the town: The deepenesse of the poole is at
no certayntie: For as the sea does arise on heyghte and ebb low, so is the
water thereof deep or shalowe. Thus is the City on all parts enuyronned with
water, as it were an ylande, oneles it be on a part of the northsyde: and the
main land there, passes not.ii. hundred and fyfty paces in breadth. Wherefore
sens the ground there was no brother, Scipio intended not to make trenches on
that part, for that he thought him self strong enough to keep that little
piece of ground from his ennemies: and also to the intent he might at all times
have recourse to view the walls and strength of the town.

When Scipio had ordered all things ordinately upon the land for the
assault, he than went to the haven, where he in like manner ordered his ships
and his men, that it might appear to the citizens, that they should be
assaulted, as well by water, as by land: he also commanded watch to be kept
upon the water in the night season in every ship. And after all things were
prudently appointed, he returned to his camp, wyllyng before he did any
thing, touching the assault, to instruct and admonyshe his people of his mind,
concerning the same, and to comfort them in that enterprise, he called them
together and made his oration to them in this wise.

Who so ever believes (good soldiers) that ye are now brought hither only to
assault and win this one town, he does more consider your labor and pain
therein, than the profit that shall ensue thereof. True it is, that ye shall
assault and skale the walls but of one only town: but in the obteynyng of
this one, ye also shall win the whole country of Spain. For in this town
are the pledges of all the noble men, kings and people of Spain, who being
ones taken, full shortly shall cause all that ever the Carthaginenses do now
possede, to be yielded unto us, and to be under our dominon. Here also is all the
money and tresure of our ennemies: which being taken from them, they shall be
able no longer to maynteyne the wars, saying they have many hired strangers
in their army. And the same treasure shall meruaylously profit us, thereby to win the hertes and love of these barbarous people. Beside this, here
remains their ordinance, their armor, and al abilimentes necessary for the
war: which being ones won, shall serve well our purpose, and thereof make
our ennemies bare, to their utter destruction. Furthermore, we shall be lords
of a fair and a rich city, whereunto lies a goodly haven, whereby we shall
be served both by sea and by land, of all things that we shall at any time
lack. The having of these things shall not only be pleasant and profitable to
us, but also the lack of the same, shall be a much greatter hyndrance and
loss to our ennemies. For this city has been and is their greattest
strength. Here be their store houses for corn^e, here is their treasaurye, here
is their armory, and their houses stuffed with all things necessary for their
ships of war: generally this city is the only receptacle of all that they
have. Hither lies the right course by sea from Africa to Spayn. And now,
sens I perceive ye be sufficiently instructed, and have all things in good
order, mete for the purpose, let us with good hertes, and all our strength,
make haste to the assaultyng of this new Carthage. Therwithall, every man with
loud voice assented thereto. And he, not thinkyng to be slack in his busynes,
went furthe toward Carthage, causing it to be assauted both by water and by
land. On the other side, Mago capitain of the Cartha ginenses, perceiving that
the assault was ordained to be given both by sea and land, he disposed his men
within the town on this manner: Two. M. of the townsmen he caused to be armed
and put in array on that part of the town, that the Romain te^tes or camp was,
five.C. men he appointed to keep the castle: other.v. C. he assigned to
remain upon a hylle, that was within the city toward the east: The rest of
the people he commanded to be ready to help and succor their companies, in
what place of the town so ever they saw most need to resist. And when so ever
they herd any cry made in any part, through the violent force of the
assauting: than suddenly the gate was open, whereat he caused the.ii. M.
soldiers of the town to issue upon the Romans, at whose first coming,
Scipio caused his men to recule back, to the intent he might draw them further
from the town, and more nere the rest of the Romayne army. At the first the
battle was styf^e, and well maynteined on both parts: but when the
Carthagine^ses per ceiued so great a number cominge from the tents of the
Romans, to the succor of their fellows, they fled with great fear toward
their city, and were chased and slain hard at their gates: which caused no
less tremblyng to be in the city, than was before in the battle. In so
much that diverse places of the walls were left bare and naked, without men
to defend the same: every man lept from his appointed place, so great and
sudden was their fear. This perceived well Scipio, standing on an hill
without the town. Wherefore he commanded his soldiers, to come out of their
tents spedyly, to the assault of the town, and to bring with them scalyng
ladders. His commandment was fulfilled. The fight was strong on both parts.
And to encourage the more his people, Scipio him self came thither, under the
covert of shyldes and pauesses, to withstand the shot that came from the
walls, of arowes darts and other ingynnes which was great. There he sometime
exhorted and coumforted his men: sometime he counsayled them, what was best for
them to do, for the attayning of their purpose. This his presence was
awytnesse, both ofmens valyant courage, and also of their cowardyse, whereby
every man enforced him self to clymmevp, neither regarding the heyghte of the
walls, nor fearyng the men of arms, that fiercely defended the walls. On the
other side of the town like assault was given from the ships, by that part
that lay toward the water: but all to small purpose. For Mago had so
furnyshed the walls with armed men, ever bringing them plenty of darts and
other ordinances, that the Romans lost more than they wa^ne. And above al
things, the saving of the town was the height of the walls, whereby few of
their ladders were able to reche to the top of the same, and those ladders
that were longest, were thereto most weak: so that when one was ascended up on
any of them, other would also clyme after him thereon, and so with heavy burden
being loded, many of them brake, to the great hurt of the climers. whereupon
Scipio, considering his vain labors, caused his weary company to withdraw
them, and to rest them: whereby the Carthagine^ses were not only eased and
releued of their present fear and danger, but also thereby took a hardy courage
and opinion, that the city was out of all danger of taking by any assault, and
that they were strong enough to defend it, till their other capitaines of the
Carthaginenses armies might have time enough to come to their rescous, and to
reise their siege. It drewthen toward the middel of the day, when certain
fysshermen of Tarracon, that had been fishing in their botes on the said great
and large poole, that lay on the northwest part of the town, certified Scipio,
that the water thereof was than at a very low ebb, and also the northwind,
being very quick, and driving the waves with the tide, caused a lower vale,
than had lightly been seen: so that men might well wade over to the walls of
the city, the water being in most places not past the middell of a man, and in
some parts not past the knees. This strange fortune of that unseen low ebb
of the water, Scipio turned to a miracle, saying: It was the will and
pleasure of the goddis, to withdraw at that time the water from that great
pole, to make for the Romans a passage, and to open them a way, by which never
man before had passed. With these strong persuasions, he caused the rest of
his army, which had rested the^ in their tents, during the time of the first
assault, to take ladders and engines, and to give a new assault in the same
place, where they were before beaten back. There began a fierce and a cruel
bickering. Nevertheless the height of the walls was so beneficial to the
citezens, that were they never so valiante and hardy, yet up could they not
get: but were overthrown with small pain to the towns men.

While they were busy and attentife to defend the City, as well there as on
the sea cost, Scipio, with a good number of strong men, secretly withdrewe
him to the said ponde: where he bad his company follow the god Neptunus, that
should be their guide on their way through that shalowe water. Whereupon they
with small labor went over, and set up ladders to the walls, which they found
easy to be scaled, and not kept with any men of war. For that they having a
sure hope in the natural strength on that part, by reason of the water, had
made no munimentes or defense: nor yet left any watch there: every man was
gone to the defense of the other parts, in the which thassault seemed most
fierce and dangerouse: so that without any resistance they entered the town,
and incontinent made have to come to the gate, where the battle was most busy
and strong. To which wha^ they were com, they found all the townsmen so ernest in
their defense, or in co^forting their fellows, that they neither herd nor saw
the Romans till they perceived them at their backs, throwing of darts, and
sleynge them on all parts, another till that time knew they the town to be won.
Tha^ anon were the gates broken down, and a great nu^bre of armed me^ entered at
the gate, many had by that time gotten in over the walls: some went incontinent
about the town, sleyng all that they met: an other company went in array to
the market place, through the myddel of the City. Than perceived they their
ennemies fleyng, some to the hyl within the town, that was kept with.v. C.
men of war. Mago with a great number with him fled to the castle. Then
Scipio sent part of his host to the said hill, which anon was won, and the
people slain or else taken. The rest went to assault the castle, which Mago
a season valyantly defended: but seeing all the town full of his ennemies, and
that he was not like to have any socours: he yielded up him self with the
castle to the Romans. Then ceased they to make any further slaughter in the
city. Every man went to the spoil of the town: the pray whereof was
great, as well of gold and silver as of ordinance, artyllary, corn,
ships, iron, laten and many other things mete for the apparel of ships:
the certayntie whereof I will not rehearse, for that writars vary much therein.
There was also.x. M. prisoners taken, whereof as many as were citizens, Scipio
let go at liberty, and suffered to dwell still in the town, and to enjoy as
much of their goods as was not before spoiled. Among other prisoners there
were two. M. of crafts men, which he caused to be bo^d men to work for the
common profytte of the city of Rome, puttyng them in comfort, that they should
within short space be made all free, if they would labor and work earnestely
about such necessaryes, as they should have need of in the war. A great
noumber of the rest, that were servants and lusty young men, he sent to be
rowers in his ships and galeys in the places of such as lacked. And he also
increased his navy of eight ships well furnished. Beside al these prisoners he
had also the pledges of noble men and cities, to a great noumbre: whom he
caused to be well kept and gently entreated. The rest of that day Scipio gave
license to his weary men to rest them selves. For there were few, but they had
all the day before ben sore trauayled with fyghtyng in one place or other. The
custody of the town he gave to Cn. Lelius and his company of see men, and him
self went to his tents.

Of the gentylnes of Scipio, in restoryng a fair young virgin undefiled to
Luceius, unto whom she was fyaunced. Cap. xlvi.
ON the morrow he assembled all his host together, and first he gave humble
thanks and praise to the goddis, that had given into his hands in one day so
great, so noble, and so rich a city, the like whereof was not to be found in
Spain. Into which his ennemies had gathered together the treasure both of
Africa and also of Spain, in such abundance, that there was but little or
nothing left for the^: the Romans having great plenty of all things. Next he
much praised the noble courage and valyantnes of his men of war, whom another
the sudden excursation of their ennemies out of the town, another the high
walls or waters of the same, could make afraid or let them of their
enterprise: another yet their castles and strong towers, could resist their
powers. Above other he praised much twayn, that first scaled the walls, and
entered the town, to each of them he gave a crown of good value: his other
soldiers he rewarded, every man after his virtue and merits: but specially
Cn. Lelius, the governor of the nauye, he praised and much loved, to whom he
gave, for a reward, a crown of gold, and.xxx. oxen.

Than caused he the pledges to be brought before him, willing them to be of
good comfort, and that they should consider, that they were now in the power of
the Romans, whose natural propretie and desire is, to bind men through
their benefytes shewinge, to love them, rather than by compulsion to keep men
in fear of them. And had leauer to join strange nations in amity with them
by faithful fellowship, then sorowfully to keep them in miserable servitude.
Than he took the names of the cities, that had their pledges there, and to the
ambassadors that by chance were with him present of any of the said cities,
he, incontinent delivered the pledges unto them: to the other cities he sent
messangers, willing them to send unto him for them, and they should have
their pledges freely delivered. There were also taken many noble matrones and
honest maidens, whom he committed to sobre and honest men to be kept, without
any force or dishonor to be done unto them: among other captives there was one
virgin brought unto him, of so excellent beauty, that where so ever she went,
all men delyted to behold her. Scipio enquired of her, of what country she
was, and of what kynred she was descended: and he perceyned by her, that she
was betrouthed or made sure to a young prince of the Celtiberia^s, whose name
was Luceius. Whereupon he incontinent sent for the said young man, and also
for her parents. At whose coming, knowing that the young man was soore
enamoured of her, he thus said unto him: I being a young man, have sent for
you, that are also a young man, to come to me, the cause is, for that when this
young maiden, being fianced or ensured to you, was brought to me, by my
soldiors, I herd say, that you entierly loved her. And her beauty witnesses,
that you have good cause so to do. If I might laufully enjoy her pleasant
love, and were not otherwise occupied in my mind about the affairs of the
commune welthe: I could perchance bear her my love: and desire to enjoy the
same: but now I will bear favor to your love, that of right ought to have
her. She has been here with me as well and honorably kept, and her virginite
preserved, as though she had dwelled still with her own parents, to the intent I
might make of her a present to you most acceptable, and for the conservation of
mine honor. And for this my gift, I require of you, but one only reward, that
is, that you from he^sforth become a loving fre^d to the Romans. And if ye
esteem me to be a good or an honorable man, as my father and uncle before me
were reputed for to be: think, that there are in the noble city of Rome many
like unto us. And trust me never, if any people can this day be found on the
earth; that you will be gladder to have the love and friend ship of, or that
ye would be more sorry to have the displeasure of. The young man, after great
thanks given him, praide the gods to reward him for his goodness, where his
power suffised not: Then were the parents of the maiden called forth, who had
brought with them a great sum of gold for the redemption of their child.
But when they perceived, that he had given her freely to her husband, they
desired him to take a part thereof, as of their gift, for the declaration of
their good hertes toward him: affirminge, that his receyuinge thereof should
be as joyful unto them, as the restitution of their dowghter undefiled.

Then Scipio, being overcome with their long and vehement intercession,
caused the said sum to be laid on the ground before his fete, and calling
Luceius again to him, he said: Beside the dowere that ye shall receive of your
father in law, for the marriage of his daughter, ye shall also take this gift
of dower at my hand. With which his great gift, and also much honor to him
done beside, he returned home to his house and country, declaring to every
man the honor and magnifycence of Scipio, saying, that there was a young man
come most like unto a god, who both with his power in war, and also with his
gentilnesse and liberality in peace, had overcome all the country. This young
gentilman leaving his house and familye in good order, shortly after returned
to Scipio, bringynge with him a. M. CCCC. good horsemen, to the aid and socour
of the Romans.

Then Scipio sent C. Lelius to Rome, to bear tidings of his victory, and with
him he sent Mago, and.xv. other senators of new Carthage, which were, at the
taking of the same city, taken also prisoners, and after he had repaired the
broken walls of the city, and set therein a sufficient number of soldiers,
for the defense of the same: he removed to Tarracon: whyther he had appointed
the legates of all his old friends, and also of his new gotten
acqueintaunce, to resort for a further communication of their aliaunce, and
for the further procedynge in their affairs.

Anniball sleith Cn. Fuluius, with xiii. M. Romans, beside Herdonea:
Marcellus the consul chasith Anniball through Apulia, making many shirmishes
with him. ca. xlvii.
IN this estate were the wars in Spain, during which time the consul
Marcellus took Salapia by treason, and.ii. other towns of the Samnites by
force: where he slew.iii. M. men of war, which Anniball had left for the
keeping of the same towns. And Cn. Fuluius the proconsull, trusting to win
Herdonea from Anniball, which was not very strong of it self, neither had any
garnyson left there, for the sufficient defense thereof: he removed thither with
his army, having the more hope and comfort to atteyne the same, for that he
knew well, that Annibal, after the loss of Salapia, was departed into the
country of the Brutians. But such as were the sure friends of Anniball in the
town of Herdonea, sent him priuyly word by messangers. And he desirous to
keep still his old friends, hasted so with his horsemen and lyghtest footmen,
making so great iourneys, that he was already com nere Herdonea, before the fame
of his comi^g were well known. And to put the Romans in more fear, he appeared
in good array of battle suddenly with baners displaied. Which Fuluius
perceiving, with like hardynes made speed to put his folk in array, and joined
battle with him. Than Anniball commanded his horsemen, that after a sign or
token to them made, whiles the Romans were busy in battle against his
footmen, and every man's eye were occupied busyly: that they should secretelye
cooste the field, and part of them to set upon the backs of his ennemies,
one other part of them to invade their camp and tents with great noise and
slaughter, saying, that he trusted to vanquyshe this Fuluius as he had.ii.
years paste overcome an other Fuluius of his name in the same country. And in
his hope he was nothing deceived. for so soon as the horsemen assailed the
Romans on their backs with great fear and slaughter, anon from the camp was
heard a great cry: whereby the Romans, that before kept array and fought
boldly, were so disinayd, that some fled, and many mo were slain. Among
which the said Fuluius and.xii. tribunes, with.xiii. M. Romans were slain,
and their camp and stuff taken.

Than Anniball, trustyng nothing to the strength of that town, removed the
inhabitants thereof to Metapontus, and to the Thurines. He slew the capitains
thereof, which had secret communication with the Consul, and after he set the
town on fire.

Marcellus the Consulle, baynge nothing afraid with the tydinges of this
loss, sent letters to the senate of Rome, bidding them to be no whytte
discomforted therewith: for he doubted not, but he would cause Anniball to have
but very short joy of his victory. Whereupon he immediately removed toward
Annibal, pitchyng his camp in the plain fields even in the sight of his
ennemies. And soon after valyantly came furthe in order of battle, ready to
fight. On the other side Anniball was no less quick than he. The battle
between them, both of the horsemen and of the footmen, was meruaylous fires
and cruel, neither ceased it, till the night departed the^, with indifferent
loss of both parties. In the night Anniball secretly removed and went into
Apulia. Marcellus in the morning, perceiving the departure of his ennemies,
followed incontinent, and ouertoke them nere unto Venusia. Thus passed they all
Apulia without any notable battle, the one folowinge the other: And ever
Anniball would remove in the night, sekyng a place to deceive his ennemies. But
the consul always followed in the day time, sendynge before him espies, to be
sure from the crafty train of Anniball.

The summer was almost ended, and the time of choosing consuls drew nere, at
the which chusyng Marcellus should have been him self: but he sent his
letters to Rome, affyrmynge, that it should be right hurtful to the commonwealth, if he did depart one foot from Anniball. For his absence, yea his only
ceassyng to assail him, should give him much courage. Whereupon he was
commanded to abide stylle with his army. The other consul Liuius was sent for.
Than were chosen consuls Q. Fabius Maximus, and Q. Fuluius Flaccus. Beside this
it was determined, that M. Claudius Marcellus should keep also his army and the
wars against Anniball one year longar.

As touching the wars in Spain, it was ordained, that Publius Scipio and
Sullanus should be there governors, not only for a year, but unto the time
they were called from the same by the senate.

About this time came the ambassadors of king Syphax from Africa to Rome,
showing the prosperous battayles that he had fought with the Carthaginenses,
desiring to have the amity of the Romans agreed to him by the whole senate,
which before was moved between him and the two brethren Cneius, and P. Scipio
in Spain. To whose ambassadors the senators not only gave gentyl thanks and
loving answers, but also sent by them to the king, rich presents.

Not long after tidinges were brought to Rome out of Africa, that Massanissa,
the son of king Gala, was come to Carthage with.v. M. Numidians, and that a
great number of other Affricans were hired to go over into Spain to Asdruball,
to the intent that he, strongly accompanied, might depart shortly from thens
into Italy to his brother Annibal, in whom they judged the hope of their
victory to rest.

About the same time came Lelius out of Spain to Rome bringing with him a
great number of prisoners, rehersynge in the senate house the happy winning of
new Carthage in one day, with the gettyng of many new friends in Spain.
These news made them not so merry, as the coming of Asdruball into Italy made
them afraid, consyderinge, that before he was come, all their power was skant
able to resist the only power of Anniball. Nevertheless, with as good chere
as could be, they discharged Lelius, sendyng him again in to Spain with the
ships that came with him.

Marcellus gives battle to Anniball, in which his men be put to flight,
whereupon he makes them a sharp oration, he renews the battayll on the
morrow, putt^th Anniball and his host to flight, with loss of many of his men.
cap. xlviii.
THe new Consul, leaving all things in good order at Rome, departed
toward the wars. Q. Fuluius Flaccus passed Capua, to whom Q. Fabius made
instant request, before he departed, that he would keep straight and quick
wars with Anniball whiles that he did besiege the city of Tarent: which
city, if he might ones take from him, he should have no place sure to go to,
neither know to what cost he might safely turn him: so that he should
afterward have small cause to abide in Italy. The same request he also made to
Marcellus by his letters: who thinking no man in Italy so able to match
Anniball, as he was him self, was so kendeled and stirred with Fabius letters,
that so sone as the winter was passed, and any fode was found in the fields,
able to sustain his army and cattle, he went to Canusium, where Annibal then
lay, and had moved the rulers of the town to yield unto him, leauyng the
Romayne amity. But so sone as he parceyued, that Marcellus was come, he
removed from thense, leaving that plain country, and sought the hylly and
woddy country, which might be more apt for traynes of deceipte for his
ennemies.

Marcellus ever followed him hard, joining almost camp to camp. Diverse
skyrmyshes were made between the horse men of both parts. But Anniball not
mynding to ieoparde all at ones, fled before him in the night. At the last
the other ouertoke him in the plain field: And as Anniball caused his camp
to be trenched and fortified, Marcellus with his men let the works thereof: so
that whether he would or no, he was enforced to do batayl, which thing he had
most eschued. Wherefore they ordered their armies on both parties, and fought
till the night departed them. On the morrow Marcellus early put his men in good
array, and Anniball did the same, exhortyng his men to remember their noble
conquestes at Trasymenus and at Cannas, and not to suffer their gredye and
unreasonable ennemy so to vex them, that they might not have time to incampe
them selves, ye scarsely to look about, or to take breathe. The son when it
ryseth, and the Romain army, do both at one time appear in the fields. But in
case (says he) ye so handle him, that he may ones depart with loss of his
men out of the field, he will herafter be more easy to entreat. With these
exhortations, and also being evil contented with the tedious continual
pursuing of their enemies: they fiersly went to battle, where they fought
cruelly by the space of.ii. long hours. At the last the right wynge of the
Romans gave back, whose place to fulfill, Marcellus appointed an other legion
of men of arms of his company. But as the first reculed with fear, so the
other came fayntly into their places. At the last the Romayn host being more
fearful than shamefast, began to flee. There was slain that day of the
Romans.ii. thousand and seven hundred, whereof.iiii. were capitaines hundreders,
and two tribunes.

Marcellus after that he was come into his camp, made to his soldiers so
soore and cruel an oration, that the words of the angry captain seemed to
them more displeasaunt and peynefull, than the travail that they took in the
battaylle the day before.

I am much bound (says he) to the immortal gods, when ye so fearfully
toumbled together into your tents, that it chanced not your ennemy, after his
victory, to assail your camp also. For no fail, look with what fear ye left
the battle, with like fear also had ye forsaken your camp. What sudden
fear has now invaded you? What thing has caused you so sone to forget,
both the estate of your self, and also of your ennemies? Do ye not remember,
that these be the same ennemies, whom ye overcame and pursued the last so^mer?
these be the same, whom fleinge before you both day and night, ye chased
through the cu^treis. Ye they be the same, that yesterday ye would neither
suffer to flee from you, nor yet give them so much time, as to fortifye their
field. I will no more rehearse things, wherein ye may glory: but now will I
declare things, whereof ye ought much to be ashamed. Yester day ye departed
from the battle with even hand: and now what has this day or this night
ben so great a let unto you, or taken from you? Was your army thereby any
whit lessed, or their power any whyt increased? Truly me thinks now, that I
speak not to mine own company of soldiers, nor yet to Romans. I perceive
here nothing of them, but bodies and armor. For if ye had had the same hertes
and mi^des your ennemies should never have looked you on the backs: nor you had
lost none of your standards. Before this time he could never glory of the
slaughter of any of our company, only yesterdaie ye gave him the honor by the
death of your fellows. Then every man cried out aloude to him, desirynge
pardon of the day past: and ones again to try the heart and courage of his
men, when so ever it should please him. Now (said he) truly and I will prove
you again. For I will to morrow in the morninge set you forth in araie, to the
intent that ye as vanquishers may ask forgiveness, rather then as people
vanquished.

On the morrow, after that his men had well eaten and dronken, and made them
strong, when he should put his people in order, he set in the v^warde those
that fled first the day before, and those companies that lost their
standards: and then the other as him best lyked, comaundinge them all,
earnestely to fight and to overcome their ennemies: so that the victory of
that present day might fly and come to Rome, before the sclaunder of
yesterdaies flienge.

When Anniball herd of the fierce courage of Marcellus, he said: We have to do
now with such an enemy, as can neither suffer his good fortune nor badde.
For if he ouercom his ennemies, he gredily still assaileth them: And when he is
overcome, he also fiersly renueth the wars upon them. After these words, he
incontinent brought his host furthe into the field, where the battle was
more cruel than it was the day before. The Carthaginenses ever stryuynge to
keep the honor, and the Romans to avenge the shame gotten the day before.
The advantage of the battle between them abode long in suspense.
Marcellus, as a present witness, was ever redye to comfort and exhort his
Romayn^s. Anniball, saying the doubtefulnesse of the fight and victory, to
put his ennemies to sudden fear, caused his Elephantes to be set against
the forewarde: which at the first coming, brought them out of order, and
did them much trouble and hurt: whereby the one part thereof was left
bare and void of resystence, and the rest had fled also, had not Decius
Flauius a Tribune taken the standerde of one of the bands of horsemen,
commaundynge the company belonging to the same standerde, to follow him
boldly, whom they obeyde: and he incontinent brought them, where the company
of elephantes did most displeasure, causynge most trouble and rumor. Than
badde he them couragiousely to throw their darts and spears at those
beasts: which they did, woundynge many of them: who feelynge them selves
hurt, with greatte rage run away, and could not be stayed by them that rode
on them. The Romans followed them still, and drove thiem upon their own
company of Spanyardes and Carthaginenses, making greatter slaughter among
them, than they had before done to the Romans. And when they saw the
Carthaginenses by this mean brought out of array, the Roman footmen in
order entered and brake the array clean, putting them to flight: who^
Marcellus caused his horsemen to follow. And the chase ceased not, till they were
driven into the yates of their camp, with great loss both of men and of
elephantes. There were slain that day.viii. M. men, and five elephantes. Of
the Romans there were slain three thousand, and very many sore hurt.
Whereupon Annibal, the next night folowinge, removed unto the Brutians: and
Marcellus abode there a season, to cure his hurt soldiers.

Home Q. Fabius Maximus recovered from Anniball the city of Tarent. Cap. xlix.
IN this season Q. Fabius Max. the consul took Manduria with force, and from
thens removed to Tarent, pytchyng his tents hardeby the mouth of the haven,
where he found certain ships, which Liuius the late consul had left
there for the defense of other ships that brought vytayle and other necessary
provision for the castle. All these ships, and also all other that came with
vitayles and provision thither, he charged some with gunnes and stones, and all
kind of weapons inuasiue, sum he laded with scalyng ladders, and other
engyns to assault the town: so that by the sea al things were ready for the
assault. And then he by land also ordered his company for the same. Now to
help his purpose to be acheued, there chanced a small thing in estimation: yet
it proved marvelous happy for the success of his great enterprise. Anniball
had sent to Tarent a crew of men of war of the country of the Brutians. The
capytayne of this company was meruailously enamored on a young woman in the
city, whose brother was then soldier in the host of Fabius, to whom his
sister sent word by letters, of the familiarity and new acquaintance of her
earnest lover, and of his great riches and honor. Whereupon this man
imagining, and trustyng also, that the love of his sister might lead her
lover to do what so ever she would divise, conceived an hope, to do good
thereby, touching the winning of the town. Whereupon he secretly opened his
mind to his captain Fabius, desiring him, that he would ly^ence him to
depart from the army, and to goo in to the city, which he would undertake
to do, by dissembling him self to be stolen away from his company, for the
love of his sister, desyrouse to be a cytezen there. The Consul thynkyng to
prove the effect of his opinion, suffered him to depart. Thus came he to his
sister, and by her means fell in great familiarite with her lover the
capytayne of the Brutianes. And after long acquayntaunce he began covertly
to prove his mind a little and a little. After, when he found some
towardness in him, he set his sister in hand with him, who with her fair
and flattering words so compassed him, that to have her love, he consented
to the betraiynge of that part of the City, where of he was rular and
Capytayne.

When they were agreed on the time, manner, and circumstaunce of the purpose:
the souldyour secretly in the night, was let furthe out of the town, and
came to his capitayn, declarynge unto him what he had done, and what way he
should take, to achieue his enterprise. At the time and hour appointed,
which was the beginning of the night, the Consul had prepared, that on the
sea side in the haven, his ships and men of war thereto appointed,
should vyolentely assault the town. And on an other part the Romans in
the castle, with all their force also, should assail the citizens: and he
with a good number with him, pryuyly drew him to the east part of the town,
where he abode a long season, without making any noise.

There was greatte noise and brute made purposely on the haven side, and on
the side toward the castelle, where least daungier was: So that Democrates
the capytayne, which was than nyghe unto the crew of Brutians, fearing lest
in his absence, the Romans might chance on the other side to win the
town, which to fear he was moved by the greatte rumor and cry of the
cytezens on that part. When he heard all things quiet and at rest on that
part of the town, wherein he was: he with his people hasted toward the
castle side, where he heard the greattest noise.

Than the consul, heringe thenoyse ceased of men of arms, which before were
very loud, judging that the kepers of that ward were gone from thens: he
commanded straight scalynge ladders to be set to the walls on that side
where the Brutians kept ward, which was done without any resystence. For the
Brutians not only made no resystence, but alsoo help them up. Thus entered
they the town, and streyghte went to the next gate, the which they brake,
and caused much of their company to enter with their baners dysplayed. And by
the break of the day, they came into the markette place. The Tarentines
parceyuinge their town to be taken, came with all their power from the
castle side, and from the haven, to the succor thereof: but all to late. For
after the battle was a little begone, they felt them selves far unable
to resist the Romans. Wherefore anon they fled every man to his house, or to
his friends house. There were Nico and Democrates slain in battle.
Philomenes, the chief autour of betraying the town to Anniball, took his
horse and fled: but whither he went, or what became of him, it was not after
known. Great slaughter was made both of the Carthaginenses and of the
Tarentines.

Many prisoners were taken, and a rich spoil. The wall, which Anniball made
to deuyde the castle from the town, was thrown down.

Anniball when he first heard, that Tarent was besieged: he with all have
possible hyed thither to the succor thereof. But when he came nere thereunto,
and heard news of the taking of the city, and by what means, he said: I
now do right well find, that the Romans have also an other Anniball among
them. For even by such craft as we wanne Tarent, by such have we lost it.
Then for that it should not appear, that he were reculed for fear, he pitched
his camp five miles from the city, where he tarried certain days: and from
thense went to Metapontus, where he caused letters to be written by two of the
chief rulers of the city to Fabius.

The contents thereof was, that if it would please the Romans and him, to
receive them into their grace, and to remitte all their old injuries and
wrongs to them done: they would deliver into his hands, both the town,
and also the garnison of the Carthaginenses, which were within the same. Fabius
nothing mistrustinge, sent to them again, appoyntynge a time, when he would
come to Metapontus to speak with them, which letters were straight brough to
Anniball. Who being very ioyouse, to train and deceive the old wise Fabius,
At the time appointed laid a great embusshemente upon the way, where Fabius
should pass to Metapontus.

The same time when Fabius should depart, he sought by diuinations and
auguries, how he should speed in his voyage, as by the kyllyng of a beast,
and therewith to do sacrifyce: and by the luck of birds, as the detestable use
was then, and long before had been among the Romans. Which auguries were so
unlucky and untoward, that they showed to him some evil adventure, if he
went forward in his appointed journey. Wherefore the deuynours or wise men
aduysed him, to tarry still in his tents, for fear of treason.

The Metapontans, seeing that Fabius came not at the day assigned, sent again
to him, requyring him to come to their capitaynes. Which messangers were
incontinente taken and examyned upon the case. And they fearing the tourmentes
that were prepared for them, confessed all the deceyte and treson: whereby
Fabius escaped his death, and the destruction of many of his army.

Scipio fyghteth with Hasdruball beside Betula, dryueth him from his hill,
sleith.viii. M. of his host, takes.xii. M. prisoners, with Massus neuew to
Massanissa, and a great pray in the camp. Cap. l.
IN the same summer time, whiles all these things were done in Italy, P.
Scipio being in Spain, had so gotten the love of the spanyardes, that Edisco,
Indibilis, and Mandonius, three great princes of Spain, were come into his
amity and alliance. Indibilis desired, that their coming might not be
dishonorable unto them, and that no man should reproach them after, that they
were stolen away from their old friends of Carthage, and like light people
were run to the Romans: For he said, they had done worthily at all times
for them, which their kyndenesse was ever recompensed with pride, auaryce, and
many injuries: so that only their bodies abode in the amity of Carthage, but
their hertes had long been toward the Romans: whom they knew ever to
be kepers of their truse taken, and mainteinours of right and equity. Wherefore
he desired Scipio, to receive their friendely coming unto him, according to
their meaning and intent* and as he found them dylygent in their service
doing unto him, so to esteem them. Scipio hertely thanked them, granting
their requests in all things. Wheruppon their wives and children were
restored unto them, which before were captyues with Scipio: and a steadfast
aliaunce of amity was knytte between them. And sone after their hole power of
men of war came to these princes, and joined in camp with the Romans, not
departinge from them, but guided them ever, till they brought them nere the
camp of their ennemies.

By this mean was the army greatly increaced. Yet besides this, by one other
way Scipio polytikely augmented his host. For when he saw no navy of Car^hage
was on the sea, so that he neded not to have any great noumbre of men in his
ships: He brought his hoole nauye to Tarracon, taking all the soldiers,
which were in them, and alsoo the more part of his maryners, with him in the
wars by land. With this great hooste he went forwards, and made such
speed, that secretly he came nere unto the town of Betula, where Hasdruball
lay with his army. At their first coming thither, certain small
skyrmysshes were made between them. But Hasdruball, seeing the Romans power
daily increased, and his to be made less, thought he would ieoparde to
fight without longer prolongynge of time. But he determined to seek a place
of strength, where he might fight to his advantage, and to the more hurt of
his enemies. Wherefore in the night he removed his army to an high hill,
nere adioynynge. In the top whereof there was a fair large plain: on the
back side of this hill, there ran a river, which compassed a good part of
the hill.

Furthermore about the mids of this hill, was there another plain fyelde,
much lower than the other plain: unto the which nether plain, the ascendyng
was hard and peinfull. Into this lower fyelde Asd^uball, the day following, sent
a great number of Numidian horsemen, and other light harnessed fotemen of
Africa, and of the isles called Baleares, now named Maiorque and Minorque.

Scipio riding about his host, showed them their enemies. Their hertes
(says he) will not serve them to fight with us on even ground. Wherefore
they seek out high mountains, trusting more to the strength of the place,
then to their own strength or armor. New Carthage had hye walls, which
nevertheless was scaled by my Romayne souldyours. Neither could the
hyghehylles, nor the castle thereof, nor yet the sea withstand their power. I
know (says he) that these hye places, which our enemies have chosen, they
think shall serve them, to fly from us, by leaping and runnyng down the
stiepenesse thereof. But that ways I will also stop from them. Whereupon
incontinente Scipio sent two companies of his men of war, commaundynge the
one to keep the mouth of the valley, by which the river ran: and that the
other should abide secretly on the way, that lay by the bowinge of the
mountain, between the town of Betula and the fyeldes: And he him self, with
a good noumbre of nymble harnessed men, went streyghte toward these
Numidians and Affricanes, which were on the lower plain of the hill: whoo
suffered them to come almooste up without let, save only of the
styepenesse of the hylle, until they came within the casting of darts.
Then was the fight soore on both parts, but specially great plenty of
stoones and other inginnes was thrown from the hill on the Romans.
Nevertheless although the hylle was very tediouse and hard to be won, and
they also almooste overwhelmed with stones: yet they being nymble and well
hearted men, and much used to the approchynge and scalynge of walls, ceased
not to goo still vppewarde, till the formooste of them had gotten the plain
and even ground. They anon put the Numidyans to flyghte, and with greatte
slaughter drove them up to their army, that abode in the hygheste part of
the hill. Then Scipio commanded the same his company to go streyghte up
after toward the myddle of their enemies. The rest of his host he divided in
two parts, whereof he caused Lelius to take the one half, and with them to go
about on the right hand of the hill, to espy where he might find a more
easy place for them to ascend. He with the other part kept on the left
hand. And ere ever he had fette any far compass, clambe up the said
mountain, and ran on his enemies, whose backs then were toward him, wherewith
the host of the Carthaginenses was sore troubled, and great clamor was made,
inforcynge them to turn them to resyst Scipio and his company, and to change
their order, which they were in before. In all this troublous brute came
Lelius on them on the other side, whose coming caused the foreward to give
back, for fear to be invaded behind, by mean whereof, the myddell ward of
Scipio got them the hylle, which before was not possible for them to have
won, the army and elephantes keeping their array, the place was so stiepe to
ascend. Then began the Carthaginenses to flee for their sauegard. there was
great slaughter made among them that abode, by Scipio and his company: and of
those that fled, many were received by the.ii. companies, which were before
laid in embusshement for the same purpose: so that there were slain to the
number of.viii. M. men. Asdruball seeing the beginning of the battle nothing
prosperous after his intent, sent his money, and many of his elephantes away
before him* and he followed after with as many as could save them selves with
flieng: and passing the river of Tagus, went straight toward the mountains of
Pyreneis. Scipio, coming to the camp of the Carthaginenses, gave all the pray
thereof to his soldiers, except the prisoners, which were in number.x. thousand
fotemen, and.ii. M. horsemen: of which number, so many as were Spanyardes, he
let go at liberty freely, without ransom paying: the rest he caused to be
sold by the Questor. Than gave he large gifts to the princis of Spayn,
specially to Indibilis he gave.iii. C. horses, the best he could choose of all
that were taken. Through which his liberal distribution, the communes of
Spain called him king: which name, Scipio declared to them, that it was very
odious and detestable to the Romans. Wherefore he desired them, to absteyne from
calling him by that name. For with the name of governor or captain, he was
well contented.

When the Questor was about to sell the prisoners by the capitaynes
commandment, among other he found a goodly young child of.xv. years old:
whom he sent to Scipio, for that he herd of him, that he was descended of
lignage roial. Of whom Scipio enquired, what he was, and of what country, and
how he, being of no greatter age, happened to be in the camp among men of
war. He answered, that he was of Numidia, and was named Massus. His father
(he said) was dead. Wherefore his mother sent him to her father Sala king of
Numidia, and from that time he had been brought up with his uncle Massanissa.
And when his uncle came over into Spain, to the socour of the Carthaginenses,
he came also with him. But ever when he went to any batteil, his uncle would
not suffer him to go with him. So that before this time (he said) he never
came in the fyelde. And now it was also unware to his said uncle. But when
every man made him redye, he pryuely also took an horse and harneies, and
entered the battle with them. But his chance was so evil, that he had now
a faule from his horse, whereby he was taken of the Romans. Scipio demanded
of him, whether he were not desirous to return to Massanissa. To whom he
answered, weeping for joy, that he would be very glad, if his chance were
so good. Then Scipio gave him a ringe of gold, a cote, a senators garmente, a
spanysshe cloak, a goodly horse, well harneysed, and a buckle of gold, and
suffered him to depart to his uncle at his pleasure, appoyntynge him
horsemenne to conducte him on the way, so far as he would have them.

After these things done, he bestowed the rest of the summer in receyuynge
many people and Cities of Spain in to the amity of the Romans, and remained
at Tarracon.

Sone after the battle fought at Betula, the other Asdruball, the son of
Gysgon, and Mago with their armies came from the further part of Spain, to
the help of the other Asdruball: but all to late. For the battle was paste
before their coming. Wherefore they consulted, what was best be done. At the
last, considering that Scipio, by gifts and his lyberalytye, had won the
hertes of the hither parts of Spain, and that only the people of the
furtheste part of the co^ntreye toward the Gades or pyllers of Hercules,
knew as yet nothing of him, nor of the Romans, wherefore they were sure
friends to the Carthaginenses: they determined, that of necessytie they must
remove all their soldiers of Spain, either to the furtheste parts of
Spain, or else into France: or else in short space they would all turn
to the friendship of the Romans.

They also agreed, that Asdruball, taking with him all the Spanyardes out of
Spain, and far from the name of Scipio, should go over the mountains with
them toward Anniball into Italy, where the head and chief ground of the
wars was.

Furthermore, that Mago, leauinge his host with Asdruball the son of Gysgon,
should pass over the sea into the isles called Baleares, now called Maiorque
and Minorque, with a great sum of money, where he should also hire many mo
soldiers for their help in this purpose. After whose departing, Asdruball,
the son of Gysgon, with all his host, was appointed to depart into Portugal,
and that he should in no wise fight with the Romans. Than had Massanissa.iii.
M. of the best and lightest horses and men appointed to be with him: with
which number he was assigned to pervse and ride abroad the countries, helping
the cities, friends of the Carthaginenses, and to spoil and distroy the towns
and fields of their ennemies. With these intentes and minds every one of the
capitaines departed from other, making great speed to achieue their enterprise.

Marcellus the Consul is slain by an imbushement laid by Anniball, Crispinus
the other consul, and Marcellus son be soore hurt. Capi li.
THe fame of Scipio daily increased at Rome. Also Q. Fabius Maximus had gotten
great honor by winning the town of Tarent. But Marcellus by mean of
ennemies was run in great infamy. For it was reported, that Anniball rouyng
abroad in the country, he kept his host in the summer season in the town of
Venusia. Marcellus to purge him of this sclaunderous name came to Rome,
against the time of chusynge of officers. Thither came alsoo Q. Fuluius
Flaccus the consul. There was the cause of Marcellus openly debated. And C.
Bibulus, one of the Tribunes, charged him soore, saying, that the negligence of
Marcellus, and other such like, was the cause of Anniballes so long abode in
Italy, This is (said he) the tenthe year, sens he came first into this
country. He has lived almost as long in Italy, as he has done in Carthage.
At the chosyng of officers, ye wylled M. Claudius Marcellus to continue a year
longar in his office: and now if ye will know the fruit that he has brought
forth this year, by the mean thereof, ye shall understand, that he has his
hooste two times beaten; and many of them slain this year. And in the chief
of summer, he has kept the resydue of his men at Venusia, within the sure
walls of the same.

To this accusation Marcellus so wisely and sobrely answered, showing his
policies and his acts done against Anniball, that his excuse was not only
well taken, but also for his well dooinge, the day following he was, by the
hole consent of the people, chosen consul: And Titus Quintus Crispinus was
chosen to be his fellow. They both were appointed to keep Italy against
Anniball. Marcellus went to his old army to Venusia, taking with him diverse
other, to supplye the places of those that were before slain. Crispinus saying
the honor that was grown to Fabius by wynnyng of Tarent, thought to besyege
the city of Locrus. Wherefore he sent for all manner of ordynances to Sicilia,
with ships also to assault the same by sea as well as by land. But hearing
of the cominge of Anniball to Lacinium, he left his purpose for a season, and
joined his host with his fellow Marcellus, who as than was come from Venusia
into the country of Apulia, where they both encamped their armies.iii. miles
the one from the other. Thither came also Anniball soon after that he
parceyued the consul Crispinus had left of his besiegynge of the Locrenses,
and in the same country pytched his camp and tents. He had the year before
assayed the power and heart of Marcellus, sometime with wynnyng, sometime with
loss of men. Wherefore fearing with the power of both the consulles to be
ouermatched, he than diuysed, how with policies and craft to deceive them. The
consulles made diverse skyrmyshes with his men, thinkyng with such tryflynge
frayes to pass furthe the summer, and to keep him occupied: yet nevertheless,
they trusted to be strong enough also for the besiegynge of Locrus. Wherefore
they sent to Sicilia, causyng L. Cincius, with his navy and army, to come to
the besiegynge of Locrus by the sea. Furthermore to assail it also by land,
they commanded part of the army, which lay for the defense of Tarent, to be
brought thither. This appoyntement was not so pryuyly done, but that Anniball
had knowledge thereof by certain of the Thurines. Whervppon against the time
appointed of their coming, he sent an embusshement of two thousand horsemen,
and three thousand footmen, to lie secretly under the hylle of Petillia,
upon the way, whereby the Romayne Tarentines should pass. The Romans
unadvisedly passing by the way, were among them to their great hurtes: for
two thousand of them were there slain, and one. M. and two hundred taken
prisoners, the rest that escaped, fled by diverse ways back again to
Tarent. The consulles lay in their several camps, not far from the camp
of Anniball. Now was there in the myddell way between the Romans camp and
him, a greatte hylle, full of woodde, not taken nor viewed by any of them both.
The Romans feared for to view it, for that they doubted, what manner of
ground the vttermooste part thereof was toward their enemies. Neither was it
viewed of Anniball: for that he esteemed the same to be a place more mete for to
deceive his ennemies, than for to pytche thereon his camp. Wherefore he in the
night sent thither a company of Numidian horsemen to lie pryuily in the myddell
of the wood, without mouynge or making any noise in the day time, for fear
to be espied. The Romans ever cried to their capytaynes, that they should
take the said hylle, and pytche there, one of their camps, for fear lest
Anniball should take it before them. Than said Marcellus to his fellow
Crispinus, let us then, with a certain horsemen with us, go view the same
hill: by the ^yghte whereof, we may dispose all things accordyngly. Being
thus agreed, they taking with them.ii. hundred and.xx. horsemen, went both to
survey the said hylle and wood. Whom young Marcellus, the consuls son, and
Aulus Manlius being both tribunes, followed. So covetous was the mind of
Marcellus to join battle with Anniball, that he thought he could never
join his camp nyghe enough to the camp of his enemy. Wherefore at his
departing, he caused his people to be in a redynesse: that in case the place
lyked them, that they might gather up the vessels, and all their stuff,
and follow them from their camps.

The capytaynes passed thorough a little plain field, and from thense they
entered into a fair broad way or riding, which went up into the woods. At
the top of this riding, the Numidians had set an espy to watch, not
thinking of any so great a pray as happed them to come: but only to
watch for forrageours or wood caryars, that should hap to roue abroad for
vytayles, wood, or such necessaries. This espy warned them of the Romans
coming, and of the number, and gave them a sign, when every man of them
should leap out of his secret den: which he craftyly executed. For he
gave them not the sign to issue out, till the Romans were so far passed
in their wa^e, that the hyndermoste part of the embusshement might enclose
them, and stop their way behind them, by that time the formoste of the
embushement assailed them before. Than on all parts they issued out, and
laid on the Romans. The consulles seeing them selves stopped, both before
and behind, fought manfullye them selves, and comforted their fellows,
thinking to prolonge the battle tylle succors might come to them. But the
other were so fierce, that part of the Romans fled. Never the less the
rest fought for a season, tylle they saw Crispinus soore wounded, and his
fellow Marcellus, thruste thorough with a spear, fall dead to the ground.
Thanne the rest that were left on live fled with Crispinus the Consul, who
was soore hurt with two darts, and young Marcellus, being also soore
wounded. Aulus Manlius was there slain, with Marcus Aulius, and four and
forty other horsemen. Arenius, with five sergeantes of the consulles, and
eyghtene other horsemen, were taken prisoners.

Anniball craftily sends lettters to Salapia, sealed with Marcellus sygnet.
Asdruball passes the mountayns with his army, to mete his brother Anniball.
Cap. lii.
ANNIBALL knowing that greatte fear would be in the Romayne hooste, by the
death of the one Consulle, and also by the woundynge of the other: to put
them to further fear, he incontinent removed his hooste into the same hylle,
where the battle had been before, where he pytched his Camp. There found
he the body of Marcellus, which he caused to be buried. Crispinus being sore
feared with the death of his fellow, and also with his own wounds: in the
night following removed secretelye his army into the highest and next hill,
that he for his suertie could find, there pitchinge his camp and tents.
Both the capitaines endeavored them selves, to the uttermost, the one to
deceive, and the other to eschew deceit.

Anniball, with the body of Marcellus, found alsoo his ringe, with his
sygnet: whereby he trusted to work deceytfull conclusions. Crispinus
mystrustinge also the same, sent with speed word to all the cities of the
Romans, nere adioyninge, warning them, that his fellow Marcellus was
slain, and that Anniball had gotten his signet. Wherefore he commanded them,
in no wise to give credence to any letters that should be sent unto them,
sealed with the seal of Marcellus, or made in his name. Soon after a
messanger came to Salapia from Anniball, with letters written and sealed in the
name of Marcellus: showing unto them, that the night following Marcellus would
privily come thither. Wherefore he commanded the capitaynes and garrison to be
ready at his coming, to know his further pleasure, what was to be done. The
Salapiens finding craft in the writing, sent back the messangers to
Anniball with gentle answer. And they the night prefyxed, set sure watch
and ward on the walls, specially on that part of the town, and at that
gate, where they demed their enemies would come. A little before the day
came Anniball, with a great company with him. The first company that came to the
yates, was of Romans, that were departed from the country, and taken in wages by
Anniball. They had all Romayne armor, and when they came to the gate, they
spoke laten, as did the Romans, waking the watchemen, and bidding them to
open the gate to the consul. The watch arose, and with great leuers lift up
the port colyes so high, that men might enter under it. Then the said band
of Romans runawayes, entered so fast as they might. But when they were
entered, to the number of.vi. C. of them, the rope, which did hold up the
portcolyes, was let slyp, and fell down with great noise making. The
Salapiens, with small resystence, slew them that were entered the town. For
that they, mystrustinge no such thing, bare their harneys hanginge on their
shulders, thynkyng to have entered with peace. Many of the town with spears
and darts, chased their enemies from the gate and walls.

Thus Anniball, being taken in his own trappe, was deceived: and from thense
departed, to raise the syege of his friends the Locrenu^s, whom Cincius, with
his soldiers and ordinance, that came from Sicilia, kept very hard and
strayghte.

Mago was in the city, who herynge of the death of Marcellus, took some
comfort unto him. But when he hard tidings, that Anniball had sent his
Numidian horsemen before him, and was coming him self after with his fotemen,
as spedely as he might, he was then without fear. Wherefore when he espied
afar of the Numidians approchyng, he caused the gate to be opened, and in
arraye with his folk issued out upon the Romans. His sodeyne coming on them,
more then his strength, caused the battle to endure for a season doubtefull.
But when the Numidians were also come, the Romans were so stryken with fear,
that without order they ran toward their ships, leaving behind them
all their ordinance, wherewith they had beaten the walls. And by this mean
was the syege of the Locrensis raised.

Crispinus the consul sent letters to Rome, both of his fellows death, and
also of his sore hurtes: which let him so, that he could not come to Rome to
the chosyng of the consuls. The senators were very pensyfe, to se two consuls
armies destitute of capitaynes. Wherefore at the day of the election, they looked
about, to find two wisd and circumspect persons for that office, who had been
acqueynted with the deceites of Anniball. First they above other lyked C.
Claudius Nero, whom they knew to be a valiant man, and a good capytayne. But
they esteemed him to be to quick for that time of the wars, and to match
that soobre capytayne Anniball.

Wherefore they devised to match his quickenes, with a sobre fellow of great
temperance. Then was there one M. Liuius, a man of great sobrenesse, late come
again into the city. He had before ben consul about.viii. years passed, and
in his consulshyppe was condemned by the commons, without fault: and put out of
his office. Which shame to him done, he took so displeasauntly, that leaving
the city, he went forth into the country, to dwell out of the company of
men. And.viii. years after his condempnation, M. Marcellus, and M. Valerius
Leuinus the consulles, brought him home again into the city: but they found
him foul and evil apparellyd, his hear and bearde long, as a token of his
shame received. But at this time the censors caused him to round his hear,
and putting on other clean garments, to come in to the senate house. When he
was brought thither, and the fathers were examyned of their opinions of M.
Liuius, touching the office of consul: They agreed all, both senators and the
commons, that it were a mete couple of him and Claudius Nero. But he alone
refused the office, accusyng the citezens of their unkind lyghtnesse, saying:

I marvel much, ye lay now the burden of this office on me, whom ye of
late thruste out of that same office, thynkyng me unworthy thereof. If ye
account me to be a good and an honest man, why then did ye condemn me as an
evil man, and as an offender? And syns ye judged, that I evil governed the
consulshyp, wherein I last was: why trust ye me now again with the same
room?

With such words he accused the fathers and also the commons. But the
senators rebuked him for his words, shewinge him the example of M. Furius
Camillus, which though he were banyshed the city of Rome, yet was he after
restored again: For (said they) like as the child ought to suffer the sharp
punishment of his father: so ought every man to suffer the punishment of his
country, with patience and gentilnes.

With these words they appeased him, and caused him to take on him the said
office.

The one consul was appointed to keep the war against Anniball in Italy,
lest he should draw nere to Asdruball, cominge from the mountains to his
succor: The other was assygned to mete Asdruball, the fame of whom was, that
he began to approach the mountains, to the intent to come over, to join his
power with his brother Anniball. The opynion of Anniball did also mo^he help
the Romans in this purpose. For although he knew, that his brother would
that summer pass the mountains, to come over to him: yet when he remembered
the manyfold lettes that he had him self, as in passing the river of
Rhodanus, and then the dangerus mountains, stryuinge both with men and
peryllous places, wherein he had spent five months, he looked not for so spedye
and quick coming of his brother. which caused him to be so long, er ever he
removed from the place, where he wintred with his army. But in this he was
much deceived. For Asdruball had better speed in his passage, then he looked
for him self. For the frenchemen, and also the mountaynoys, did not only
receive him, and suffered him with his army to pass their countries: but also
they followed him to the wars, leadinge him many sure ways, which to
Anniball his brother, were then unable to be passed. Again, the ways over the
mountains, by the continual use of goinge over them, were made much more
easy then they were, and the people more gentle to entreat. For before
Annibals coming, they were not used to the company of strangers, neither had
seen any before in the country. wherefore they were wild and savage people.
They thought also at the first time, that the Carthaginenses had come to take
their castelles and cattle from them. But now the fame of the war holden in
Italy, between the Romans and the Carthaginenses, taught them, and made them
to know, that the hole contention between those noble head cities of the world,
being so far distant a sundre, was only for the honor and for riches: so
that they would try, whether of them should possede the dominion of the hole.

These causes known, made the mountains open and easy for Asdruball to pass:
but his speed was not so good in passing the same, as his let was great in
the besieginge of Placentia. When he was come over, he had thought the city,
being in a fair plain country, had been easy to win: and by the fame of
the winning thereof, he thought all other cities adioyninge, should have
trembled for fear. But the strength thereof much deceived him, and that knew
Anniball full well. For when he came over the river of Trebia, he in vain had
assayed the strength thereof. So that Asdrubals assieginge of Placentia was not
only a let of his own iourneye: but also it stayed Anniball much longer:
after he hard thereof, ere ever he set forth of the place, where he wyntered
with his host.

The consulles with their armies went to their provinces, M. Liuius toward
Placentia, whom ere he departed, Q. Fabius warned and exhorted, that he should
not over hastyly fight with his ennemies, before he knew the manners and
conditions of them. To whom Liuius, remaining yet in dyspleasure toward his
citezens for his banyshement, answered: that he would fight with them so soon
as he might have fight of them. When the cause was demanded of him, why he
would make therm such haste: Truly (said he) either I will quyckely have
great honor, by subduinge mine enemies, or else greatte joy, by the sleynge
of mine own unkind cytezens. Which joy although it be to me not honest:
yet shall it be according to their deservings.

Quintus Claudius Nero made haste, till he approached nere unto Anniball: who as
than was gone into the country of the Lucanes, and lay by the town of
Grument. Claudius had in his army forty thousand fotemen, and two thousand
and five hundred horsemen: Anniball gatherynge together as much power as he
could among the Brutians, and from such fortresses as he than held: lay
inc^mped nigh unto the walls of Grument: and within half a mile of them was
the camp of the Romans. Between both the camps there was a goodly plain
valey, having on the oone side fair plain hills, without any wooddes or
couerte, for to hyde any embusshement, or cause deceyte. Wherefore it was the
less suspecte to both parties. These hills lay adioynyng to the left side
of the Carthaginenses, and to the right side of the Romans. In the plain
medowe were many light eskyrmysshes made between the hosts, and many
excursyons the Romayne consul caused to be made only to keep his enemies
there from going toward Asdruball.

On the other side Anniball, desirous to remove out of that place with all his
power intended to give him battle. Wherefore he put his whole host in
array. Claudius Nero, perceiving his intent, caused secretly the night
following, Titus Assellus, and P. Claudius two tribunes, with a good noumbre of
men with them, to pass over the said hylle, adioynynge, and to abide in the
valeye behind the hills, appoyntynge them a time, when they should descend
from the mountain on the back of their ennemies. He him self in the break
of the day, with the rest of his footmen and horsemen, came into the field
in good array. Anniball likewise commanded his men to arm them, and great
noise was made in the camp, every man runnynge to harneys. And when they were
armed, they ran out of the camp yates, both horsemen and footmen, without
array before Anniball had knowledge thereof. And as soon as they were out of
the Camp in the plain, they ran to their enemies, fighting both on
horseback and on foot, as chance gave them to meet with their ennemies,
keeping none order.

When the Consul saw them thus rounnynge abroad in the fyelde without order,
he commanded C. Arunculeus, with the horsemen of a legyon, to invade the
Carthaginenses, with as much vyolence as he might: whereby he might slay them,
being without order like beasts, before they could be brought in array.
Which he did dilygentely execute, making great slaughter. The battle was
strong for a season, by reason of contynuall resort of fresh soldiers,
runnyng to the succors of their fellows.

Anniball, being yet in his camp, hearing the noise of his men fyghtyng, came
furthe with the rest of his power, and so dilygently applied him self: that
even as his men were fighting, he put many of them in array. Which thing
has not been lightly seen, and therein he showed him self to be an expert
capytayne, having old and well acquaynted warryours under him. And thus had he
brought his wholle host in order, as they were still fyghtyng: had not C.
Assellus, with his bands of Romans, suddenly descended from the hills, at
the back of the Carthaginenses, with great clamor: By the means whereof,
they being aferde lest they should be stopped from their camp, began to flee on
all parts. The horsemen slew many of them in the chase: and many mo had been
slain, had not the camp been so nere at hand. yet lost Anniball of his men
at that battle.viii. M. which were slain, and vii. C. taken alive. The next
day, and diverse days after, the Romans in array kept the field, desirous to
fight, but the Carthaginenses abode still in their tents.

Soon after in the night, Anniball, with his army, removed toward Apulia,
making great fyres before the camp, toward the Romans, and leaving in
the entree of his camp, certain Numydian horsemen for a show, till he with
his hooste might be far gone from his enemies. When it was day light, the
said Numidians showed them selves in the gate of the camp for a season,
purposely to deceive the Romans: and when they saw their time, they spedily
rode after their company.

Than the consul, hearing no noise in the tents of his enemies, sent two
light horsemen to view their camp, who finding it void of their ennemies,
returned to Claudius, certifiynge him of their departing. Whereupon he with his
host went thither, and took the spoil of such baggage as was there lest:
and on the morrow early followed the Carthaginenses, by the fame that they
heard of their way, by which they were gone. Anniball, no more willing to
fight, took his way ever in the night, and over the mountains, till he came to
Metapontus: where he took of Hanno, the soudiours, which were there left, and
joined them to his army, sendynge him with a small number with him, into the
country of the Brutians, there to assemble moo men of war to his succor.

Of the great battle between Asdruball and the consulles, in which Asdruball
was slain, with syx and fyfty thousand men, beside many that were taken, with
a great spoil. Cap. liiii.
ASdruball, leaving his further assiegyng of Placentia, sent four frenchemen,
and two Numidians to his brother Anniball with letters: who passing all Italy,
heryng that Anniball should then be at Metapontus, followed him thither: But er
they were ware, they lost their way, and came to the fields of Tarent, where
they were taken, and sent to Claudius Nero with their letters. Who when he had
read them, and knew by the contents thereof, that Asdruball intended to mete
his brother in Vmbria, thynkyng then to be no time mete for the commonwealth,
to tarry the determination of the senate: he imagyned, that he would enterprise
some strange thing, whereby he should put both the citezens of Rome, and also
his ennemies in great fear. But at length, when it was achieued, it should
turn the wholle city from great fear into marvelous gladness. Wherefore
he sent the said letters to Rome, with other his own letters of his intended
enterprise. And incontinent sent messangers before him, to all the towns and
countries, by which he with his army should pass: commaundyng them to bring
furthe into the fields against his coming, vitayles, horses, and other
necessaries for his souldyours. Than of his wholle army he chose out.vi.
thousand footmen, and one. M. horsemen: saying and publyshyng, that with them
he intended to assault the next town of the Lucans, and to take the
Carthaginenses, which were there left for the keeping thereof. With this company
in the night he departed, making as great haste as he might in his journey, to
come to the healpe of his fellow Liuius, before he should have to do with
Asdruball: leaving Quintus Tatius in his camp, to rule and govern the rest
of his host. At Rome the consulles letters made all men no less aferde, than
they were two years past, when the Carthaginenses had pytched their tents
before the walls of Rome. They doubted, whether they might allow or disallowe
that bold enterprise of the consul, which did appear to hang all upon
chance. They knew the camp was left very nere to Anniball, with an army
dispurueyed of a captain: ye and the flower and strength of the same army
was taken away with the Capytayne, leaving his camp sure in nothing, but
only by the ignorance of his ennemies, who were not privy as then of the
consulles absence. But what if it happed to be known, and that it chanced
Anniball with his wholle army to follow Nero, having with him but.vi. thousand
fotemen armed, and one. M. horsemen: or that he would assail the rest, which
were left in the camp, without strength or good governance. The evil chances,
which they had before sustained in the wars, with the late death of.ii.
consuls in one year, increased their fear, which all had happed to them,
when there was but one capytayne and one army of their ennemies in Italy. Now
they knew.ii. mighty armies.ii. valyant capitaines: ye almost.ii. Anniballes,
to be in the country. For Asdruball the son also of Amilcar, had many
years in Spain, made war against the Romans, where he had had two noble
victories, sleynge two great armies, and also.ii. Scipions, the noble
capitayns of the same. Furthermore, that he might glory above Anniball, both
of his spedy passage over the mountains, and also of drawyng with him the
frenchemen to battle. For even where the one had almost lost the greatter
part of his men, by hungre and cold (which two be the greattest myseries
of war): even there had the other gathered together a great puissance. They
rekened also, that Claudius Nero should have to do with a witty capitayn, whom
he knew before had mocked and illuded him in Spain like a child, with
deceiteful intretyng of conditions of peace: whereby he escaped out of the
straytes, wherein he was indaungered. Thus through fear (which is
thinterpretour of all things to the worste) they esteemed the power of their
enemies to be great, and their own to be small.

In the mean time Nero the consul, after he had so far traueyled from the
danger of his ennemies, that he judged he might safely discover his secret
enterprise: he then called together his soldiers, and spoke unto them saying:

There was never any enterprise taken in hand by any captain, which was in
appearance more bold, and in effect more sure then this was. For I will now
bring you (said he) to a certain and sure victory. For we goo to a
battle, for the which my fellow Liuius had before as many fotemenne and
horsemen appointed him of the senate, as he would desire. Ye such a number as
he would not have desired a greatter, if he should have been appointed to fight
with Anniball him self: and now, by the fame of the coming of the other
consul, with his army, being joined to the other: we shall not fail to have
an undoubted victory. For fame is the thing that gives victory in battle.
Yea small things often times drive the hertes and minds of men, either in to
fear or in to a good hope. And the hole glory and honor of all the good
speed shall be given to us. For ever that, which comes last, draws all the
honor to it.

With this comfort he led them forward on their way, passing by a great
multitude of men and women of the country, that came forth to mete them with
great favor and praise giuynge: namynge them the patrons and defendours of the
common welthe, and of the hole empire of Rome, in whose hands then lay the
health wealth and liberty, both of them and of their children. Wherefore they
prayed unto the gods for their prosperous return with victory and tryumphe.
And in declarynge their love toward their soldiers, they offered them
cattle, vitayles, and other necessary things, which they hertely desired
them to take at their pleasure. And they on the other side, thankefully
receiving that they neded, went on their way, eating when they were hungry,
and but seldom took any rest, till they came nere to the camp of the other
consul M. Liuius. Then sent Claudius messangers to his fellow, aduertysynge
him of his coming, to know his mind, whether it were best for him and his
company, to come to him pryuely or openly, in the night time or in the day: and
whether he should enter in to his camp, or make an other camp for him self
and his army: Liuius answered, that best it was, he entered into his camp
secretly in the night. For the more suertie whereof, he gave a pryuy watch
word or token, whereby one tribune should receive an other, one centurio or
hundredour an other, one horseman an other, and one foteman should receive an
other. And it was thought, that there was space enough in the first camp, to
receive him and his company, sense those that came with Claudius Nero brought
little more with them, but only their armor, for the spedinesse of their war.
Liuius tents were then pitched nere to Sena, and Asdruball rested not past
half a mile thence. When Nero approached, he covered him with mountains and
hills, till it was night. Then keeping great silence, they entered the camp
of Liuius, and were every man brought into the tents by his like officer,
where they were friendly and gentylly received, with great joy and
gladness.L. Portius the praetor had his camp ioynynge to the camp of the
consul. The day following they counsayled, what was best then to be done.
Some gave advise, that Nero with his company, being weary, should rest them
certain days, and that the battle should be differred, till they were fully
refreshed of their long travail: and in the mean time to know the manner of
their enemies. But Nero would in no wise agree thereto, he instantly desired
them so to work, that his secret enterprise, which by his swyfte coming
thither was made sure, should not by their long tarying be made folyshe and
void. For Annibal being deceived, keeps him close in his tents, not
knowing of my coming hither, nor of the unsure leaving of mine army in my
camp: but this deceyte can not long behyd. With speed making Asdruball and
his host may be overthrown, er ever I depart: and then may I with like speed
return to my company into Apulia. But whoo so by prolongynge of the time,
gives space to his ennemies, he causes my camp in Apulia to be delivered to
Anniball, and opens the way for him to come hither to be joined to his
brother, Asdrubal at his pleasure. Wherefore incontinent let us go to battle:
and thereby both our enemies, that be absente in Apulia, and also those that
be here present at hand, shall be deceived: the other by thinking our number
there to be no less then it was, and these by thinking your number to be
nothing increased.

After these earnest words of Claudius, they departed from the counsel, and
every man armed him self, and were put in good order of battle. The
Carthaginenses also were already come out of their camp, and stood in array
ready to fight, and both the armies had without taryeng gone to gither, had not
Asdrubal for a season caused his company to stay. He, with certain other
horsemen in his company, rode before his host: where he perceived among the
Romans, to be many old shildes, which he had not seen before. Also he
marked many carreine lean and over labored horses. He thought also the number
of his ennemies was greatter then it was wont to be. Wherefore having a mistrust
of that, which in deed was true: he blewe the retraite. And incontinent sent
certain of his men to the river, where the Romayne horses were watered, to
espy and mark, whether any of their horses were discolored by dashinge with
mire of the way, or with dust: whereby they might appear to be of late
iourneyed. He also caused some other to ride a far of about their camps, to
se, whether the trenche that environed the camp, were enlarged any whyt or
not. Furthermore to mark, whether the trumpet, did sound ones or two times
within the camp of the Romans. Nothing deceived him so much, as when word
was brought him, that the camps were nothing enlarged: but that there were
but twain as was before, one of Liuius co^sull, the other of L. Portius: and
neither of the^ altered otherwise then they first were. Nevertheless it
troubled him sore, being a wise man and much used to wars with the
Romans, when it was showed him, that the trumpet blewe but ones in the
pretors camp: but in the other it blewe two times: wherefore he judged surely,
that both the consuls were there. Whervppon he began to muse, how the other
consul should be departed from his brother Anniball. He could not deuyse the
thing as it was, that his brother was so illuded by the departinge of the
captain from his camp, which was not far of, with part of his power. He
judged, that he had sustained some great loss: whereby he durst not follow the
consul. Wherefore he feared greatly, least when all was lost before, he was
come to late to his brother with socours. He also mistrusted, that his letters
never came to Anniballes hands, but that they, with his messangers, were taken
up by the way: upon the syghte whereof the other consul was come with have to
vanquishe him also. Being in this great perplexity, he caused all the fires
to be put out, and every man to trusse up his stuff and baggage: and in the
beginning of the night, he with his hole host departed secretly, folowinge
two guides. Whoo had not far gone with them, but partly for fear, and
partly being troubled with the rumor of the army, took no good head to
their way: wherefore they secretly slypped away, leauyng them without a
guide. Some wandered abroad in the fields, some being weary and ouerwatched,
laid them bowne to sleep and to rest them, leaving their standards. When the
day appeared, Asdruball caused his standards to go before the host alonge the
side of the river of Metaurus, seeking for fordes, where he might pass over:
but the further he went up the river, the hyer were the banks. Thus wandering
still after the crokes and tourninges of the bank, sekyng a place of passage:
he spente a great part of the day in waste: whereby the Romans had gotten
time and space to follow them. First Nero with his horsemen over took them:
sone after came Lucius Portius with his light harnessed men. They slew many of
Asdruball his folk, that abode behynd in the fields to rest them. Asdruball
saying no remedy to escape, sought for some hill by the river side, whereon he
might lodge his host. By that time was Liuius also come with all his power of
fotemen, armed and in good array. Then ioynynge their companies to gether, they
put every man in order. Claudius Nero led the right wynge. Liuius kept the
left wyng. Portius the praetor came in the myddell ward.

When Asdruball saw to remedy, but that he must needs fight, he left the
fortifiyng of his camp, and put his people in array. In the forefront he set
his elephantes: about them on the left hand against Claudius Nero the
consul, he set his frenchemen: not for that he trusted to them much him
self, but because he thought his ennemies feared them most. The right wynge
he kept him self with his spanyardes, his old mean of war, in whom his
most trust was. The Liguriens, men of a country of Italy, were set in the
middell behind the elephantes. There was a greatte hylse between the
Frenchemen and Claudius Nero: so that he by no means with his host, might come
to fight with them. Wherefore they stood still a good space without doing of
any thing. But between Asdruball and Liuius fyers and mortal was the fight.
There were the great number of Romayne fotemen against the multitude of
Spaniardes his expert warryours, and also against the Liguriens, which were very
strong and valiant men. The elephantes also did at the first much
displeasure. Claudius saying that he could not have to do with the
Frenchemen, turned about his company, and fetchyng a compass, came on the
other side of Asdruballes army. Than were the Spanyardes and the Liguriens
slain on all parties, and the fight was already come to the frenchmen, who were
able to make small resistance: for many of their company were shronken away and
feeble for labor and ouerwatchynge, as they be a people that can not well away
with pain. Many of them were there slain. Many also of the elephantes were
slain by the Romans, but moo by their own rulars that rode upon them. For
after they were ones stryken and aferde, the beasts were so unruly, and did
so much hurt to their own Carthaginenses host: that their own kepers and
ryders slew them.

Asdruball, like a full noble captain, handled him self in that battle,
sometime fyght^ng valiantly in his own person, sometime exhortyng his men
manfully to fight, sometime he desired his werye soldiers to take some pain
for him, and for their own lives, sometime he rebuked their sluggyshnes. And
if any began to flee, he anon brought them back to the battle, and restored
again the field, which in diverse places was slaked. At the last, when he saw
no help, but that without remedy he must lose the field: not minding to
live after so great a slaughter of his men and friends, which for his sake
undertook that voyage: he ran his horse with the spurs into the myddell of
the Romayne host: where to declare the noble valor of his stomach, of whom
he was descended, like the son of Amilcar, and brother to Anniball, he
valyantly fought, and fyghtyng was slain. Great was the slaughter of the
Carthaginenses in that battle: so that it was thought equal to the Romans
loss at Cannas, as well for the number of menslayne, as for the loss of the
capitaynes. There was of Asdrubals host in this battle slain syx and fyfty
thousand men, and there were.v. thousand and four hundred taken prisoners.
The pray at the spoil was great, both of gold and silver, and also of the
Romayne prisoners, which before Asdruball bad taken. Of which Romayne
prisoners, there were found above.iiii. M. The Romans lost in this battle
almost.viii. M. men. On the morrow word was brought to Liuius, that those
frenchemen and Ligures, which were left on live at the battle the day
before, were now assembled together again, and went away without any capitayn
or keeping good order, so that they might soon be all slain, if he would send
but one wynge of horsemen to pursue them. Not so said Liuius, we will suffer
some of our ennemies to escape, which shall remain and be messangers, both of
the destruction of our ennemies, and also of our noble honor and prowess.

Claudius Nero, the night after the battle foughten, departed with his
company again toward his own camp, making so much have in his return, that
the syxt day following he was come to his own camp, and to the frontiers of
his ennemy Annibal, he made such speed, that no messenger was come thither
before him, which had brought any news of the victory. Wherefore his
personalle coming, with the sodein declaration of their good speed, caused so
greatte joy and gladness in the Romayne army, as though an heavenly comfort
had been sent them after an extreme doloure. At Rome also, when news were
brought of their prosperus success, such joy was made, as can not well be
expressed. For after Claudius departing toward his selowe, from the son
rysynge to the some setting, the senators never departed from the senate
house: neither went the cytezens out of the market place. The matrones of the
city were in contynuall prayers: so that with their clamor, pylgremages, and
vows, their goddis were all weryed. But whame the certayntie of the vyctorye,
the greatte occision of their ennemies, with the death of the Capytayne, was
brought the^^ by the legates of the consulles: their suspended hoope was
sodaynely turned into a perfect joy, which passed measure. Th^n began the
merchants to bye, to sell, to pay, to receive, and to make all manner of
contractes, as they were wont to do intyme of peace.

Claudius the cons^ll, retournynge from the battle, brought with him the
head of Asdruball: which at his first coming, he caused to be thrown
before the entree of Anniballes camp. He alsoo caused the Affricans, which he
had taken prisoners in the battaylle, bounden as they were, to be set
before his camp: to the intent his enemies might see them. And for the
more increase of Anniballes sorrow, he loosed two of his said Affricanes
prisoners, commaundynge them to goo to Anniball, and to declare unto him, the
order of all things as they had been done in the battayl: wherewith he was so
stryken with sorrow, both for the loss of so great noumbee of men of his
brothers army, as also for the loss of his friends and famylyars, that he
said, he knew full well, what should be the fortune and fatal chance of
Carthage within short space. Whervppon he removed into the fields of the
Brutians. And for that he had no power left him of men, to defend his
fortresses, that yet held, being so far of: he gathered to gyther all the
Metapontanes and the Lucanes, such as were his friends: and brought them all
into the country of the Brutians, where he remained for a season, counsailing,
what were best for him to do.

Scipio in dyuies battayles discom^iteth the Carthaginenses, takes Hanno on
^yue, dryucth Hasdruball and Mage, with all their power, clean out of Spain,
Cap. liiii.
IN Spain between the Romans and the Carthaginenses thus was the country
diuyded. Asdruball, the son of Gysgon, was driven with his company into the
vttermoste part of Spain, and to the yles called the Gades. The rest of the
country eastwardes, was under the dominion of the Romans, onelesse it were
very few cities, which were kept by the Affricanes: to whose succors Hanno,
a new captain was sent from Africa, with a new army, in steed of
Asdruball, that was slain. This Hanno had also hired a great number of men of
war in Celtiberia. With this great host he joined to Mago. Against whom
Scipio sent M. Sillanus, with.x. M. footmen, and v.C. horsemen. And he
passing the hye hills, and manifold dangerous passages and straites of
Spayn, made such speed, that by the guyding of certain runawayes of
Celtiberia, he came within ten miles of his ennemies, before any knowledge was
had, or any fame was bruted of his coming. There he stood for a season, till
he had by the said runawayes or espyes knowledge, that his ennemies were
lodged in.ii. camps: the Celtiberiens on the left hand of the hye way, and
were to the noumbre of.ix. M. souldyours, the Carthaginenses were on the right
hand. Sillanus first assailed the Celtiberiens: who by the means of Mago,
were soon put in order. The battle endured soore for a season: and somewhat
the longer, by means of resort of the Carthaginenses, which came from the
other camp to the healpe of the Celtiberiens. At the last Mago, saying his
part like to be put to the worste, with two thousand footmen, and the
wholle power of horsemenne, that were left on live, fled unto the Gades, and
came to Asdruball. Hanno, the other capytayne, was taken on live: with many
other noble prisoners.

Soon after the battle with Hanno, Cornelius Scipio departed to Tarracon,
leaving in that country L. Scipio his brother, with ten thousand fotemen,
and one thousand horsemen. who after his brothers departing with this power,
assanted the town^ of Qungin: not without pain. For they scarsely were
suffered to put their scalinge ladders to the walls: so great was the violence
of the darts and other ingins, which were thrown at them. And so sone as any
were raised up thereunto, and men thereon, striuinge to ascend: anon they were
either thrown down, men and all, by the soldiers of the town, having
forkes made for that purpose: orels they were in ieoperdy to be drawn up
ladders men and all, by reason of iron hokes that were thrown upon the
ladders, taking such sure hold on them, that the clymbers were often times
pulled up far from the ground, and hanged long by the roundes of the
ladders. Thus continued the assault very long, and was very fyers and
dangerous on both parts. Then had Scipio divided his host in three parts, to
the intent one part should ever assault the town, while the other rested.

Wherefore he commanded those, which were at the first assault, to withdraw
to their tents, and rest them: and incontinent with other two parts of his
fresh soldiers, he gave a new assault on two parts of the town: so that
the defondours, being weary with the long susteinyng the furst assault, and
also soore afraid, as desperate, leauinge the walls, withdrewe them: whereupon
the town was won, and great occision made of people of all kinds and ages.

When tidinges of this noble act was brought to P. Scipio the capitiane, he
greatly praised his brother, doing to him as much honor as he might. And after
sent him to Rome, to bear news to the senate of their speed. with him also
he sent Hanno the capitayn of the Carthaginenses, and diverse other noble
prisoners, that were before by them taken.

Asdruball the son of Gysgon: and Mago the son of Amilcar, desyrouse to
redress their harms, and to recover their losses, gathered together of their
friends in Spain, and of hired soldiers, an huge army, to the number of.l.
M. fotemen, and.iiii. M. v. C. horsemen: and came to the town of Silpia, where
in the plain fields they pitched their camps.

P. Scipio, heringe of their great army, assembled all his men likewise: and
to be more able to rencountre with his ennemies, he sent Sillanus to Colchas,
the king and ruler over xxviii. cities and towns: of whom he had.iii. M.
footmen, and.v. C. horsemen. He h^dde in his army, when he came to Betula.xlv.
M. of horsemen and fotemen. Certain days after their metynge there were
shyrmisshes and iustes between the horsemen and the light fotemen of both the
armies. At the last they both descended into the fields with all their powers
in good order of battle. The middell wards kept the Romans on the one
side, and the Carthaginenses and the Affricanes on the other side: the wings
of both the parties were of spaniardes and hired soldiers. Thus stood they
redye to do battle, till it was night, without stroke strikinge: and even so
they did certain days following: So that ever it was bruted in both armies,
that the myddle wards should be still of the Romans and Carthaginenses,
where the greatest strength was, and where that most noble and expert men of
war were: between whom also rested the cause and chief ground of the war.
Scipio being advertised, that his ennemies trusted and believed, that this
order should be kept still in the battle: against the day, wherein he
thought to fight, he changed all his order. First in the euenyng before, he
commanded all his horsemen, before the dawning of the day, to eat some
meat, and then to be armed, and every one of them to have his horse also made
ready for the battle. Which his commandment they diligently accomplished.
Then Scipio, so sone as the day appeared, caused al his horsemen, with light
armor, to invade the station or camp of the Carthaginenses: and he with the
rest of his hole host followed in good arraye, but otherwise ordered, then
either his ennemies or his own company looked for. For he put his Romans in
the wings, and in the middle he put all strangers and hired soldiers.
Asdruball, heringe the great noise of the Romayne horsemen, with the sudden
rumor and fear of his own men, ran out of his tente. And when he
perceived all the fields garnyshed with his ennemies, he sent forth anon his
horsemen against the Romayn horsemen: and sone after he him self with all his
fotemen came forth of his camp keeping the same ^rdre that he had dove certain
days before, without chaungynge any part thereof. The battle between the
horsemen endured long, but when the host of fotemen were within half a mile
together: Scipio caused his horsemen to withdraw them selves, whom he divided
then in two parts, and caused to stand behind the two wings, to be ever
ready for their aid and succor. Now was his myddle ward most of Spaniardes:
whom he commanded to march forwards, not fast, but a soft pace. Then sent
he a messanger to Sillanus and Martius, who governed the left wynge, chargyng
them to make speed forwards on their parts, in like manner as they saw him
do with the right winge, which he led him self: so that the wings might be
fyghtyng a good space before the myddle wards should mete. In this order they
went forwards, spreadynge their wings, and making a great bosom in the
myddell of their host. For the spanyardes in the middel went a much softer
pace then the wings: whereby the wings were al ready come to strokes, and
fought a long space, before that the Affricans and Carthaginenses (in whom
rested the great strength of their ennemies) were come to any stroke strikinge.
Again, to bend to any part of the wings to help their fellows that fought,
they durst not, lest they should open their battle to their ennemies,
which came directly upon them. By this means the wings were anon overcome,
and driven into the myddell ward: and no marvel. For the young and the hired
soldiers of Spain were marched with the strong and old warriors of the
Romans and the Latins, Again, Asdrubals men were so suddenly taken in the
morning, that they had no time to receive any sustenaunce before the battle.
Wherefore when the day was somewhat spent, they waxed feynte and feeble. And for
that intent Scipio purposely tracted and prolonged the time, before the myddell
wards should mete: to the end the heat of the son toward the myddell of
the day, with the long standing in harneis, and lack of meat and drink,
should take from them both their strength and courage. Thus they being weary,
and assailed both before with the middell ward, and also on the sides with
the Romayne wings, were constrained to recule. Which they did a great while,
keeping still good order in their withdrawynge: for Asdruball continually cried
to them, and thereto exhorted them, saying: If they would by little and
little withdraw them, they should sone get the mountains, which were at
their backs: and then they should be sure out of the danger of their
ennemies. But at the last, saying them selves overcome, and so many of their
company slain on all parts: their fear overcame shame. Wherefore with great
slaughter they fled to their camp. The Romans pursued them fast, and had
taken their camp and tents, had not a vehement storm of rain suddenly come
upon them, with such violence, that every man was glad to get him to his
own tent and pauilion.

The Carthaginenses, although the night drew fast on them, being very sore
wounded and wet with the rain (whereby they had necessary occasions of sleep
and rest) yet were they so afraid, that they ceased not, stylle to strengthen
and to fortify their camp with dyches and stones, which they gathered in all
parts about them: trustinge more to the strength thereof, then to their
armor. Then many of the hired soldiers of the host of the Carthaginenses
left Asdruball, and came to Scipio. Diverse strong towns also were delivered
up to him: with all the garrisons, which were left in them. Wherefore
Asdruball, thinking him self more sure by fleinge, then by his abydinge,
secretly departed from thense in the night.

Scipio in the morning, being advertised of the departing of his ennemies,
sent his horsemenne before: and he him self with his army suddenly followed
them: The horsemen at length ouertoke them, and made so many skyrmyshes with
them, that thereby they were stayed, till their hole army of fotemen also over
took them. Then was there great occuion made of them with small resistance. And
Asdruball with.vii. M. men with him, was feign to flee to the next hye
mountain, where they encamped them selves, and were safe from any danger or
hurt, that could be done them. Sone after he slypped from thens, and stale to
the sea, which was not far of: where he took shyppynge him self, with Mago,
and a few with him, and went to the isles beyond the furthest part of Spain,
called Gades, leaving the most part of his men behind him at their own
adventure, to provide for them selves. Part of them went to the Romans,
part to such cities as were then remayninge in the dominion of the
Carthaginenses.

Scipio, after the dryuinge away of Asdruball and his company, wyllyng utterly
to expel all the Carthaginenses out of Spain: laid siege to Illiturgus:
which after long trauail he wan with force, and caused his men to slay all that
ever they found on live, man woman and child. And after they set the town
on fire, and threw down the walls to the earth, that the place, which had been the chief receptacle of their ennemies, might be clearly defaced, and the
memory thereof abolysshed for ever. From thense he went toward Castulo, with
his army. The capytayne thereof, fearing the cruelty of the Romans: yielded
the town to them, with the Carthaginenses also that were therein. Ascapa also a
strong town was won by Martius, and brought in subjection, with all other
towns cities and fortresses that the Carthaginenses before held. Thus were
they clerelye expelled out of Spain, the.xiiii. year after the wars first
began, and the.v. year after that Scipio was appointed by the senate to be
captain of the army, and was assigned to war in Spayn as his province.

M. Liuius, and C. Nero the consulles, enter the city of Rome, in triumph. A
praise of Anniballes gouernynge his army. Capi. lv.
Now let us return to M. Liuius the consul, that after the great victory
had by him and his fellow Claudius Nero, against the other old Asdruball, in
the frontiers of Italy, as is before declared: He sent Q. Fabius Maximus to
Rome, to the senators, aduertifynge them, that he thought the army, which L.
Portius the praetor had there, was sufficient inoughe for the keeping of that
province: So that (if they thought it best) he and his army might be well
spared there. To whom the senators answered, that they wylled him to come him
self to Rome with his army, and that Claudius Nero his fellow should also mete
him the same time at Rome, leauyng his host with good capitains to keep the
country still against Anniball.

Upon this decree of the senate the consulles wrote letters either to other,
and agreed, that like as they had with one good will and mind governed and
defended the cuntreye, during the time of their office: even so now they
should both at one time come into the city of Rome, although they came
from diverse parts. Wherefore it was agreed, that who so ever of them came
first to the city of Preneste, should there tarry the coming of his fellow.
According to the appoyntement, there they met both in one baye: and from
thense they sent messangers to the city, desiring the senators to mete them
in the house of Bellona the gods of war, the third day following. There were
they received with a great multitude both of senators and of citezins with
goodly salutations and great thanks for their politic governance of their
roumes: by whose help and dexterity the common wealth was nobly preserved and
advanced. Soon after they were brought into the senate: there according to
the old custom of conquerours, they declared their noble acts, which they
had achieued for the common welthe of the city of Rome: and for the same
desired, first that honor might be given to the immortal gods: and then
that they might with triumph enter the city. Which their request was
granted them. As touching the manner of their entringe in triumph, it was
appointed, that they should not come in severally but together, as they
vainquished their ennemies together. They agreed also between them selves, that
because the victory was had in the province of M. Liuius, and also because
Liuius army was come to Rome with him, where Nero his host could in no wise be
brought thither: Therefore should Liuius ride in a charyot, and his soldiers in
order follow him. Nero should ride by him on horseback without any of his
soldiers to follow him. Claudius was contented to give the honor to his
fellow: by which his gentilnes he wan much the more honor and praise. For
every man said of him, that he on horseback in.vi. dais had ridden the length
of all Italy, and had fought with Asdruball in the borders of France, what
time Anniball judged him to be in Apulia. So that his only name was able to
keep Anniball lurkyng in his camp, and his only coming was the cause of the
victory against Asdrubal. Wherefore (said they) ride the one consul never so
high in his charyot, yet the other consul, that rode but on horseback, was
worthy of the very triumph. ye although Nero did go but on his foot: yet was he
worthy of glory and fame perpetual. With these praises they followed Nero into
the capitoly or palaice in Rome. Where they presented much money of their
gain, and that was put into the treasory. On the morrow both the consuls, and
also the horsemen, praised much L. Veturius, and Q. Cecilius: desiring that
they might, for the next year following, be chosen consuls. Which at the next
election was done, and both they appointed with.ii. consuls armies, to keep
war against Anniball.

After all things were put in good order, they departed from the city, and
went into the country of the Lucanes, and in short time they had brought all
that country into subjection. With Anniball there was little done. For he
offered not him self to give battle, he was so discouraged with the loss of
his brother, his friends and his soldiers. On the other part, the consulles
thought it not best to provoke him to battle: se^s they found in him no
sturrynge. So much they feared and esteemed the valor of that noble capytayne:
to whom this praise is given, That no man could judge in him, whether he
were more to be commended in time of prosperity, or in time of adversity. For
who would not wonder to se, that he maynteyned the war so far from his
country by the full space of thyrtene years in the land of his ennemies,
having his army not of his own city or countreye, but gathered together of
many nations, which lived not under one manner of law, neither had one
custom or language, but much different in apparayle, armor, customs,
ceremonies, ye they had all several goddis. Yet did he so govern them
all, and knytte them to gyther all in such amity, that no man could judge
or know of any dyssention between them, or insurrection against their
capytaynes, although diverse times he lacked to pay them their wages, and
also vitayles for their sustenaunce: by the lack whereof, in other wars
much inconvenience has ensewed. Again, after the death of Asdruball, and
his army, in whom was all his trust, when all Italy was taken from him, save
only the country or corner of the Brutians: Who would not wonder to see no
rebellyon amongst his own men. Considering that vyttayles had they not,
but only from that little angle of the Brutians, which if it had been
wholly tylled and sowed, had not been able to sustain so great an army.
Never the less, a greatte part thereof was untilled, part for fear of the
Romans, and their friends, partly for that the most part of the young
men of the countreye were taken to the wars, which were before wont to
tylle and man^re the ground for husbandrye. These things (I say) conferred
together, it will make al men to muse, how he could so quietly govern his
great host, and to praise greatly his wise conduict therein.

Scipio and Asdruball arrive both in one day in Africa, and be lodged both
together in the palace of king Syphax. Cap. lvi.
AFter the departing of P. Scipio to Tarracon, the Carthaginenses being
driven out of Spain, Massanissa, saying the great fall of his friends the
Carthaginenses, secretly had communication with Sillanus, and was wo^ne to be
a sure friend to the Romans. Whervppon to have his friends in Africa the more
obedyent and ready to him in all his necessities, he appointed to sail over in
to his country, there to make him self as strong as might be, for the aid
and succor of the Romans when need required. And Sillanus soon after
returned to Scipio to Tarracon.

Than P. Scipio, wylling to certify the senate of his great victory and happy
chances, sent his brother L. Scipio to Rome, as is before rehearsed, who led
with him many noble men prisoners, whom he had before taken in the wars:
whervppon he was meruaylousely honored and praised of all men. Yet he alone,
that had deserved all the said honor, esteemed all his feats done in
Spain, to be nothing in comparison of those things which he had conceived in
his mind. He looked for the conqueste of great Carthage and Africa, as the
end of his war, and the consummation of his honor and glory. Wherefore, to
work in time all things, that afterward should serve for his purpose, he
determined to win unto him the hearts of princis, which were borderars unto
that country. And first he minded to attempt king Syphax.

This Syphax was king of a people in Africa, called Masesuli, adioynyng to the
Moors, and lying on the other side of the sea Mediterrane, over against new
Carthage in Spain, who at that time was a great friend to the Carthaginenses:
To him he sent C. Lelius, with a goodly present: wherewith the king was very
glad and well pleased. And considering in his mind the good fortune, which
the Romans had in all parts, and seeing the power of his old friends the
Carthaginenses to be so greatly decayed, that in Italy they had now
little to do, and in Spain nothing: He agreed with Lelius, to become a
friend to the Romans. But he said, he would no further proceed to the
confirmation of the amity between them, till he might personally speak with
Scipio, the chief capitayn of the Romans. Whervppon Lelius taking assurance
of him, for the safe going and coming of his captain, returned to Scipio.
And declared unto him, how he had spedde, as is before declared. Scipio
indgynge his frendshyppe to be a great help and furtheraunce to his purpose,
touching his desirous affairs in Africa, both for his greatte strength and
richesse, and also for that his country was adioynyng to Carthage, directly
over against Spain, leaving Lucius Martius at Tarracon, and Sillanus at new
Carthage, with a power sufficient for the defense of Spain: he with Lelius in
two galeys or rowbarges of five oores a piece, passed over into Africa.

Now it happened, that even the same time Asdruball, who of late had been
driven out of Spain, was newely arrived in the same haven, with seven galeys,
and castyng their ankers, drew as near the shore as they could. Asdruball,
perceyuinge the other two galeys or rowbarges of Scipios, coming toward the
same haven: knew full well, they were the vessels of his enemies.
Wherefore not doubting, but that they being so few in number, might easyly
be oppressed and vanquys^hed, before they should get the haven: he
commanded his folks to wey up the ankers, and to make them ready to set
furthe with all speed. But the other, having good wind to their furtherance,
entered the haven, before the galeys of Asdruball might get out, such
ruffelinge noise and littell shifte was made by his men. Wherefore when the
Romans had ones gotten the kings haven: no man durst be so bold to meddell
with them. Thus went the two capyteynes on land: first Asdruball, and then
Scipio with Lelius, and both went to the kings palayes: whose coming did
unto Syphax greatte honor. For it was never before seen, that the gouernoures
of the.ii. most noble seignories, that were in those days in all the world,
came ever to his palayce upon one day, to desire his amity and peace. The
king right gentylly received them both, and sens their chances were to mete
both at one time in his house: he did what he might, to bring them both to
communication, trusting thereby to appease all strife and discord for any
mattier that had been between them. But that Scipio refused to do,
affyrmynge, that there was no pryuate matter of displeasure between him and
Asdruball, which by communication or hearing of friends, neded to be
determined. Neither was there any thing touching the common welthe of his
country, wherein he might travail or entreat, onelesse it were by special
authority or commandment of the wholle senate. Than the king made great
instance to Scipio, saying they were both his guestes at ones, that he would
be contented to be so ordered, that he might not have cause to expelle any of
them both from his table. Scipio at the kings request was not only
contented to sytte with Asdruball at oone table, but also, for the kings
pleasure, he lay in the same bed that he did. For Scipio was naturally of
such dexterity, and so conformable to reason, that thereby he not only wanne
the heart of Syphax: but alsoo he brought his most mortal enemy Asdruball
in more admyration of him, after he had seen his conversation, than ever he
did before, for any act that ever he did. Whereupon he began than to
conjecture and to judge, that Syphax, with all his might was become friend to
the Romans. Such polycie he deemed Scipio to have in winning the hertes of
men. And than he began to dyuise, that it was necessary for the
Carthaginenses, to consult among them selves, not how Spain was lost, and
might be recovered: but rather how they might keep their domynion in
Africa. Specially he was moved thus to be in doubt, for that he judged, that
so greatte a capytayne of the Romans, would not leave the country, that he
lately had conquered, to wander abroad in a strange domynyon, only with two
galeys, leaving behind him his greatte power, and committyng him unto the
daungier of an unknown king: but only upon some trust that he had thereby
to win Africa.

Scipio concludinge a peace and amity with the king, departed from him,
leaving Asdruball wrapped in manyfolde troubles. And within four days after,
susteynynge many storms on the seas, he arrived in safeguard at new Carthage.

Massanissa speaks secretly with Scipio, and enters in leage with the
Romans: Mago sayleth into Italy, to join with Anniball. Cap. lvii.
IT is before declared, how Sillanus had secret communication with
Massanissa, and had won him to be friend to the Romans: but the conclusyon
of this communication was deferred, till Massanissa might speak with Scipio
personallye, for the more sure and faithful assurance of their alliance.
Which caused P. Scipio to enterprise that long peynfull journey, to come nere
to the sea side, to mete him. Of whose approchynge Massanissa, being in the isle
called the Gades, was advertised by L. Martius: He fained to Mago, that his
horses were lost and spylt, for that they were so long kept within the isle,
without any exercise: and his men also were empayred through idleness, not
putting them selves in ure to do any feats of arms. Furthermore he said,
their long lienge in that island caused derth and scarsitie of all things.
Wherefore he desired license of him, that he might, with his horsemen pass
over in to Spain, there to spoil and wast the country nere to the sea side.

By this perswasyon he obtained license, and came over in to Spain. At his
first arryuaile, he sent three noble men of Numidie to Scipio, whereof he
wylled him to reteyne with him two of them, as pledges: And to send again the
third of them, to acertayne him of the time and place of their metynge: by
whose conducte he might be brought to the place appointed. When the day came,
they met to gether, with a small number in their company: where Massanissa,
at the first syghte, although before he had a great admyration of Scipio,
through the noble fame of his acts: yet upon the sight of him and his
presence, he had him in much more veneration. For besides that of nature he
was endowed with goodlye and large stature: wherein he showed a marueylouse
magnifycence: yet the same was set forth the more by reason of his goodly long
hear, and his comely apparel, after a manly and warrelyke fashion. He was also
of a myddle age, at his full strength, and was become so beautyfull after a
sickness, of which he was late recovered: that his lusty youth seemed renewed:
whereby he was more pleasant to behold. At their first metyng, Massanissa half
astonished, gave him humble thanks for his goodness showed, in sendynge home
his brothers son: whom he before had as prisoner. From which time (he said)
he ceased not to seek occasion of his friendshyp and amity, for the which,
now that he had obtained it, he gave thanks to the gods. Trusting that he
would so apply himself in his affairs and the Romans causes, that their
common welthe was never more advanced by one man, being a stranger unto
them. Which his hearty benevolence and good will that he bare to them, he could
never before (although he would) have showed to him and to them in Spain,
being to him a strange, and an unknown country. But in case the Romans
would send Scipio as their captain into Africa, where he was bred and
brought up, he doubted not, there to do them such hie service, that the honor
of Carthage should no long while endure.

Scipio gladly beheld him, and also heard him: knowinge surely, that he was
the chief of all the horsemen in the army of his ennemies, and a lusty young
man, of a nobleherte and courage. Wherefore after they had entreated of their
business, giuynge faith the one to the other, of faithful love and amity, they
departed: Scipio to Tarracon, and Massanissa to the i will of Gades. but because
it might appear to Mago, that he had done some feate in Spain: Scipio
suffered him to spoil certain goods and grounds on the sea cost, and to
take the pray with him.

Mago being desperate of any good speed to be had in Spain, was in mind to
sail into Africa, when sodeynlye letters came to him from Carthage,
commaundyng him with his navy of ships, that he had at the Gades, that he
should sail over into Italy. Where hyringe as much people as he might, of
frenchemen, and Liguriens, he should with all speed ioyn him self with
Annibal. And for that purpose great sums of money were sent him from
Carthage. Besides that he levied and exacted as much money as he could of the
Gaditanes, compellinge every man to bring in his money. Besides this he
spoiled the temples. With all this riches he arrived at the i will of Minorque,
where he gathered together.ii. M. young men, whom in the beginnynge of summer
he took with him, and failed over into Italy with.xxx. great ships of war,
and many other ships laden with prouisyon. He had in his host at that
time.xii. M. fotemen, and two. M. horsemen. With this number he sodeynlye
arrived at Geene, which town he took with small resystence, being unprovided
of men of war. From thense he sailed alonge the costs of Liguria, next to
the mountains called Alps, and hering, that a people of that countreye,
called Ingawni, held war with certain mountanoys called Epanterii: he
landed there, and making a leage or amity with the Iagawnes, he granted them
to invade the mountanoys with certain of his people. The rest he sent to
Carthage, to defend the costs of the sea there. For it was bruted abroad,
that Scipio was minded to land his navy in Africa.

He had no long season tarried there, but his army still increased. For the
frenchemen daily resorted unto him, hering the fame and glory of his name. Of
his arriuaile in Liguria about Geene, Sp. Lucretius sent letters to Rome to the
senate, aduertisynge them, that where Asdruball was about.ii. years paste
slain with his army in the frontiers of Italy, to the great comfort of the
city, that great joy was but in vain, and passed like a shadow, unless
they provided now spedye remedy. For a new army was come with Mago from
Carthage, to begin a new war like the other: only the capytayne thereof
was changed. These news moved much the senators. Wherefore they sent letters
to M. Liuius, then proconsull, commaundynge him to bring his host from
Hetruria to Arminius. Cn. Seruilius the pretour had also commandment, to
bring thither from Rome two new legions. Thus lay both the hosts of
Romans, and the army of the Carthaginenses, with their friends, the oone not
far from the other, a long season, without any thing doing worthy of
memory.

Scipio sayleth into Italy, comes to Rome, and is treat one of the consulies,
he despreth to have license, to sail into Africa with an army. Cap. lviii.
SOne after the departing of Mago from the i will of Gades, the Gaditanes yielded
them selves to the Romans. P. Scipio committing the rule and governance of
his army to L. Lentulus, and L. Manlius, taking with him.x. ships, with men
sufficient, went him self to Rome. Against whose coming the counsel satte
without the city in the house of Bellona. There he soberly declared to the
senators, what things he had done in Spain: How often he had fought with
banners displayed against his ennemies: how many cities he had taken from them
by strength: what people he had brought into their obeysaunce: he showed also
that he had fought with.iiii. sundry capitaines noble men, and vanquished
them and their armies, which before were never vanquished: So that now there
was no Carthaginenses left in Spain. But for all his noble acts, he was not
admitted to enter the city with triumph, because he had never borne office in
the city. After the counsel arose, he entered the city, where he presented
and brought into the tresory great plenty of money and riches of his gaynes and
prays. Soon after the time came of chosyng of consuls, at which day P.
Cornelius Scipio was chosen consul, and P. Licinius Crassus his fellow for
that year. Great was the resort that came to behold Scipio where so ever he
went. The commons had conceived in their minds an opinion of him, that he was
the manne, appointed by the gods to finishe the wars in Italy, as he had
before delivered Spain from the Carthaginenses. Which wars in Italy ended,
they appointed in their own hertes, and also they spoke it openly, that he
should have Africa, appointed as his prouynce. When the prouynces were
allotted, he was appointed to Sicilia, and L. Crassus to the Brutians against
Anniball. The fame among the commons ran still, that Scipio should have
Africa to his prouynce. And he ever desyrouse of great glory, said: that he
was not only chosen Consul, to meynteyne the war, but to fynysshe and to
make an end thereof. Which in no wise might be achieued, oneles he might pass
with his army into Africa. Which his desire in case the senators would not
grant, he would refer it to the voice of the communes.

An oration made by Q. Fabius Maximus, dissuading Scipio from his desired
journey into Africa, and willing him to mayntein the wars against Anniball
in Italy. Cap. lix.
OF this purpose of Scipio the senators consulted together, and among other,
they desired Q. Fabius Maximus to declare his opinyon. He answered, making an
oration in manner and form following.

I am well assured, fathers conscript, that if I dissent and agree not to this
hasty passage into Africa, two things will be judged and spoken of me. One
is, a slownes or a slack tractynge of my mattier, which naturally is given
me, and that yongemen call fearefulnes or slouthe. And it greueth me little,
though they have such opinion in me, sens other men's councelles heretofore
have appeared glorious at the first face: but at length my counsel has ever
proved best and most for the common welthe. The second thing is, that I
should for evil will go about to hinder the glory of this valiant consul,
that daily grows and increases. From which suspicion, if neither my
fascion of living and manners, nor the office of Dictatour, which I have
borne, nor the room of a consul, which I have five times enjoyed: neither
the great glory, that I have won both in the time of peace and war, will
deliver and pourge me: let mine age at the least deliver me therefro For what
indifferent contention can be between me and him that in years may not match
my son? When I was dictatour, the master of the horses labored so to the
senate, that he was made equal with me in auctoritye and rule: which thing
never was seen before. yet never manne herd me, either priuyly or openly
refuse their order therein. For I had leauer to get by my deeds than by my
words, that he which was by other men's judgment compared with me, should
shortly after by his own confession give me the preferrement. Much less
now, when I have so often borne these honorable offices, do I intend to
strive with this flourysshynge young manne. I let Anniball of his vyctory,
to the intent he might now be vanquysshed of you that be lusty and strong.
Reason would, Pub. Cornelius, that ye should be contented (sens I die dde
never set more by mine own fame and honor, or the fame of the people, than
I did by the commonwealth) although I do not now prefer your honor and
laudis before the commonwealth. Never the less in case there were no war in
Italy, or else such an ennemy, by whose vanquyshing small honor were to be
gotten: than he that would keep the in Italy (although the commune welthe were
thereby somewhat anaunced) might seem to go about to take thy glory from the.
But sens Anniball is our ennemy, who has with his hooste these.xiiii. years
vexed Italy: should thou P. Cornelius, think the to lose honor, if by thy
prowess, being consul, thou canste expelle and drive him out of this
country, who has been the cause of so many of our men's slaughter, and of our
so great destruction? Whereby as Luctatius bare away the honorable title of
fynyshyng the first war with the Carthaginenses: even so now thou may
obtain the praise of fynyshing this war. Onelesse thou do think, that
Amilcar than capitayn, was to be preferred before Anniball: or that war
before this: or that victory to be more noble and glorious, than this shall be
to the, if it be thy chance (being consul) to overcome? Think thou it more
honor, to deliver Spain from our ennemies than to deliver Italy? Anniball is
no such man, but that who so ever will chose to war in an other place, must
be reckened rather to fear him, than to dispyse him. Make the ready therefore,
and think not to fetch a compass about the busshe, to goo before in to
Africa, to the intent Anniball should follow the: but goo the next way to
work, and where so ever Anniball be, thither dyrecte thy war. Nature
gives, that a man should first defend his own country: or he invade or
assail an other land. Let there first be peace in Italy, before there be
war in Africa. And let fear be first expelled from us, or it be driven
upon other. If thou canste by thy governance do both, first overcome
Anniball here: and then after assail Carthage. Our treasorye is not able to
find.ii. great armies: one here, and an other in Africa. And if it were
sufficient to find P. Licinius one host in Italy, and P. Scipio an other also
in Africa: what if it should chance (as god forbid, yet such happes have
happed and may do again) that Anniball did overcome Licinius, and were
coming toward Rome: Might we call the from Africa, as we did call
Quintus Fuluius from Capua to our succors? Ye, and in Africa also the
fortune of war is doubtful and variable. Let thine own house or famylie
be to the a warnyng. Were not thy father and thyn uncle slain, with their
hoostes, and all within thyrty days space? Yet had they before among
strange nations, both by sea and by land, gotten greatte renoume to the city
of Rome and all their posterytie. The day would fail me, or I made an end,
if I should reaken up the names of kings and capyteynes, which rasshelye
have invaded the lands of their enemies, to the utter vndooynge of them and
their armies. The Athenienses, leaving war at home, sent a noble yongeman
capyteyne, with an huge nauye into Sicilia, where being overthrown in oone
battle, they had such loss, that their common welthe was clean subverted
for ever. This outward exaumple is to ancient. Let the same A^frica, and the
loss of our own consulle M. Attilius, there taken by the Carthaginenses, and
their friends, be to us a document. In comparyson of Africa, Publius Scipio,
the countries of Spain be but a play or a game. The estates of them be
nothing like. For at thy passing into Spain thou dyddeste sail by the
costs of Italye and France, and dyddest arryue with thy nauye in the city of
our friends. Where setting thy men on land, thou by sure ways were
conveyed to Tarracon, the friends also of the Romans. From Tarracon, thou
came to the river of Iberus, where thou foundeste that noble capytayne L.
Martius, and many fyers Romain soldiers, left of the armies of thy father and
thine uncle. And sone after new Carthage was won: because none of the.iii.
hosts of the Carthagynenses, came to the succor and defense of the city and
their fellows. These things I cannot so greatly praise: but touching the
wars in Africa, they shall be found far unlike. For there shalt thou
find no haven open for our army and navy, no ground peasyble, no city of
our fryendeshyppe, no king our friend. Also no place mete for us, either to
abide upon, or to goo forewardes on. Wherefore wheresoever thou look, thou
shalt see all full of thine enemies. Will thou believe Syphax and the
Numidians? Let it suffyse the, that thou dyddest ones believe him. Folysshe
hardynesse doothe never prospere: Deceyte doothe so order it self in small
things, that faith may be given to it: to the intent in great things he may
deceive with great advantage. Thy father and uncle were not oppressed by the
armor of their ennemies: til they were first deceived by their own fellows
and falls friends the Celtiberiens. Ye thy self were never in so great
ieopardy through Mago and Asdrubal capiteines of thine ennemies, as thou were
in by Indibilis and Mandonius, princis of Spain: whom thou did take to be
thy very friends. Thine own Romain soldiers have of late rebelled against
the: and will thou now trust the Numydians? Both Syphax and Massanissa,
touching the dominion or rule in Africa, will prefer them selves before the
Carthaginenses: yet will they gladlier suffer the Carthagine^ses to bear rule
there, then any stranger. Now is there contention and debate between them:
because they be not fraied with any foreign power: but so sone as the Romain
army shall appear before them, they will straight join them selfs together. As
in a town where fire is in a house, people will assemble together to the
quenchyng thereof, for fear of a common hurt or danger. ye shall see the
Carthaginenses defend their walls of their town and country, their temples,
their own houses, with their wives and young thildren, of an other sort then
they defended Spain. And what if the Carthaginenses, making peace with the
kings that be their neighbors, trusting to the strength of their towns, and
perceiving Italy to be made bare of men of war by thy coming thither with
such a power, will send a new army from Africa into Italy, or will command
Mago, who is already come to the costs of the Liguriens, to join with
Anniball with all his power: Then shall we be in the same case, wherein we were
when Asdruball passed the mounteynes, and was descended into Italy. The more
stronger and valyant Capytaine that thou art, the moore ought we and all
Italy to rejoice, and to keep the still among us. Thou can not deny thy
self, but that where Anniball is, there is the head and strength of all this
war. And thou say, that thy goinge into Africa shall be to draw Anniball
thither, so that whether it be here or there, with Ann^bal thou must chefly
have to do. And then I pray the answer me, Shall thou be more sure in
Africa, being there alone, or here in Italye, having the other consul thy
fellow and his host joined with the? And if thou will seek the experience
thereof, let Claudius and Liuius, the late consulles, be to the an exaumple and
a learning. Again, whether shall Anniball be stronger in the little angle of
the Brutiens, whereunto he is driven with his hole host, or when he shall come
to Carthago, having al his friends of Africa about him? What a devise is
this, to chose rather to fight and to try with thine ennemie, where thy power
shall be smaller by the half, and thine ennemies power doubled: then to fight
in a place, where thou shalt have two armies against his one? ye and that one
worn and weried with long and grievous war. Consydre thy self, how much
this thy counsel varieth from the mind of thy father, he being fully
appointed to Spain, as his prouynce, fearing the coming of Anniball into
Italy, to the intent to mete him at his descendinge from the mountains, left
his own prouynce, and came into Italy. But now thou, when Annibal is al ready
in Italy, intendest to leave Italy: Not for that it is for the common welthe so
to do, but thereby to purchase the a noble and glorious name. But O ye noble
fathers conscripte, I do think, that P. Corn. Scipio was not made consul for
his own private welthe or pleasure, but for the common welthe, and the
safegarde of all us. Neither were the armies of men of war appointed to him,
to the intent, be like a prince might sail with them into what part of the
world he will. But they were assigned to him, and to all other his
predecessors, for the safegarde and defense of this city and of Italy.

With this oration of Fabius, being a man of great authority wisdom
experience and fame, the more part of the ancient senators were persuaded:
and mo men allowed the sobre counsel of the old man, then the fyerse mind
of Scipio the yongemanne. Wherefore Scipio made unto him this answer.

The answer of P. Cornelius Scipio, to the oration of Q. Fabius Maximus: And
of his saylynge into Sicilia with his army. Cap. lx.
QVintus Fabius in the beginning of his oration (fathers conscript) said, that
in the declaration of his opinyon he might be suspected to speak of evil
will and envy: but it is not I that do accuse so great and so noble a man
thereof: Although I do not perceive the same suspicion as yet to be by him
sufficiently avoided, whether the defaulte thereof be in the deformity of his
oration, or for lack of good matter, I know not. But this I well perceive,
that to avoid the crime or suspicion of envy, he has so extolled his own
honor, with the fame of his noble acts, as though it should not become him, or
stand with his honor, to contend with me, being my self but a child, under
the age of his son. Considering the great offices that he has borne in the
city, whereby as it seems, his meaning is, that the desire of glory should be
measured only, by the length of the life of man, and not extend to be had in
perpetual memory with our posterity. But this I know well, that every noble
heart has a covetous desire to be equivalent in famous virtue, not only with
the age present, but also with the people of al ages, both past and yet to
come. And (onles I would dissemble) truly Q. Fabius, my will is not only to be
equal unto the in renown, but also to pass the in praises, if I may atteyne
thereunto. Let neither of us both think, that none that shall come after us,
shall be like unto us. For that were a desire of great hurt and hynderaunce,
both of our posterity, and also of the commonwealth, and generally of all
mankind. Furthermore, Fabius has remembered the ieoperdies and peryls, that I
should enter into, by my going into Africa, as though he were careful both
for me and mine army. I marvel greatly, from whens this loving care and
thought for me is so sodeinly spronge. For when my father and mine uncle were
both slain, and both their armies almost distroied, slain, and clean
lost, the Affricanes ouerrounnynge the country with.iiii. several hoostes
and capytaines: than would no man offer him self to be a captain of the
Romans in Spain, but only I. Atwhychetyme, when the people of the city
made me governor, being tha^ but.xxiiii. years old, there was no man found,
which would remember my tender age: neither the power of our ennemies, the
daungerousnes of battle, nor yet the late death and destruction of my friends
in Spain. Is there now in Africa any greatter armies or better capitaines,
than were than in Spain? Was mine age at that time more mete for the war,
thanne it is now? or is it greater matter to fight with our enemies of Africa
in Spayn, than it is in Africa? As it is now easy to auaunce my self of
iiii. armies of Carthage, by me distroied: after so many cities taken by force,
after so many princes and wild nations subdued, and all Spain won unto the
occean sea, so that none appearance is left there of any war: Likewise after
my victorious return from Africa, it shall be as easy to set forth the
ouercominge of all things, which now be laid very terryble and dangerdus:
only to the intent to keep me still at home. Fabius demeth, that I shall have no
havens or ports open for me to enter. He also remembers the taking of M.
Attilius Regulus in Africa: as though M. Attilius had his fall at his first
arrival into that countreye. Where of truth he had havens open and enter at
his pleasure, ye by the space of an hole year he did many noble acts there:
Whom the Carthaginenses were never able of their own power to subdue, till
the second year after his coming, and many of his host slain. They sent for
Xantippus, captain of the Lacedaemonians, with his power: by whom he was at
length overcome and taken in battle. This exaumple can nothing fear me. For
why should I more fear to sail into Africa because of the taking of M.
Attilius, then I was afraid to sail into Spain after the death of both the
Scipions? And I trust Xantippus the Lacedemonien was not born to be more
fortunate to the Carthaginenses, then I shall be to the Romans and to mine own
country. The tale must be recited of the Athenienses, how fondely leaving
war at home, they entered into Africa: But why do thou not rehearse the
history of Agathocles, king of the Syracusanes? Who when his country of
Sicilia had been long troubled with war by the Carthaginenses, he with his
host failed over into Africa: whereby he delivered his own country from
war, and turned all to the defense of him and his power in Africa. But to
show the commodity of inuadinge of a foreyne countreye, thereby to avoid
ieopardyes at home: what better example can any man rehearse, then of this
Anniball? There is great difference between the sight of bournynge and
spoylyng of other men's countries: and the sight of the destruction of thine
own cities and regyons. There is more courage in a man, that offrethe
battle, then in him that defendethe. Little thought Anniball at his first
coming to Italye, that so many cities and people would have yielded them unto
him as did after the battle at Cannas: much less cause shall the
Carthaginenses have of trust or hoope in Africa, consideringe their untruths
to their neighbors, and their own proud and cruel dominion over their
subjects. We being forsaken of our neighbors, have still endured al dangers
by our own power and strength. The Carthaginenses have no great strength of
their own. Their power is in hired soldiers of Africa and Numidia, whose
light wits cause light faith, when they se cause of change. If ye suffer
me to depart hence, with speed, ye shall shortly hear of my passage thither,
and of the war wherewith I shall vex them. And then shall ye see Anniball
make speed to depart from this countreye: and ye shall hear shortly of the
syege of Carthage: not doubting, but that ye shall receive gladder tidings
from Africa, then ever ye had fro me out of Spain. These hopes I do conceive.
First of the fortune of this city and people of Rome. Secondely, through the
trust of the gods, which are witnesses of the truse broken by them.
Thyrdely, that occasyon offered by Syphax and Massanissa, to whose promise and
faith I will so trust, that I will also be well ware of their falsehode and
dysceipte. And it is the part of a man and a good capyteyne, not to shrynke
and forsake fortune, when it is offered. I know well Quintus Fabius, that I
shall find Anniball my match: but I will rather draw him, then he shall
retire me. I will cause him to fight with me in his own country. And Carthage
shall rather be a pray and a reward of our victory: then the country and
castelles of the Brutians, which are almost dystroyed already. Now when ye
say, Italye shall be in daungier by my departing hens, I pray you, may not P.
Licinius the consul (whiles I am say lynge thither) stay with his host
Anniball, that is now of small power: as well as thou Q. Fabius, dyddest slaye
him, when he as a conqueror ouerranne all Italy? Yt shall be a great honor
to the Romans, and an eternal same among kings and strange nations, that we
have the courage not only to defend Italy, but also to enter and make war in
Africa. What shame shall it be when it shall be said, that Anniball
enterprised an act, that no Romayne capiteyn ever durst enterprise? When
contention was between us and the Carthaginenses for Sicilia, our nauies and
armies oftentimes invaded Africa: How when contention is for Italy between
us, Africa remains quiet and in peace. But now let Italy take rest, and be
in peace, which of long time has been vexed, and let Africa an other season
suffer bournynge spoylynge and wastyng. And let the puissaunt Romayne army
approach the walls of Carthage: rather then we should with bulwarks and
fortifycations defend our ennemies from our own walls. Let Africa be from
henseforthe the place of war. Let fear, flieng, sleing, wasting of fyeldes
and other dystructions, belonging to war, be now turned thither, which by
the space of.xiiii. years has invaded our country.

After this answer of Scipio, great strife and altercacion was in the senate
house. At the last it was decreed, that Sicipo, with thyrty ships should go
into Sicilia, and from thence at his pleasure, if he thought it most
conueniente for the common welthe, to sail over into Africa: the other co^sul
to keep war in the country of the Brutians against Anniball. Besides these
ships, and the Romayne legyons, which were appointed to Scipio, many cities
and countries adjoining to Rome, willingly aided him with ships, with vii.
thousand soldiers, and all things necessary, of their own costs and
charges. With which noumbre he arrived in Sicilia, and there divided them
into companyes, appointynge to every company an hundred men. Among al which
number, he chose out three hunderd of the most valyant and actife young men,
that were without armor: whom he kept ever about him. But they knew not to
what purpose he mente it. And on a day he chose and named.iii. C of the most
noble and rychest young gentylmen of all Sicilia, whom he said, should sail
with him into Africa: assygninge them a day, at which they should appear
before him with their horse and armor. This commandment troubled them sore,
and to be so far from home with the labors by land and by sea, seemed very
painful, not only to them, but also to their friends and kinsefolkes. At the
day appointed for their return, they came all before him, bringing with them
horses harneis and althinges necessary. Then said Scipio: It is showed me, that
certain of you, men of arms of Sicilia, grudge sore to go inthis iourneye
with me: Wherefore if there be any of you here, of that mind, I pray you
speak now, and I will gladly hear you. For I had much leauer, that ye
uttered it now betymes: then that ye should against your hertes go forth, and
become unprofitable soldiers to me and to the common wealth. Whereunto one of
the.iii. C. answered: Truly sir, if it were in my choice and election, what I
should do, I would not go forth in the wars. Well, said Scipio: Sense ye
have plainly declared your mind without dissimulation, I will appoynte one in
your place, to whom ye shall deliver your horse, harneyes, and other
necessary instruments of war, whom ye shall take home with you to your
house, and there teach instruct and exercise him in feats of war, till I
send for him again. Of this bargain the young gentylman was very ioyefull,
and delyuerynge him all his appareyll for the war, he took him home with him.
When the rest of the three hundred men of arms of Sicilia, perceived their
companion by this mean dismyssed from the war, with the good love and favor
of the Capytayne: every one of them also began to make his excuse, and
desired to have Scipio to appoynte other in their roumes. Which he gladdelye
did, and by this mean he horsed, harneysed, and instructed the three hundred
willing Romans, that were unarmed, with the horses and harneys of the
knights of Sicilia, without any charge of the stock of the city of Rome:
Which proved after valiaunte men of arms, and did many noble acts for
the aduauncemente of the commonwealth. Than Scipio serched out such soldiers
as warred under Marcellus the consul, at the wynnyng of Syracusa, whom he
chose chiefly: for that he judged them to be expert in assaultyng and scalyng
of towns and castelles. For even than he imagined the wynnyng of great
Carthage. Sone after he set men a work to make ships with speed, and to
amend and to repair his old ships. Which done he sent C. Lelius, with a
good number of men into Africa, to spoil rob and wast the sea costs: where
he landed in the night. And in the dawning of the day, setting his men in
good order, he spoiled the fields, distroyed and slew many of the Affricans:
which looked little for any such sodeyn invasion, they had so long continued
in pleasure and ease. The fame of the destruction came anon to Carthage: the
messangers noysed abroad, that Scipio was arrived. For they had herd before,
that he was already come into Sicilia: and they were so sodeinly taken, that for
fear they could tell the certayntie of nothing, neither of the number of the
Romans, nor of their ships: But fear caused them to make much more
thereof then it was in deed. The citezens of Carthage were then in a meruaylous
fear and pensifenesse, beholdynge the sodeyne change of fortune, that of late
had so advanced them, that their army lay before the gates of Rome: and their
capytaines had almost subdued al Italy: Now contrary wise, they looked for none
other, but the spoiling of their country, and the besieginge of Carthage by
the Romans. When they considered their help, they found their citezens, and
men of their own country about them, weak and nothing mete for the war.
All their strength was in hired soldiers from other parts of Africa: and
they were wauerynge people, untrue and unsteadfast. They also rekened Syphax to
be turned from them by the secret communication, that Scipio had with him: and
Massanissa was apparently become their enemy. Of Mago they had no tidinges of
his removing from Gene, and goinge into Italy to join his host with Annibals
host: and the fame, and also the strength of Anniball was waxed faynte.

When they had all hole considered their woeful state and condition: then began
the senators to counsel and provide for help in their present necessity.
They mustered their men, both in the city and without. They hired many
soldiers Affricans. They vytayled their city: they amended their ships,
they provided harness and all other things needful.

When they were thus busy, true tidinges came, that it was not the captain
Scipio, that was arrived: it was Lelius, that with certain ships and men
was come to rob and spoil the country only. And that the great rest of the
army was yet in Sicilia. With these news they were somewhat comforted: and
then they devised to send ambassadors to Syphax, and to other princes about
them, for a sure aliance and frendshyp. They sent also to Phillip king of
Macedonia, promising him great sums of money, to invade either Italy or
Sicilia with a great host. Into Italy also were messangers sent, to cause the
capitayns Annibal and Mago to stay Scipio in Italy. To Mago was sent.xxv.
long ships.vi. M. fotemen.viii. C. horsemen, and.vii. elephantes, with
great plenty of money, to hyre mo men in those parties, willing him with all
his strength to remove toward the city of Rome, and join his host with
Annibals. This preparation made the Carthaginenses.

When the ships of Carthage were arrived at Gene, they found there Mago with
his army and navy of ships: who knowing the mind of the Carthaginenses,
called before him a great number of frenchemen and Liguriens, unto whom he
showed, that he was sent into those parties to purchase them liberty, and
deliver them from bondage, wherein they had long ben holden. He declared also
to them, how M. Liuius, and Sp. Lucretius lay with their two Romayne armies
not far from them. The one in Hetruria, the other in France. Whose powers to
resyst, he neded to have a great assemble of people. Then the frenchemen
answered, that their hertes and minds were holly to serve him therein. But
they said, there was an host of Romans all ready in their country: which if
they did perceive, that Mago were aided by them, they would incontinent wast
and destroy their country. Wherefore they desired, that the Liguriens might
help him: who were nothing so nere danger, and they would privily help him
with vittayles and all things necessary, to the best of their power.
Whereunto the Liguriens agreed, and desired two months space, to assemble and
take musters of their best soudiours.

Marcus Liuius, herynge that Mago gathered to gether so great a number of
people: he removed with his host in to France, and joined him self to Sp.
Lucretius, lyinge ever in awayte to mete with Mago, so sone as he remouynge
from the Liguriens would offer to enter into Italye, and take his journey
toward Rome. But in case Mago would rest in the angle of the mounteynes
without further procedynge: then they like wise would abide about Arminius, ever
ready for the defense of Italy.

The complaynt of the Lortenses to the senators of the cruel governance of
D. Pleminius. Cap. lxi.
MAssanissa hearing of the arriuaile of a Romayne army in Africa, with a
small number of horsemen came to Lelius, to whom he complained much of the
slowenes of Scipio, that he had not all that time ben in Africa with his
great power: consyderinge the low ebb that the Carthaginenses were brought
unto, and also seeing that Syphax was now busyed with war with the princes
adioynynge unto him. Whom (he said) he knew suerly, after that he had brought
his own purpose to good effect, and had leiser to settle all his own
busynes, that then he would observe no promise or bond, that he had before
made to the Romans. So little good faith he knew to be in him. Wherefore he
desired Lelius, to move and stir Scipio, to make have thither, and he would
not fail (although he were driven out of his own realm) to mete with him
soon after his landinge, with a good number both of horsemen and of fotemen.

On the morrow after Lelius departed, with his ships loded with their pray
and landed in Sicilia: where he found Scipio, to whom he declared the mind and
message of Massanissa. Whereupon he had shortly set forwards into Africa, had
he not heard comfort of the winning of Locres, a city in the uttermost
part of Italy, that then was holden by the Carthaginenses. Which city in
short time he obtained, partly by treason of certain carpenters, that wrought
in the castle, partly by the favor of the citezens thereof. Who being
grievously opressed by Amylcar the captain, and other Carthaginenses of the
garrison, that ceased not to use all kinds of oppression over them: at the
last consented to receive the Romans into the town. Which brought to pass,
Scipio returned to Sicilia, leaving behind him Q. Pleminius captain of the
town, with a garryson sufficient for the kepinge of the same. After whose
departing, Pleminius with his souldyours, far passed Amylcar and the
Carthaginenses in pride auaryce and all other vices. So that it seemed, they
strove not, who should overcome other in feats of arms: but who should excede
other in vice. They spared another men's wives maidens nor daughters: they
exercysed cruel rapine of men's goods, and spoilyng of temples. Whereof the
citizens being weary, sent message of complaint to Scipio the consul. whereupon
he eftsoon came to Locrus, where he had al their matters debated, and at
length punyshed certain of them by emprysonmente: and after departed,
leaving still Q. Pleminius captain there, with no less auctority then he
had be fore. But after he departed, Pleminius wyllinge to execute his malice
over his ennemies, put certain of them to cruel death: which before had
complained of him to the consul. His soldiers also were afterward more
cruel and unruly then they were before. Therefore they sent legates to Rome,
with grievous complaynte to the senate, of the manyfolde injuries, hurtes, and
cruel pains, that they suffered: much more by the Romans, then ever they
had by the Carthaginenses. Whose complaynte being well and delyberately herd
in the senate, Quintus Fabius, replete with old malice against Scipio, to set
forth his negligence, inquired of the legates, whether they had never before
that time showed their cause to the consul Scipio. They answered, that at
their first complaynt, he herd the matter, and then putting the tribunes in
prison, he let Pleminius go at liberty, and put him again in auctority:
although he was worthy more punishment then the other. But at their second
complaynt made to him by their legates, he was so busied about the setting
forewardes of his ships and men into Africa, that he could not attend to
here or examine their matter. Then was there great reproach spoken of Scipio, by
many of the princes of the senate, specially Q. Fabius alleged, that he was
born to corrupt and distroy al warlike policy and lernyng, by his ouermoche
suffera^ce and giving of liberty. Some would have had Pleminius brought to
Rome bound, and Scipio called from his province. At the last the sentence of
Q. Metellus took place, which was, that it was good, to send for Pleminius,
according to the mind of Fabius. But as touching Scipio, whom the whole city
first had chosen in his youth to be a captain in Spayn, and he according to
their expectation had delivered the hole country out of the hands of their
ennemies: whereupon they also of late had chosen him consul, to subdue Africa,
and to deliver Italy of Anniball: He thought it not meet for such a noble man
to be suddenly condemned, his cause not being duly herd and debated, or to have
him called from his journey, without a greatter cause than this was.
Consideringe that the Locrenses could lay no defaut to Scipio, but only
overmuch sufferance of Pleminius. Wherefore he thought it best, that M.
Pomponius, with.ii. tribunes, should be sent to Locrus, and from thens to
Sicilia, to examyne and try, whether the wrongs done to the Locre^ses, were
done by the commandment or assent of P. Scipio or not. And in case he were
consentyng thereto: then that they should command him to return to Rome: and
other legates to occupy his place, or else that he should continue in his
purpose and journey into Africa, as he had appointed.

According to this sentence Pomponius, with.ii. tribunes and other legates,
came to Locrus, making proclamation, that if any man would accuse Pleminius,
Scipio, or any other man, that they should come before them, and they should be
well herd. The Locrenses gyuyng great thanks to the Romans, for the goodness
therein to them showed, answered, that they would accuse Pleminius, as chief doer
of all the mischief, and certain other with him. But as touching Scipio, they
had nothing to charge him withal: but that he either gave ouermoch crede^ce to
Pleminius, or to litell faith to their words. But they said, they knew weary
well, that the wrongs to them done, were neither by the will nor
commandment of Scipio: but they thought him to be of the nature of many men,
which are sorry, that any wrong or offense should be committed, and yet when
the injuries be done, they have not the hertes or wills to revenge or punish
the offenders of the same.

With this answer M. Pomponius, and the other, were much eased of any further
inquiry of Scipios matter. Where fore they took Pleminius, and.xxx. other of
his accomplices, that were found gyltie of diverse greatte offenses, and sent
them bound to Rome: where Pleminius dyed in prison. Sone after the other were
put to condign execution. Then thought they to go to Scipio, to see, whether
the sclaunder spoken of his slouthe in governance, or of the mysorder of his
hooste, were true or not: that they might thereof make true report, when they
were returned to Rome.

Scipio hearing of their coming, caused all his army to repair to Syracusa,
where he than lay: and also caused his navy of ships, to be set furthe and
ordered in all points, as though he should the same day have fought with the
Carthaginenses, both by water and by land. When Pomponius, and the other
ambassadors were come, he gentilly and lovingly received them. he showed them
his army on the land in array ready to fight: his navy also on the sea, he
showed them not only ready to battle, but making a show of a fight in the
haven. Than led he them to his garners of corn: and into his armory and
store houses of ordinance and artillary, and all instruments of war. Who
seeing al his provision and order, were stricken with a great admiration of him
and his conduict: iudgyng that through his governance and his army, the
Carthaginenses should be overcome: or else it were never possible for them
to be subdewed. Wherefore desiring the goddis to prospere well his iourneye,
they departed from him, taking their way to Rome with greatte joy, as
though they were goinge to bring tidings to Rome of victory, rather than to
report the meruaylouse preparation toward battle, which they had seen in
Sicilia. When they came into the senate house, they extolled the fame and
acts of Scipio after such sort, that they sent him word incontinent, to
depart toward Carthage, taking with him whom he would, leaving behynd him
for the defense of Sicilia certain at his pleasure.

King Syphax marieth the daughter of Asdruball, he sends letters to Scipio,
willing him to abstein from any war in Africa, with the answer and
dyssimulation of Scipio unto the same. Scipio arryueth in Africa with his
host, to whom comes Massanissa. Ca. lxii.
VVhyles the Romans made this great ordynance for the war: the
Carthaginenses, fearing greatly the coming of Scipio, prepared as much as they
could for their defense and strength. Wherefore to pluck Syphax from the
amity of the Romans, Asdrubal, the son of Gisgon made have to fynishe a
marriage between Syphax and his daughter, that was a very fair maiden. The
king being inflamed with love, made have also to be married. Then Asdrubal,
besides his particular aliance, made a new general bond of amity between him
and the Carthaginenses, with great solempnitie and oaths taking: promisynge
faithfully, that the friends and ennemies of the one, should also be the
friends or ennemies to the other. Never the less Asdruball remembringe the
promise of amytie, that the king had ones made with Scipio, when he was lodged
with him in his palais: knowing the mutabilitie and unsteadfastness of those
barbarous nations, and fearing lest if that Scipio were ones arrived in
Africa, that the band of marriage would be but lyttel worth: Therefore whiles
the love was fervent between the king and his daughter, he by his great
desire, and his daughter also with her fair entreatynge, caused the king to
send his ambassadors to Scipio into Sicilia, with letters, gyuynge him
warning, that he should not upon the trust of any promise to him before made
by the king, sail over into Africa: aduertisynge him, that he had married the
daughter of one Asdruball of Carthage, whom Scipio met in his palaice, when
he arrived in Africa. Furthermore he said, he was in a great leage and
amity with the people of Carthage. Wherefore he desired him and the Romans,
if they would war with the Carthaginenses, that they do it far from
Carthage, as they have done heretofore, that he should not need to be present
at their battles. For in case Scipio would not forbear Africa, but lay siege
to Carthage, he could no less do, but fight for the defense of his country
of Africa, in which he was gotten borne and brought up: and for the defense of
the country of his wife, for her father and family.

With these letters came the messangers to the city of Syracusa to Scipio, who
parceiued by the contents of the same, that he should have great lack of the
kings help, in his business of Africa: yet he set forth a countenance,
keeping secret the cause of their coming, till he had sent them home again to
the king with letters: wherein he moved him, never to break the promise that
he ones made him, nor swerve from the faith and amity made with the Romans,
whereof the gods were witnesses. When the messangers were departed with his
letters, Scipio fearing, lest his soudiours would muse much and devise also of
the cause of the coming of the said messangers, to hyde the said cause from
them, and to put them in courage, he dissembled the matter, and calling his
men to gether said to them.

Sirs now is the full time for us to depart hense into Africa, without further
tarieng. For the kings our friends have sent unto us, instantly desiring us,
to make speed. First Massanissa came to Lelius, complaining greatly of our
tractynge of time. And now Syphax has also sent unto us, marueylynge why we
tarry so long. Desiringe that we will either shortly come over to him, or else
in case we be otherwise minded, to certify him by writing: that thereupon he
may provide for himself and his country. Wherefore sens althinges is now
ready, and the matter requires have, I intend to lead mine army and navy to
the parts of Lilibeus: and as soon as the wether, serves, to depart with the
favor of the gods toward Africa.

After these words to them spoken, he ordered al things for his departing,
and soon after came to the said port, with all his host. All his ships
also met him there. The number whereof was so greatte, that the haven suffysed
not to contain them, nor the city could not receive the men. Of the
certainte of the nombre wrytars do not agree. Wherefore I will let it pass. But
it seems, the number of the men was greatte, that achyeued so greatte an
enterprise, and for whom so great provision was made. For there were.iiii. C.
ships charged with men vitailes ordinances and other necessary carriage,
besides.xx. great and long ships: whereof Scipio him self, and L Scipio his
brother, took the governance. and other.xx. like ships under the rule of C.
Lelius his admyrall of the sea. Which.xl. great ships thus divided, sailed
ever on both sides of the other.iiii. C. as wafters, for the defense of their
vitayles and carriage. In every ship also he caused to be vittailes and fresh
water for.xlv. days: whereof the meat that would serve for.xv. days, was
redye sodden: the other was raw. Then gave he commandment to al his
soldiers, to keep peace and silence in their shyps, for troublynge the
shipmen: and that they should be ready to do all that the said shypmen desired
them to do, if need required. With this great number of ships and of me^,
they departed the day following: Every one of the.xl. long ships being
appointed to have in the night season one light, every one of the.iiii. C.
laden ships. u. lyghtes, and the capitaynes chief ships for a special mark
or knowledge, had three fair lights. In the morning at the soundinge of a
trumpet the vessels set forth in good order. And Scipio him self at his
departing made his prayer openly in the audience of many people on this manner.

Oye gods and goddesses, which inhabit rule and govern both sea and land,
I humbly beseech you, that ye grant all things that I have done, do, or shall
do, may turn to the honor and welthe of me and the citizens of Rome, and that
ye will be aydynge and assistinge to me in my procedinges: So that our
ennemies, being over come, we may safe and sound return home to our houses,
laden with the pray gotten by the spoil of our ennemies. Grant ye also, that
I may have power, so to do unto the people and city of Carthage, as they have
intended to do to the city of Rome.

After these words, doing sacrifice (after the custom that they used) he
departed. The wind was good, and in short space took them from the fight of
the land, and within four days, they were brought upon the cost of Africa.
Then Scipio saying a great mounteyne or rock, lienge out upon the sea,
inquired of the master of his ship, what was the name of that mountain. He
answered, it is named the mount of Beauty. Then said Scipio, I like the name
and the luck thereof very well: in the next haven thereto set us on land. When
the army was landed, they get them to the next hills, whereupon they pitched
their tents, and encamped them selves. Then were the inhabitants of the sea
costs, and all the country there about, in great fear and trouble,
perceiving the arriuaile of so great a navy, every man fled from those
parties, taking with them their wynes their children and substance: driuinge
before them their cattle to the next strong towns, to the great fear of all
the country, where the news thereof was brought. Specially in Carthage such
fear sorrow and trouble invaded the people, as though their city had been all
ready taken by their ennemies. They were then unprovided both of men of war,
and also of a good captain to be their governor. The best captain that
they then had, was Asdrubal the son of Bysgon, whom Scipio at diverse
battelles in Spain, had before put to flyghte, and at the last drove him
clean out of Spain, with all his helpers: so that they esteemed the
capitaynes to be as far unlike, as the army of Carthage was unlike to the
Romayne host. In this great fear the gates of the city were shut, the
walls kept with watch and ward, as though their ennemies had been already
come before the walls of the town. Five hundred horsemen were also sent
forth to espy the conduite of the Romans, who by chance met with many
Romayne horsemen, that were sent out to rob and spoil the fields
adioynynge, and were by them put to flyghte, to the great loss of many of the
Carthaginenses.

Sone after the arriuaile of the Romans, came Massanissa to Scipio, bringing
with him.ii. C. good men well horsed. His power was then not great, for he had been driven and chased out of his own realm, and was banished by strength out
of his own country. Whose coming was very joyful and comfortable to the
Romans. The Carthaginenses after the loss of their horsemen, assembled
again a new winge of horsemen, whereof they made governor Hanno, the son of
Amilcar. Then sent they letters and legates to Asdruball, to come to the
succor of the city, that was at point to be besyeged. They sent also to king
Syphax, desyring him to come to the socour and defense both of Carthage and
also of all Africa. Then lay the Romans nere unto the city of Vtica. Hanno
having with him.iiii. M. horsemen, came to the town of Salera, xv. miles from
the Romain camp. When Scipio had knowledge thereof, he sent Massanissa before,
with certain horsemen with him to shirmishe with them at the gates. Commanding
him, that so sone as the multitude of his ennemies were ones come forth, and
that he could no longer endure their strength, that then he should softly
withdraw him self toward the hills, where he should find him with his
host, ready to succor him. With this instruction Massanissa departed and rode
to the gates of the city, skirmishing with such as were at the said gates. ma
ny came forth to the battayl, without good order, and then Massanissa faining
him self to be afraid, somewhat reculed: sometime he turned again and fought,
with them that followed him. Thus he played at base with them, till the whole
multitude of horsemenne were come furthe of the yates. Than sobrely he
withdrewe him self till he came to the hills: to which hills the Romayne
horsemen were than couertely come. Than Massanissa fiercely returned and
assailed his ennemies, and the Romans being fresshe them selves, and having
fresshe horses, compassed and assailed them that were before almost weery with
chasing Massanissa: so that at the first brunt Hanno him self, and ^. M.
horsemen with him were slain. The rest fled, whereof the Romans in the
chase slew and took other.ii. M. among whom were many noble men of the city
of Carthage. The pray after the victory was greatte. The town was taken, and
the capytains with other men of arms were well rewarded by Scipio. But above
other he gave Massanissa great gifts, and leaving a sufficient garrison in
the town, he with his host removed thense: sendynge much of the pray, which
he had taken, both men, beasts, and other richesse, by certain of his
ships into Sicilia: intendyng him self to assail the city of Vtica, with
all his power: which if he might ones win, he reckened to be a restyng place
for him and his, till the rest of his voyage were acheued.

Thus was the town of Vtica besieged round about, and their hope was to have
succors of Asdruball: who had assembled together.xxx. M. fotemen, and.iii. M.
horsemen. Never the less for all that number, Asdruball durst not set furthe
of Carthage till king Syphax was also come to him with fyfty thousand
footmen, and.x. M. horsemen. Then set he forewardes, and came nere unto Vtica,
pytchinge his tents and camp not far from the Romayn army. There came
about this time from Sicilia and Sardinia, great plenty of wheat, to vitaile
the Romans: so that they had thereof great plenty. There was also brought
thither.xii. C. gowns, and.xii. M. cotes for the soldiers, and provision was
made for all things that they lacked. These were the acts of Scipio in
Africa this summer.

During which summer P. Sempronius the consul in Italy fought with Anniball:
where the Romans had the worst, and lost.xii. C. of their men. But soon
after Sempronius sent for P. Licinius the proconsull, to come to him with his
army. After whose coming, their powers being joined together they went
toward Anniball, and he being ioyefull of his last victory, fought with
them again, to his great loss. For there were above.iiii. M. of his men
slain, and iii. C. taken. Then Anniball, being greatly dyscomforted with
this loss, returned from thence to Croton. Sone after the time of the chosyng
of consulles was come, at which Cn. Seruilius Cepio, and Cn. Seruilius Geminus
were create consulles, and other officers were chosen, according to the old
custom, diverse cities also of the Brutiens, as Consentia, Pandosia, and other,
submytted them selves, and returned again to the Romans.

Scipio wisely espieng the manner of his ennemies camps, in the night burns
them both, puts Syphax and Asdruball to flight, with great loss of their
men. They make again a new fylde, and are eftsoon discomfyted and put to
flyghte. Cap. lxiii.
THe winter drew nere, and both the great hosts lay encamped not far from
Vtica: Yet Scipio never ceased from the besiegynge of the town, and his camp
was in syghte of his enemies. His mind was still upon his busynes touching the
war. Among other his cares, he devised greatly, by what means he might
win king Syphax from the Carthaginenses, iudgyng that the heat of love,
which he had to his young wife, was by that time somewhat assuaged, and that he
was then werye of the pleasure in love, being (as he thought) satisfied
therein to his contentation: When he had by legates assaied the mind of the
king, he made answer, that he would entreat of peace between the Romans
and the Carthaginenses, Upon this condition, that the Romans should depart
clean out of Africa, and the Carthaginenses likewise out of Italy, without
further trouble: orelles he would not fail to pursue the war on the party
of the Carthaginenses. With these conditions Scipio was nothing pleased:
Nevertheless, trustinge by further communication in the matter: to have
advantage, by the search and true knowledge of the state of his enemies,
through the common intercourse of either party to the others camp: he
fayntly refused those conditions, whereby his ennemies might take some hope of
the achieuinge of their purpose. Now were the winter houses in the camps of
the Carthaginenses made of wodde and bows, such as they could get together.
The Numidiens lodginges were covered with flagges and redes, and they lay
within their camp, without order. Many also choosing their own places without
assignemente, lay without the camp or dyches: which being showed to
Scipio, gave him a comfort and an hope, that the lodginges of his ennemies by
policy might be set on fire. Wherefore at every time that he sent any
ambassadors to the king Syphax, to entreat of the peace, to be parfectly
assured of the ^rewe state of all things, he ever sent with them certain
witty fellows of his army, disguysed in the habit and form of slaves,
commaundinge them, whiles the ambassadors were busy in their communication,
that they should straye abroad to all parts of the camp of his ennemies, and
to mark well the entrees and issues of the camps, with the syte and fascion
of the stacion or lodginges, as well of the Carthaginenses as of the Numidiens,
and in what quarter they were set, and how far the kings camp was
distante from the camp of Asdruball, with the manner of their watch and ward
both by night and by day.

When the matter was thus diverse times debated between the two counsayles: and
that the Romans were parfecte of all the state of their ennemies, and their
order: Then the legates of Scipio said unto the king, that they were
commanded never to return, until they had brought determynate answer,
either of peace or of war: Desiring him, either to give answer thereof him
self, or to take the counsel and advise of Asdruball and the Carthaginenses,
and thereupon to make them their answer. For it was now hye time to know,
either the oone or the other, without further tryfelynge forth of time. Thus
while Syphax took the advise of Asdruball, and Asdruball of the noble men of
Carthage, the espyes had leysar to view and search all things that they were
charged with: and Scipio had time to prepare all that was mete to serve his
purpose. The Numidiens also and the Carthaginenses, trusting ever on peace,
were neglygente in foreseinge and aduoydynge daungiers of war, that were
prepared for their myschiefe. At the last answer was made, that the Romans
would have peace, but their conditions were not indifferente, which they
desired. Wheruppon Scipio, having a good occasion, honestlye to break the
truse before between them taken: On the morrow he sent word to the king,
that syns he perceived no man willing to have peace but him self: therefore
the king from thens forth should trust to have no peace with the Romans,
unless he would leave the amity of the Carthaginenses. Then was the time of
truse expyred, and the spring of the year was come. Wherefore Scipio, to
bring his purpose about, assembled to gether his ships, and furnished
them with ordinance and artyllery, as though he would assail Vtica on the
sea cost. He also sent two thousand men of war to keep the hill about
Vtica, which before lay vnkepte: And that he did for two purposes.

First, to draw the minds of his ennemies from the suspection of that which
he had devised, and to occupy them with contrary work. Secondly, with that
power to defend his camp from the excursions of the citezens, in case they
would issue out, whiles he with his power were gone to Syphax and Asdruball.
Then did he open unto Massanissa, and certain other, what his mind was to
do the night following. And he commanded the Tribunes, that in the evening
following, they should bring forth the host into the fyeldes. They
according to his commandment, about the son setting, set forth the
standards and banners, and in the beginning of the night, the host set
forward in arraye, so that by mydnyghte they had gone.vii. miles, and were
come nere to the camp of their enemies. Then Scipio divided his army in.ii.
parts. The one part with the Numidiens, he appointed to Lelius and
Massanissa, willing them to invade the camp of king Syphax, and to set fire
on the lodginges made of bows and of flagges, heartily prayinge them both,
that night to apply their business with great dilygence. And he said, that so
sone as he might perceive the fire to be in the kings camp, then would he
also assail the camp of Asdruball.

According to his commandment the purpose was achieued. For incontinent after
the fire was put into the uttermost parts and houses, the fire anon took in
the dry styckes and flagges, and ran from one house to an other: so that in
short space it was abroad in every part of the camp. The Numidiens of the
kings host, parceyuinge the fire, were stryken with a sodeyne great fear,
and the more because it chanced in the night season. yet nothing mistrustinge
the cause thereof to arise through their ennemies, but iudginge it to come
through some negligence or evil fortune. They ran on all parts to help to
cease or quench the fire, without armor or weapons. Now Massanissa, which
knew the ways and entrees about the kings camp, had so laid his Numidiens
in embushme^tes, that as the people ran abroad to quench the fire, they fell
into the company of their ennemies er they knew where they were, and by that
means many were slain, many also were burned in their beds with fire. The
watch of the Carthaginenses, in the camp of Asdruball, parceyuinge the great
fires in the kings camp, awaked the rest of the host. Who being also
deceived, for that they thought the fire was happened by negligence, and not by
the devise of their ennemies, and herynge the great cry of their company in
the kings host, that were slain, which they thought came but only through
the sodeyne fear of the fire, that was happened in the night: they ran
together in companyes unarmed out of the gates of their camps, the next way,
taking only with them such things, wherewith they might quench the fire.
Whom the Romans received as they came, and flewe them every one, that none
escaped to bear tidings thereof. Then Scipio incontinent invaded the camp.
Where fyudynge the gates there of vnwarded, he entered with his army, and set
fire on the lodginges in diverse parts, which spreadyng abroad, in short
space burned all that was therein, both man beast and stuff. And such as
would have fled from the danger of the fire, were slain with the sword of
the Romans.

Thus in one time were both the camps won. Nevertheless both the
capitaines escaped with.xx. M. fotemen, and v. C. horsemen: whereof many were
wounded and hurt with that fire. There were slain and burned that night.xl. M.
besides them that there were taken, above.vi. thousand, with many noble men of
Carthage: whereof.xl. were senators, with a great and rich pray, of horses
armure and other things much of valor, which were distributed among the
soldiers. The king with certain with him, fled to his own country.

Asdruball with as great speed as he mightcame to Carthage, where he found
the city soore troubled, and in great fear. For they judged, that Scipio,
leaving the further assault of Vtica, would incontinent after his victory come
to assault and overcome Carthage. Than they determined, in have to assemble a
new host of the city and country about them. They also sent messangers to
king Syphax, to require him, that he would gather his power, and healpe to
defend both his country and theyrs. Whereunto his young wife much moved him:
who pyteously weeping, desired him not to suffer his fathers and her country to
be distroyed, and the city of Carthage to be bourned by the Romans, as they
of late bourned the kings tents and her fathers. The legates of Carthage also
showed him, that good fortune was coming toward them. For that there were
arrived of late.iiii. M. men of war of Celtiberia, a country of Spain,
which were hired to comme to their succors. And that Asdruball would not
fail to join with him with a full noble army. To whom the king gave gentle
answer, saying, that he would assemble and put in armor all the lusty
young men of his realm. For he said, he knew well, that he was before
overcome by fire, and not by battle. Wherefore he would never account him
self vanquyshed, oneles he were overcome and subdued in the field by strength
and power. With this answer the messangers departed.

And shortly after, according to their appoyntement, Asdruball and the king
met together, with their armies, and had between them both.xxx. M. men.
Scipio herynge of their new coming again on him, with that power, left at
the said Vtica, a small number of his people, both by sea and by land: and
him self with his greatte power, went to mete his ennemies. He pitched his
camp in the plain field, not far from the kings camp, where light
skyrmysshes were made between the horsemen of both parts, by the space
of.iii. days. On the fourth day, the capitaynes prepared their hosts to
battle.

Scipio set his spearemen in the front of his battle: behind whom were his
best assured soldiers footmen set to their aid and succors. On the right
wynge were his horsemen of Italy. In the left wynge was Massanissa with his
Numidian horsemen.

On the other side, Asdruball against the wynge of Italyan horsemen, set his
Numidians, and against Massanissa he set his Carthaginenses. In the mids were
the new soldiers of Celtiberia. Thus being ordered, the battailles joined.
And at the first encountre, both the wings of the Carthaginenses and of the
Numidians were driven back. For the Numidians being now rude and untaught men
of arms, were noothinge able to resyste the Romain horsemen: neither the
Carthaginenses (being also inexpert in feats of war) were able to withstand
Massanissa, that was fierce and terrible, through the joy of his late victory.
Wherefore the wings being thus put to flight, the poor army of the
Celtiberians remained alone, naked, destitute of help or refuge. Fly they
durst not, for that being in an unknown country, they knew no place whither
to fly to be saved. Again, if they were taken, they looked for no grace at
Scipios hand: saying they came from their own country into Africa, to fight
against him that had before often times been their good friend. Wherefore, being
compassed about with their ennemies, they were slain one upon an other
without pity. But whiles al men were busy about them, Syphax and Asdrubal had
time to escape, to whom the night being so nere, was much their safegarde.

What fear the Carthaginenses were in after this great overthrow of their
friends, and seeing Scipio with his army, over ryding the country round
about them, and winning the cities and towns, which were under their
subjection: no pen can write, nor tunge express. They looked every hour when
their city should be enuyronned with their ennemies: they fortifyed their
walls, they brought in vytayles to endure a longer space, and prepared all
things necessary. They consulted, what were best for them to do. It was
agreed, that messangers should be sent with letters to Anniball, commaundyng
him to come to Carthage with his power to their socours.

Certain of the senators gave counsel, that a good nombre of ships,
furnyshed with men and ordenance, should sodeinly invade the Romayne host and
navy, that lay in rest at Vtica: not mystrustynge, but they should find the
ships neglygently kept: whereby with small pain they might oppress them.
On these two points the senators agreed. The ships were set furthe, and
letters were also sent to Anniball. Scipio retournynge from the battle,
leadynge and cariyng with him the spoil or pray of many towns, which he
wanne: sent his said pray with the prisoners to his camp at Vtica. He him
self came to Tons, which he found void of men of war. They were fled
after the battle, and left the town without any garrison. Of the taking of
this town Scipio was very glad, as well for that it was naturally strong by
reason of the syte thereof, beside that it was surely fortifyed by the industry
of man, as also for that the place was so commodyouse for his purpose. It was
dystaunt from Carthage twelve miles. Yet from thense he might well see the
city of Carthage, and also the sea that bette on the walls of the town.

Whiles the Romans were casting a trenche and fortifiynge this town of
Tons: they perceived the navy of the Carthaginenses saylynge toward Vtica.
Than Scipio leauyng his works, made haste with his men toward Vtica, to
come to the healpe of his ships, that lay at the siege thereof, and came
before the arryuing of the Carthaginenses: who trifled the time on the sea,
being in fear to set on that enterprise: so that Scipio had provided well for
the defense of his ships before their coming. Never the less after much
trouble and fight on the sea, they took with them.vi. Romayn ships, and
returned to Carthage, where no small joy was made of that very small gain.

Syphax makes a new fialde with Lelius and Massanissa: where he is taken
prisoner, and his men put to flighte. Massanissa then takes the city of
Cirtha, and there in have, marieth Sophonisba, wife to king Spphax. Cap.
lxiiii.
THe morrow after the battle was fought, and the king Syphax escaped, as is
before declared, Scipio sent Lelius and Massanissa, with all the Romayn horsemen
and the lyghtest harneissed footmen, and also the Numidians, to follow the
king and Asdruball: whiles he went about to win the towns and country
adjacent to Carthage. They within xv. days came into Numidia: at whose coming,
a people thereof called Masesuli, received gladly Massanissa, and delivered him
the whole realm, as to their ryghtfull king, whose cominge they had so long
desired, expellynge clean out of the cities and fortresses thereof, all the
garnysons of Syphax, so that he was glad to keep him within the bonds of his
own realm. His heart swelled at this displeasure, willing to be revenged:
whereunto his wife and her father much intyced him, and prycked him forwards.
He had great plenty of men, and also of horses, which much encouraged him
to make a new field. Wherefore he assembled as many as he thoughtable, gyuyng
them horses and harneys: diuydynge his horsemen and footemenne into companyes,
appoyntynge to them capitaines, according as he before had learned of the
Romans. Thus having all things in a redynesse, he marched toward his
ennemies, with as great an hooste as he had before: but they were almost all
new soldiers, and young men of war. When he came nere the host of the
Romans he there fortified his camp. And anon certain of his horsemen issued
and badde base to an another number of the Romayne horsemen. And who so was
beaten, returned again to his company, and was anon rescued of an other
number of his company. Thus by diverse issuynges and helping every part their
companies, being either ashamed or angrye of their driuynge back, the battle
began to be quick on both parts, so that at the last the hole companyes of
horsemen on both parts were come to the fields. The noumbre of king Syphax
host was come so thick to the bataile, that the Romans were feign to
recule, and had been put to the worse, had not the Romain legyons of fotemen
come to their succors. At whose coming the kings people musing of their
order and manner of fyghtyng, began to stay, and at the last were driven back,
and began to flee. Syphax, willing to withholde his people from flight,
began to exhort them to abide, and manfully to fight, showing unto them,
both the shame and also the ieoperdye that would ensue through their flyinge.

And whiles he rode about the field, comfortyng his people, he happened to come
nere a company of Romans, where his horse was stryken down and slain under
him, and he taken alive, and brought to Lelius. His people fled as fast as
they might, and came to the city of Cirtha, which was the chief city of all
that realm. There were of his men slain in that battle.v. M. and
about.ii. M. v. C. taken. Than said Massanissa to Lelius: There were nothing
to me more pleasant, than having now victory, to visit my fathers kingdom,
which after my long exyle, I have now recovered. But the time will not suffer
us to cesse from our enterprise. wherefore, if ye will suffer me, to take with me
all the horse men, and the king also now prisoner: I will goo before you to
Cirtha, where I shall find every man so supprised with fear, that I shall
soon win it with small resistance: ye, with your fotemen may come after me
small iourneys at your ease.

To this his diuyse Lelius assented. And Massanissa with his horsemen hasted,
till he came to the walls of the city of Cirtha, where he called certain of
the town to him, and desired to have certain of the noble me^ of the city to
come forth and speak with him, which done, he moved them gentylly, to yield up
their city: But they, not knowing of the taking of their king, in no wise
would be persuaded to submit them selfs to the Romans. Than caused Massanissa
the king Syphax to be brought before them bound as a prisoner. After which
pitiful sight, the citezens partly for fear, partly trustyng thereby to
obtain favor of Massanissa and of the Romans, opened the yates of the city.
And Massanissa, leauyng first the gates and walls furnished with his people, to
the intent none of the city should escape out: he with great speed rode to the
kings palaice. Where at his first enter he found Sophonisba, the wife of
Syphax, daughter to Asdruball of Carthage, who abode his coming at the gate of
his palaice. when she espied him coming among a great route of men of arms,
she judging partly by his goodly armure, partly by his rich apparaile, that he
was the king: she fell on her knees before him and said: The goddis, thy
strength, and thy good fortune (...) the full power to do with us what so ever
shall be t^y pleasure. Never the less if the prayer of a poor woman ^^y take
place with her lord, that has power both of life and of death: I humbly beseech
the, by that royal majesty, wherein of late also we were, and for the love of
the name of the people and country of Numidia, which appertained both to Syphax
and to you: for the love also of the goddis of this place, who^ I desire to
send the better and more prosperus coming hither, tha^ they gave to Syphax a
departing hens, that thou will grant me to be thy prisoner. and what so ever
thy pleasure be to do with me, I shall not refuse it: so that thou suffer me not
to come into the cruel and proud dominion of any Romayne. I had leauer
adventure to yield me into the power of a Numidian, and of one that is borne in
mine own country of Africa, than to the hands of a stranger. For it is not
unknown to you, how much the daughter of Asdruball and a Carthaginense
borne, has cause to fear the hand of a Romayne. And in case thou canste none
otherwise help my desire, I most heartily require the, to steame: and thus by
death deliver me from the danger of the Romans.

This queen being of excellent beauty, and in her lusty flourishyng age, what
with her humble behavior, what with her fair speech, so persuaded the king
Massanissa, that he not only took her to mercy, but also having the victory of
her, and the hole city, he becam so captive to her by love, that he takig her
by the right hand, promised her, her request, and thereupon he mounted into the
kings palaice. Than he began to dyuise in his imagination, by what means he
might perform his promise unto the queen. And when he could find no way to
bring his purpose to pass, as one that was overcome with blind love, he
invented a folishe and a shameful divise, which was, to be married incontinent
unto her the same day: thynking by the marriage of her unto him, he had taken
away all occasion both from Lelius and also from Scipio, of doing her any hurt
or displeasure. When the marriage was stnyshed, Lelius with his host of
footmen came to the city of Cyrtha. And knowing of the sodeine weddyng he was
so displesed with the act, that he was minded to take her from the pleasant
bed of her new husband, and to send her to Scipio, with her husband Syphax
and other ^^isoners. But at the last, he being overcome by thintercessio^ of
Massanissa, who remitted the order of that matter to the judgment of Scipio:
he sent Syphax and other prisoners to the emperor Scipio. After whose
departing, he, by the help of Massanissa, received the other towns and cities
of that country of Numidia into his hands: which before were kept by the
retinue of king Syphax.

Syphax is brought to the camp of Scipio, Massanissa sends to Sophonisba
poison, which she without fear drinks. Capi. lxv.
When tydinges came into the Romain camp, of the coming of Syphax, and the
other noble captives: greatte was the number of people that ran to behold
them. The king being bound, was carried formooste, and after him followed a
great number of the nobility of Numidia. And as the opinion of men is diverse,
so diverse were the tales of the people, extollynge the honor of the victory
by the mighty power of Syphax, and by the noble fame of the people that was
overcome. There was recounted the mighty power of the king, to whose majesty
in one day.ii. of the most noble seignories of the world sued for his favor
and frendeship, that is to say the Romans and the Carthaginenses. The Romans
sent their valiant emperor and captain Scipio, only with.ii. galeys that
bare five oores on every side, into Africa, to seek his amity, leauyng in
Spayn, than his province, all his host and great charge. Again Asdruball, the
capytayne of the Carthaginenses, not only came into his country for amity,
but also he gave him his daughter in marriage, for the more sure consyrmation of
alyaunce between them. Some rehearsed the power and acts of Syphax to be
such, that he had driven Massanissa out of his realm, brynging him to such
extreme calamity, that his life could none otherwise be saved, but by the
brute and fame of his death: and he after glad to hyde his head in dens or
caves, and to live in the forestes and woddes like a wild beast.

With these and such like famous report of the beholders he was brought into
the tent of Scipio: who was by his presence and sight much moved with pity,
consyderyng the honor that he of old time had known him in, and conferryng
the same to his present misery. Than Scipio after salutations made, and other
co^municatio^ between them had (...), what he would have him to do to him: seeing
he (...) only refused the amity of the Romans, but also wyllingely
gauetheim battle. To whom the king answered, that he knew well, that he had
offended, and he confessed, that he was not in his right mind, when he moved
war against them. He was mad: when he did forget the coming of Scipio
into his realm, and the bond of alliance that he then made with him: but
specially when he received into his house a matrone of Carthage, of whose hot
love and marriage the fyry brondes had already set fire in his royal palaice.
That mad and pestilente fury, by her intisement never ceased, till she had
turned his heart and mind from his old friends the Romans: causynge him to
pursue the war against them. Never the less (said he) in all my mysery I
have nothing that so much does comfort me, and rejoice my heart, as when I
behold the same pestilent mad fury now to be entered the house of my most
ennemy. And when I consider that Massanissa is no more wise then Syphar was:
but that he more madly, and with less temperaunce has received her, then ever
I did.

With these words of the king, Scipio was not a little troubled, and then
herynge the great offense laid to Massanissa, he saw good cause, why he should
give credence thereto. Consydering the great have made in the marriage, without
the advice of Lelius, and without abydinge his coming. This act also seemed
worse, and more to be abhorred, consyderyng, that he being a young man in
Spain, was never before taken with the love of any captive or prisoner.

As he was musing hereon, anon Lelius and Massanissa came unto him, whom in
open audience he meryly and joyfully received, giuynge them great thanks and
praises for their dilygence in that journey showed. But anon, taking
Massanissa alone with him in to a secret place, he said thus unto him.

I know right well Massanissa, that you did perceive some good qualities and
virtues in me, when you first came into Spain to me, defyrynge there my
frendshyp and amity: and afterward in Africa, when ye holly committed your
self into my governance. But at that time ye thought your self, that there
was no virtue in me, which ye so much esteemed as temperaunce and
continency: of which also I truly did most glory of my self. And these
virtues Massanissa I would ye should join unto other noble qualities and
virtues, wherewith ye are endued. For believe me, there is not so much danger
to men of our young age by armed ennemies, as is by voluptuouse pleasure of our
wanton desires, which ever are ready to vainquishe us. And who so ever through
temperaunce can bridle and subdue those affecions, is worthy more honor, and
has achieued a greatter victory, then we have now had by the taking of king
Syphax. The acts which ye have so valyauntly and nobly done in mine absence,
remain daily in my memory: the other your evil acts I had lever ye did call
to remembrance your self, then that I should declare them to your greatte
shame. Syphax, by the good fortune of the Romans, is now overcome and taken.
Wherefore he, his wife, his kyngedome, his possessions, his towns and
castelles, his people, inhabitauntes of the same, with all that ever to Syphax
belonged, is now a pray due to the people of Rome. The king and his wife
(although she had not be^ a citezen of Carthage, and although her father were
not the capitain of our ennemies) ought to be sent to Rome, and there she ought
to abide the judgment of the senators, and people of the city, for that she
turned the mind of the king her husband from our friendshyp, perswadynge him
to take armor against us. Wherefore now overcome your own affectionate
mind, and beware, that with one vice, ye dysgrace not so many your good
virtues: and by one offense, lose the reward and the thanks, which by your
merits ye have here tofore worthily deserved.

With these secret rebukes Massanissa was not only ashamed, but also
constrained to weep, saying: that he would always be at his commandment.
Never the less he desired him, as much as might be admitted, to regard the
faithful promise that he had unadvisedly made unto her: which was, that he
would deliver her into none other man's hands. After these words, all abashed
he departed to his own tente, where remayninge alone, he sighed and sobbed a
great season so vehemently, that such as were without his tent might easily
here him. At the last, making doleful lamentation, he called to him one of
his faithful and secret servants, who had the keeping of his poison,
according to the ^^age (...) kings and princes: who used to have the same ever
kept nere to them, thereby to overcome the incertayntie of fortune: part of
this poison put into drink, he sent by him in a cup to Sophonisba,
commaundynge him to say to her, that Massanissa would (if he had could)
gladly have kept his first promise made unto her, as becomes a man to do to
his wife: but sens it lies not in his power, to perfurme it, yet will he keep
his second promise made unto her, which was that she should not, whiles she
were on live, come into the daungier of any Romayne. Wherefore he wylleth her,
to remember the Emperor her father, and the.ii. kings, to whom she has been
married, and thereafter regard her own honor.

When the messanger had presented to Sophonisba the poison, and done his
message, she answered: I will receive this marriage gift, and that gladly, if
a husband can give no better gift to his wife. But (said she) I pray the
show Massanissa, that my death had not ben so greuouse to me, if I had not
married so nere the goinge to my grave. And without gyuinge other sharp words
to the messanger, she without fear or trembling, took the drink empoysoned,
and drank it of.

When this was showed unto Scipio, lest Massanissa, being a fyerse young man,
and taking this displeasantly in his mind, might do some hurt to him self: he
called him unto him: sometime comfortynge him, sometime gentilly rebukinge him,
for that he had corrected his first folly with an other folyshe act, making of
the thing more sorrow then neded. On the next day, to the intent he would put
all such fantasies out of his mind: he ascended to the place of judgment,
whyther he caused all his host to assemble. There he first gave to Massanissa
the name of a king: and after great lawdes and praises given to him, he also
gave him many rich gifts, as a crown of gold, with a great bolle of gold,
a chair of Iuorye, a walking staff of Iuorye, a rich gown, with a cote of
bawdekyn, used to be worn in ^ygne of victory. And to set the matter forth to
his further honor, he declared, that in any tryumphe at Rome, after any
victory had of their ennemies, no man could wear any more noble apparaile
then this, which he had ^yuen him. Saying also, that of al strangers the
(...) of Rome judged only Massanissa worthy to be presented with th^se
gifts. Then called he forth Lelius, to whom he also gave great praises, and
rewarded him with a crown of gold. And after he rewarded other his soldiers,
according to their deserts. By this gentel handeling and honor given to the
king Massanissa, his troubled mind was pacifyed: and he was put in hope after
the death of Syphax, to be ruler of all Numidia. Then Scipio sent Lelius to
Rome, with Syphax and other prisoners, with whom also went the ambassadors
of Massanissa. And he after their departing, went again to Tunise, where he
encamped his host, and fortifyed the place, making an end of the works,
which he before had begun.

Lelius, with king Siphax, and other prisoners, and the ambassadors of
Massanissa, came to Rome: Massanissa is made king of his realm of Numidia.
Cap. lxvi.
THe Carthaginenses, hering of the taking of Syphax, in whom they had as much
trust, as they had in Asdrubal, and his army: began then to be faint hearted.
Wherefore sens they knew no further help in their war, they sent.xxx. the
most noble senators of their city to Scipio, to entreat of peace. These
ancient noble men, so sone as they came into the pauilion of the praetor before
Scipio, of a flatteryng facion they fell prostrate to the ground, and then made
an humble and a flattering oration, not pourgynge them selves and their city
of their offense, but layinge the beginning of all the defaulte in Anniball,
and his adherentes. Desiring to have the city pardoned of this offense, synse
they trusted, that the Romans would not desire their destruction, but that
they would be contented with their humble submission, as of people overcome,
which would be glad to obey to any thing that he should command them to do.
To whom Scipio answered, that his coming into Africa was upon trust, to
return home again to Rome with victory, not to conclude with peace, which
his hope, fortune also fauouryng, had much advanced by prosperous success.
Nevertheless (said he) now (...) victory almost in my hands, yet will I not
refuse p^ace, to thintente al men may know, that the Romans do ^^stly both
begin and end their warr^^* And these shall be the conditions of your peace. ye
shall restore us all your prisoners, and our fugitive run aways. ye shall
remove your armies out of Italy and France. ye shall forbear to meddle any
more in Spain. ye shall depart from all the Isles, which be between Italy
and Africa. ye shall deliver us all your long ships, except only.xx. ye
shall give us of wheat.v. C. M. busshelles, of barley.iii. C. M. bushels, of
money.v. M. talentes. And three days respite I do give you (said he) to take
your advise, whether these conditions of peace please you or not. And in case
ye be contented with them, ye shall have truce of me, and send your
ambassadors to Rome to the senate, for a confyrmation of the same.

The Carthaginenses, minding only to tracte the time till Anniball with his
power might come into Africa, thought they would refuse no conditions of
peace, that were demanded to be done for their parts. Wherefore they sent some
legates unto Scipio, to take truce, other they sent to Rome, to ask peace,
leading with them certain prisoners and fugitives for a color, to the intent
they might thereby the better obteygne peace.

Whiles these things were woorkyng, Lelius with king Syphax, and other
noblemen prisoners of Numidia, were com to Rome. Where he declared to the
senators by order all things which had been done in Africa, to their great
comfort and also hope of good end of that voyage.

Then were these news publyshed abroad in the city, which caused great joy
and gladness.

Sone after were the ambassadors of Massanissa brought into the senate, where
first they said, They were glad and joyful, that Scipio had nobly and happily
spedde in Africa, to the no small comfort of the senate, and also of the
city of Rome: Than did they give thanks for that Scipio had not only given
to Massanissa the name of a king, but alsoo had made him a king, restoring him
to his fathers kingdom, if it were the pleasure of the fathers of the senate.
Thyrdly, that it pleased Scipio, not only to give great praises to Massanissa
openly, but also that he had given him greatte gifts, which to deserve he
has and will dilygently endeavor him self, desyryng that the said name of a
king, with other the beneficial gifts of Scipio, might be confyrmed by the
decree of the senate: And furthermore they said, that if it might stand with
their pleasure, Massanissa desired them, to send unto him certain prisoners
of Numidia, which were kept in prison at Rome: by the restoring of whom, he
should purchase much honor and love among the communes of the country. To these
their sayings and demaundes, it was then answered by the senate, that the
prosperous acts of Scipio, done in Africa, were as much to their comfort,
as to the kings. And that the honor and the gifts, which Scipio had given to
Massanissa, were well bestowed, and according as he had well deserved: which
his acts they al did ratify and allow: Besides which his gifts, they also
sent unto Massanissa the king, by them, diverse other presents of apparaile,
mete to be worn both in the time of peace and of war. Furthermore, the
ambassadors of the king were honorably rewarded. The prisoners also of
Numidia, at their delyuery and sendyng home, had certain apparayle given them.
And thus plentyfully enryched, they had all departed toward Africa, had
not the news of the coming of the legates of Carthage caused the senators to
stay Lelius and them all for a season, to tarry their cominge, because the
communication of the peace with them, should be in the presence of Lelius.

Mago is discomfited by the Romans, and wounded, of which wound he dies,
Anniball by the commandment of the senate leaves Italy, and sayleth toward
Carthage, making great doole for his departing. ca. lxvii.
IN the same Summer, whiles these things were wrought and decreed in Africa,
and at Rome, Quintilius Varro, than being Praetor, and Marcus Cornelius, being
Proconsull in the costs of Lumbardy, had battle with Mago the brother of
Anniball, which was earnestly fought on both parts: and had not the
Romayne horsemenne sodeynely invaded the footmen, soore fighting, and broken
their array, it had been lykely to have turned the Romans to the worse.
But after the array was broken, they were feign to recule: And Mago so well
handled him self in the reculynge, that so long as he abode unhurt, he
defended his company, and caused them to recule in good order and array. But at
the last he was soore wounded, and fell to the ground, and with pain was
borne out of the field alyne. After whose overthrow his people fled on all
parts, whereby many of them were slain. He lost at that battle above.v. M.
men. And the Romans escaped not free: for they also lost then above.ii. M.
iii. C. men, with many capitaines that bare offices of honor. The night
following Mago departed with great silence, and making as great hasty iourneys
as his wound would suffer him, he came to the sea costs of Liguria, where he
found the messangers of Carthage, that few days before were arrived, and
there abode his cominge. Their message was, that with as much speed as might
be, he should hye him to Africa. and that his brother Anniball had also like
commandment by other messangers to do the same, certifiyng him, that the state
of Carthage was not now such, that they were able to keep stylle both Italy
and France by force of arms. Mago partly moved by the commandment of the
senate of Carthage, partly fearyng left his ennemies, pursuing him, might by
his long carrying do him further displeasure. Again, trusting on his way
homewardes to be better releued and cured of his wounds: he with speed put his
company into ships, and departed. But he had not passed the I Will of Sardinia:
but he dyed of his maladye. After whose death, diverse of his ships, being
beaten with the storms of the sea, were taken by the navy of the Romans,
that lay the same time about Sardinia.

All this year Anniball, and Cn. Seruslius the consul, lay both with their
hosts in the parties of the Brutians, without any memorable bataile between
them foughten. And than came the legates of Carthage unto him, calling him
home to Carthage to their succors, whose message he heard roaring and
lamenting, and with pain could he forbear weepynge. And after a pawse he
said: Now they openly call me back, that before covertly imagyned to fetch
me from hense, in that they denied for to send me money and men of war,
to supplye the roumes of such as lacked.

Wherefore I would all men did know, that the vanquishynge now of Anniball
is not by the people of Rome: but by the senate of Carthage, through despyte
and (...). And of this my shameful return, Scipio will no more rejoice,
thanne will Hanno of Carthage, the old enemy of my whole famylie.

After greatte doolefull moan made, he took the sea him self, and his chief
men of war, with ships therefore prepared: leaving certain
vnprouffytable sowldyours, as a defense of such small fortresses as remained
than in his possession, more for fear than for any good will or faith.

It has not lightly been seen or heard of, that ever man departed from his
country (being exiled therfro) with more heaviness, than Anniball departed
from the country of his ennemies. Full often, when he was on the sea, he
looked back toward the sea costs of Italy, accusyng both the goddis and
also men, ye and cursyng him self, for that he after his victory at the
battle of Cannas, had not incontinent brought his fierce and bluddy knights
to the taking of Rome. Thus bewaylyng his evil fortune, he left the possession
of Italy, which he had kept the space of.xvi. years after that he first
passed the mountayns of the same.

Anniball arryueth in Africa, and desires to speak with Scipio, which he
grants him, and thereupon they mere at a place appointed. Capit. lxviii.
Now was Q. Fuluius Sillo, the legate of Scipio com to Rome, with the
ambassadors of Carthage, to require peace of the fathers of the senate. But the
senators would not suffer them to enter the city, but appointed them to abide
with out the walls. The senators soon after satte in the house of Bellona,
whyther the Carthaginenses legates were brought, and there made an oration,
much like to the other, which they before made unto Scipio, laying all the
blame from the common counsel unto Anniball: saying, that he, without the
consent of the senate of Carthage, passed both the mountains and also the
river of Iberus, making war not only to the Romans, upon his own will
and pleasure, but also to the Saguntines. Where the mind of the Senate of
Carthage was ever, to keep the leage and amitieinuiolate, which was taken
before with the Romans. In conclusyon they declared, that the sum of their
charge given them, to desire of the senate of Rome, was, that they might
continue in the same leage and conditions of amity and peace with the
Romans, as were before at the last truce taken with them by Luctatius, than
being consul.

Then diverse of the ancient Senators of Rome, which were present at the
leage taken by Luctatius, demanded sundry questyons of the legates of
Carthage, concerning the said condition of peace, contained in that leage.
Whereunto they, being all young men, answered, that they were not of aege
to remember that treaty. This answer was greattely suspected of the fathers.
Wherefore they said with one assent, that the Carthaginenses, according to
their old accustomed craft and falsehode, had chosen such imbassadours, to
require a peace to be renewed, whereof they had no knowledge nor remembrance.
Whervppon the legates were caused to avoid the place, whiles they counsayled
upon the matter. And after long deliberate discussynge thereof, Lelius and
Fuluius declared to them the opinyon of Scipio, touching this peace, which
was, that he did not myslyke the meaning of the Carthaginenses, in case they
did not send to call home Anniball and Mago out of Italy: but if they so did,
than he thought they would dissemble the matter unto their capitains coming
with succors, and afterward forgettyng their promise, would renew the war.
Upon these words the whole counsel agreed to the saying of M. Valerius
Leuinus, who said, that they were to be taken as espies, and not as
ambassadors, and that they should be commanded to avoid Italy, having guides
sent with them, to conduct them unto their ships. And that word should be
sent to Scipio, to proceed in the war as he had begun.

Now in the mean space, whiles the legates of Scipio and of Carthage, were at
Rome, Cn. Octauius, with.ii. C. ships of carriage, and.xxx. other long
ships, to guide them, passed from Sicilia, to go into Africa: but the
winds were so vehement, and the storms so importunate, that he with the long
ships, with pain saved him self in a port near to the mountayn of Apollo.
The other hulkes of carriage were driven to diverse places on the cost of
Africa, in the sight of the men of Carthage. The Carthaginenses perceiving
this great pray easy to be taken, forgetting their desire of peace, and also
the time of truse taken with Scipio (yet mention of them both was made to them
by certain of the city) they by hole assente appointed Asdruball, with fyfty
ships to gather together, and to bring home those seabeaten and disparpled
ships, with all that was in them. At whose coming the shypmenne fled away,
leaving their vessels: and he without any resystence drew them with him to
Carthage. Scipio considering this their act to be done, before the legates
were returned from Rome, or that they knew what answer they should receive,
either of war or of peace. Also saying the time of truse was not yet expyred,
took it to be much more heinous and displeasaunt.

Sone after this break of truse on the part of the Carthaginenses, arrived
Lelius and Fuluius, with the legates of Carthage, to whom Scipio, declarynge
their untrue dealing, commanded them to depart, and he with all speed
prepared for the war.

This year following were chosen consulles, M. Seruilius Geminus, and T.
Claudius Nero. Seruilius was appointed to Hetruria, as his prouynce: and
Claudius Nero to Africa. He had ordained fyfty good ships, wherewith he and
his host should pass into Africa, where he should be equal ruler with Scipio.

NOW WAS Anniball, with his army, arrived safe in Africa, and by land came
to Zama, five days journey from Carthage. From thens sent he espies before
him, to know the state of the Romayne camp and army. These spies by chance
happed on the skoute watch of the Romans, and were taken and brought to
Scipio. Who demanded of them the cause why their captain sent them thither.
They answered, to espy and to have knowledge of his army and order. Then
Scipio called certain of his capitaines, called tribunes, commaundinge them to
go with the espies of Anniball, and to conducte them through all his camp,
not fearing to show them, what so ever they desired to see: When they had
gone round about a long season, and were brought again to him, he demanded
of them, whether they had well, according to their minds, viewed his camp
and host. They said ye. Then said he: Go ye to Anniball, and make to him
relation of that ye have seen. Thus let he them depart, sendynge with them
guides to conduct them out of danger.

The spies, when they came to Anniball, declared unto him, how Scipio had
entreated the^. Besides that they showed him, that Massanissa the same day was
come to Scipio, with.vi. M fotemen, and.iiii. M. horsemen. But there was
nothing, that ever they told him, so much abated his courage, as the liberty
that he gave his espies, to view his order and power. For that great boldenes
of his enemy he judged and knew well proceeded of some great assurance, that
he had in his strength and good order. Wherefore although he him self was the
first cause and occasion, both of the war and also of the truse brekinge:
yet he devised him self, to speak with Scipio, thinkinge before any battle,
whiles his power was not assayed, he should obtain peace with more easy
conditions, then he should, in case it chanced him to be overcome. Wherefore he
sent a messanger to Scipio, desyringe that he might have liberty to speak
with him, and that he would apoynt a place, where they might come together.
Scipio refused not to accomplysshe his desire. The place was appointed, void of
al deceit and gile. Thither came the.ii. most noble capitaines of the world,
having only each of them one interpretour with him, to declare to each other,
what should be spoken by them. Their hosts abode a good space from them. When
they were come together, either of them was astonished with the fight of the
other: So that as persons amassed through admiration, they spoke no word of a
good season. At the last Anniball began to speak in manner following.

The wytty oration that Anniball made to Scipio, before the battle between
them. Cap. lxix.
IF it be given me by the fatal fortune, that I which first moved this war
against the people of Rome, and that so many times have had the victory over
them, should now of mine own voluntary will come to be a suitor to have
peace: I am glad, that it is thy chance Scipio, to be the man appointed of the
gods, of whom I should come to require the same peace. And among many other
praises, that be given unto the, this may be as one of the greatest: That
Anniball, to whom the gods have given so many victories of the Romans,
should now give place and obey unto the. So that thou may make an end of
this notable war, that has been between us, as yet more to your loss then to
ours. Again, what work is this of fortune, that I which first fought with
your father, being consul, in arms, with banners displayed, should now come
to his son unarmed, for to sue for peace? I would it had pleased the gods,
to have given such honest hertes to our fathers and predecessors, that they
would have been contented with the dominion of Africa, and to your fathers to
have been contented with the empire of Rome. For if we make a true reckoning,
neither Sicilia, nor Sardinia, be a worthy recompense of the manyfolde nauyes,
armies, and noble Capytaynes, that we have lost, through our proud
contention. But it is easyer to find fault with things that be passed: then
it is to amend the same. And for our parts we have so coueted others
dominions, that at length we have been feign to fight for our own. We have
for our part not only warred in Italy, but also so far advanced our host
and power, that at the very gates of Rome ye have seen our standards, and men
of arms. And in like manner we of Carthage have been within the herynge of the
noise of your Romayne camps and army. Now by your good fortune,
communication of peace is had betweners, which we of reason should least
care for: And ye for your parts should chieflye desire. And we now entreat
thereof, whom it most behooves to make peace. Considering that what so ever
we two agree upon, our cities will ratyfye and coufyrme. Wherefore there lacks
nothing in us, but quiet minds and peasable hertes. And for my part mine age
upon my return into my cuntreye, from whense I came forth but young, with
the times sometime chaungynge to prosperity, sometime to aduersytie, have so
taught me, that I can be better contented, to follow reason then brittell
fortune. But I fear greatly, lest thy youth and thy perpetual felicine,
engender in the such a fyersenesse, that thou will not regard quyete
counsel. No man shall so aduysedlye consider the uncertain chances of
Fortune, as he that has benne deceyned by Fortune: as I was at the battle of
Trasymenus and at Cannas, so art thou now being but a young soldier of age,
made a captain the first day. Thou beganste all things with a bold and a
stout courage, and fortune never failed the, throughethy desire to revenge thy
fathers and thine uncles death (whereby all your familye was almost brought to
extreme calamity) thou have purchased the a noble fame. Thou haste received
Spain, that was before lost, driuynge from that country.iiii. notable armies
of the Carthaginenses, that before did possess the same. Afterward being made
consul, when other men lacked hertes to defend Italy, their own country,
thou tokest on the to sail into Africa: where sleinge two great hosts, and
in one hour taking and burninge two rich and strong camps: And after the
taking of the mighty king Syphax, with many cities and castelles of his realm,
and of our empire of Carthage: at the last thou haste now plucked me from
the possession of Italy: which these.xvi. years I have with strong hand
kept and enjoyed. Now having all these prosperous chances, it is like, that
thy mind may be more desirous of victory, then of peace. And truly I have
known yours and such like hertes and courages, to be ever more great and
valiant, then wise and profitable. The days also have been, that fortune did
in like manner shine bryghte and smyle upon me. But if the gods would give us
in prosperity good and right minds: we would not only consider things that
have happed, but also what might happen unto us. And setting all other
exaumples aparte, I my self may be best a document of lernyng unto the, for
all kinds of fortune. I had not long agone mine host encamped between the
river of Amenes and the city of Rome, and displayed my banners before the
walls of the city: Now after the loss of my two brethren, which were full
good and noble capitaynes, I am here to succor mine own troubled and sore
vexed country, glad and desirous to pray, that mine own city may be
delivered from the dangers, wherewith I assailed then your city. Let no man
put to much confydence in high and swellyng fortune. Better it is, and more
certain, to be sure of peace, then to hope for victory. The one thou have now
in thine own hands: the other is in the hand of the gods. Put not the
felicity, which in many years thou have ^tteigned, into one hours ieoperdy.
Call to thy mind, both thine own power, and the power of fortune: which in
war is common. On both parts be men and weapons of war. And consider,
that chances be varyable in all our affairs, specially in battle. And in
case thou vanquishe us in battle, thou shalt not win so much glory and
profit, above that thou may have of us by peace: as thou shalt lose, in
case fortune turn against the. For in one hour fortune may overthrow, that
in long space has been gotten, and also that is looked for, which ye trust to
have. Now it is in thy power, to join all things to gether by peace P.
Cornelius. But if it come to further trial, we must both take such fortune
as the gods will send. Among other exaumples of felicity, Marcus Attilius
may be well remembered for one, who arrived here in this same country of
Africa, and wynning the victory upon our forefathes the Carthaginenses,
denied to grant them peace, which they instantly required of him. But at the
last, for that he could not measure his felicity, nor moderate Fortune, that
so hyghly advanced him: therefore his fall was the fowler, by how much he was
the more higher eleuate in prosperity. It belongs not to him that asks
peace, but to him that gives peace, to appoynte the conditions of peace: But
we knowlegyng our defaulte, will appoint to ourselves condign punishemente for
the same, not refusing to leave unto you the possession of such countries,
for which the war began, as Sicilia, Sardinia, Spain, and all the Isles
within the sea, between Italye and Africa. And we of Carthage, being
contented with Africa only (sense it has so pleased the gods) will
suffer you to enjoy the Empire of diverse strange countries and dominions,
gotten both by sea and by land. Paraduenture in the asking of peace
heretofore ye have not been playnelye and justly delte withal, which causes
you to mystruste the faith and promise of the Carthaginenses. But therein, as
touching the observing of peace when it is taken, it is much to be
considered, what the persons be, by whom the peace is required. For as I have
hard it told Scipio, your fathers heretofore denied the Carthaginenses peace,
for that the persons, that came to entreat therefore, were of small dignity
or estimation. But now do I Anniball require peace, which I would not
desire, unless I thought it profitable, and for the same profyt that I do
demand it, for the same will I also still keep and conserve it. And as I have
endeavored my self, that no man should forethynke him of the war begun
thorough mine occasion: in like manner shall I now enforce my self, that none
shall repent of the peace, which I shall take. His oration finished, Scipio made
him thereunto this answer.

The answer of Scipio to the oration of Anniball, with the battle thereupon
had between them, wherein Anniball was vanquished and put to flight. Ca. lxx.
I Knew right well Anniball, that the trust of thy coming home, made the
Carthaginenses to break the truse between us taken, and also to let all
further hope of peace. And this thou do not deny thy self: but thou now
withdrawest from us all things that we require, and were also granted in that
treatise of peace, save only those countries, whereof we have already the
possession. Wherefore as thou do labor, that thy citezens may feel of what
burden they be discharged by the: so must I travail, that no part of that,
which they have promised me, shall be now withdrawn, for to remain unto
them as a reward of their untruth, consyderyng the same their untruth,
has made them unworthy to have the conditions of peace before to them
offered. Neither did our father first make war for Sicilia, nor we now for
Spayn: But than the dangier, wherein the Mamertines our friends and fellows
were put into: and now the destruction of Sagunt, caused us justly to make
war. That all has been by your provocation, thou have confessed thy self.
The goddis also be witnesses, who gave such end to the first war, as of
right it behooved to have. And in this war have given: and I doubt not, but
will give like end. As for my part, I consider well, both the infirmity of
man, and the power of fortune: and I know, that all our acts be subject to a.
M. chances. But as I do knowlage, that in case thou woldist have come to desire
peace of me, before I took so grettrauaile, to come into Africa, and that thou
had with thy good will departed with thine army out of Italy: if I had then
denied thy request, I might well have been judged, to have wrought proudely
and stubburnely. Even so now after that I have drawn the and thy power home
into Africa, where thou art ready to make us resistance: And saying that a
peace and truce was ones taken, which ye have broken, taking our ships with
force in time of truce, and violatinge our ambassadors: I may right well with
honor, bid you prepare for the war, sens you could not hold you contented
with peace, when ye had it.

Thus without any agreement of peace, the.ii. capytaines brake of their
communication, and departed every one to his company, determining to try the
matter by battle, and to take such fortune as the goddis would give them.

As soon as they were come into their camps, they openly on both parts gave
commandment to their soldiers, to make them ready to fight now their last
battle, whereby in cas they did overcome, they should have felicity, not for
one day, but for ever. For before the next night, they should know, whether Rome
or Carthage should have the superiority. And that not only of Italye or of
Africa: but of all the world, which should be a reward now to him, that
should have the victory. On the contrary part, the peril and ieoperdye was no
less declared to that part, which should have the worse in this battle. For
the Romans had no place, whether to fly, being in a strange country.
And to Carthage must needs come an utter destruction, in case this their last
army of refuge were vanquished or overthrown.

In this great ieopardy on the next day the.ii. valyant capitaynes of the two
most noble and rychest people, set furthe with their.ii. mighty armies:
intending that day, either to increase the honor, which before they had
gotten, or else to be overthrown and lose all. Hoope and fear were myngled
both together in their minds. And when they saw their own battle, and the
battle of their ennemies: they conceived in their minds both joy and
sorrow. And that that the soldiers failed to remember, their capitaines
declared unto them, with great warnynges and exhortations. Anniball rehearsed
to his people all their acts done in Italy: how many Romayne capytaynes, and
how many armies they had slain. Scipio showed his conquestes in Spain, and
also of late in Africa, with the confession of his enemies, that they for
fear were constrained to require peace: although their untruth would not
suffer them to keep the same, when they had it. Wherefore he gessed, that the
goddis had appointed them to fight in this bataile, with like success and
luck, as they had wha^ they fought at the isle of Egates. Now (said he) all
war and travail is at an end. The spoil of Carthage is even at hand, after
which ye shall return home in to your countreye, to your parents, your
wives, your chylderne, and your own goods. These comfortable words he set
furthe, with such gesture of his body, and merye countenance, as though he
had al ready had the vyctory of his ennemies. Afterward he put his men in
order. First his spearemen, than his chief and most assured footmen, not in
great multitudes together before any standarde, but in small bands, which
should be a certain space distaunt the one from the other, to the intent the
elephantes of their enemies might come between the said bands, and be
received of them, without breaking any arraye. In these void spaces between
the said bands, he appointed diverse of his lyghtest harneysed soldiers to
stand, to fulfill the void places, commaundynge them, that when the
elephantes pressed on them, that they should recule behind the said bands,
which were in array, or else to step in among those that went before the
standerdes, on their right hand, or on their left hand, giving way to the
unruly beastis to enter among his men, where with weapons they might be
wounded and overthrown. The left wynge led Lelius with the Italyan
horsemen. The right wynge led Massanissa with his Numidians.

Anniball on the other part, in the forefront of his battle, set his
elephantes, which were to the number of.lxxx. After whom he put in order all
such nations as were hired, or came to his succor, as Liguriens, Frenchemen,
and men of the Isles named Baleares, now called Maiorque and Minorque, myngled
among a great number of Moors. In the second battle he set his
Carthaginenses, with the Affricanes, and the legion of the Lacedaemonians, sent
thither to the succors of the Carthaginenses from Philip king of Macedome. And
within a little space of from them, he placed the Italians, which came with
him, when he left that country. The wings were of horsemen. The left winge
held the Numidian horsemen. The right wynge was of the Carthaginenses. In this
host of Annibal were men of diverse nations and cuntreis, of diverse tunges and
langages, they were also different in laws, armor, and in aparaile. To every
one of these he gave sundry and diverse exhortations, either of fear, or of
comfort. To such as were come to his succors he promised great reward of the
pray, which should be won by their industry and travail. To the Liguriens
he promised a plentiful reward of the fertile and pleasant fields in Italy.
The Moors and Numidians he exhorted to do well, for fear lest they should
else be in grievous servitude of Massanissa. The Frenchemenne were set on by the
natural hatred, which they bare to the Romans. The Carthaginenses he put in
remembrance to fight for the walls of their natural country, for their propre
goods, for the sepulchers of their elders, for their children, their parents
and trembling wives. There is no mean way (said he) now to be put between
hope and fear. For either must we suffer miserable servitude, after the
destruction of our city and country, orels obtain the empire of all the
world.

By that time this noble capitayn had finyshed his words: the Romans blewe
up their trumpettes and horns, making so terrible a noise and clamor, that a
great number of the elephantes, being furyouse, turned back upon their
company, specially upon the left wynge of the Moors and Numidians. Which
perceived well Massanissa, wherefore he also invaded the same wing with his
horsemen, putting them to such fear, that they fled, leaving that side of
the host bare of succor. Diverse of the elephantes by force were constrained to
enter the myddle battle, to whom anon the light armed soldiers gave
place, suffryng them to enter among them, where they were thrust in with
spears and innelyns, so that many were there slain. During this while, Lelius
with his horsemen assailed the right wing of the horsemen of Carthage, puttig
the^ also to slight: so that the body of the host was of both sides left
without defense of horsemen, the wings being chased away: tha^ began the battle
of fotemen to be strong on both parts. Great were the cries that were there
made: but the Romans were of better courage, of stronger hope, and of more
strength. wherefore in a short space, they caused their enmies to give back a
certain space of ground. And wha^ they had ons gote^ some ground, they with
their shyeldes and targettes came still thrusting on their ennemies, bearing
them back, till some sone after the first battle, tourninge their backs,
began to fly, and came to the second battle of the Carthaginenses and
Moors, who would not suffer them to enter, lest they should cause all their
arraye to be broken. Wherefore between them and their own fellows began great
debate and slaughter: so that the Carthaginenses were constrained to fight,
both with their own unruly fellows, and also with the Romans their
ennemies. Nevertheless they would in no wise receive their fellows that fled
in among them, lest they should mengle that fearful sort, which in the
flyghte were hurt and wounded, among them that were earnestly bent to fight:
Which might have turned much more to their dyspleasure. But dryuing them away
by heaps, compelled them to go to gether, some into the one side of them,
some abroad the fields. Great was the occision that was made of them, in so
much that the Romans could not come to fight with the Carthaginenses: but
first they must with pain go over the dead bodies of them that were slain.
Then Scipio caused a troumpet to be blown, to withdraw his men of the first
battle, who had been sore traueyled, and many of them were sore wounded. These
caused he to stand behind the rereward, and made the same rerewarde of his
best men to auaunce forewarde upon the Carthaginenses. Then began the
battle new again: which was very sore and fierce. For then came the
Romans to the most assured and strongest men, and most expert in wars, who
before being vanquished twyse, were now loathe and ashamed to be vanquished.
But the Romans were far moin noumbre, and had taken to them a great
courage, by dryuinge away both the wings, and also the forewarde of their
ennemies.

Whiles they thus fought in the second battle, Lelius and Massanissa
returned with their horsemen from the chase of the wings of the
Carthaginenses: and with all their power and violence came on the backs of the
second battle of the Carthaginenses, which were busy and valiauntly fought.
Then were they not able to endure their violence, but were with force put to
flight and slain on all parts. There were that day slain and taken of the
Carthaginenses about.xl. M men. Many elephantes, and many standards of noble
men were taken in that battayll. Great also was the pray of the spoil found
in the Camp, which all the Romans took and brought to their ships. The
Romans also lost at this battle above.x. M. men. Anniball, with a few with
him, fled to Adrument: But he never departed from the field, til he had both
in the battle and before, assayed to do asmoche as was possible for to be
done, for the safeguard of his people. Wherein he that day had praise both of
Scipio, and of al other expert men of war of the Romans: specially for the
ordering of his battayl. For first he set in the forefront his great number of
elephantes, whose great strength and intolerable violence should break the
arraye of the Romans, putting them out of order, which is half the winning
of a battle. Then set he foremost his hired soldiers of diverse nations: to
the intent such a confused nombre of strangers (who fought for no great faith
or love, but only for money) should have no place nor time to flee from the
battle. Also to the intent such strangers should endure the first violence of
his ennemies, making them weary and weak, before his chief men of most trust
should have any thing to do. Then after them were his Carthaginenses and
Affricans, his most trusty soldiers. Last of al a good space behind them,
he placed his Italiens, as people whom he knew not well, whether they should be
his friends or his foes. Thus when all his policy would not serve him, nor
yet his strength could help, he fled (as I said before) to Adrument: and
from thense he was sent for to come to Carthage.

Whyther he came the.xxxvi. year after his departing from thense, being but a
child. There in the open assemble of the noble men of the city he confessed
him self to be vanquished; and that there was none other hope of safegarde for
them, but by obteyninge of peace.

The conditions of peace granted to the Carthaginenses by Scipio: and the
ratyfyeng of the same by the senate. Ca. lxxi.
AS Scipio and his host were coming to his ships, laden with a rich pray,
word was brought him, that P. Lentulus was arrived at Vtica, with.l. ships
of war, and an.C. hulkes laden with all manner of provision.

Wherefore Scipio, thynkinge to put the city of Carthage in fear on al parts:
First sent Lelius to Rome, to bear news of his victory. And then sent Cn.
Octauius by land toward Carthage, with his army of horsemen and fotemen.
Whiles he, taking with him both the new navy of ships, brought him by
Lentulus, and also his old nauye, went by sea from Vtica toward the haven
of Carthage. He had but a while sailed on the sea, when a ship of Carthage
met him, covered all with white lynnen clothe, and full of bows of Olive, in
token of peace. In which ship were.x. ambassadors of the princes of
Carthage, sent by the mind of Anniball to desire peace. When this ship was
come to the fore part of Scipiosship, the coueringe was taken away, and the
legates right humbly required him to extend his mercy and pity upon them. But
other answer had they none given them, but that they should come to him to
Tunes, for to that place he said he would remove his camp. With this answer
they departed: and he went with his navy of ships before Carthage, partly
to view the situation of the town, partly to make the inhabitants there of
the more afraid. But after small soiourninge there, he departed from thense,
and returned to Vtica: And from thense was goinge to Tunes, when sodeine news
were brought him, that Vermina, the son of Syphax, with a great number of
horsemen and fotemen, was coming to the succors of the Carthaginenses. To
encountre with these people, Scipio incontinent sent a good part of the
fotemen of his host, and all his horsemen, who metynge with them, at their
first reencountre put them to flight, and stoppinge the passages, whereby they
might by fleinge escape, they slew of the Numidiens.xv. M. and took above.xii.
C. with many horses of that country, to the number of xv. C. and with pain
the captain him self escaped, having a small number with him. From thense
the camp was pytched at Tunes, in the old place, where they before had set
it. Thither came.xxx. noble men of Carthage ambassadors, sent unto Scipio, who
with much more lamentation then the other had done before, required peace of
Scipio, constrained more thereunto through the contrariety of Fortune, and by
the late overthrow of their friend Vermina: And they were likewise herd with
less pity, because of their late untruth and rebellion. In so much that it
was thought by most men, that the city of Carthage might then justly and
worthily be destroyed by them. And so had it ben in deed, had not one thing
specially moved Scipio to the contrary. Which was, that the new consul was
coming thither, whose desire was, to have the honor and fame of that victory,
and of fynishinge that war, which was before achieued by Scipios traueile,
to his great daungier. And for this cause Scipio and his counsaylours were fully
minded to take peace with the Carthaginenses. Wherefore the next day he called
the legates of Carthage before him, greatly rebukinge them of the vntrewth to
him diverse times showed: Willing them now at the last, being taught by
good experience, to regard both their gods and their oaths, and shewinge
them, that he, having pity of the destruction of them and of their so noble
a city, was contented to grant them peace upon these conditions. First,
that they should live free after their own laws and customs, enioyinge all
such cities and towns in Africa, as they had in possession before the
war between them taken. And that from that day forth, the Romans should
no more destroy or spoil any part thereof. Again, the Carthaginenses should
restore to the Romans all such persons as were fled and run away from the
Romans, and all the prisoners of the Romans, and their friends, whom they
had in captivity. Also that they should deliver them all their ships of
war, and other ships, except only galeys, having three orders of oores in
a piece. And that they should also deliver up all their elephantes, which
were alredye tamed and made apt for the war: neither should they after tame
any moo. Again, that they should move no war in Africa, nor without
Africa, but by the license or commandment of the Romans. Furthermore,
that they should restore unto Massanissa all such things as they had taken
of his, making a peace and agreement with him. And also yield unto the Romayne
host wheat and wages unto the return of the legates from Rome. Besides all
this, they should pay.x. M. talentes of silver in fyftye years: during which
time, they should yearly pay that sum, divided in even portions. For the
paymente whereof, and perfourmaunce of these condytions, they should deliver
him an.C. pledges of his own election. Whereof none should be under thage
of.xiiii. years, neither above thage of.xxx. Upon these conditions, he agreed
to give them truce: so that they would deliver to him out of hand all such
hulkes or ships of burden, with their fraught and implementes, which the
Carthaginenses took from them, duringe the last time of truse, that he had
before granted them: Or else they should neither look for truse nor for
peace.

When the legates were come to Carthage, they were commanded to declare the
same conditions of peace openly before the congregation of the people thereunto
assembled. Against which conditions one Gysgo, a noble man of Carthage, spoke
very sore, and would have dissuaded the people from the taking of peace. To
whose sayings many of the unruly multitude gave good audience. But Annibal,
being therewith greatly moved, went to him, and with force drew him down from
his place. Which his violent facion had not been used before in that city, and
was thought of diverse to be contrary to the liberty of their city: where
before all people had free liberty to speak their opinions: Annibal being
used to the facion of the wars, more than to the peasible use of the city:
remembrynge the liberties thereof, excused his rudeness in this manner. When I
departed from this city, I was but.ix. years old, which is now.xxxvi. years
agone: during which time I have sufficiently known and been instructed in all
feats of war, being taught by the chances of fortune, even from my
chyldehoode. Wherefore being disvsed so long space from the laws, manners,
and customs of the city, although I do forgette the liberties and uses
thereof, I am the less to be blamed. Thus after he had excused his folly, he
persuaded the people to the taking of peace, and how necessary it was now
for them, and also how reasonable the conditions were, considering their
present estate. To which his persuasions the greattest part of the multiude
agreed, and the resisters against it, were greatly blamed. The greatest
doubt was, how they might make restitution of that that was taken from the
Romans in the time of truce. For all was spoiled and goone, neither knew
they, who badde them, only the ships and hulkes remaygned. But in
conclusyon, word was sent again to Scipio, by the same legates, that they
would receive his conditions of peace. And where they could not know, who had
the goods that were in the hulkes: they would pay therefore at his own
judgment. The vessels and men should be restored.

Thus was the truce given to the city of Carthage for three months, with a
commandment, that during the time of truce, they should send ambassadors to
no place, but only to Rome. And in case that any ambassadors were sent from
any place to Carthage, that they should in no wise depart from thens, until the
Romayne captain were ascertayned what they were, and what was the cause of
their coming.

Soon after went the legates of Carthage to Rome: with whom were sent C.
Veturius Philo, M. Martius Valla, and Lucius Scipio, brother to P. Scipio the
Romayn capytayn.

When they were come thither, L. Veturius Philo declared, how Scipio had
foughten with Anniball, and overcome the Carthaginenses, to their utter
confusyon, making now an end of the doleful long war, that had been
between the Romans and them. And that also Vermina, the son of Syphax,
with his power, was beaten and overcome. Of which news the senators being
meruaylous joyful, commanded him to publysshe the same glad tidings, to
the whole multitude of the citezens. Who making greatte joy, gave thanks for
the vyctory to the goddis. Than were the legates of Carthage brought into the
senate. And when the senators beheld the age, the dignity, and the gravity
of the ambassadors (who were of the most noble men of the city of
Carthage) than they judged, that they intended plainly and syncerely to
entreat of peace. Among other of these nobles of Carthage, there was one
Asdruball, called Hedus, one of the chief of them, both in authority and in
nobility: who was ever desirous of peace, and held much against Anniball and
his affinity. This Asdruball said, that a few covetous persons of the
city were culpable for this war, and not the comminaltie. Some faults,
which were laid to them, he excused: some other he confessed, lest by the
denying of all, he might be the worse heard of the senate. Than he persuaded
the Senators to use their prosperous fortune gentylly, and in due temperance,
professynge ever, that in case the Carthaginenses would have followed the minds
of him, and of Hanno, taking the time when it was offered: that they had been
the gyuers to other of peace, upon such conditions as they were now glad
to take at others hands. But (said he) it is but seldom seen, that good
fortune and a good mind be given both at ones to men. The cause of the
conquestes of you Romans ever chiefly has been, for that in prosperity ye
have had the remembrance to consulte of things to come. And your empire has
been more increased by gentylnes and favor showed to nations, whom ye have
vanquyshed, than it has been by the victories gotten on them.

After that Asdruball had finysshed his oration, the other ambassadors made
much more lamentable propositions, bewayling the miserable fall of the state
of the Carthaginenses, who being the greattest lords in honor of the world,
were now constrained to abide enclosed within the walls of the city, having
nothing else, that they might claim propretie of. ye and that same only city
they held, but upon the goodness and forbearyng of the Romans, whiles their
pleasure was, to forbere the utter destruction thereof. With these humble and
gentle words, the senators universally were fully inclyned to peace. Than
one of the senators spoke out with loud voice: If peace be granted to the
Carthaginenses, by what goddis shall they swear, and make peace, when they
have broken promise, and deceived the goddis, by whom they swear, when they
last took peace with us: To whom the said Asdruball answered, even by the same
goddis will we swear, who be so angry, and are revenged on us, that brake our
last truse and leage. Hereupon all the senators and the commons, being
inclyned to peace, determined, that by thaduise of.x. legates of Rome, P.
Scipio should make with them the peace, upon such conditions as to him seemed
best. The legates were named, and made them ready to depart with the
Carthaginenses. For the which the ambassadors gave great thanks to the
senate, of their goodness to them showed: desyryng them before their departing,
to license them to enter the city, and to visit certain of their friends
and kynnesmen, that were kept in the city, as prisoners. which request was
granted them. And they desired also, that they might redeem diverse of them
upon reasonable raunsom. They were commanded to write the names of such as
they would have redeemed. And they named.ii. C. of them, who incontinent were
delivered to the x. legates, to take with them into Africa to Scipio, wyllyng
him, in case the peace went forwards with the Carthaginenses: that then he
should render these.ii. C. prisoners to the Carthaginenses, free without
payinge any ransom. These things being so concluded, the Carthaginenses,
with the Romayne legates, departed toward Africa. And when they came to
Scipio they concluded the peace with him upon the conditions before specified.
The ships of Carthage, the elephantes, the fugitives and prisoners, to the
number of.iiii. M. were delivered to Scipio: among whom was one Terentius
Culleo, a notable senator of Rome. The ships, upon the delivery of them,
were had forth into the sea, to the number of.v. C. of al sorts: and there by
the commandment of Scipio were set all on fire. Which bourninge was as
sorrowful a sight to the Carthaginenses, as if they had seen the whole city of
Carthage on fire.

Scipio teturneth to Rome with great triumph and joy of all the people. Cap.
lxxii.
THus ended the wars between the Romans and the Carthaginenses, more
gentylly than it was thought it should have done. For Scipio diverse times
after reported, that the conctouse and high mind, first of Claudius Nero, and
after of Cu. Cornelius, desiring both the honor of the vyctorye of Carthage,
was the cause, that the city of Carthage was not utterly distroyed and wasted.
After the said peace thus taken, the money, which should be presently paid
to the Romans, was very grievous to the Carthaginenses. Whose stock and
common substance was before greatly wasted, by reason of the long contynuall
wars. Wherefore at the leuyinge of the said sum of their pryuate
substance, great lamentation and wepinge was made in the city. Which
Anniball beholdynge, could not forbear to laugh. Whereat Asdruball Hedus took
great indignation, rebukynge him, for that he (being the very origynall cause
of al their sorrow) in the common mournyng of the city, should so laugh.
Thereunto Anniball answered: If ye might behold the inward thought of my
mind, as ye may the outward apparent countenance of my face, ye should
parceiue this laughter not to come of any joy of the heart, but of a madness
and a frenzy. Never the less this my laughter is not so inordinate, nor
comes not so out of time, as your tears do. For you should have wept, when
your armor was taken from you, and your ships burned before your eyes: and
when your liberty of making of wars with any stranger (but only by
license of the Romans) was taken from you. wherein rested your chief
undoing and greattest fall. But ye feel no hurt, onelesse it touch your
private welthe. The great hurt of the common welthe ye neither feel nor
regard. When your ennemies had the great spoil, after the vyctorie had, and
when Carthage remained alone, and naked without armor or defense, among so
many armed men of Africa: Then no man wept nor mourned. But now, when ye
must pay the tribute of your own private goods: every man wepeth, as ye would
do at the burienge of all your friends. I fear it sore, that ye shall shortly
perceive, that ye wept now in your least harms, and the worst to be behind.

When the peace was thus concluded, between the Romans and the Carthaginenses,
Scipio, calling his people together, besides that he restored unto Massanissa
his fathers kyngedome: He also gave him the city of Cyrtha, and other towns
and grounds that he had won of Syphax. Afterward he caused Cn. Octauius, to
deliver to Cn. Cornelius, the new consul, his navy that he brought into
Sicilia. Then caused he the ambassadors of Carthage to go toward Rome, there
to have all things confirmed by the authority of the Senate, which he by the
authority of the Romayne legates had before concluded with them.

Thus all things being at peace, both by sea and by land, he with his army
took shippynge, and sailed over into Sicilia, and from thense into Italye:
where he was met by the men of the country with great honor and joy: so
glad was every man both of peace and of victory. The poor men of the
towns and cities by the way, as he went toward Rome, ran forth to se him,
and to praise him. Thus in great honor came be into Rome, where he was
received into the city with most noble triumph. After that he enryched the
city with great s^mmes of gold and silver, of the prays that he had taken,
beside that he distributed among his soldiers.xl. M. li. And of the
conquest, which he had made in Africa, he was called Scipio Affricanus ever
after, to the great honor of all his family and succession.

Anniball fleith by sea to Antiochus king of Siria, Antiochus moves war to
the Romans, L. Cornelius Scipio sayleth into Asia, fyghteth with Antiochus,
vanquisheth him, grants him peace upon conditions, and returns to Rome.
Cap. lxxiii.
AFter the wars thus ended in Africa, the Carthaginenses continued in peace
a certain season. At the last the ennemies of Annibal, to work him
displeasure, sent word to Rome to the senate, that Anniball had pryuely sent
messangers and letters to Antiochus the king of Siria, mouynge him, to war
with the Romans. And also that messangers were sent with letters secretly
from Antiochus to Anniball. Certifieng them further, that the mind of Annibal
was such, that he could never be contented, till he hard the sound of
harneis upon men's backs. The Romans being angry thereat, sent legates
thither, C. Seruilius, Claudius Marcellus, and Terentius Culleo, to try,
whether the information to them made, were true or no: Commanding them, to
publishe abroad, that the cause of their coming was, to here and determine
certain matters in controversy, which were between the Carthagine^ses and the
king Massanissa, and none other.

This tale published by them, was believed to be true of the common people. But
Anniball therewith could not be blinded. He knew full well, that he only was
the cause of their coming. Wherefore thynkinge for a season to give place,
till the time might better serve him. He with.ii. other departed out of the
city in the beginning of the night, in a strangers apparaile, and came to a
place: where he before had appointed his horses to mete him, and from thense
with speed he went to a castle of his own by the sea side, where a ship of
Italy awaited for him, appointed for the same purpose. In which ship he sailed
from Africa, and arrived the same day in the I Will of Circyna, making more dole
all the way for the hard chances that were happed to his countreye, then he
did for his own evil fortune. In the haven of Circyna he found many
ships laden with marchaundyse, and at his landinge, great resort of people
of the i will came unto him, salutynge him, and making of his coming great joy.
Anniball fearing, lest some of those ships in the night should depart from
the haven, and show in Africa, that they had seen him in Circyna: He devised
to make a solemn sacrifice, and a great feast, to the which he badde all the
masters of the ships that were in the haven, and all the merchants that
were in the same. And for that the wether was very hot (being about the mids
of summer) he caused all the sails of the ships, with the cross mastes,
whereunto the sails be fastened, to be all brought on land. W^erwith he made
pauilions and bowres, to defend them from the vehement heat of the son,
while they souped on the shore. The feast was sumptuous, as the time might
serve thereto, and was kept very solempnely. There was wine great plenty,
wherewith many were drunken and heavy headed. The bankette was also purposely
prolonged, till it was far in the night. Then fell the merchants a sleep,
with the maryners also. Which Anniball espienge, thought he had then good
time to mock them, and taking his ship, secretly departed, leaving them
fast on sleep. On the morrow, when the maryners arose with heavy heads, they
carried their sails and other tackelinges again to the ships, preparynge all
things ready. But or they might bring al to pass, they spent a good part of
the next day.

On the morrow after the departing of Anniball from Carthage, his friends,
that usually resorted to his company, after that they could not find him, nor
here of him, they gathered a great multitude of the city together in the
market place, inquiringe, if any news could be showed of the chief ruler of
their city. Some coniectured, that he was fled away for fear of his
conspiracy against the Romans. Some other said, that the Romans had by
some crafty train conspired his death. Thus diverse were the tales,
according to the diversity of sects that were in the city. Tidings sone
after was brought thither, that he was seen at Circyna. Than the Romayne
legates openly in the senate of Carthage, found great lack, and blamed
greatly the citezens and rulers, for suffryng him to depart, considering the
privy letters and messages that were sent between him and Antiochus, saying.
That he would never be satisfied, till he had moved war through all the
world. The Carthaginenses excused them selves, affyrmynge, that they were
nothing privy nor consenting to his departing.

Now was Annibal arrived at Tyrus, where he was received honorably, and with
great joy: and there he soiourned certain days. From thense he sailed to
Antioche, and after that to Ephesus, where he found the king Antiochus: who
was in great doubt before his coming, in what manner he should mainteygne his
wars against the Romans. The king was greatly comforted by the mean of his
coming, and also by the being there of the ambassadors of the Etholiens: whoo
the same time were departed from the amity of the Romans. He was determined
to move war: for agree would he not to certain conditions of peace, that the
Romans prescribed unto him. Which he thought should be greatly to the loss
both of his honor and also of his dominions. For they would have caused him to
leave the possession of certain cities, that he had. And also that he should
not meddle in Greece: but how and where he should move this war, he was not
determined. Anniball was greatly in his favor, and chieifly for that he
thought him an expert man and a mete counsaylour in his affairs against the
Romans. Anniball ever was of the opinion, that he should make war in Italy,
for that the country of Italy is able to furnyshe an army of vitayles and all
things necessary, and also of soldiers, if he should have need of men of
arms at any time. But (said he) if no war be moved in Italy, so that the
Romans may have all the hole power thereof, to make war in other regions
out of Italy: then is there no prince nor nation of the world able to
withstand the Romans.

Wherefore if ye will deliver unto me one.C. of ships of war, and.xvi.
thousand fotemenne, with one thousand of horsemen: I will with that power
sail into Africa, trusting to cause the Carthaginenses to rebel against the
Romans. Or in case they will not follow my request: yet will I invade some
part of Italy, and move war to the Romans. Then may you (said he to the
king) with all the rest of your power, sail into Europe, keeping your army in
Greece, ready to set forwards as ye se cause.

This his counseyle was well allowed of the king: whereupon one Ariston, an
Ephesien, a wise and a trusty manne, was chosen to sail to Carthage, to the
friends of Anniball, with privy and special tokens by mouth, which they
knew were true and not feyned, to show unto them his purpose. For writing
durst he send none, for fear of taking of the messangers. His message only
was to be declared upon credence.

But while Aryston went on his message, and therein had no good speed: the
ambassadors of Rome were come to Ephesus, to know of Antiochus, the cause why
he intended such war against the Romans, among which ambassadors it was
said that P. Scipio, called Affricanus was one. Which ambassadors having
knowledge, that the king Antiochus was a little before gone against the
Pisidians, and fyndyng Annibal there: they diverse times resorted unto him, and
had familyar communication with him: only to the intent to make him have a
good opinion of the Romans, and not to mystruste, that any thing was intended
by them against him. Among other communication between the ambassadors and
Annibal, it is remembered, that Scipio demanded of him, whom he judged to be
the most noble captain, that ever he knew or heard of. To whom Anniball
answered, that it was Alexander of Macedony: for that he with a small power
overcame so many nations, and vanquished so many great armies in battle,
traueylynge so many strange and far cuntreis, which passed the power and
wit of man's cumpasse. Then Scipio demanded of him, whom he judged to be
the second most noble capytayn. He answered, Pyrrbus, which was the most wise
and expert man in placinge his camps, in fortifieng his fortresses with watch
and ward, and in getting the hertes of men unto his obeysaunce. In so much,
that when he warred in Italye, the Italyens were gladder to be under his
governance, being but a straungyer, then under the dominion and power of the
Romans. Then demanded Scipio, whom he thought to be the third: Without
fail (said he) it is my self. At which answer Scipio laughed, and said:
What would thou then have said, in case thou had overcome me in
battle, as I have done the? Treuly (said Anniball) then would I have put
myself before both Alexander and Pyrrhus also. This answer seemed to Scipio
very strange and proud, whereby he minded to take from Scipio al his glory.

During this long taryenge of the Romayne legates at Ephesus, nothing else
was wrought, but that the often metynge and communication of them with
Anniball, made the king more to suspecte and mystrust him. Whereupon he was no
more called to his council.

Again, one Thoas an Etholien, desirous to have the king, with all his power,
to arryue in Greece, without partynge of the same his strength, said unto
him: Sir, the greatte city Demetrias, and the more part of all the cities in
Greece, look daily for your coming thither. And against your arryuayle, ye
shall see all the countreye assemble on the seasyde, so sone as they may by
watches perceive your navy coming on the sea. And as touching the parting of
your ships and power: that I can in no wise allow. And in case ye were
minded so to do, Anniball of all men is most unmeet, to have the rule and
governance thereof.

First ye must consider (said this Thoas) that Annibal is a Carthaginens, and
an outlaw or banished man from his country: Whose crafty wit will imagyne
daily a. M. new deuyses, even as fortune does varye, or as it shall fall into
his brain. Again if it should chance, that Annibal loose his navy, or his
men to be vanquyshed: the loss will be no less, then if any other captain
had lost them. But in case it should happen him to have the vyctorye, the
honor thereof shall wholly abide with Anniball, and not with Antiochus.
Furthermore, if fortune so well serve, that Anniball utterly subdue the
Romans: what will ye then think, that he will continue in your subjection,
which in his country culd not suffer him self to be in any obedience? Nay
(said he) he that in his youth has ever coueted in his mind, to be Emperor
of the hole world, will now in age never be contented, to be under the rule of
any other, if he may chose. Wherefore my cou^sayl is, that ye have no need to
make Annibal your capitain: But if it please you, ye may use his company as
your fre^d in your journey, taki^g his advise in your affayrs, as a prudent
counsailour, and none otherwise.

This crafty and untrue cou^sail of Thoas, turned the kings mind clean from
sendynge of Anniball with any army into Africa: which before was thought most
mete and necessary. Wherefore he prepared to sail in to Greece, where by the help
of the Etholiens he wanne certain citi^s. At the last the consul M. Atulius,
with an army of Romans, came to the socors of their friends, and at the great
mounteyne, which passethe through the myddle of Greece, fought with Antiochus,
and put him to flight, sleyngal his host, except only.v. C. which fled with
the king.

After which discomfiture, Antiochus, with Annibal, and his small number of
men, that were left him at the battaylle, came to the sea, and took shipping,
and came to Ephesus, where he remained, thynkyng him self there to be sure
out of the danger of the Romans. And that he was persuaded to believe, by
many that were about him, glad to please his mind: as many such dissemblers
have been and shall be daily about greatte princes. But only Anniball aduysed
the king, to prepare for the coming of the Romans, saying, that he
meruayled more, that they were not already arrived, rather then their coming
might be looked for. Showing him also, that the Romans were as strong and
valiant upon the sea, as on the land: Not doubtyng, but shortly they would
strive for the dominion of Asia, and that either he must take from them their
Empire, or else he should be in dangier to lose his kingdom. For he knew, their
desire was to be rulers over all the world, Counselynge him to look for none
other thing at their hands. For in case he did, he should deceive him self with
his vain and false hope.

Not long after this beginnynge of the wars in Greece, L. Cornelius Scipio,
and C. Lelius, were choosen consulles. After which election, P. Scipio
Affricanus offered the senate, that in case they would grant his brother, L.
Scipio the country of Greece for his prouynce: he would gladly take the pain
to go with him in his journey. Whereunto the senate agreed, geuynge him also
further authority, to go into Asia, if he thought it expedient. Saying, they
would now prove, whether Antio^hus should be more helped by the counsayl of
Anniball, which was before vanquyshed: or the Romain consul and his army by
the help of Scipio, that had before made the great conquest in Africa. The
armies and ships were made ready, and the consul arrived in Greece, where
sone receiving many the rebel cities into his hands, he from thense sailed
into Asia: where, by the license of the king Philyp, he had passage through
Macedony and Trace, to the kingdom of Antiochus.

Diverse battaylles were fought upon the sea, between the Romayne navy and
Polixenidas, captain of the kings ships: but ever the Romans had the
victory, by the help of the king Eumenes, and also of the Rhodiens. At the
last it chanced, that the soonne of Scipio Affricanus was taken prisoner, and
brought to Antiochus: who kept him honorably and gentelly. And afterward,
trustyng to have the frendshyp of P. Scipio, and his healpe, for a peace to be
made between the Romans and him: he sent him home his son, without payeng
any ransom for him. For when he perceived the Romans to approach so nere
unto him, he thought it better to common of peace before the battle, then
after, trustyng to have more easy conditions of peace, if it were moved in
time. But when the matter came in communication, between the consulle and the
kings ambassadors, the conditions of the peace were so sore, that Antiochus
refused to take them, although he were thereunto persuaded by the letters of
P. Scipio the Affricane. Whereupon both parties prepared them to fight. The
battle was cruel, but at the last the king Antiochus was put to fiyght,
and.liiii. M. of his footmen slain, and of horsemen.iiii. M. besides.i. M.
and iiii. C. that were taken prisoners, with small loss of the Romans. Then
sent Antiochus eftsoon his ambassadors to the consul for peace: which at
length, by means of P. Scipio Affricanus, was granted him, upon these
conditions.

First that he should from thense forth no more make war in Europe.
Alsoo that he should leave the possessions of all the cities lands and
countries, which were on that side the greatte mountain, called Taurus.
Again, he should pay the Romans fyftene thousand talentes in xii. years,
and to pay unto king Eumenes.iii. hundred talentes, and a great quantity of
wheat. Upon these condytions he should have peace. Provided that Anniball,
the author of this war, with Thoas, and diverse other capytaynes and
counsaylloures, might be delivered unto him. The king, being at this
extreme myschyeffe, received the peace upon the said condytyons: and put
in for the perfourmance there of pledges. The same peace also was after that
confirmed by the senate of Rome.

And so all things thus prosperously brought to pass, L. Scipio the consul
returned to Rome, who was received into the city with great honor and
triumph. And as his brother, of his victory in Africa was named Affricanus:
so was he of his conquestes in Asia, called Asiaticus, to the honor of his
succession ever after.

Anniball fleith to Prusias, the king of Bithynia, and how he ended his life.
Cap. lxxiiii.
ANniball, after the battle begone between the Romans and Antiochus, wherein
he was vanquished and fled, mistrustinge (as it followed after) that the king
of necessity must be driven to take peace, in which he feared, lest the
Romans, bearyng to him mortal malice, would require his delyuerie: thought
to provide for him self in time. Wherefore he incontinent fled to Prusias,
then king of Bithynia. He had not long tarried there, but that T. Quintius
Flaminius was sent from Rome to the king, shewinge him, that the senators
thought, he delte not friendly with them, to keep in his realm their great and
capital ennemy Annibal: a man that made first his own country to make war
with them, to the utter undoing of the same, and from thense came to
Antiochus, and was autour also of his war with the Romans, and now was
repaired unto him, which he thought would turn to his undoing. Prusias,
willing to gratyfy the Romans: devised, either to slay him, or else to take
and deliver him to Flaminius. Wheruppon incontinente the servants of the
king, and also of Flaminius, besette the house of Anniball round about, so
that he could no way issue out. Anniball, foreseinge the hatred that the
Romans bare him, and the small faith of princes: specially the lyghtnes of
Prusias: He therefore, thinking to have some way to fly daungier, if need
required, had devised.vii. ways and entrees into his house. Whereof certain
were very secret and privy. But the number was so great of men of arms,
which were about his house: and the watch so straightly kept by the kings
commandment, that where so ever he offered to issue, he espied embushementes
of harney^^^ men. (...) his time of death to draw nere, he called for poison,
which he long time had (...)! him, and had ever ready for such chances, and
said: Now will I deliver the Romans of great thought, that they have long
time taken, to bring me to confusion. For although I be now old, yet they
think it long before I dye. But of this death, both they and Flaminius
their legate shall have small victory. Then blaming the detestable falshede of
Prusias, that so cruelly would suffer the murder of his friend, whom he had
received into his keeping: He drunk the empoysoned drink, and sone after dyed.

This was the lamentable end of the right wise noble and valyaunte capytayne
Anniball, in a strange region, exiled and banyshed from his own native
country. About which time, or not long before, the worthy Romayne Scipio
Affricanus also dyed: whom the Romans, after his manyfold benefits to them
showed, recompensed with detestable ingratitude, certain of the city being
his ennemies (as no man in authority can escape envy) charged him with the
old matier, between Pleminius and the Locrenses. Wherein (they said) he being
consul was corrupted with money. And therefore ministered not justice. Again,
they laid against him, the delyuerye of his son, being prisoner with
Antiochus, without ransom: which they thought was very suspecious. For
these small causes was he called before the Senate, and as though he had been a
mean person, put to answer with extremity: without favor, or having any
respect to his noble acts, done for the common weal. Which ingratitude he
took so displesantly, that departing out of the court, he went into the
countreye, to the town of Lytarne, where he dwelled as long as he lived,
exilynge him self from Rome for ever. And at his death, he commanded his
body to be buried there also: that his bones might not rest in an unkind
country.

Thus were.ii. of the worthyest cities of the world found unkind to their
noble rulers and capytaynes, and both about one time. Carthage banyshed
Anniball, after that he was vanquished. Rome exiled Scipio, that had vanquished
all her ennemies. Wherein she was of the twain more to be blamed of ingratitude.

FINIS.
Londini. IN aedibus Thomae Bertheleti regii impressoris typis excusum.

ANNO VERBI INCARNATI. M. D. X L I I I I.

CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVW SOLVM.


