A new ballad entitled, the stout Criple of Cornnwall, wherein is showed his
dissolute life, and deserved death.
To the tune of the Blind Beggar.
OF a stout Cripple that kept the high way,
and begd for his living all time of the day:
A story I Will tell you that pleasant shall be,
the Cripple of Cornwall surnamed was he.
He crept on his hands and his knees up and down,
in a torn iacket and ragged patcht gown:
For he had never a leg to the knee,
the Cripple of cornwall surnamed was he,
He was of stomach courageous and stout,
for he had no cause to complain of the gout:
To go upon stilts most cunning was he,
with a staff on his neck gal ant and free.
Yea no good fellowship would he forsake
were it in secret a purse for to take:
His help was good as any might be,
the Cripple of Cornwall surnamed was he.
When he upon any such service did go,
the crafty young cripp^e provided it so:
His tools he kept close in an old hol ow tree,
that stood from the City a mile two or three.
Thus all the day long he begd for relief,
And late in the night he played the false thief:
And seven years together this custom kept he
and no man thought him such a person to be,
There was few grastiers wenton the way,
but unto the criple for passage did pay,
And every brave Merchant that he did descry.
he emptied their purses ere they passed by,
The gallant L. Courtney both valliant and bold,
rode forth with great plenty of silver and gold:
At Exeter there a purchase to pay,
but that the false cripple his journey did stay.
For why the false cripple heard tidings of late
as he lay for alms at this noble man's gate:
What day and what hour his journey should be,
this is quoth the cripple a booty for me.
Then to his companions this matter he moved,
which he in like actions before time had proved.
They make themselves ready and deeply they swear
this moneys their onwe before they come there.
Upon his two stilts this cripple does mount
to have his best share he makes his account
All clothed in canuas down to the ground
he takes up his standing his mates with him round
The^ comes the L. Courtney with half a score me^.
that little suspected these theenes in their den:
And they perceiving them come to their hand,
in a dark evening they bid him stand
Deliver thy purse quoth the Cripple with speed,
for we be good fellows and thereof have need
Not so quoth L. Courtney but this I tell thee,
win it and wear it, else gee none of me.
With that they L. Courtney stoo^d in his defense
and so did his servants but ere they went hence
Two of the true men were stain in the fight,
and four of the thieves were put to their flight,
And while for their safeguard they ran thus away
the jolly bold cripple did hold the rest play.
And with his pikestaffe he wounded them so
as they wers unable to run or to go.
With fight the L. Courtney was driven out of breath
and most of his seruanes wounded to death,
Then came other horsemen riding so fast,
the cripple was forced to fly at last.
And over a river a river that ran their beside,
which was very deep and eighteen foot wide,
With his long staff and his stilts leaped he,
and shifted himself in an old hollow tree.
Then through the country was hue and cry made
to have these thieves apprehended and staid,
The Crepple he creeps on his hands and his knees
and on the hie way great posting he sees,
And as they came Riding he begging does say,
O give me one penny good Master spray:
And thus unto Exeter creeps he along
no man suspecting that he had done wrong.
A none the L. Courtney he spide in the street:
he comes unto him and kisses his feet:
Saying, God save your honor and keep you from ill
and from the hands of you enemies still.
Amen quod L. Courtney and therewith flung down
unto the poor Cripple an English crown:
Away went the cripple and thus did he th^nke,
five C. pounds more would make me to drink
In vain that hue and cry it was made.
they found none of them though the country was laid
But this grieved the cripple both night and day,
that he so unluckely mist of his pray
Nine hundred pounds this cripple had got,
by begging and robbing so good was his lot,
A thousand pound he would make it he said,
and then he would quite give over his trade.
But as he striued his mind to fulfill,
in following his actions so lewd and so ill.
At last he was taken the law to suffice,
condemned and hanged at Exeter Sise,
Which made all men amazed to see,
that such an impotent person as he,
Should venture himself in such actions as they,
to rod in such sort upon the hye way.
FINIS.
Printed by the Assigns of Thomas Symcock.


