A QVATERNION OF SERMONS PREACHED IN JRELAND in the Summer season. 1624.

BY GEORGE ANDREW Master of ARTS, and Deane of Limmericke.

The several Titles, Texts, Time, and Place are set down in the next Page.

DVBLIN, Imprinted by the Society of STATIONERS, Printers to the Kings most
excellent Majesty. Anno 1625.

The first Sermon.
The Title The Temple-purger. The Text 2. Chron. cap. 29. verse. 3.4.5. Time and
place May 16: at Dublin.
The second Sermon.
The Title The Merchant commodities. The Text 1. Kings cap. 21. verse. 2. Time
and place July 13. at Limmericke.
The third Sermon.
The Title The Shepherd and the sheep. The Text John 10. verse. 27.28. Time
and place July 20. at Ennis.
The fourth Sermon.
The Title Sions compass. The Text Psalm. 48. verse. 12.13.14. Time and place
August 15. at Limmericke.
THE FIRST SERMON, Viz. The Temple-purger, Preached at CHRIST-Church in Dublin
on Whitsunday. May 16. 1624.

Before the Most Honorable the Lord Deputy of Ireland and Council of State
in that Kingdom.

By G. A.

Imprinted at Dublin. Anno Dom. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD, HENRY CARRY VISCOUNT FALKLAND LORD DEPVTY OF
IRELAND.
Most Honorable
THe Evangelist S. Luke mentions a quaternion of Soldiers: Act. 12.4.
and I a quaternion of Sermons: that is Polemicall, this is Theological: And
out of this (which the desire of many faithful ones, and the importunity of
some judicious friends have drawn from me) I have presumed to set forth two,
to stand Sentinel before your Honor. The first was naturally yours, for I came
from far to give it: The last is necessarily yours: for you came from far
to take it: Both preached before you, both graced by you, your honorable
presence, your attention: So both are yours, and you are Christ's, 1. Cor
3.22.23.
and Christ is Gods. I confess they are the two extremest in this Book: (for
so the order of time required) but he which is Alpha and Omega, the first and
the last, Revel. 1.11.
no doubt will give a blessing unto them both, in regard that the extremes and
the mean, and the maine, and all was intended for his glory. They are my first
Infants which the light has seen: and nature bids me to seek forth a
nourisher: and whom sitter can I find then him who (under God) was the chief
cause of their life, Isa. 49.23.
and is the common nursing Father of this Church. Vouchsafe therefore Right
Honorable to reflect upon him who desires to express his duty toward you,
now by sight as then by speech: especially in a work that is accompanied with
hope of profit and comfort to the Church of God. Even so Right Noble Lord: Ride
on and prosper with the word of truth and righteousness. Keep open the doors
of the Temple and repair it. Nehem. 2.19. Ezra 7.21. Nehem. 2.8.
Prevent every Sanballat and Geshem: and let Ezra and Nehemias be gracious in
your eyes. Reformation is the work of the Lord and therefore let not your
hands be weak. You have an Hezekiah with you even the strength of God: To him
I leave you, and from him I wish you all increase of honor, with external,
internal, eternal peace.

Your Honors To do you all humble service in the Lord. George Andrewe.

THE FIRST SERMON The Temple purger.
2. CHRON. CAP. 29. verse. 3.4.5. 3. He opened the doors of the house of the
Lord, in the first year, and in the first Month of his reign and repaired
them.

4. And he brought in the Priests and the Levites and gathered them into the
East street.

5. And said unto them, hear ye me ye Levites, sanctify now your selves,
and sanctify the house of the Lord God of your fathers and carry forth the
filth out of the sanctuary.


MOst Honorable, and all right dearly beloved in our Lord and Savior: I have
begun already to speak unto you out of this Text, June. 1. 1623.
which I then styled (...) or the Temple-purger: since which time our Temples
were threatened to have been defiled by our Adversaries, for they had conceived
hope to have set up their banners in our Congregations: Psalm. 74.4.
But he that sits in the Heavens laughed them to scorn: Psalm. 2.4.
and scattered the proud in the imagination of their heart: Luke 1.51.
The match is put out, and the Powder will not take: so that for the time past,
we may comfortably say with David: Psalm. 114 7.
The snare is broken and we are delivered; and for the time to come,
confidently say with Micah: Rejoice not against me O mine enemy: though I
fall, Mic. 7.8.
I shall arise. I will therefore (Christ being my guide) proceed in that my
Text: least withal it be said to me, as is said in the Gospel, Luke. 14.30.
This man began to build and was not able to make an end.

Now in the first place I must repeat my former division: (for the Text had
naturally three general heads) Who: When: What.

First, Who was the purger of the Temple?

(...)
Hu. He: viz. Hezekiah King of Judah.

Secondly, When was the Temple purged?

In the first year of his reign and first Month.

Thirdly, What course was taken in this purging?

A twofold course.

First for the house of God.

Secondly for the guides of the house.

Where three considerations are offered.

The care taken for them. The titles given them Priests and Levites. In the
particular Priests Levites

3. The pains taken with them, viz. What Hezekiah did: What he said: What he
did: Two things.
He brought them in He gathered them into the East street,
What he said: Two things. Hear ye me ye Levites. 2. For the matter: a
threefold command Sanctify now your selves Sanctify the house of the Lord
Carry the filth out of the sanctuary.



Thus much for the division.

Who was the purger of the Temple, even He (...): Hezekiah the King: where I
observed, That the care of Gods Temple and work of reformation, is worthy of a
King, nay necessary for a King: as I then proved by five arguments, viz.

The rule of Scripture. The consent of the Fathers. The example of godly
Princes. The confession of our Adversaries. The practice of our own.
The use whereof was threefold: viz.

First, to show the world what is the right of Kings, and that herein Papal
power is but usurpation.

Secondly, to tell the world, Heart. conf with Ren. cap. 9. d^. 4.
that it is but a trick in the Papacy to draw the ground of Regal supremacy
only from the time of King Henry VIII.

Thirdly, to pray that God would stir up the spirit of Princes to make use of
their own right: and that in due time he would be pleased to send a David into
Spain, a Iehosaphat into France, a Josias into Italy, a Constantine into
Germany, that (with our Hezekiah of great Britain they may pull away the
vizard from the Church of Rome, Revel. 17.16.
hate the whore and leave her desolate.

I then spoke also of the second general head: viz.

When, was this purging of the Temple? viz.

In the first year, and first Month of Hezekias Reign: where

I proposed Two Meditations.

1 For them that Rule, that they may not defer, but with David, betimes cut
off the workers of iniquity; Psalm. 101.8. Ierom. 3.22.
and quickly to prepare that Balm of Gilead, to recover the health of their
people.

2 For them that are Ruled: that there may be among us no evening repenters,
but that this year, this month, this day, this hour, may be the year,
month, day, hour, yea the very moment of their conversion.

I began then also to speak of the third general head, viz.

First what Hezekiah did for the house of God, in opening it, in repairing it.
Wherein, I have set forth Bethels excellency, namely the title, glory and
beauty of the house of God.

I have warned you to take heed to the feet of your affections, Eccles. 4.17.
When you enter into the house of God, least you turn Bethel into Bethaven.
Hos. 4.15.


I have commended unto you the piety and bounty of Hezekiah, in repayring this
house of God.

I have prayed you to keep open this house as long as you can, and often to
tread in these Courts.

And lastly I have exhorted you, with care and cost to maintain this house of
God, Hag 1.^.
a thing expected of him, and accepted by him, 1. Cor. 6.19
especially if withal we adorn and maintain the spiritual Temples of the
holy Ghost, viz. The Saints of God: And hitherto we came the last time.

Let us now proceed to the second and last general part of the Text: viz.
What course Hezekiah took for the guides and principal officers of the house
of God.

This is taught in the fourth and fifth verses, being the remainder of this
Text: and therein three considerations are offered.

The care had for them. The title given them. The pains taken with them.
In order, of these, and first, of the first,

The care that Hezekiah had for the guides and principal Officers of the house
of God.
the place, then he brought in the persons: imitating herein the Creator, who
first made the Air for man to breath in, the Water to refresh him, the Earth
to bear him, and the Heavens to cover him, and then he made Man. When his seat
was prepared, then he sent Him: This was very good in God, not only for the
matter, Genes. 1.31.
but also for the manner; for there was apta proportio and nexus (says
Mercerus) and it was good and orderly in Hezekiah, Mercerus in locum.
first to provide the place, then the persons: First the place, here was
Policy: yet not the place alone but persons also, here was Religion. Oh that
in this and in all other actions, USE. 1.
we would join Policy and Religion together, that they may kiss each other,
Psalm. 85.10.
and be like the two Cherubins which look one to another, and both toward the
Mercie-seat! Exodus 25.20.


As for the place alone, let us not be transported with the beauty of it,
least That be verified of us, Hilar. lib. contr. Auxentium.
which Hilarie spoke against Auxentius, Male vos parietum cepit amor: You do
ill to be in love with walls: but let us be in love with the persons, 1. Tim.
5.17.
especially with them that labor in the word and doctrine: Romans 10.15.
Oh how beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad tidings of peace.

USE. 2.
Let all those whom this concerns, (as Rulers, Patrons, Parochians) think on
this point; when they have prepared the place, to prepare the persons: Provide
them, provide for them: that with greater courage the Bells of Aaron may sound
in the Temple of God.

Thus much for the Care had of them.

Title given them, (by the holy Ghost,) viz. Priests and Levites. Whereof,
first I must speak in the general.

It is certain that there were Sacrifices, Oblations, Tiths, and Priests, even
almost from the beginning: witness Moses in the 4. and 14. Chapters of
Genesis: Adrichem. in Levi.
Put the Priesthood was extraordinary, and used promiscuously by the first
borne of sundry Families: especially after the time of Noah (says Hierome)
for from thence, Hieronym. ad Evagrium.
all the first borne were Priests to the time of Aaron.

Then was the Priesthood restrained to the tribe of Levi, and settled in Aaron
and his posterity, who were consecrated Priests unto the Lord. Exodus 28 1. 2.
Chron. 29 34
But because the Priests were too few for the service of the Tabernacle,
therefore the Lord added all the tribe of Levi, Numb. 3.6.9.
and gave them to the Priests to serve them. Of both these, Priests and Levites
does the Text speak: and of them both I observe that which God himself
observes, viz.

The Priests are named first, then the Levites:

The Priests as chief, the Levites as inferior,

The Priests for government and ministration,

Number. 4.16.27. (...) Number. 4.24.27.
The Levites for portation, custody, Gnavodath Gnavodah, the service of the
service in the Congregation.

Now Aaron was the chief of all: Aaron as the head: the Priests as the hands:
and the Levites as the feet, to go and come, to serve and bear. It is Paul's
rule, 1. Cor. 14.40. 1. Cor. 12.17.
(...). For if the whole body were an eye where where were the hearing?

Here then is (...), order, USE.
nay (...) it self

In nature, there is superior and inferior.

In the heavenly Hierarchy, there is Angel and Archangell.

In the celestial Orb, one Sphere is in the circumference of another.

In civil policy, there is supreme and subordinate: 1. Pet 2.13.
and difference is not unfitting in the Ecclesiastical Policy: For God is not
the Author of confusion but of peace. 1. Cor. 14.33.


But in this Order let there be no disorder.

1 Aaron though he be the head of the Priests, yet he must not be the head of
the Church, for that office does properly and solely belong unto CHRIST. Ephesians.
1.22.


2 Aaron though he be the head of the Priests, and (...), yet he must not
(...), that is to say, domineer over the Priests, Levites, and the rest of Gods
inheritance.

And thus much for the Priests and Levites, in the general.

But now I must entreat of them in particular: for the Text divides them, and
therefore I must give them several meditations.

And first for the Priests.
Levi, Numb. 4.24. Exodus 29.38. Levit. ^. 6. Malach. 2.7.
and appointed by God to oversee the Tabernacle, to offer the daily sacrifice,
to pray for the people, and to expound the Law unto them. Their manner of
consecration, purity of their garments, sounding of their bells, shining of
their breast plate with Vrim and Thummim, are described in the 28. and 29.
Chapters of Exodus.

Malach. 2 1. USE.
And now o ye Priests this is for you.
Let us not care for the name so much as for the nature, yet the name it self
is not to be despised, for the Priest by an Anagramme signifies Ripest. Let us
then (of the Ministry) be ripe scholars in the school of CHRIST, riper then
others ripest of all. Malach. 2.7. 2. Cor. 3.20. Revel. 1.16.
Let our lips preserve knowledge, for we are the Ambassadors of Christ: yea
we are stars in the right hand of God, though proud worldlings do despise
us.

Hebr. 5.4.
Only in so great honor to which we are called, let not us our selves
dishonor our calling: the more honorable, the more humble, the more great,
the more good: And if we will reform others, let us first reform our selves,
our works will prevail with many before our words, and they will be ready
to say to us as the woman said to Christ, John. 4.19.
Sir I see that thou art a Prophet.

Philip. 4.9.
It is Paul's example, as you have heard and seen in me and the Heathen said in
his Senary.

Menander.
(...).
Suadet loquentis vita non oration.
In a word, remember the Bells, remember the Breastplate, that we may both sound
and shine, yea Shine as lights in the midst of a crooked generation. Philip.
1.15.


Thus much for the Priests.

Now for the Levites.
E^^d. 12 29.
In one night the Lord smote all the first borne in the land of Egypt, saving
the first borne of Israel, which he spared and sanctified to himself. N^mb.
8.^^.
Now in stead of these, all the first borne, he took all the borne of the
Tribe of Levi, Numb. 8.18.
and styles them Levites.

Their ages, and offices, their charge and services in the Tabernacle are
described by Moses, Numbers the 3. and renewed by David, 1. Chron. 23.

The sum of all is, they were the Lords portion, sanctified by himself,
separated to himself, for the work of that Ministry, Isreal's Liturgy. True
it is, they were inferior unto Priests, yet especially regarded of the Lord:
(...), Romans 1.1. a rad: (...)
put a part (like Paul) from the world, and according to the (...) of their
name Levi, coupled unto God.

Oh that the Levites of our time, USE.
would consider of this point! Seems it a small thing, Number. 16.9.
that God has separated you from the multitude, to take you near to himself,
says Moses to the Levites of those times: Directed to the College at Dublin.
and I to my brethren, the Levites of these times, the younger sort of the
Lords (...), lot and portion? It is a great thing that the Lord has thus
separated you, elegit, selegit, to train you up in his (...) and service. Oh!
With what care and conscience ought you to prepare your hearts to stand before
the Lord? You walk in danger, Ezra. 7.1^.
and had need to be circumspect.

For your name of Levi, Levi
^il vile lun live.

by an Anagramme will easily turn to evil, and once turned to evil, it will by
a second Anagramme, be as sudainely turned into vile: But if you turn and tune
your hearts unto the Lord, then shall you be unto the people by a third
Anagramme in lieu, or in stead of God: and so by a fourth conversion your
souls shall live.

Oh! Mark, how God has marked you: Ye are his lot, his separate part and
portion: Take heed to your selves, and beware of the profane: Nec tam juvant
Athenae, quam nocent voluptates. Let neither sin nor Satan, nor any
instrument of Satan rob you of your heart, the Church of her hope, of God of
his inheritance.

And thus much for the Titles of the Priests, and Levites.

Now follows in the third place, The pains, which Hezekiah took with these
persons, viz.

What he did. What he said.

What he did: Two things.

And first the Text says verse. 4.

He brought them in.
He brought them in, namely, into the Temple; for his father Ahaz had shut up
the doors of the Temple, 2. Chron. 28.24. and so by a probable consequence, He
had shut out the Priests.

Or, He brought them in, namely, into the City, (which is most likely) for
the Text says that they being brought in, Hezekiah assembled them into the
East-streete viz, in Jerusalem.

USE. Js^ 1.^^.
1 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! What a miserable City art thou become, which wast
once accounted faithful? The Saints did once lodge in thy bosom, but now they
are cast out: The Prophets are banished, and the Priests of Baal kept in.

2 There was a second City, like unto the first, less in quantity, but as
bad in quality, it was Bethlehem the City of David, Luke. ^.^.
where many a rich and churlish Nabal lodged in the Inn, Luke 2.7.
when poor and meek Christ lay in the Cratch.

3 But is there not a third City in the world, as bad as these? It is the
City of Rome, where the lewd strumpets, (says their own Cardinal) did at
their own pleasure, Baron. in an. 912. art. 8.
thrust in their (amasios) lovers, false Popes, into Peter's seat.

O Rome! thou make no room for those that are good. Or if thou bring them
in, thou pervertest them? and Bernard Bernard. de confid. ad Lugen.
wittily speaks of thee, bonos recipit non facit.

4 I would to God this fourth City wherein we stand, Dublin.
deserved not to be added to the rest, to make up the square: But; Though
Israel play the harlot, Hos. 4.15.
let not Judah sin.

When Christ came to the house of Iairus, Math. 9.23.25.
he thrust the Minstrels out of doors: And the Scripture says, Put out the
bondwoman and her son: So, put out the profane, Galat. 4.30.
the blasphemer, the fornicator, and the harlot too, the Idolater, and every
unreformed Papist; (though they bring you in never so much profit) and in stead
of them, bring in the Prophets, the Preachers of the word, the servants of God,
and his Saints. Let such dwell in your house, Psalm. 10^.6.
in your heart. Oh! Shut not them out, neither in your action, nor in your
affection, least that you your selves one day be shut out of doors. Luke ^^.28.


Thus much for Hezekiah, his bringing in of the Priests and Levites. Now for
the next.

He gathered them into the East street.
Caietane says, it was atrium templi ex Orient, Caietan. in loc^
but the word will not bear it, for it is not Chatzer, but Rechob, (...)
which latter word is directly used for a common street, Esth. 4.6.
and so generaly all expound it, of some street on the East part of Jerusalem.
Yet we may not think, that this gathering into the East was for superstition,
like those twenty five Idolaters in Ezechiel, for it is not probable, Ezech.
8.16.
that the King would nourish that superstition which he went about to abolish,
but certainly it was some street, of spatiousnesse, a rad: (...)
and roomth, as the word Rechob, does import. Hither did Hezekias gather them.

Colligo, is one of the works of corporal mercy, but here it is spiritual,
Colligere dispersos, for a spiritual end, to gather together those which were
dispersed. It was the right of Hezekiah so to do. Thus God commanded Moses the
Civil Magistrate, Numb. 10.2.
to make to himself two Trumpets for his assembling of the Congregation. So
Josiah the King, 2. King 13.1.4.
assembled the Priests and the Prophets, and commanded them.

So Christian Kings and Princes in the Primitive Church assembled the Counsels
of those times; as to insist upon the four first general Counsels, viz.

See. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Nice the first assembled by Constantine Mag. Id. libr. 5. cap. 8.
Constantinople first. assembled by Theodosius. 1. Evag libr. 1. c. 3.
Ephesus first. assembled by Theodosius Junior. Id. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Chalcedon. assembled by Martian.
Let our Masters of Rome look unto this, who by Papal authority have
assembled in former times so many Counsels at Rome it self, and of late that
Conventicle of Trent, of all which, a man may say as Hierome said in the like
case, Hieron. libr 2. Apolog. contra Ruffinum.
in his Apology against Ruffinus: Dic, quis Imperator jusserit hanc Synodum
convocari? But enough of this; for no doubt the Princes of the earth will
maintain their own right, pluck the plumes of the Babylonish strumpet,
Revelat 17.16.
and leave her naked.

For our parts, let us obey, when such occasion of assemblies are offered, and
in the mean time, let us be gathered into the assemblies of the righteous,
Psalm. 1.5.
and that with profit, not with hurt; and continue therein, 1. Cor. 11.17.
until we meet with, Numb. 10.25.
That gathering host of Dan (even with death) who shall gather us, as
scattered members unto our head: For, Luke 17.37.
where the dead body is, thither shall the Eagles resort.

And hitherto what Hezekiah did to the Priests and Levites.

Now, What he said.



Hear ye me ye Levites, verse. 5.

Where I pray you to mark, Three Things.

WHY, HOW, WHAT.
1 First, Why does the King speak to the Levites alone? The Answer is
threefold.

First, under the name of Levites (which did bear the name of their Tribe) the
priests also were comprehended, who were of the same Tribe: The Prophet Malachy
does make this plain, Malach. 2.1.
for he begins with a commandment for the Priests, Malach. 2.4.
but concludes with the covenant of Levi, and Chapt. 3. verse. 3. Purify the
sons of Levi. Yet we may not think, but that the Priests had need of
purifying as well as they. But the 16. verse. after my Text cleares this point,
where both Priests, 2. Chron 20.16
and Levites are named in this clensing of the Temple, yea our very Text it
self: Lahem, to them, viz. Whom he had brought in, (...)
and gathered together: verse. 5.
and they were Priests and Levites.

Secondly, 2. Chron. 23.28.
it was the proper office of the Levites to cleanse, therefore he names them
apart.

Thirdly, 2. Chron 29.34.
the Levites were more zealous in setting forwards religion then the elder sort
of Priests: and therefore happily he directs his speech to them. And
encouragement to young Daniel and young Timothy, and to every Neophyte, 1. Tim
3.8. Act 18.25. Eccles. 12.1. ^. Pet. 3.18.
and (...) in the school of Christ, that they may the better Remember their
Creator in the days of their youth: Growing in grace, and in the knowledge of
Jesus Christ, and endeavoring to say with David, I have more understanding then
the ancient, Psalm. 119.103
because I have kept thy precepts.

2 Secondly, How, speaks he unto them? Lovingly; mark the words, Hear ye
me, ye Levites, nay in the eleventh verse, (...)
he calls them sons, yea Banai, My sons; Isa. 49.23.
and no marvel, for Kings are nursing Fathers to the Church.

USE. Euod. 20.12.
Are we their Children? Let us be obedient to them: Pray for them: Bear with
them: Depend on them: and Allow them a great part of that honor and love
enjoined in the fifth Commandment, as if they were our natural parents.

3 Thirdly, What is That, the King says unto them?

Hear ye me ye Levites.
He exhorts them to Hear: They which should exhort others, are exhorted by
others. True it is, admonition does always profit, and oftimes from those that
are our inferiors, or have less knowledge then our selves, thus Job Job. 31.13.
did not contemn the judgment of his servant, or of his maid: and Paul
directs the auditory at Colosse, Coloss 4.17.
to say to Archippus (their Pastor) Take heed to the Ministry. And Athenaeus
Athenaeus.
speaks aptly in the Proverb.

(...).

The Gardener sometimes speaks opportune things.

But admonition does more profit when it proceeds from our Superiors, Imperator
est a Dei secundus. Tert. ad Scap.
especially from Kings and Princes, who by a divine influence do participate
with that supernatural wisdom from above, even of him to whom they are next,
and with whom they do so nearely converse.

But beware (my brethren of the Clergy) that we be not prevented in our own
element, no, USE.
not by our Superiors, much less to be discovered in our follies by our
inferiors, or through neglect of our calling, or scandal of our life, be
justly disgraced by them, Numb. 2^.28.
as Baalam was by his Ass.

Thus much for the Preparation.

Now for the Matter it self, which contains a threefold command of Hezekiah
to the Priests and Levites.

The first Command. Sanctify now your selves.
viz. An Action. A Limitation. A Question. A Correction.


1 The first Consideration is the Action. Sanctify your selves, or be you your
selves sanctified: For, (...)
the word Hithkaddeshu is in Hithpael, reciprocal in Conjugation, and immanent
in signification, and the order and meaning of the word is, that first we must
sanctify our selves, before we can sanctify others.

And good reason; Simil.
for if you would have water to ascend to the top of a mountain, you must
bring it from another mount as high as it. USE.
That which we teach others, let us first teach our selves: we are the Lords
Seers, 1. Sam. 9.^.
and tasters for the people. Seers, least they fall, tasters, least they be
poisoned. Oh! How many are like the Architects of Noah his Arc, they built the
Arc and were drowned themselves. Take heed (my beloved brethren) least when we
have preached to others, 1. Cor. 9.27.
we our selves be cast-awayes.

2 The second is, the Limitation. Now, not put expletive, Psalm. 118 25. (...)
like the Hebrewe Na, but emphati^e, Gnattah. Now, even at this time whatsoever
ye did before.

It teaches Two things.

1 Now, in relation to the time past, as if he should have said: My Father
Ahaz silenced you, disturbed you in your calling, and you gave your selves to
other affairs, and were polluted: But Now, return and sanctify your selves
again.

USE.
And truly while we attend not our calling we are unsanctified, peradventure
there is an unwilling desertion; How much more blameworthy are we, if
willingly we forsake our calling, and blot out the character which God
imprinted? This deserta militia without just ground draws on the censure of
man, and the vengeance of God.

2 Now, in relation to the time to come, as if he should have said, USE
Now, o Now, and defer it not, even now be sanctified while it is called
Today. Delay brings danger as in other affairs, so especially in the matters
of God: To morrow, Cra^, Cra^ ^^rvus ^^t. A^g. confess. lib. 8. cap 12.
is not the voice of the Dove: To morrow? (says Augustine) and, Why not now o
Lord? Why should not my uncleanenesse have an end this very hour?

3 The third Consideration is a Question, Whether Priests and Levites can
sanctify themselves as here they are commanded? I answer, They cannot; for
it is the Lord that must purify the sons of Levi: Mala^h. 3.3.
yet to encourage us he gives us the honor of the work. 1. Io. 3.3.
We have no freewill unto good, 2. Corinthians 3.5.
for we are not able of our selves to think a good thought, much less to do
a good work. It is Christ that is made unto us, 1. Cor. 1.10. 1. These. 4.3. 1
Pet. 1.15. Mark 9.50.
not only Justification but Sanctification; yet we are still called unto
holiness and sanctification. Have salt in your selves says Christ, alas: Have
we in our nature any seasoning, or savor of spiritual wisdom at all? No
but when he said Have, then he Gave: that when we feel our wants, we may
cry with that good Father, Domine da quod jubes, and jube quod vis: Aug. conf.
li. 10
Give us O Lord what thou command, and then command what thou will.

4 The last Consideration, is matter of Correction, Priests and Levites are
here called to sanctification: yet, What grievous complaints were made against
them? viz.

Isaiah Isa. 56.10.11.12
says, they were blind watchmen, dumb dogs, greedy and given to wine.

Hosea Hos. 6.9.
says, they murder in the way by consent and work mischief.

Zephany Zeph. 3.4.
says, they are light and wicked persons, and have wrested the Law.

Malachy Malach 2.8.
says, They are gone out of the way, and have broken the Covenant of Levi.

I wish that these and the like sins may not be found in the heritage of
Jacob. USE. Ecclesiast. 23.15


If ever there were need of sanctified Priests, it is now: Oh! How many are
there, who by a dissolute life do make religion to be made a scorn? I have
spoken but one word, and that somewhat secretly, because I like not to discover
the nakedness of Noah, and I fear that some Church-papist did over-heare me
to tell it in the streets of Azkelon. But if so, I will then cry aloud and
say, 2. Sam. 1.20.
Psalm. 75.5.
Set not up your horn on high* for if you do, I will pluck you down again
with the hands of Ten of your own approved Authors, viz: Aventine, Albertus
Magnus, Holcot, Platina, Clemangis, Genebrard, Staphilus, Iansenius, Cornelius
Agrippa, and Cornelius Mus: all which (take them jointly together) do speak
such shameful and vile things of the Popes and Clergy of Rome, that they
make them the beastliest monsters that ever trod upon Gods earth. And in
particular thus.

A vent. annal. libr 8. in ^nit. page 481.
The Pope (says Aventine) sets over the flock of Christ Goats, Woolves,
adulterers, ravishers, usurers, cooks, muletors, perfidious, perjured,
ignorant Asses; nay he sets boys and wantons to rule the Lambs: I am
ashamed to say what manner of Bishops we have.

Albert. Magn in Evang. Io^. c. 10
Those (says Albertus Magnus) which rule in the Church, be for the most part
Thieves, and Murderers: rather Oppressors, then Pastors: Perverters, then
Teachers: Seducers, then Guides: These be the messengers of Antichrist, and
such as supplant the flock of Christ.

Platin in vita Marcellim.
Sed quid futurum (says Platina) nostra aetate arbitramur? qua vitia nostra eo
crevere, ut vix apud Deum misericordiae locum reliquerint. Quanta sit avaritia
sacerdotum, and eorum maxim qui rerum potiuntur, quanta libido, ambitio,
pompa, superbia, desidia, quanta ignoratio tum suiipsius tum doctrinae
Christianae? Quam parva religio, quam corrupti mores, (vel in hominibus
secularibus detestandi) non attinet dicere, cum ipsi ita aperte and palam
peccent, ac si inde laudem quaererent.

(...) Sapient. se^l. 182
The Priests of our age (says Holcot) be like the Priests of Baal, Dagon,
Priapus, wicked Angels, Angels of Hell.

(...) ang^ de sta^^ Ecclesiae, page ^7. ^^. 5^. etc.
Concerning Monks, Clemangis says, they are slipperie, indisciplinated,
dissolute, running up and down into dishonest places, and hating nothing so
much, as their reading and praying, rule and religion. The Friars are worse
then the Pharisees, making show of Austeritie, chastity, humility, but
secretly they go beyond the luxuriousness of all worldly men: And like Bells
Priests devour with their brats the oblations of the people. And what are
Nunneries now a days, but the execrable brothel houses of Venus? that now the
veyling of a Nun, is all one, as if you prostituted her openly to be a whore.

Pontifices (says Genebrard) circiter quinquaginta, Genebrar. Chronolog. lib.
4. seculo. 10.
pro spatio fere 150. annorum, a Joan. 8. ad Leonen 9. recesserunt totaliter a
virtute praedecessorum suorum, and fuerunt Apotactici, Apostatici ve potius,
quam Apostolici.

It is much to be lamented (says Staphilus Staphilus Apol. part. 1.
) that the life and behavior of the reverend Priesthood answers not their
godly and high Profession, but is very scandalous to the world. Can this be
denied? It is (alas) too true.

Truly (says Iansenius Iansen. concord. page 270.
) the greater part of Bishops and Pastors, are so infatuated, that they bewray
themselves to have no corn of Salt in their life and doctrine: There is no
hope, when they themselves are irrecoverably corrupted, by whose health others
should be helped.

There be (says Agrippa Corn. Agrippa de vanitate scient. cap. 62.
) in the Church, Monckes, Friars, and Anchorites, but few among them are good:
For hither come flocking, they which have spent their substance upon whores,
dice and surfeiting. This crew has dissembled holiness: From hence start out
so many Stoicall apes, patched rogues, cowled monsters: who having no credit
left in things humane, yet for their monstrous habit sake are put in trust with
the things of God: whose life being most lewd, and filled with all villainy, is
yet left unpunished, through pretense of Religion.

And lastly ( Cornelius Mus Corn. Mus Conc. Evang. and de festis tom. 1. ser. 4
says) O my beloved Rome, Thou art wholly turned away, overthrowen, and
perverted: Thou art become a stews, a furnace, an hell: Every order is
departed from God, Religious men are become dissolute, Virgins have cast off
shame, Priests their Gowns, Monks their cowles.

Elus. l. orat in Conc. Trid. in 3. Dom. Advens.
With what monsters of filthiness is not both Priest and People defiled? Begin
at the Sanctuary of God, and see if there be any hope, or help for honest
life. Would God they were not fallen, with one consent from Religion to
superstition: from Faith to Infidelity: from Christ to Antichrist. The sacred
name of Jesus, is made a jest and fable, among the Jews and Pagans, by reason
of us; whose wickedness with a shameful report is bruted over all the world.
Ser. 33. in Cant. or in Conc. Rhemens.
Yea, S. Bernard himself says of them in his time: Many Devils are chosen to
be Bishops, they are the ministers of Christ and they serve Antichrist.

Romans 14.4. Ephesians. 4.20. Basil.
But let them stand or fall to their own Master. We have not so learned Christ.
Basil says, (...); not with words, but deeds, that is, not with words alone,
least we nourish with a word, and kill with a work. Oh!

USE. Exodus 28.37.
Let the name of Holiness be upon us, as it was upon the forehead of Aaron, and
let the Nature of it be within us and without us too, like that Vrim and
Thummim upon the heart and breast plate of Aaron: and let all pray with David:
Exodus 28.30.
O Lord let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness. Psal^. 132 9.


And thus much of the Kings first command,

Sanctify your selves.

Now for the second command.

Sanctify the house of the Lord God of your Fathers.
House of God: and therefore I shall now spare to speak. Only here by the way
observe, that he calls it not the house of their Fathers (for then they would
have pretended antiquity) but the house of the Lord God, that they might
attend to verity: and withal, the Lord God of their fathers, that they might
join both together, even Antiquity and Truth. Our boasting Adversaries, are
somewhat like the Gibeonites, they pretended unto Joshua that they came from
far, Josh 9.4, 6.
and packt up a company of old sacks and bottles, to color their fraud, when
indeed they dwelt near at hand. So these men of Rome, patch up a garment with
the shreds of Antiquity, when as they are but the younger Children of Time.
For, What age can that Religion be of, which was never heard of in the time of
Christ, nor in the time of his Apostles? Or if they had a show of Antiquity,
it were nothing; for Antiquity without Verity is but vanity: Or if they will
have it in the words of Cyprian Cyprian. coutra epist. Stephan. Papae.
against a Pope himself, Consuetudo sine veritate est vetustas erroris,
Custom without truth is the antiquity of error. But of this by the way. The
maine thing, that this part of the Text intends, is the Sanctifying of the
Temple.

Sanctify the house of God.
That is, cleanse the Temple, and prepare it to a holy use: for otherwise there
was no holiness in it at all. Many things in the Scripture are said to be
Holy, viz. Exodus 3.5. Levit 24.9. Math. 4.5. 2. Pet. 1.18. Psalm. 79.1.
The Place where Moses stood. The shewbread. The City of Jerusalem. The Mount
Tabor, and the Temple it self is called Holy. Yet not by any inhaerent
holiness, but only during the time of Gods presence, Holy uses, Christ his
miracles, Transfiguration, or the like.

Oh! USE.
What impostures are done in the Papacy under the name of Holiness? viz.

Holy fathers of the Church of Rome. Holy house, viz. The house of Inquisition.
Holy Wels, or waters. Holy Maid of Kent.
And lastly, the Holy Cross in this kingdom, but more truly, the hollow
Cross, a stale for Idolatry, an offense to Gods children, and generally an
impoverishing and robbing of the Subject. Psalm. 93 5. USE
Yet holiness becomes the house of God for ever. A lesson not only for
those that are Officers in the house of God: but even for all that tread in the
Courts of the Lord our God. To every man belongs some especial virtue, as
Liberality to the Rich, Patience to the Poor, Justice to the Magistrate,
Humility to the Minister, but Holiness answers unto all: and to show the
generality of it, it was prophesied by Zechary, Zech. 14.20.
that holiness should be written upon the horse-bridles, yea and every pot in
Jerusalem should be holy, and verse. 21.
and the whole Nation was called holy; yea and upon the very coin it self
was there stamped on one side Ierushalaijm kedhoshah, (...)
Holy Jerusalem. But oh! How far are this people now degenerated? (...)
Their kedhoshah (which signifies Holy) quickly turned into kedheshah, (...)
Deuteronomy. 23.17. Isa. 1.21. Romans 11.20. Hebr. 12.14.
which signifies an Harlot? Oh! How is the faithful City become an harlot,
says the Prophet? Be not high minded but fear. Let there be no profaine
person among us, but follow holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

And hitherto of the Kings second command.

Now of the last command.

Carry the filth out of the Sanctuary.
Sanctuary is not meant a place of refuge, as Isa. 8.14. Isa 8.14.
but it concerns the Temple of God in Jerusalem, and had four parts.

viz. Atrium gentium, or the outward Court, Adrich. theat, in Ierusal. nu. 101
Revelat. 11.2. Atrium Iudaeorum, or the inward Court, Adricho. ibid. number. 87.
Exodus 27.9. The holy place, Exodus 26.33. The holiest of all, Hebr. 9.3.


Among all these, by the Sanctuary, is meant commonly, the holy place or
Tabernacle. But Synecdochically is meant the whole Temple, 2. Chron. 29.16.
both the inward and the outward parts.

And here I observe Two things: viz.

(...): Quod and Quid. First, that there was filth in the Sanctuary.

But was there any indeed? In the Sanctuary?

What, in the Holy place? In the House of God?

Yes, there was filth there, And it is not strange.

The Church of Corinth, 1. Corinthians. 5.1.
was stained with the filth of Incest.

The Church of Galatia, Galat. 1.6.
was stained with the filth of a new Gospel.

The Church of Pergamus, Revelat. 2.15.
was stained with the filth of the Nicolaitans.

Laodicea, was blind and naked, and Sardis was dead. Revel. 3.17.3.1.


In one Arc Family Field Barn Net.
there was Cham Ismael Tares Chafe Bad fish.
with Sem Genes. 7.13 Genesis 21.9.
Isaac Wheat Math. 13.25.
Corn good fish. 3.12.13.48.

There is no perfection in this life: USE. Luke 17.10.
When we have done all we can we are all unprofitable servants. Yet under the
color of perfections want, let us not abound with folly: and though we be
sinners, let us not cast away the fear of God: Hebr. 12.3.
We have not yet resisted unto blood, neither have we yet attained the mark:
Phil. 2.13 14.
But we follow hard toward it, for the price of our high calling in Jesus
Christ.

Secondly, What was this filth of the Sanctuary?

It was Twofold. Proper and Metaphorical.

Proper: viz. dust, dirt, and filth, grown and contracted by not using of the
Temple: This was the sin of them in the time of Haggai, They themselves dwelt
in seeled houses, Hag. 1.4.
and the house of God lay wast. This is the sin of our times: and to all such
I will say in the words of that Prophet, Consider your own ways in your
heart. Ye looked for much, Hag. 1.^, 9.
and lo it came to little, because of my house that is wast.

From the Proper, we come to the Metaphorical filth, viz. The Idols, Altars,
Ornaments, whatsoever were brought in contrary to the law of God: for so all
Divines, both theirs, and ours do expound it; and not without reason: 2. King.
23.13. Isa 30* 22. Ezech. 2 1.3. (...) Ezech, 8.17.
for Idols are called Corruption, yea, a polluted and a menstruous cloth. Nay
more then that, they are called Gillulim, stercora, dung, and that which is
worst of all, they are termed stink.

USE.
Oh! that these things would move us to hate Idolatry from the ground of our
heart, and not to think the better of it for the external pomp and beauty:
though the Images be of gold and silver, and the Ornaments rich, yet the
Prophet bids the faithful to say unto them, Isa. 30.12.
Get you hence. As an adulteress, the fairer, the fouler: So Idolatry, Simil.
Isa. 44.9.
the more fine, the more filthy: the more dainty, the more deformed: the more
delectable, the less profitable. Let our Adversaries doat if they will upon
their golden Babylon: let us esteem all their Idols, Aliars, Beads, Grains,
and Popish Ornaments, no otherwise then the Scripture esteems them, namely, to
be filth.

And now let me conclude with a Question. Is there any filth in our sanctuaries
at all? I answer. For the maine filth of Idolatry (God be thanked) it is well
kept out; but let us search Jerusalem with lights, Zephan. 1.12.
whether there be any other left. As for example.

If there be found among us any renewing of any Popish doctrine. That is filth.

If contrary to those religious Articles, agreed upon in a Convocation held in
this City, (1615.) there be any Images of the Trinity, or expressing of God
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, in any outward form. That is filth.

If in our Congregations, any thing be done without Order, and edifying. That
is filth.

If the life of the speaker be not orderly, but dissolute. That is filth.

Out with this filth, and out with that filth, and out with every thing that
does offend, Math. 13.41.
that God may come to his holy Sanctuary, and find us there sitting clothed
with the clean and Wedding garments of Faith and obedience.

And to this end, let every one cast out the filth out of his own heart,
which is Gods spiritual Sanctuary, and the Temple of the holy Ghost: That he
which has pure eyes, and cannot abide that thing which is evil, Habac. 1.13.
may take delight to dwell within us, until we come to that celestial
sanctuary which is above, Hebr. 8.2.
and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Testament, Hebr. 12 24. Malach. 3.1. Isa.
9.6.
the Angel of the Covenant, and the Prince of Peace.

THE SECOND SERMON, Viz. The Merchant Commodities, Preached at St. MARY'S in
Limmericke. In the time of the general Assizes holden for that City, July 13.
1624.

Before the R. Hoble. the Earl of Thomond And before The Lords Justices of
Assize, Sr. George Shurley Knight, Lord chief Justice of his Highness Court
of chief Place in Ireland: and Sir Edward Harris Knight, one of his Majesty's
Justices in the same Court.

By G. A.

DVBLIN. Imprinted by the Society of Stationers, Anno Domini. 1625.

THE SECOND SERMON, The Merchant Commodities.
1. KINGS. 21.2. Because it is near by my House.


RIght Honorable, and the rest right dearly beloved in our Lord, having
proposed this History of Ahab and Naboth, as a fit subject for such assemblies,
I came to that part of the Text which concerns the reason, why Ahab should
desire Naboths Vineyard. Which reason was Twofold, viz.

Matter of Necessity: because he needed a Garden of Herbs.

Matter of Commodity: because it was hard by, near his house.

After that I had spoken of the first, I came to the second: where I proposed
unto you three several meditations, viz. concerning A House, Neerenesse,
Commodiousnes.

I have spoken of the first already, and have proposed sundry abuses which men
run into for a House: and withal, offered you Eight Meditations for Houses:
viz. Four for Houses Material: viz. Houses of our Own: Houses of the Poor:
Houses of the Prophets: and the House of Go^.

1. Ti. 3.15. 2. Cor. 5.4. Job 10.21. 2. Cor. 5.1.
Four, for Houses Metaphorical: viz. The Church of God. The house of the
Body. The house of the Grave, and, The house of Heaven.

I have also spoken of the second, viz. of the neerenesse of Naboths Vineyard
to the Palace of Ahab: and have showed the absurdity of Ahabs covetousness,
for by the same reason he might as well have coveted all the neighbor bounding
Lands, because they were near, and Naboths Wife too, because she was near.

Then I corrected the vanity of the world, which seek for those things that
are near, and neglect that which ought to be most near, Romans 10.8.
and dear unto them: and so I then concluded, that in all our actions we ought
to draw to God, whether for Hebr 11.6.
Direction, or Ephesians. 5 1.
Imitation, or Psalm. 30.8.
Consolation, and this with that (...), or assurance of Faith, which as by a
certain sprinkling, purges our hearts from an evil Hebr. 10 22
Conscience.

Thus much for an entrance, by way of repetition.

Now let us proceed to the third and last Meditation: viz. Matter of
Commodiousnesse.

For this Vineyard of Naboth, it was not only near the house of Ahab, but it
was Etzel, at or by his house, so commodious as nothing could be more devised.
This day therefore I must speak unto you of Ahabs con^^^ding reason, why he
desired poor Naboths Vineyard, viz. for Commodiousnesse which is the fair
Havens where every man desire^ to cast Anchor: Let us follow them, and cast
Anchor too upon this Word: which though it be long, yet it is but a Word.

(...)
It is the ground of Moral Philosophy, (...) (...): All things desire a
certain good. Nay it is (...), natural, to seek for that which is good,
especially if that good thing be commodious. Hereupon infinite questions are
moved concerning Commodity: What place most convenient to build in? What time
fittest to plant in? Where is the cheapest land, the best Company, the nearest
Market, the chiefest Wares to be bought? wherein the folly and hypocrisy of
the world is strangely discovered.

They seek for land, and yet there is a land above, that is never fought for:
Even that celestial Canaan, that flows with better things then milk and
honey. Exodus 3.7.


They seek for good Company, and yet behold a City above, where there is
better company then can be found in this world; Heb. 12.22.
namely the company of innumerable Angels, the Congregation of the first
borne, the spirits of just and perfect men, and Jesus the Mediator of the new
Testament: and yet this company is not cared for. But though this seeking
world be ready to faint under this endless travail and vexation, yet I will
labor to correct in you this error, and unto you to propose a better
commodity then ever Ahab could get by the Vineyard of Naboth: And this I will
endevore to do Two ways.

First, Negatively, what false Wares (which I may call discommodities) are to
be rejected?

Secondly, Affirmatively, what are those pure and delicate Commodities which
are to be sought after by all the sons of Adam? In order of these, and first
of the first.

The Negative,

Here I meet with 4 parcels of false Wares. viz. The false Wares of The World.
A Satan. B Antichrist. C Sin. D


World: There is a resonabilis Echo, which in the concavitie of mountains,
does render and sound back the ends of words: As for example, if there you
ask, How shall I come by a benefice? the Echo will answer, buy a benefice.
So if we ascend up into the mount of Contemplation, and ask, Are the things of
the world commodious? The Echo will answer odious. Oh the folly of this
stirring age! They rise up early, Psalm. 137.^
lie down late, and eat the bread of sorrow: and when the purpose is
achieved, it is but wind. They bow unto Mammon so long as they have a knee to
bow: and when they come to touch it, it is but earth. They run after riches
which takes to it self wings. Proverb. 23 5.
and when they have caught it, it is but the childrens butterfly, bedawbing the
fingers of our affections. Oh! How dear is the purchase of vanity, got with
carke, kept with care, lost with grief? Oh! How incommodious are the wares of
this wicked world, fet from far, held at a high rate, bought with the loss
of our time, want of our quiet, weariness of our flesh, and often the woe of our
Souls, proving to the buyers no other then the reward of iniquity, A^t.
18.19. (...)
or like another Acheldama or field of blood? Oh! Buy not repentance at so
dear a rate: R^^ 4 2^ (...) 2 15.
ask first with Paul, What fruit? Say with Isay: it is but a Spiders webb.
Hear Christ: The G^^tiles seek after these things: And then resolve with
John, ^ John ^ 15.
Love not the things of this World.

Satan.

In the shop of this world, P^lm. ^.5.^0.
The Prince thereof sets out his ^^nes to say: Ep^^ 5.11.
but as in the end, they are unprofitable, so in the mean they are false: For
he sels his Water for Wine, and sophisticating his commodities, he sets out
vice under the color of virtue: As Pride, he calls handsomeness:
Coveteous^^sse, thrist: Prodigality, goodfelloship: Lust, recreation:
Quarrelling, courage: Superstition, devotion. In all which, and the like, he
keeps, but his old wont, playing the subtle Serpent, and the lying Merchant,
weighing these Wares with his own weights: But (you my beloved) remember what
he was from the beginning; trust not Satan, for he is your enemy, carry his
wares to the light, and weigh them by the Balance of the Sanctuary, and you
shall find them to be Lighter then vanity, or like the Apples of Sodom, which
have a fair rind, but within, Solin. Polyb. cap. 38.
they are nothing but cynders and smoke.

Wares of Antichrist. The man of sin, Antichrist of Rome is the foreman in
the shop of Satan: Nay he is the grand Cape-Merchant. He acts indeed many
other Arts and parts, viz.

He plays the Chirurgian, Revel. 18.24.
for he lets blood (In her was found the blood of the Saints) and he scarifies
the Princes of the earth.

He plays the Fisherman, he has certain escas inebriativas, baytes of
honor, pomp, ease, and liberty, to besott the simple, Revel. 17 2.
and to make them drunk with the wine of her fornication: and all must be, sub
Annulo Piscatoris, The Ring or seal of the Fisher, meaning Peter, but indeed
far unlike to Peter: for Peter was a fisher of men, Math. 4.19.
but the Pope a fisher of Monarchies.

He plays the Grazier, for he feeds Bulls in the Pastures of Italy, and so
sends them into great Britain that they might be sold. These are bad Wares,
and they are met withal now and then unto their cost, and drawn out of the
doors.

He plays the Lapidarie, Hazzenmull. Ios con. cap. 4.
for he wears a shoe of Gold, wherein there is a precious stone preservative
from poison, least he should be infected by them that kiss his soote.

He plays the Physician, for he has an infinite sort of Patients, to whom he
ministers, before they be sick: he shows them his Drugs, as (...), very
loathsome in taste, but in show it looks like Manna: and Pills without number,
whereof one is double-gilt, and preserved in the Cabinet of the Church of Rome,
viz. That same Canon: Creg. 7. Can. 15 q. 7. cap 4. Sir Ed. Sands his ^^Lit.
Nos sanctorum, wherewith he purges Princes of choler, praedominant in their
hot fevers, namely, when they begin to wax red against him, or to swell about
their prerogatives. But of all trades he is the most cunning Merchant, for he
discurres thorough all Europe, yea, Currit mercator ad Indos: and by his
Mart-men, vents his apish Toys, drugs of Rome, dreggs of Superstition,
counterfeite Relickes, hallowed Beads, consecrated Grains, Pardons, and
Indulgences, by ships lading: a share of which false Coins, do our
Mint-masters of Rome, send over to their Hucksters here, to delude the people
of this Land.

But this Romish-merchant, uses one merchandise above all the rest, more
great, more grievous, more dangerous, A^^^. ^^.13.
more damnable; it is the mercha^dise of souls. Oh! Buy not any of these Wares
in the shops of Rome: Avoid it and go not by it: Proverb. 4.15.

fourth and last parcel of false Wares, are the Wares of Sin: As we have by
the way of Negation excluded the commodities of the world, and of the Prince of
the world, and of the said Princes chief Merchant, Antichrist of Rome; ^^t 3.1.
so now let us see if among us any deceitful commodities can be found Sin in
general is a deceifull commodity: it promises unto us profit and pleasure
for our work, but when it is done, he pays us with the Wages of death. (...)
6.2^.
But from the general, let us descend unto the particular Wares of Sin: and
yet here I will propose but one false pack for all, in a subject nearely
allied to the Text: It is, Hope of Commodity, and unlawful Gain: which
deceives many a buyer, causes the wise to wander, and multitudes to fall into
the snare. And to give you a sample, cut from this deceitful pack, understand
that, viz.

1 Hope of commodity, makes the guiltless, oftimes to be kept in prison
longer then is fitting. So Felix dealt with Paul, Act. 24.27.

2 Hope of commodity makes the guilty to be let go. Thus Ahab dealt with
Benhadad, but Ahab for that, 1. King. 20.42. 1. Sam. 15.3.28.
was appointed to die. Thus Saul spared Agag, but Saul for that, lost his
kingdom.

3 Hope of commodity, makes the Temple of the holy Ghost, the Temple of
Satan: and the body to be prostituted to fornication. Thus Tamar said unto
Judah: Genes. 38.16.
What will thou give me?

4 Hope of commodity, makes the Subject, to break the Laws of his
Sovereign. Thus Shimei contrary to David's command went out of Jerusalem. 1.
King 2.42.


5 Hope of commodity, makes every bold sinner, to transgress the bounds of
obedience to God: Such are they who think, gain to be godliness. 1. Tim. 6.5.


6 Hope of commodity, makes the Servant to betray his Master, as Judas did
Christ, or the Wife her Husband, Math. 26.49. Judge 16.18. 2. Sam. 4.6.
as Delilah did Sampson: or one friend another, as Baanah did Ish-bosheth.

7 Hope of commodity, makes the Prelate, to make havocke of the Church
revenewes, to the impoverishing of succession, and hinderance of the service of
God.

8 Hope of commodity, makes the Preacher, Ezech. 13.10.12.
to sow pillowes, and to dawb with untempered mortar, and when it comes to the
point, not to reprove sin.

9 Hope of commodity, makes men to lie, flatter, Math. 28.15.
dissemble, bear false Witness, 1. King 21.10.
and to tell many untruths.

10 Hope of commodity, makes a man to war against the Orphans, Widows,
poor, and fatherless, to seek Earth, and loose Heaven.

11 Hope of commodity, makes many a man to marry his children unto Papists, yea
and himself to, a thing forbidden by God in the seventh of Deuteronomie (a
place reviewed of late by one of the Worthies of our Law. Deuteronomy 7.^4. Sir E. C.
) Now they do but blurre the world, to say, They had hope to gain them. No,
it was hope to gain by them: if God be not more merciful, it will turn the
edge of their Souls.

12 Lastly, Hope of commodity, makes many a worldling to live in a place,
where he shall never hear the Bells of Aaron: he sits down by wood and water,
and in the mean time, Revel. 22.14.17
they want the Tree and the Water of life.

Loc, I have impannelled a Jury of Hopes, but make no trial of them, for they
will cast you. They are called Hopes of commodities, but they shall prove unto
you discommodities indeed. ^ophet. in ^iace.
(...) (as it is in the Greek Proverb. A^t 27.11.
) These hopes are worse then the Haven of Lasea, this only incommodious to
Winter in, but the other incommodious at all seasons. Oh! Arrive not at these
Havens: Abandon these Hopes: Pass by all these parcels of wares, they are
unreadie, uneven, unprofitable: they are deceitful, dangerous, damnable to the
Soul.

And thus much for the Negative.

Now for the Affirmative part. (viz.)

What are these pure, good, delicate, and Marchantable Commodities, which are
to be sought after, by all the sons of men?

Where in the entrance, I must give this overture, that if the appetite of
mortal men be not set an edge to long after these Commodities, 1. Cor. 12.31.
and (according to Paul's rule) To Covet after the best gifts; yet We, whom the
Lord has separated for the work, Act. 13.2.
will offer unto men all our merchandise, and hold forth the Word of life,
Phil. 2.16.
for it is not a thing abhorring from our element, nay it is proper unto us to
play the spiritual Merchants. I know that the Magistrate is the chief Master
of this Art, for he can procure The wealth of his people, Esth. 10.3. 2 Chronicles.
34.33
and speak peaceably, yea he can compel them too, to come in and buy: And it
is every man's Art and part, to search for that which is most commodious for the
Soul. Coloss. 3.1. Ephesians. 5.16.
Seek those things that are above and redeem the time. But in an especial
manner this Art belongs to the Prophet, even to every man of God: Thus
David, Psalm. 122.9.
In regard of the house of the Lord, I have procured thy wealth: Thus David's
Solomon: The Preacher searched forth, Eccles. 12.9.10.
and prepared many parables, and sought to find out pleasant words: even the
words of truth.

Now in following this, Metaphor of Merchants, I will first make a comparison
between the common and the spiritual Merchant (for so I will distinguish
them) and then I will vent out all my commodities at the last.

The Comparison: Where Two things are observed, Community and Difference.
The Community, Community.
or wherein they do agree.

In Common Merchandise there is a shop to sell in, wares to be bought, light to
sell by, the Market Day, the Buyers, and the Merchants.

In Spiritual Merchandise, the Shop is the Temple: the Wares, are the precious
things of the Gospel: the Light is the Word: the Market Day, is the Sabbath:
the Buyers are O Men, Proverb. 8.4. yea and Women too: And the Merchants, are
the Preachers of the Word. And these spiritual Merchants, call and cry, Come
ye weary, Mat. 11.28 Come ye thirsty, Isa. 55.1. Come ye hungry, Prover.
9.5. Come ye Children, Psalm. 34.11. Come all, Revel. 22.17. The Difference,
Difference.
or wherein the Common, and the Spiritual Merchandise do differ and disagree.

In Common Merchandise there are Wares corrupted:

But in the Spiritual Merchandise, they are without sophistication: (...)
Proverb. 30.5. Math. 10.16. 1. Cor. 5.8. 1. Pet. 2 2.
Tzeruphah, Pure, says Solomon: (...), unmixt, says Christ: (...),
unleavened, says Paul, (...), without deceit, says Peter.

In the Common, the Wares are not only corrupted but corrupting, taynting and
spoiling one another: Math. 23.5. 2. Cor. 1.24. Genes. 50.26. Coloss. 4.6.
But in the Spiritual, there are (...), Keepers, helpers, and edifiers one of
another, like those embalmings which preserve the members, or like Salt,
seasoning both body and soul to eternal life.

In the Common, there are false Lights:

Psalm. 119.105. 2. Pet. 1.19.
But in the Spiritual, there is the true Light, and the Light-maker John. 1.9.
and waiting upon this Light.

In the Common, nothing is to be had without money:

Isa. 55.1.
But in the Spiritual, Come and buy without money.

In the Common are oft-times old and rotten commodities:

Jerem. 6.16.
But in the Spiritual, they are old and good.

In the Common, they are gotten with extreme toil, Impiger extremos currit
mercator ad Indos.

Rom 10.8.
But in the Spiritual the chief Wares are near, yea they are brought unto us
by the revelation of JESUS CHRIST. 1. Pet. 1.12.


In the Common, they are bought at some low price:

2. Pet. 1.4. Philip. 3.14.
But in the Spiritual, they are Great and precious: The price of our high
calling.

In the Common there is some want, for you shall not always meet with cloth
enough of the same color, or fit for all times, places and persons:

But in the Spiritual, there is fullness, and largeness, Psalm. 36.8. Psalm.
119.96. 1. These. 5.17. 1. Tim. 2.8. 1. Tim. 2.4.
fit Commodities for all times: Pray continually: for all places: Let the men
lift up every where pure hands. For all persons: God wills that all men should
come to the knowledge of the truth: Isa. 55.1.
And Isaiah calls to every one to come to the waters to drink.

Now have I ended with the comparison, and I know ye do long till I do vent
the Commodities themselves: Therefore now at the last I will turn Spiritual
Merchant, and as an apprentice to that divine wisdom which Solomon speaks
of, I will utter my voice in the streets, Prove. 1.20.
and will thus cry and call to all comers. Ye Nobles and Gentles, ye sons
and servants of the Highest, What do you lack? Will you buy any good
Commodities indeed, and that without money?

Do you lack a Chain for your neck?

Here it is, Take instruction, Proverb. 1.9.

2 Will you have a parcel of pure fine linen?

It is the righteousness of the Saints, Revelat. 19.8.

3 Will you have any flowers, as Roses and Lilies? Cant. 2.2.


It is the resplendent beauty of the Church of God.

4 Will you taste any fruit, pleasant fruit? Cant. 4.16.

There is none better, then the fruit of a good life. Iam. 3.17.


5 And what say you to Gain? ye are greedy of it.

Take Godliness: it is great gain, 1. Tim. 6.6.

6 Do you want any Garments against Winter, an excellent suite of apparel,
that will last for ever?

It is the Robe of the righteousness of Jesus Christ. Isa. 61.10.


7 Will you have any gold, better then the gold of Ophir? 1. King 9 28. Revelat.
21.21.


Aspire unto that heavenly City, the streets whereof are of pure Gold.

8 Are you destitute of a dwelling, and will you have a good House?

Oh! Look up unto that building above, that is given of God, 2. Cor. 5.1.
not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

9 Will you come and take part of good cheer?

Proverb. 15.15.
Use a good Conscience, for it is a continual feast.

10 Will you have a Commodity, that is good and lasting?

1. Cor. 13.8.
It is Charity, it abides, and never falls away.

11 In this time of infection, do you need any Incense?

It is Prayer and invocation, Psalm. 141.2.

12 Do you lack any Land, better then Canaan? Ex. 3.7

1. Pet. 1.4.
It is the Land of your inheritance, immortal, undefiled, and reserved in the
heavens for you.

13 Will you have any sweet odours?

Phil. 4.18.
Use Liberality toward the Saints of God.

14 Do you wish for green pastures?

They are the never fading comforts of the holy Ghost. Psalm. 23.2.

15 Will you buy any Pearl?

Get wisdom and understanding, Proverb. 3.15.

16 Would you see a good salve for the eye?

It is divine illumination. Revelat. 3.18.

17 Do you want any Spices? Cant. 4.14.

Galat. 5.22.
They are the Graces of the holy Spirit.

18. 19. 20. Will you have three parcells of extraordinary Commodities
together, as Wine, Milk, and Honey?

They are the precious things of the Word of God preached, Isa. 55.1. Psalm.
19.10.

21 Would you meet with a Commodity, that when you have got it, you must
never part with it?

Proverb. 23.23
It is Truth. Buy the truth, but sell it not.

22 Are you not angry with your selves for a Commodity, which you slipped long
ago? And would you see it once again?

It is Time. Oh! Redeem the time, Ephesians. 5.16.

23 To draw near to a period, Will you feign have a Commodity that is good
for all things?

It is Piety, and Sanctification. 1. Tim. 4.8.


24 Lastly (because I have kept you long) Will you have a refresher, least you
faint by the way, a little Vsque bah?

Oh! Drink freely of the water of life, Revelat. 22.17.
and at the brinke of death, be revived with the Meditation of all those
comforts, which are solely to be found in Christ, the Well of living waters,
and Fountain of our Salvation. Cant. 4.15.


Behold now, I have vented all my Commodities, and uttered two dozen of pure
and delicate Wares: The best that could be found in the shop of Christ, the
holy Scriptures.

They are not like Phillips 200. peny-worth of bread, Joh. 6.7.
for they were not enough that every man might have a little: But these are of
that nature, that all may have every one, and every one may have all.

And now that I have showed you all my strength, USE. Judge. 16.18.
Come, o Come, and overcome: Come and buy.

Ye, Been Elim, sons of the mighty, (...) Psalm. 29.1. Ierem. 55.
Ieremies great ones, these commodities are for you. They will so adorn you,
that they will cause you to be praised in the Gates: they will make you full
of Piety, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy and Truth, that you may destroy Sin,
chase it with your Eye, chasten it with your Hand, Proverb. 20.8.
and preserve the Throne.

Ye Daughters of Israel, these Commodities are for you: They are far set
(namely from the storehouse of Heaven) and dear bought (namely w^^ the blood
of the immaculate Lamb. 1. Pet. 1.18.
) They shall grace you more then that glorious raiment that David tells of, 2.
Sam. 1.24.
to the daughters of Judah: they shall cloth you as it were with Scarlet, and
hang like Ornaments of Gold upon your rich Apparel.

Ye Sons of Levi (Merchants Royal to the King of Kings) these Commodities,
are excellent for you: they shall furnish you with that which was graven on the
breast plate of Aaron: Exodus 28. Heb. 5.4.
and if you wear of the same piece that you vent to others, it will truly
honor you, and make you to shine as stars for ever and ever. Dan. 12.3.


Psalm. 49.1.
To conclude o all ye Sons of Adam, high and low, rich and poor, one with
another, Hearken unto me, Judge. 9.7.
that God may hearken unto you. Leave none of these Commodities unseene,
unsought, unbought: not one of them unshaken, untost, untaken. Oh! That ye
would fly as Doves to the windows: Isa. 60.8.
and as Buyers, desirous of gain, to assemble in these shops of the Saints.
Ye may go further and fare worse: ye cannot be so fitted in any of the shops
of the Merchants of Tyrus, of Sin, Isa. 28.20.
of Satan, or of Antichrist. As Isay says, The Bed is too strait, and the
covering to narrow: So I say, The Wares are too dear, and the Commodities too
course: But those that I set forth unto you out of the shop of the Lord, are
fair, and cheap, and profitable, are full and fine and durable; warranted to
you for good, as well in this life, 1. Tim. 4.8.
as for that which is to come.

Oh! That these things might move us to covet after these spiritual Wares that
being furnished with them, we may find Grace with God: Favor with men: and
Peace in our own souls, until we come to that same (...), (as Nazianzene
Nazianzen.
calls God) the chiefest Artisan, even to him that is the maker and donor of
these spiritual Merchandises, Revelat. 22.16.
Jesus Ch^^^^ the righteous, the bright morning star.

FINIS.
THE THIRD SERMON, Viz. The Shepherd and the Sheep.

Preached, At Ennis in Thomond, And In the Dioces of Killaloe.

In the time of the general Assizes, holden there, for the County of Clare.
July the XX. 1624.

Before the Right Honorable the Earl of Thomond, And before the Lords
Justices of Assize for that County, and before the Reverend Father in God,
John, Lord Bishop of that Dioces.

By G. A.

DVBLIN. Imprinted by the Society of Stationers, Anno Domini. 1625.

THE THIRD SERMON, Viz. The Shepherd and the Sheep.
JOHN. CHAP. X. Verses. 27. and 28. 27. My Sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me.

28. And I give unto them eternal life: and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of my hand.


RIght Honorable, Reverend, and all right dearly beloved in the Lord Jesus: I
trust that God has given me some footing in this Diocese, and therefore
hither am I come to do some part of my duty.

I have spoken elsewhere, Seven days before at Limmericke. Psalm. 51.15.
very lately, in such another assembly: and if now also the Lord will be
pleased To open my lips, my mouth shall show forth his praise. As in the
City I turned Merchant, so now in the Country, I must turn Shepherd. And
my Text (which runs upon that subject) contains 2. things.

The Sum: and The Parts.
The Sum, is the drift and scope, namely of the Sheep, Division.
and consequently of the Shepherd.

The parts of the Text, contain a particular description of the Sheep; and
that in Four things.

1 The Title given them, (...), Sheep. 2 The owner of them* Christ, (...).
Mine. 3 Their Duty 2 fold To hear the sheepheards voice. To follow him.
4 The benefit they get from the Shepherd.
In Two things. 1 Affirmative: 2. fold He knows them. He gives them eternal
life.
2. Negative: 2. fold They shall not perish. No man shall take them out of his
hand.



Thus much for the Division.
Now according to this order, I will speak, of so much of this Text, as Gods
assistance, your patience, and my time, will permit.

The sum.
And first of the Sum, scope, drift, and maine subject of the Text, namely of
the Sheep, and consequently of the Shepherd, that is, of the faithful, and
of their chief Pastor, Jesus Christ: For though the Shepherd be not named,
yet the Sheep and the Shepherd are Relatives, and according to the nature of
Relatives, one cannot well be defined without the other.

But in casting up this Sum, let us see the manner of it, for it is so full,
that no Cipher can therein be found: and it is not calculated Continge^ter, by
chance, to lay down a little of the Sheep, and then to say somewhat of the
Shepherd, but Providenter, of set purpose, the Lord does so inter-lard, and
mingle together the relation of the Sheep and the Shepherd, that nothing
could be devised with more Art: and I think the like passage is hardly to be
found elsewhere in the sacred Volumes. For mark the words, and observe.

What do They? What does He?
What do they? They begin, and account themselves to be Sheep: For, the words
(...), are the beginning of the Text in the Original.

What does He? He professes himself to be their Owner. (...). Mine.

What do They? They hear his voice. What does He? He knows them. What do
They? They follow Him. What does He? He gives them eternal life.
What do They? They seek for no more, they are silent, lie down, and rest:
being secure, and sure, that They shall never perish.

What does He? For their further security, he promises them, that no Man
shall pluck them out of his hand.

Do you not see, what an excellent frame this (...), (as Trismegistus calls
him) this public workman, Lactant. lib. 4. cap. 6.
JESUS CHRIST does make?

But is there nothing herein but Art alone? Look again; stay and wonder:
(...). You have found a better thing then Archimedes.

Oh! The admirable comfort of a Christian: USE.
the dear and near respect that Christ has of his Chosen for here he
inter-laces and inter-mingleth himself with them: and by a sweet kind of
Communion, he makes them as it were, one with him. This is it, 1. Corinthians. 1.9.
which the Apostle says that God has called us unto the fellowship of his
Son. Ruth. 2.22.
If Ruth got a blessing when she joined her self with the handmaydes of Boaz:
Oh! How many blessings shall befall us, being thus joined, mingled, and
incorporated with JESUS CHRIST. And let this Meditation, raise us up to an high
pitch of thankfulness, that the Lord vouchsafes to come so close unto us,
among us, within us; and withal let it stir us up to Sanfictication,
cleanenesse of heart, cleanenesse of hands, cleanenesse of all our members,
within us, and without us, being now so nearly, so dearly, conjoined to our
Head. Thus much of the Sum.

Now to the Parts, namely, to the Fourfold description of the Sheep: The
Title Sheep.
Where, First, in order, we meet with the Title which is given them, Sheep.

The Faithful have many Names given to them in the holy Scriptures: viz.

Romans 8.17.
In respect of their inheritance, they are called Heirs:

2. Corinthians. 6.16.
In regard of the holy Spirits habitation in them, they are the Temple of God.

Math. 13.48.
In the Net, they are good Fish.

Math. 3.12.
In the Garner, they are Wheat.

Cant. 6.1.
In the Garden, they are Lillies.

Cant. 2.14.
Among Birds, they are Doves.

And here, among Beasts, they are called, Sheep.

And (that I may not be thought to have erred in the Metaphore) it is so
expounded by the holy Ghost: And ye my Sheep, Ezech. 34.31.
the sheep of my pasture, are Men, and I am your God, says, the Lord.

Now we are set straight in the Metaphore, but beware that we err not in the
Matter: Let us therefore make farther search, for here are Two Questions that
do rise.

The first Question.
Whether there may be no deceit in this term of Sheep? And, Whether the
Name, and, Nature of them, may not be Counterfeite?

I answer, that even in Paradise, Genes, 3, 1.
Satan in the subtle serpent began to deceive, and by reason of his
continuance in this Trade, S. John calls him, The old Serpent, Revil. 12 9.
which deceaveth all the world. His Trade indeed is old, but his Tricks are
new: even, new shreds of the old snare; and this is one, to deceive under some
glorious name: Diabolus excogitavit novam fraudem, Cyprian. de simplic. Praelat.
(says Cyprian.) The Devil has invented a new fraud, to deceive the unwary,
under the Title of a Christian name; and aptly to our purpose, CHRIST calls
this, by the name of sheep clothing: Let me fore-arme you, Math. 7.1^.
by forewarning you, for I must give you a view of Sheep clothing outwardly,
and wolvish Ravening inwardly: And that in sundry Persons: In sundry Sects.

In sundry Persons.
Antiochus, was surnamed Epiphanes, that is, 1. Mac. 1.11.
illustrious, Dan. 11.21.
but in deed he was (by reason of his outrages to Gods Saints) Nibhseh, vile
and contemptible.

Elimas, clothed with the name of Bar-iesus, (...) Act. 13.6.
but in deed he was a Sorcerer.

Eunomius, well ordered in name, but he was leprous (says Platina) in body
and mind.

Eusebius, Bishop of Nicomedia, Plat. in Foelic. 2
had sheep clothing in his name and office, but in deed he was an Arrian.
Soc. hist. li, 1. c. 3.


In sundry Sects.
The Valentinians (Anno 150.) called themselves spiritual, and without sin,
Iren. li. 1 aduers. haer. cap. 1.
yet they were known to be Wolves, Eusebius. hist. lib. 4. cap. 11.
and condemned for Heretics, for all their sheep clothing.

Cypr. ad Nov. libell. Eusebius. hist. 6. cap 42.
The Novatians after them, (Anno 250.) called themselves Gold, and yet were
condemned for heretics, by Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, and Cornelius Bishop
of Rome.

The Manichees (Anno 280.) Derived their name from (...), Alphons. adver. har.
libr. 2. Eusebius. 7.30. Socrat. hist. lib. 1 cap. 17.
as if they powered forth Manna (says Augustine,) when in deed it came from
(...), To be mad, as Manes (their Author) was in deed by nature frantic, by
manners barbarous and by profession, a blasphemous Heretic.

The Minorites (Anno 1224.) were so called, from their humility and lowliness
of heart: But it was smaly regarded among them, and furthest from their study,
Polid de inven. lib. 7. cap. 4.
as Polidore observes.

But of all Persons and Sects too, for sheep clothing, our grand-masters of
Rome do carry the Bell away.

They cloth their Church, with sheep clothing, calling it Catholic, that
is to say, General, when it can be but a particular Roman Church (if it be a
Church at all) and that, Revel. 1.9.
not the Church of Christ, but the Synagogue of Satan.

They cloth their Councels, with sheep clothing, as when they call the
Council of Trent, Oecumenicall: when it deserves not to be called
Oeconomicall, nor a Council at all.

They cloth their Champions, with sheep clothing, as the Jesuits with the
Name of JESUS: when as they are farther from him, then Dan is from Beersheba.

-- Procul a Jesus, ite profani. They cloth their Religion, with sheep
clothing, pretending that they have all Antiquity for it, when it was never
taught by CHRIST, nor received in the Primitive Church.

Lastly, they cloth themselves with sheep clothing, and yet are ravening
Wolves.

In their names, there is Bonifacius, Vrbanus, Clemens, Polid. 4.7.
Innocentius, and Pius, there is the Sheep: Platina Luitprand. Benno.
but in their natures, they are malefactors, uncivil, cruel, nocent, and
wicked, there is the wolf.

In their Titles, they are Servi servorum, there is the sheep, but in their
courses, Domini dominantium: L'Estat de l'Eglse. page 308
treading on the necks of Kings and Emperors, there is the wolf.

In their persons, they would be the successors of Simon Peter, there is the
sheep: but in their practice they are more like to be successors of Simon
Magus, Guicciard. hist. Ital lib. 1. Platin. in Ben. 9
in their shame full buying and selling of the Papacy, there is the wolf.

In their Mandates, Bulls, Seals, Messengers, Sacrar. cere. Rom Eccles. lib 1
sect. 1 5.6.8.14. Lyr. in Math. 16. Chronol. lib. 4. seculo. 10.
Palaces, and Chambers too, all must be Apostolical: there is the sheep: But
their own Lyra says, that many of them were Apostatas: and their own
Genebrard, writes that fifty of them were Apostolical: there is the wolf.

In a word, Bellar. in Epist.
they are clothed by others in sheep clothing, when they are saluted with
Sanctissime, or beatissime Pater: there is the sheep: when as in deed they are
accursed beasts, and monsters, there is the wolf, Plati. in Form. 1 Id. in Ben.
4. Id in Christ. 1.
or rather a den of Wolves.

Lo, How these instruments of Satan have taken upon them the name of Sheep,
and in some things perhaps counterfeited their nature to. But be not you (my
beloved) deceived by them, for they are discovered to be but counterfeits:
John. 8.44.
The children are not more cunning than their father, and he could not
transform himself, ^. Cor. 11.14.
into (...) the substance, but only (...), the skimming, habit, and outside of
an Angel of light.

The second Question.
IN this coloring, How may the Sheep be known from Wolves, or Goats?

I Answer, it is no hard matter to distinguish Israel, from Izreel: Nos. 1.4.
Barak, from Balak: Elias, from Elimas: Cephas, from Caiphas: Paul, from Saul.
But how? By their fruits, Math. 7.20.
ye shall know them, (says Christ.)

It were needelesse and endless for me, to rip up all the ill fruit, which
has been sown, and grown by the means of ancient Heretics, in the
Primitive Church, or by our new Heresiarches in the Papacy. If I should, it
would cast out an ill savor: Non redolet, sed olet.
It smells, but it smells not sweetly.
For the former, Ecclesiastical Histories are full; and for the latter, their
own Merchants have vented them to the full, Doctor John White: Way to the true
Church.. 38. Revelat. 3.4.
and have been faithfully set to view, by one that was (while he lived) an
excellent ornament in our Church, then in the White of Grace, and now in the
White of Glory.

But because that I am in the field, among the Sheep, I will therefore enlarge
my self in that behalf, and tell out the properties of the Sheep: And so
withal, the nature of the Goats will be discovered, for, Contraria iuxta se
posita magis elucescunt.

And that I may not wander too far, I will draw the qualities of the Sheep
to Three Places.

Their Habits: Their Actions: Their Passions.
Their Habits, and they are Three. A. B. C. Their Actions, and they are Three.
D. E. F. Their Passions, and they are Three. G. H. I.
First then of the Three Habits.
Habit of the Sheep, is to be Harmless. They bite not other Cattle, Ezech.
34 19.
they tread not down their Pasture, nor trouble the water of others with their
feet.

So are the Faithful, they have learned a lesson from CHRIST, to be
harmless, for so he is called: Hebr. 7.26.
They do not bite nor devour one another: Galat. 5.15. Psalm. 37.16. 1.
Chron. 29.13
For that little which they have, they give much thanks: and envy not, that
the Sun does shine upon others: Thus David calls the righteous, by the name
of Sheep, Psalm. 11.3.
in one place: What has the righteous done? And in another, What have these
Sheep done? 2. Sam. 24.17.


Habit of the Sheep is to be Patient, this property is laid down by the
Prophet. Isa. 53.7.


So was CHRIST, He was dumb before the shearer. Act. 8.32. Act. 7.60.


So was Stephen, He prayed for his persecutors, and slept. When they are Full,
they are not proud, Proverb. 30.9.
and when they are Empty, they are patient. They are not too much moved at the
injuries of men, Ruth. 1.21. 2. Sam. 16.10, Psalm 39.10.
they open not their mouth, but are dumb, because God has done it.

Habit of the Sheep, is to be Profitable, profitable to themselves, in
nourishing the Wool, which preserves them from the cold: profitable to their
Owners in Wool, Fell, and Flesh: Profitable to the Earth it self, where they
lie, in that they fatten it with their dung:

So are the Faithful many ways Profitable. For themselves, for their Own,
for their Posterity: for their Neighbors, for the World, and lastly for their
Owner, even God himself.

1. Tim. 4.8.
1 For themselves, in intertayning Piety, which has promises of this life, and
of that which is to come.

1. Tim. 5.^.
2 For their Own, as well in domestical provisions, as in bringing them up, In
instruction, and information of the Lord. Ephesians. 6.4.


3 For their Posterity, not only by a careful foresight, to procure that it
may go externally well with them, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Ierem. 32.8.
and their Children, but much more to leave command, Genes. 18.19.
that their household, friends, and posterity after them, may remember their
duties to God, and walk in his ways: a thing practiced by the examples of
Abraham and Peter. ^. Pet. 1.15.


4 For their Neighbors: and That diverse ways.

Genes. 34.21. Ierem. 29.7. Prove. 3.27 28.
To live Peaceably among them.

To pray for their Prosperity, where they dwell.

To do them no outward Hurt, but all the help and furtherance that they may.

Hebr. 10.24.
By a good and holy fellowship, To consider one another, to provoke unto love
and good works.

5 For the World, even the most wicked thereof.

Genes. 13, 7,
By showing them good example, for their conversion.

Genes. 19 22, Genes, 18, 32,
By hindering the speediness of prepared vengeance

By their prayers, keeping back the plagues of God.

6 And lastly, these Sheep, the Faithful, are profitable to God their Owner.
viz.

In Gayning him Glory, by their Holy life. 1. Peter 2, 12


In Laboring to increase his Kingdom.

In Honoring him with their Riches. Prover, 3, 9,


In Providing for his Children. 2, Cor. 9, 1.


In giving their Lands for his service. Act. 4, 37 Revel. 4, 10,


In Casting their Crowns down before his Throne. Act, 20.24.


And in spending of their Lives for his Glory.

Thus much of the three Habits of the Sheep. Now.

Secondly of the Three Actions.
first Action of the Sheep, is to follow one another, Where one goes, there
goes all: All in a fold.

So the Faithful.

1 They are all bound together in one bond of the Communion of Saints. 1, John,
1, ^.


2 They are knit together In one mind and Judgment. 1. Corinthians, 1, 10, Phil,
3, 16,


3 They all proceed By one rule.

4 They all eat of the Spiritual meat.

5 They have all One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. 1, Corinth, 3, 10,
Ephesians, 4, 5.


6 They are neither divided into Fractions, nor separated into Factions.

7 And are Followers of them, who through faith and patience have enjoyed the
promises. Hebr, 6 12,


second Action of the Sheep, is observed to be this: They compass the whole
ground at the entrance, but at last they lie down in a little part thereof.

So the Faithful, they know the world, that they may not be fools. When the
worldling runs at large in his boastings, works, and speeches, the Faithful
by their understandings can try him well enough. Proverb. 28, 11,


They hear and see, and say little.

They know what is done under the Sun, but they say to their Souls, Psalm,
116, 7
Return to thy rest.

Rom* 4, 13,
They find that they are Heirs of the World, but they leave it willingly, for
that better inheritance which is above. 1, Corinth. 7.35,


Use the World, as if they used it not: And when they have observed all things
at large, they retire and wait for renovation.

The third Action of the Sheep, is to be feeding upon an Herb: Sermon 50, in
par. Hiem.
So says Hugo de Prato Florido: Est enim ovis, animal valde sobrium, herba
contentum. The Sheep is a very sober living creature, and content (as it
were) with one herb. They eat little, and (it is still observed that) they
drinkelesse.

So the Faithful, in all their courses they entertain Sobriety, a virtue of
great esteem,

Math, 6.11.
They pray not for dainties, but for Daily bread. They labor to avoyde Salomons
curse: The Drunkard and the Glutton shall be poor. Proverb, 23, 21,


1, Pet, 5, 3,
They hearken unto Peter's motion, Be sober.

They attend unto CHRIST his caveat. Take heed, Luke 12, 34,
least at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenesse,
and least that day come on you unawares.

Thus much of the Three Actions of the Sheep. Now,

Thirdly of the Three Passions.
first Passion of the Sheep, is that they are troubled of all sides, both by
man and beast, they are pusht at with the Horn, Ezech. 31, 21, Esop. fa^ul de
^^po and Agno.
and thrust with side and shoulder: They are falsely accused by the Wolf for
troubling of the Fountain: they must needs be thought to offend, because they
cannot resist. The Owner takes his L^^be: the Women take their Milk: The
Shearer takes their Wool: The Glover takes their Skin: The Butcher takes
their Life: and all Men take their Flesh.

So the faithful: Psalm. 35.16.
on all sides they sustain the scoffs and injuries of men: Nazian. in Orat.
1. in Iul.
They must suffer themselves to be spoiled, and to turn the other cheek, for
so Julian mocked them: 1. Corinthians. 4 13. Act. 24.5.
They are accounted the offscouring of the World: And even (...), Pestilence it
self. The Extortioner takes his Goods: The Slanderer his Good name: The Pick
thank takes his Place, and the Persecutour takes his Life: So true is that of
the Prophet, Isa. 59 15.
He that refraineth from evil makes himself a pray: But the Lord will one
day, set them as a blessing, Ezech. 34.26.
even round about his heavenly Mountain.

second Passion of the Sheep, is to be hurried up and down from place to
place, that they might have good Pasture, and many a time, to endure the Pitch
and Tar, for a preservative against the scabbe, and other diseases incident
to their kind.

So are the Faithful: Genes. 13.3. Genes. 11.31.12.5.12.10.13.3.
They have for the most part uncertain dwelling, like Abraham, in a Tent; and
changing from Vr to Haran, from Haran to Canaan, from Canaan to Egypt, from
Egypt to Canaan again: Confessing that they are strangers, and Pilgrims upon
the Earth, Hebr. 11. verse. 13.14.16.
declaring plainly (says the Apostle) that they seek a country: desiring a
better, that is an heavenly.

They willingly suffer themselves to be rubd with the Tar of Affliction,
knowing that by this means they are proved Legitimate: Hebr. 12.8.
kept within their bounds, Hos. 2.6.
when their way is hedged with thorns: and brought in again when they go
astray: Psalm. 119.67.
And so from this fold on earth, by many afflictions they enter into Gods
kingdom. Act. 14.22.


third and last Passion of the Sheep, is to be compassed with Wolves: and to
be mingled with Goats: For so Christ tells us in the Gospel.

So the Faithful do not only live hard by, but even (...), Math. 10.16.
in the midst of Wolves, and not yet separated from the Goats, Math. 25.32.
but shall be at the last, even in that great and fearful day.

Now in this last Meditation, I must observe Three Things: viz. Matter of

Information, Comfort, Instruction.

1 First, Information, it cannot be avoided but that the Sheep, and the Goats
must here be mingled together in this world.

Genes. 13.7.
Where Abraham lived, the Canaanite was in the land. 25.23.
In one womb of Rebecca, was Jacob, and Esau. In Jacobs flock, 30.32.
there was both Lambs and Goats. In one vallie, Cant. 2.1.2
do grow the Lillies, and the Thorns. This is it that Petrus de Rave^na
says, Petr. Raven. in. quad. Epist.
Interim, cum Hierosolimitanis, habitat Iebusaeus. In the mean time, the
Iebusite, must dwell with the men of Jerusalem. Let us not then think it
strange, that in the visible Church, there will be always a mixture of good
and bad. A thing that the Donatists themselves, August. Collat. sert. diei.
confessed, in the Council of Carthage: and let us look for none other,
unless (as Paul speaks) We go out of the World. 1. Cor. 5.10.
Mihi arrogare non audeo (says S. Augustine) ut domus mea melior sit quam arca
Noe: Aug. epist. 137. ad Hipponen.
I dare not arrogate to my self, that my house should be better then the Ark of Noah, where was both Cham and Sem.

2 Secondly, Matter of Comfort; that though here we are conjoined to our loss;
yet hereafter we shall be disioyned to our gain. The left hand shall be
theirs, Math. 25.3^.
and the right hand shall be ours. Now do we call, and they will not hear
us: Then shall they cry, and not be heard.

Now we are as a Lamp despised: Job. 12.5. Dan. 12.5. 1. Io. 3.2.
but then shall we shine as the brightness of the firmament. Now it is not
known what we are: but then shall we both know, and be known.

When Two men walk together with one Spaniell, Simil.
a stranger knows not whose the Spaniell is, but when they part, then it is
known, for the Spaniell will follow his Master.

Oh! How sweet will then be the fruit of virtue, whose root in this world
was esteemed so bitter? And How pleasing, after thy safe arrival in that haven
of happiness, to cast back thine eyes, and view thy dangerous escaping from
the Goats, and to cast forwards thine eyes, to the delighfull Company of the
Saints?

O My Soul, settle thy self in the Center of this hope, that thy Shepherd
will one day come to thee in anhappie hour, to gather thee from the Goats:
and knocking at the gates of thy flesh, will call thee forth from prison unto
liberty: from trouble to ease: from travail to rest: and from a living death,
to a never dying life.

3 Thirdly, and lastly, here is Matter of Instruction, namely, that while we
carry about with us this lump of flesh, and until we have escaped that
passion to be compassed with Wolves, and mingled with Goats, that we avoyde
the nature both of Wolves and Goats.

Psalm. 49.20.
Man is in honor, and understands not, and is compared to the beasts that
perish. For many are fierce as Lions, cruel as Tigers, envious as Dogs, wild
as Bulls, ravenous as Wolves, lascivious as Goats: There are such creatures
among beasts: There are such beasts among men: Zephan. 3.3.
For Zephany compares bad Princes, to roaring Lions: and corrupt Judges, to
ravening Wolves: and David compares the malicious enemies of the Church, Psalm.
5^.6.
unto Dogs which bark and run about the City.

Revel. ^2.15,
But as S. John says, Without shall be Dogs, so, without shall be the Lions,
without shall be the Wolves, without shall be the Goats, that is, all those
who are of a brutish disposition, breaking the bounds of their obedience to
God, and their duty to man. But then, Happy, yea thrice happy shall they be,
who have had respect unto his Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. Mat. 25.33.
for they shall stand like Sheep on the right hand, Yea, their right shall be
in the Tree of life, Revelat. 12.14.
and shall enter in thorough the Gates, into that celestial City which is
above.

And thus much for the First general part of the Text. Viz. Of the Title that
is given unto the Faithful, they are called Sheep.

Now to the Second general part, namely, to the Owner The Owner.
of the Sheep, even Christ, the speaker in this Text: (...), Mine.

In our English translation, the words are but Two, My Sheep: but in the
Original they are Four, (...), These Sheep, These Mine: each of them having
his Praepositive article, Copor. de artic. cap. 1.
which (as Grammarians speak) Certificant emphatice: a thing remarkeably to be
observed, in that description of the whore of Babylon, in the Apocalypse,
Revel. 17.1.
where within the compass of seven words, the article is six times found:
There is therefore some extraordinary thing, both there and here: Let us
search into it.

Paul tells the Corinthians and us, 1. Cor. 6.19.
that we are not our own: Now if we be not our own, Whose are we? for we
must besome bodies. He tells us, Ye are Christ's: 1. Cor, 3.23.
and here Christ tells us, ye are Mine, ye are very Mine.

But, How and by what right is Christ our Owner?

In a Twofold manner.

Iure poli, jure soli: Iure praemij, iure pretij. In particular, I must enlarge
it into Six ways, whereof the Two first are common to all the sons of Adam,
but the four last, only proper to the Sons of God.

1 First we are Christ's, by the way of Creation, Genes 1.26.
for he has made us: and in this respect, all persons are called his sons
and daughters. Deuteronomy. ^2.1^.
But though all men in Adam were created by God, and that according to his
Image, yet this Image of his, Genesis 1.26.
does principally shine in his Saints, so that this first way, Coloss 3.10.
we are in some respect, principally and peculiarly his own.

2 Secondly, we are Christ's, by the way of his Providence, and Preservation;
Job. 7.20. Math. 5.45.
thus he is called The Preserver of men: but though he cause the Sun to arise
upon the evil and upon the good (as he himself speaks) yet David in an
especial manner calls him, Psalm. 31.23.
The preserver of the faithful: and Paul, when he calls him in a common sense,
The Savior of all men, 1. Tim. 4 10.
yet he presently adds, especially of those that believe: which must make us
with David, Psalm. 31.19.
to break forth into a loving admiration, and say, O, How great is thy
goodness (o Lord) which thou have laid up for them that fear thee before the
Sons of men.

3 Thirdly, we are Christ's, by way of Predestination, namely, in that we are
chosen in him before the foundation of the world, and predestinate to be
adopted thorough him, according to the good pleasure of his will, and to the
praise of the glory of his grace (as Paul at large delivers to the Ephesians.
Ephesians. 1.23.4.5
) This doctrine, is taught by the same Apostle, Romans 8.29.
to the Romans: and is acknowledged by our Adversaries: Bellar. de Great. lib.
2. cap. 10.
and though carnal Gospellers, do either make a mock at the same, or take it
as an occasion to sin, yet we know it is a most comfortable doctrine to the
Sheep of Christ: that according to the final cause thereof, Ephesians. 1.4.
We should be holy and without blame before him in love.

4 Fourthly, We are Christ's, by way of Redemption, By whom we have Redemption
(says Paul:) And again Ye are bought with a price: Ephesians. 1.7. 1. Cor. 6.20.
If we did but enter into the consideration of every circumstance, it would
drive us into an admiration of the love of CHRIST: whether in it we do
observe: The Act, or the Person, or the Manner, or the Price, or the Time.

The Act of our Redemption, was to be bought out. for we had sold our selves
to sin, 1. King. 21.25.
like Ahab, nay unto Satan himself, then was Christ contented to be sold too,
Math. 26.15.
into the hands of sinners, that he might buy them out again from Sin and
Satan.

The Person redeeming, was no other then JESUS CHRIST. Man could not redeem
himself from sin, being a sinner: The Angels could not, for they were but
creatures, and no steadfastness found in them: Job. 4.18.
But it was his Son, his only Son, his only begotten Son. Oh! The
greatness of his love, that he would send none but his Son. Oh! The guilt of
our sin, that could not be expiated by any, but by this (...), God and Man,
CHRIST JESUS. Greg. Theol. lib. 2. de fill.


The manner of our redemption, willingly: He offered up himself (says the
Apostle) It was man that owed to God a debt, but He became a voluntary
surety, Hebr. 7.27.
and undertook the debts of us all: Innocence made him free, but his (...),
affection toward man, Tit. 3 4.
brought Him under the charge of our accounts: and when the Lord was ready to
strike, He stepped in between the blow and us: and received it upon his own
Soul, for, Math. 26.38.
His soul was heavy unto the death.

The Price of our redemption was his blood: Ephesians. 1.7.
So says Paul, Redemption through his blood, So Peter: 1. Pet. 1.18.
Not with silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ: So says
John, the blood of Christ, cleanses us from all sin. 1. Io. 1.7. Genes. 1.3.
But could not now a word have done it as it did at the first? If not a word,
yet a work? If not some one work? yet the whole passages of his life? If not
his life, yet a natural death? No, nothing could do, but Blood, For, Hebr.
9.22.
without blood there is no remission: Christ may say to us as Zipporah said to
Moses: O bloody husband, Exodus 4.26.
so o bloody spouse: bloody servants: Sons and sins of blood. David would
not drink of the water of Beth-lehem, when he saw it was got with danger of
blood. Oh! 2. Sam. 23.17.
That we would refuse the waters of Sin, which are nothing else but the
price of Blood.

The Time of our redemption: Romans 5.10.
when we were his enemies. If we had been his friends, or had merited any
thing at his hands, or had bine first reconciled to him, it had been
something: but now, whilst we are in our blood (as the Prophet speaks) he
gave us blood for blood, Ezech. 16.6.
Genes. 9.6.
not by the way of a direful revenge, but of compassionate redemption.
Therefore now considering the Time, Romans 13.11.
we must needs acknowledge that we are his own, and until Time shall be no
more, Revel. 10.6.
to set forth his praise.

Rom 4, 25.
5 Fifthly, we are Christ's, by way of Justification. For to that end He rose
again: It is good, neither to condemn the just, nor to commend the wicked;
yet Christ without sin has done the latter, even while we were sinners to
justify us: We were nothing, We were worth nothing, We were worse then
nothing: We were sinners, we were sin, we were worse then sin: Yet he
has taken us by the hand, and justified, or made it good before his Father,
that we are no sinners at all. For he has made himself to be sin for us, ^
Cor. 5.21.
that we might be made the righteousness of God through him: So he has made
us his own: and we may say with the brethren of Joseph: Genes. 5^.1^.
We are thy servants.

6 Sixthly, We are Christ's, by way of Glorification, this is the last, but it
is the greatest of all. For he has appointed us a kingdom, Luke 2^.2^. John.
^^.22.
and the same glory which his Father gave him, has he given us. Oh! The
greatness, the height, the depth, the degrees, the immensitie of the love of
Christ: G^n 1.16. P^^lm. 16.16. Io^n 15.15. Galat. 3.26. Romans 8.17.
He brings us from nothing, to be men, from men, to be servants; from servants,
to be friends; from friends, to be sons; from sons, to be heirs: from
heirs, to be Coheires with him in his kingdom: when we deserved to be tumbled
into Hell, He has exalted us to a Throne. Then justly may Christ cry as in
the Text, (...), Mine: for every way we are his own.

Oh! That some divine light would dispell the mist, the dullness, the dimnesse
of our understanding, that comparing all these Six ways together whereby we
are his own; we may look down from this height of glory to which we are
advanced, into the depth of his love: and acknowledging our selves to be his
Peculiar, to make a peculiar love to him again, Cant. 1.^.
To run after him (our beloved) To lay hold on him by faith: and To cry with
Thomas, My Lord and my God: John. 10.23.
and in all our conversation (till we come unto him) to entertayne a peculiar
care, that neither the world, nor the flesh, Sin, nor Satan, may rob Christ
of his own, or us of our owner.

And thus much for the Second general part of the Text.

The Owner of the Sheep, and that is CHRIST.

Now to the Third general part, (viz.) The Twofold duty of the Sheep: To
Hear: To Follow. The duty of the Sheep.


The first duty then, is to hear the voice of the Shepherd. My Sheep hear
my voice.

Here are Two Things: What? and Whom? What? To Hear: Whom? His voice.

First, of the first. My Sheep Hear.

The whole Scripture runs upon this Tenor, What? to hear
Hear the word of the Lord: Moses and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles,
they all call to Hear: Aristotle calls the Ear, the organ of knowledge: God
stroke Mephibosheth lame, Paul blind, and Zachary dumb, but none of them
deaf: to show that men should Hear, when they can neither go, nor, see, nor
speak. Yet, o the neglect of the world in this kind, and the manifold errors
which are committed in this one sense of Hearing.

Many are so far from Hearing the word, that they rather abuse it to jests,
or superstition.

Many are absent from Hearing, for the Devil labors to keep men (for that
time) in the Shop, or in the Market, or in the Tavern, or in Play Houses.

Many are present, and yet they err about hearing.

For either they will not Hear, like the deaf Adder that stops his ear

Or they do not Hear, Psalm. 58.4.
because they fall fast a sleep, being troubled either with too much drink,
or late up-sitting the night before (Somno vinoque sepulti) so that the
Preacher, Virgil Aeneid. 3.
does as it were preach a Sermon at their funeral.

Or if they do Hear, yet they do not hearken; the man claps himself down,
and is cast into a brown study: either musing upon his suites in Law, dinner
at home, or pleasure abroad, and an hundred fancies and temptations do
distract him.

Or if they hearken, it is but just like to

(...). 17.21.
An Athenian, to get some news. or,

Matthew. 22.15.
A Pharisee, to entangle. or,

A Momus, to carpe, to take no solid, but a stolide occasion to reject the
rest. or,

A Cham, to scoff at the preacher, either he is not learned, or he has no
elocution, or he does not keep his Text, or he does not follow it himself.

So a speech comes from us, and a sound to you, and the matter is ended: all
these do hear amiss, and therefore they do hear, and miss. But, How happy
are they that hear with an honest and a good heart, Luke 8.15.
and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience? To which end let me
propose these Four rules in order.

1 First, to prepare your selves by prayer before you are coming to the
assembly, and to say to this effect: Thou God of power, give knowledge to this
man to strike me upon the vein, and to lay open my sin as if he were in my
bosom, that the sore of my sin being discovered, I may be healed by the
balm of thy Mercy.

2 Secondly, to give attention, Act. 16.14.
as Lidia attended unto Paul; and as Benhadads servants caught at the words of
Ahab, so must thou catch at the word of the Preacher; 1. King. 20.33
either for the comfort of thy soul, or instructing of thy ignorance, or
information of thy knowledge, or reformation of thy manners, or to hear that
which thou never heardest before, and perhaps shall never hear hereafter.

3 Thirdly, to meditate upon that which has been spoken: Levit. 11.3.
Typically meant by the chewing of the cud in the Leviticall law, to ponder
upon it our selves, Deuteronomy. 6.6.7.
and to rehearse it unto others, especially to our family: For want whereof,
Satan steals away all those good instructions out of our hearts, and we
remain as if we had never heard them. Romans 2.1^.


4 Lastly, to practice what we heard, for, not the hearers of the law, but the
doers shall be justified. John. 13.17.
And if ye hear these things (says Christ) Blessed are ye, if ye do them.
So when we have prepared before hearing, attended in hearing, meditated upon
hearing, and practiced after hearing, we shall be ready to hear again with
advantage, and comfortably to cry with Samuel, and say, Speak Lord, for thy
servant hears.

Thus much of the First, 1. Sam. 3.10.
What the Sheep of Christ must do: They must Hear.

Whom? His voice.
Now in the second place, Whom? His voice.

It is none of those extravagant voices whereof the world is full, as namely:

Roman. Breviar. in festo 7. war.
It is not that flattering voice which Aquinas was said to hear, when he prayed
before the Crucifixe: Been de me scripsisti Thoma.

Plarin. in Syl. 2.
Nor that aequivocating voice that was heard by Sylvester the second. Thou shall
live long, if thou come not to Jerusalem.

Plat. in Bonif. 8,
Nor that cousening voice caused by Boniface the eight, to Celestine the fifth,
Renounce thy Popedom.

Revel. 13, 11,
Nor that cruel voice, The voice of the Dragon.

Peral. sum. de fid, cap. 4,
Nor that lying voice, which was said to be heard of Gregory: Trajanus precibus
tuis liberatus est a paenis infernalibus.

Nor the voice of Antichrist, which utters many a toy concerning The
Apostles saying of Mass, Peter's prerogative: Popes supremacy: Brigits
Revelations: and many a tale about Limbus, Purgatory, Relickes, and fained
miracles.

Vens. de Val. de Sanctis.
Nor the voice of any dangerous discovery, as that which was heard at the time
of Constantines fained donation, Hodie venenum effusum est in Ecclesiam Dei. In
a word, it is the voice, neither of sin, nor Satan, dread nor danger: But it
is the voice of the good Shepherd, and that is CHRIST.

Psalm, 29, 3.
And yet not his extraordinary voice, The voice of thunder: nor his last voice,
which he shall utter at that great and fearful day: John, 5, 28, Cant, 2, 8,
Proverb, 1, 10, John. 1, 1,
But it is the comfortable voice of the Bridegroom: The voice of the eternal
Wisdom: The voice of (...), that essential Word.

Oh! But some will say, if we could but hear that voice (even the voice of
CHRIST,) once speaking unto us from Heaven, the matter were soon at an end,
and we would hear, hearken, and believe.

I answer, that we are not to expect any Anabaptisticall enthusiasmes, no,
nor yet any divine revelations: The voice was extraordinary that was heard by
S. Augustine, Toll, lege: Take up the Book, and read. Aug. confess. lib. 8.
cap. 12.
God spoke unto our Fathers in old time by dreams and visions, Hebr. 1.1.2.
but in these last days, he has spoken to us by his Son: He uttered his
voice in the streets: Luke 13.26. Ephesians. 4.11.
But before he ascended up on high, He gave some to be Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and Teachers, not only for the time
present, but to stand in the continual work of the Ministry, even, till we
all meet together in the unity of faith; Ephesians. 4.13.
and until we come unto him who is our head, Jesus Christ. Of all these
workers, himself has spoken, He that hears you, hears me: and then, Luke
10.16.
With what care and conscience ought we to hear? 1. Sam. 3.5.
If Samuel had but thought that it was the Lord that called him, he would have
run: but because he thought it was but Ely, therefore he slept again.

Beloved, The case is ours; we are careless, because we think it is but a
man, but know thou careless and presuming hearer, that when the Preacher calls
upon thee to awake from sin, to leave thy Adultery, fornication; swearing,
profanesse, oppression, and the like, it is the thundering voice of the Lord
from Heaven, to rowse thee from the Den of Sin: if thou lie still in thy
Sin, thy case is damnable. Oh! That at the last we would hearken to this
voice of CHRIST.

Woe be to the contempt of the world in this point, Antichrist utters his
voice, and is heard: He speaks by his Decrees, Decretals, Clementines,
Extravagants, Canons, and Constitutions: and they that have received the Mark
of the beast, do lift up their ears on High. Oh! My beloved, it is dangerous
to hear him: It is damnable to believe him: But CHRIST utters his voice, and
is not heard at all. You will say, How shall we discern the voice of Christ,
from the voice of Antichrist?

I answer, The Essential Word, speaks by the Predicated Word: The begotten
Word, by the written Word If the voice uttered, be according to that Word
which He himself and his Apostles delivered, it is the voice of Christ: But
if the voice sound forth any doctrine that was never heard of in the time of
Christ, nor in the time of his Apostles, that is the voice of Antichrist: And
such are the new doctrines in the Papacy. Oh! That all whom this concerns,
would be deaf at the entising voice of the whore of Babylon. But when ye are
cleared from that, ye are not clear. Oh! What Sirens do daily inchant us
with their voices? What pleasures? What temptation? What vanity? Sin and
Satan, do but once call us, and we come and hear: Our elder Brother, John.
7.37. Luke 23.46.
and our loving Savior, does daily call unto us, nay Cry, and yet we will not
hear. If we had wise hearts, we would think on these things: It would make us
better to love his word the^ ever we did before. Revel 1.3.
Read at home: Hear in the Temple, a blessing shall follow both. Then let
every soul say with the Spouse in the Canticles: Cant. 2.14.
Let me hear thy voice for it is sweet. And thus much of the first duty of
the Sheep, viz. To Hear the voice of the Shepherd.

Now of the other duty: To follow Him.

It is not enough for the Sheep, to lie still upon the earth, and only to
hear the call of the Shepherd: but they must rise up and follow him; and such
must be the practice of Gods Saints, that the voice of Christ uttered by his
Ministers, may not be to them only, as the pleasant voice of a Sweet singer,
but that by the same, Ezech. 31 32.
they may be raised up from all earthly meditations, to have their Conversation
in Heaven: Phil. 3.20.
and thither to follow the good Shepherd whither He is gone before. To this
end, He himself began to call, for He said to Peter, Math. 4.19.21.
and Andrew, and James, and John, and Matthew, Follow me; Math. 9.9.
and thus daily, by his Spirit inwardly, and by his Word outwardly, does he
call to his Saints and chosen.

But a Question arises, How shall we follow him, seeing He has left us: He
is ascended, and is not here? It is readily answered. Act. 8.32. Matthew. 11.29.
Luke 23.34.6.12.21.37. Math. 14.14
Let us follow him in his Patience, in his meekness, in the forgiving of his
enemies, in his diligence in prayer: We, of the Clergy, in his laborious
teaching in the Temple; and all men, in his compassion. Indeed the Scripture
calls us in other terms to this course of following: Psalm. 34.14. 1. Cor.
14.1. Ephesians. 4.15. Hebr. 12.14. 1. Pet. 2.21. Damasc. de ver. incar.
follow after peace (says David) and the Apostle, follow after Love, after
Truth, after Holiness: But, He is the fountain from whence all these graces
flow, that (...), as Peter calls him, Proposing himself an example to us,
that we might follow his steps. Woe be to the world, because of offenses in
this kind: For, many errors are committed in this one action. In not
following: In following: After following. First, In not following, namely:

Either they will not follow at all, Ezech. 2.5. Ierem. 6.7.
like the stubborn

Jews: We will not hear: We will not take heed.

Hag. 1.2.
Or they will not follow yet: The time is not yet come, this is the sin of
Procrastinators.

Or they cannot follow, being clogged in the world: They are choked with cares,
Luke 8.14.
and bring forth no fruit.

Secondly, In following: But not in every place: perhaps in the Temple, but
will not be seen to pray with their Family at Home.

Not in every Time: In prosperity, they will praise God, but in time of
temptation, Luke 8.13.
they go away.

Not in every Thing: They will leave their Prodigality, not Coveteousnesse:
Many a sin, but not their beloved sin.

Thirdly, After follovving, namely, either to follow weakly or aloof, Luke
22.54. John 3.2. Philip. 3.14.
or fearfully, like Peter, or Nicodemus: Not pressing forwards to the mark.

Or to follow a little, and then to stand at a stay; like Dvvarfes in Religion.
1. Cor. 9.24.
So run that ye may obtain.

Or to begin, and then fall off again; as if they repented like Demas, 2. Tim.
4.10.
that ever they were seen in the race.

Unto all these Three sorts of ill followers, we may add one as reprovable as
the rest, namely, him that will follow Christ for gain, John. 6.26. Hebr.
12.16. Numb. 11.4.
these love themselves better then Christ: and are profane like Esau, or like
the Israelites, longing after the fleshpots of Egypt.

All these do err in their kind, and they have their reward: 1. Tim. 6.11.
But thou o man of God (says Paul) fly these things and follow after
righteousness: So I say, But thou o child of God fly these things, and follow
Christ thy guide, until thou come to the end of thy way, the salvation of thy
soul in his heavenly kingdom: Math. 19.28.
For they which have followed him in the regeneration, shall follow him in the
glorification.

Thus much for the Text.

Now, a word or two of particular Application, and that to Two sorts of Persons.

To the Shepherds. To the Sheep.

Shepherds of two kinds: Civil, and Ecclesiastical.

And first, let me speak to the Civil Pastors.

Ye Rulers, Judges, and Magistrates, Homer. Iliad. ^.
ye are (...), Shepherds of the people (So the Greek Poet calls you, and
the Hebrew Prophet too. He says unto Cyrus: Jsa 44.28.
Thou art my Shepherd. And in this very sense, Joshua is called a Shepherd.)
Then know your Sheep, Numb. 27.17.
search them, keep them from infection, dress them for the scab, least they
spoil the flock: nourish the weak, defend them from the Wolves, sheare the
wool, Ezec. 34.16.
but do not pluck it from the skin: and feed the^ all with judgment.

From the Civil Pastors, I turn to the Ecclesiastical. Ye sons of Aaron,
These things are proper for you, ye are the Shepherds of the flock of
Christ. Take not to your selves the instruments of a foolish shepherd: Zech.
11.1^.
But be ye Pastors after the Lords own heart, and feed the sheep with
knowledge, and understanding. Ierem. 3.15.
Be diligent to know the estate of your flock, Proverb. 27.23.
and bring into the fold those that wander. If you find in your flock, a
sheep untoward, unsound, unrepentant, after once or twice admonition, Tit.
3.10.
(when no other means will serve) Deliver him unto Satan, that the rest may
feate. But, 1. Corinthians. 5.5.
if you find any sheep that is tractable, growing, ready to return, quench
not the smoking flax, open the bosom, shut not up the fold least by your
severitie he fall away again, and draw many after him, and so it shall be
imputed to you, (as Cyprian imputed to Novatus) Propter unam sauciam multas
integras ^ves perdidisse. In a word, Cypr. Anto. lib. 4 Epist. 2.
Carry a continual hand, and tender heart over the flock, and give them
preservatives against the rott of sin. Carry them from the boggs of Popish
error and superstition, to the Hill of the Lord, ^sa. 2.5.
and to the sound, and green Pastures of the word of God: Psalm. 23.2.
and refuse no toil for the flock. Your charge is trebled by your Lord and
Master, Feed, Feed, John 21.16*
Feed. Pasce verbo, Pasce exe^plo, Pasce subsidio: Verbo praedicationis,
Exemplo co^versationis, Subsidio charitatis: Feed by preaching, Feed by
practicing, Feed by hospitality: Aur. Rosa. tract. 4.
Or as Sylvester de Prierio, Pasce, Pasce, Pasce, incipie^tes, proficie^tes,
perfectos, Feed beginners, Feed the^ that are grown, and, Feed them who
have attained to some good measure of perfection in the school of Christ. And
know, that the Owner will examine you about his sheep (as Eliab did David) 1.
Sam. 17.18.
and will require a more strict account at your hands, Genes. 31.39.
then ever Laban required at the hands of Jacob. Oh! That every day we may be
found ready with our reckonings, 1. Pet. 5.4.
that when that (...), The chief Shepeheard, shall appear, we might stand
Recti in Curia, and receive a Crown of Glory.

I have done with the Shepherds, and now let me conclude with the Sheep.

Ye Sons of God, seed of the righteous, and sheep of that great Pastor
JESUS CHRIST, remember your Title: execute your task: be harmless, meek,
and patient: sound in the Faith: sober in your life. Ye shall fight with
Beasts (as Paul did at Ephesus) and be infested by a thousand injuries from the
sons of men: ^. Cor. 15.^2.
but here is your comfort: You are Sheep, They are Goats. Let neither Men, nor
Angels, height, nor depth, things present, nor things to come, steal away your
hearts, from your Owner, JESUS CHRIST. Hear his voice, and shun (o shun)
the voice of Antichrist. Hearken to the true Shepherd, and follow him in his
steps, Guil. Paris. in Postill.
In praesenti per gratiam, in futuro per gloriam, Lay hold on him, and leave
him not, till he take you by the right hand, Cant. 3.4.
guide you with his Counsel, and receive you unto glory: Psalm. 73.24.
Then shall the Servant, follow his Master: the Son, the Father: the Spouse,
her Bridegroom: the Saints, Revel. 15.3.14 4.
their King: The Virgins, the Lamb: and the Sheep, their Shepherd, even unto
the Throne, there to sit, 1. Cor. 6.8.
and to Judge the world: And (that which now must be my ending, but then shall
be to you and me, and to all that love his coming the beginning of all
endless Comfort) so shall we be for ever with the Lord: 1. These. 4.17.
Then, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly: Make an end of these days of sin:
Judge between thy Sheep and the Goats: and bring us to those green pastures
of Heavenly pleasures, Psalm. 16.11.
which are at thy right hand for evermore.

THE FOVRTH SERMON, Viz. Sions Compass, Preached, At S. MARY'S in Limericke,
August, 15. 1624.

Before the Most Honorable, the Lord Deputy of IRELAND..

And, Before the Council of State, General, and Provincial.

By G. A.

DVBLIN. Imprinted by the Society of Stationers, Anno Domini. 1625.

THE FOVRTH SERMON, Viz. Sions Compass.
PSALM. 48. Verse. 12.13.14. 12 Compass about Sion: and go round about her:
tell the Towers thereof.

13 Mark well her bulwarks: Consider her Palaces: that ye may tell it to
your posterity.

14 For this God is our God for ever and ever: He shall be our guide unto
death.


MOst Honorable, it is said of Iehosaphat King of Judah, 2. Chron. 19.4.6.
that dwelling at Jerusalem, he rose up, and went thorough the people of the
land, from Beersheba, to Mount Ephraim: and as he went, he cried, Take heed
what ye do: You, as Viceroy of another Iehosaphat, are risen up from your
Metropolis, to go thorough the people of this Land, almost from Dan to
Beersheba: and give me leave (I pray) to say unto you (as you pass along) in
the words of Iehosaphat, Take heed what ye do, or in the words of David,
Compass about Sion, and go round about her: Tell the Towers thereof: Mark
well her bulwarks: Consider her Palaces, that ye may tell it to your
posterity: For this God is our God for ever and ever, he shall be our guide
unto death.

But (as that which CHRIST said to his Disciples, That which I say unto you,
Mar. 13.37.
I say unto all men, Watch: so) this our present Text, speaks unto all:
witness for us, Tremelius. Tremel. and Iun. in locum.
Ecclesiam hortatur, He exhorts the Church, that is, all the members of the
Church: And witness for them, Iacobus de Valentia: Jacob. de Valent in locum.
Omnibus Christianis loquitur, He speaks to all Christians: Compass about
Sion, that is, observe diligently the state of the Church of God: What helps
it has received from God: What hurts from man. Behold, mark, consider, tell
it unto others, for it is the work of God (even Our God) who as hitherto he
has assisted his Church, so he will assist it still: and has promised in the
Text, to be our director (as well in this, as in all other good things) even
unto the end of our days.

This is the Sum of the Text: And now to the Parts, Which are Two: (viz.)

A Precept: and A Reason.

In the Precept, I observe Two things.

The Subject, and The Action.

The subject, five-fold: And The action, five-fold.

The fivefold subject.
Sion. Sion again. Her Towers. Her Bulwarks. Her Palaces.
All which we will reduce unto One, namely unto Sion. The fivefold Action.
Compass. Go round about. Tell. Mark. Consider.


All which, we will reduce unto Two: viz.

To Compass, and To Mark.

Now for the Reason, it shows it self to be Twofold.

Drawn from the cause Final, and Efficient.

Final, in respect of man, To tell it to Posterity.

Efficient, in respect of God, and that Four ways, viz. His.
Greatness, Elohim, God. (...)
Goodness, Elohenu, our God. (...)
Eternity, in respect of himself, for ever and ever. Constant love, in
respect of us: until death.


Thus much for the Division of the Whole.

Now unto the Matter, as it is branched into his several parts: And first, of
the First, namely, Of Sion, which is the maine subject of this Text: And
therefore though it be but a word, yet it must take up the largest portion of
our Time.

Sion, was one of the four Mountains, Travel of the Patriarchs. p. 7. Psalm.
48.2. 2. Sam. 5.7. Psalm. 48.1.
upon which Jerusalem was situated: It was the joy of the earth. Here was the
fort of Sion, and the City of David, nay it is called, The City of God. Now it
is (...), confessed of all sides, that Sion for very many respects is
accounted, The type of the Church of Christ: Witness Esaias: Isai. 59 20.
witness David, in twenty places of his Psalms, and in this respect, He
says, Many glorious things are spoken of thee, Psalm 87.^.
thou City of God. Awake o my glory, Psalm. 57.8.
my tongue and my heart, that I might set forth the praise of Sion.

In handling this subject, I must propose seven Meditations concerning Sion:
and so (as I pass along) to apply it to the Church of God.

1 The first Meditation, is, The compactnesse of Sion, like a City: Psalm.
122.3.
a term used by David: who twice also in this Psalm, calls Sion by the name
of a City: In every City, there is Grex, Lex, and Rex: Inhabitants, Laws,
and Governors. So in the Church of God: Grex, sunt Fideles, Lex, est Charitas,
Rex, est Christus: The Faithful, are the flock, Love, is the Law: and Christ,
is the King.

2 The second Meditation, is Sions fairness, for so it is commended in the
second verse of this Psalm. And in our Text, there is mention made of Palaces,
which no doubt were fair: yea Sion is called, The perfection of beauty.
Psalm. 50.2. Cant. 4.7. Cant. 1.4.
So is the Church counted fair in the sight of God. It is true, that she
calls her self Black, and no marvel, for whiles she dwells in this Cabin
of the flesh, she is begrimed with the Coals of sin and sorrow: yet the
compassionate Lover (even her Christ) has washed her with his blood, Revelat.
1.5. Ezech. 16.14.
and made her fair and perfect thorough his beauty, which he has set upon
her.

Psalm. 48.2.
3 The third Meditation, is the Form of Sion, a Hill, for so it is termed in
this, Psalm. 2.6.
and the second Psalms. The Members of the Church, Math. 5.14. Homil. 10. in
Math.
are set upon an Hill (for so Chrysostom applies it, not only to the
Apostles, but ad Ecclesiam sanctorum, The whole Congregation of Saints) We are
made a gazing to Men and Angels, 1. Cor. 4 9.
and it is not much amiss, there is little danger in being descried: Let them
look upon us that we perish not in the works of darkness, and being set upon
a Hill, we are so much the farther from the vale of death. But there is
somewhat else remarkable in this Hill of Sion. Many of Christ's actions were
done upon an Hill: His Preaching: His Praying: Math. 5 1. Luke 6.12. Math.
17.1. Math. 28.16. Act. 1.12.
His Transfiguration: His conference after his Resurrection: And lastly, His
Ascension.

And all this to quicken our dullness: We are wedded to this lump of Earth: We
leave the Hill of contemplation, and run into the valley of every vanity.
Oh! Psalm. 121.1.
That we would Lift up our eyes to the Hills, from whence comes our help, and
aspire by those same Mesilloth, (...) Psalm. 84.5. Colos. 3.1.
steps and exaltations, to that which is to be found above.

4 The fourth Meditation, is, Sions foundation, Rockie, for herein was a strong
forte, 2. Sam. 5.7. Travel of the Patriarchs, p, 9. Psalm. 125.1.
and probably therefore it was rockie, and in the Itinerarie, it is directly
said, that in Sion was a Rock: then Mount Sion, (as David says) cannot be
removed. God does not build his Church upon the Sand. But if the Church be
answerable unto Sion, Where is Sion? And what then shall become of the Church
of God? I answer: Ierem. 26.18. Micah. 3.11 12.
That corporal Sion must needs have been plowed as a field (according to
Micah his Prophecy) and that for the sins of the Princes, and Priests: but
spiritual Sion stands, because the Rock stands: This Rock was not Peter, 1.
Cor. 10.4.
but the Rock was Christ; of Him, and to Him, shall always be said Eli Tzuri,
(...) Psalm. 18.1. John 10.28.
My God, thou art my Rock. Oh endless comfort! None of his Flock, none of
the Members of his Church shall perish, The gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it. Math. 16.18.


5 The fifth Meditation, is, Sions fullness and plenty, 2. Sam. 5.9. (...)
Aria^ Montan. Travel of the Patriarchs, p. 9
shadowed in the term of Millo, which signifies fullness: Now Millo was a
place within this Hill of Sion, or rather (as some think) Sion was otherwise
styled Millo, because there was no want, but all abundance therein. Oh the
fullness of CHRIST! In Him, For his Church. In Him, Colos. 2.9.
because all the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily: John. 1.16.
Psalm. 130.7.
and for his Church, For of his fullness we have all received: Redemption, and
that plentiful: Life, and that in abundance. John, 10.10.
Here, is a flowing of Gods graces, ever increasing, never decreasing; and
therefore compared by Ezechiel to a River, Ezech. 47.4.
first, up to the Ankles; then, to the Knees, then, to the Loins, then, so
great that none could pass over: Psalm. 16.11,
and in that other life, there is truly Millo, even fullness of joy for
evermore. In regard of this fullness, fear not any outward emptiness. Say (if
occasion be) with Naomi, Ruth. 1.21.
I went out full, but the Lord has made me to return empty, but yet beware
of spiritual emptiness, least the Lord find you naked, Exodus 32.25.
as he found Israel, that is, empty and destitute of his Graces, with which,
if you will be filled, empty your souls of every stuffing Sin, Bono
implendus es (says Augustine) sunde malum: When freed of evil, then filled with
good.

6 The sixth Meditation, is, Sions latitude. For, from Sion, as from a Center,
went out into a circumference, the valleys of Jordan, Siloe, Hinnon, Gihon,
Cedron, and Baca. Thus, like many resplendent beams from the body of the
Sun, Psalm. 134.3. Psalm. 50.2. Isai, 2.3.59.20. Psalm. 14 7.
came many a blessing out of Sion: The Lord bless thee out of Sion: for hence
has the Lord shined: in his Law: in his Lawgiver: in his Salvation. And all
this is proper to the Church of God: for here is the Word, and there is no
salvation out of this Arc: no comfort, no Christ out of the Church. He cannot
have God to be his Father (says Cyprian) which has not the Church to be his
Mother. Cyprian. de simp. Praelat.


Psalm. 68.15. Travel of the Patriarchs, p. 8 Antiq Iudaic. in Nehem.
7 The seventh Meditation, is, Sions altitude: David calls it an high Hill: There
were many high hills about Jerusalem, but This surmounted them all: Arias
Montanus says, it was, Mons praeruptus, and ascensu difficilis: Craggie, and
hard to climb: but when once we had attained to the top, it overlooked all the
plains of Jordan. This is our estate in the Church of God: as the Apostle
says, We have need of Patience, so I say, Hebr. 10.35.
we had need of strength, Psalm. 84.7.
till we appear before God in that Sion which is above. The Greeks have a
Proverb, (...), Excellency, is joined with difficulty: Let then the
promoting of true Religion, and demolishing of superstition, be always held a
matter of excellency in the eyes of Ieremies great ones, Ierem. 5.5.
though uneasy to accomplish, yet (as Sion) not so hard, as high; not so
difficult, as excellent. And let the execution of the Laws, both Humane, and
Divine, be unto them as their Sion, their delight, their altitude, their
height, their excellency: And though (in the midst of so froward and crooked a
generation) Phil. 2.15.
they shall meet with many pull-backes in their ascending of this height of
Sion, yet when once they have attained to the top, they shall then with
comfort, overlooke all those carnal reasons which (in this climbing of Sion)
they have rejected with so heroical a resolution. Yea let us all climb up to
the top of Sion, by the steps of Piety. Math. 5.8. 1. Pet. 1.15. 2. Corinthians.
7.1. Proverb. 22.13.
Christ calls us to Purity in Heart: Peter, to Holiness: Paul, to
Sanctification. These are hard sayings: A Lion is without in the streets. But
let us mount over all difficulties with the wings of Faith, and fear not to
climb up to the Rock of Sion: Let our pains be endless, till we have gotten
to the top, and our desires restless, till we come to him who is the Morning
star. Revel. 22.16.


And thus much for the First seven Meditations concerning Sion: And now behold
I am entangled in my own words: For, the first seven does imply a Second
seven. A second septenarie
I must therefore add another Septenarie to the former, for the greater
ornament of SION.

1 The first Meditation, in this Second rank is, Sions Longitude: for though
Corporal Sion be confined to one side of Jerusalem, yet Typical Sion, is
extended far and near: and in the Garden of the World, the Lord gathers his
Lillies here and there. Can^. 6.1. Genes, 11.31. Job. 1.1. Act. 8.27. Ierem.
3.14.
Thus he gathered Abraham, from Vr of the Chaldees: Job, from the land of Vz,
and the Eunuch from Ethiopia. One of a City (says Jeremy) and two of a Tribe,
and brings them to Sion. Lift up thine eyes (says Esaias) and behold, Jsai, 60,
4,
thy Sons (O Sion) shall come from far, The riches of the Gentiles, The
Dromedaries of Midian, The Ships of Tarshish, The Sheep of Kedar, and the
Rams of Nabajoth, shall come unto thee, Isai, 60, 8,
shall fly like a cloud, and like the Doves to their windows, and so shall
they fear the name of the Lord from the West, Isai. 59, 19,
and his glory from the East. A comfort unto us that live here in this ultima
Thule, Seneca in Medea
sometimes far from Christ, Ephs. 2, 13,
but now are made near by his blood. Oh, The breadth, and length, and depth,
and height of that love which indeed passes all knowledge, Ephesians. 3, 18,
all dimensions!

2 The second Meditation, is, Sions multitude. Many shall be borne in her
(says David, Psalm, 87, 5,
and Esaias) The multitude of the Camels shall cover thee. Isai, 60, 6,
Thus in the Text, have we Towers, Bulwarks, and Palaces, in the Plural
number. Yea, Revel, 7, 4,
the Angel in the Revelation did seal one hundred and fortiefoure thousand.
Not that I intend (with Bellarmine) to make multitude, De noti, Ecclesia, libr,
4, cap, 7,
to be a note of the Church, for (when they have talked their fill yet) Christ
shall have but a little flock: Luke 12, 32,
and He is true of his word that said, Few do enter in at the strait Gate.
Math, 7, 14,
But yet you will say, Are they few whom no man can number? Revel, 7, 9,
I answer: This is spoken Hyperbolically, and by the way of Comparison: If the
King would muster his Army, and gather Twenty out of every Parish in this
Kingdom, it would be an admirable great Army; yet it were not a handful to
those that are left behind. so are the multitude of Gods Saints, little, in
respect of the wicked: yet they are many and great too, in account with God:
And if yet thou do contend, and think them to be but few (as they are
indeed) do thou make One, and so the number will be increased.

3 The third Meditation, is, Sions Memorial, and that may be taken Two ways.
Actively, and Passively.

Actively, Sion has the Art of memory, she remembers her Creator: for the
Time past, Eccles, 12, 1,
she remembers his wonders of old: for the Time Present, Psalm, 77, 11, Psalm,
71, 24,
her tongue talks of his righteousness daily, and for the Time to come, even
from generation to generation, Psalm, 79,13,
she will set forth his praise: and here in the Text, she tells it to
Posterity: this was the practice of the Saints in the Old Testament; as
Abraham, who commanded his Sons, Genes, 18, 19.
and household after him to keep the ways of the Lord. Yea, and of the Saints
in the New; for Peter's care was, that the dispersed Jews, should have
remembrance of his doctrine, 2, Pet, 1, 15,
even after his departure. And seeing that Sion is so good a Remembrancer, Let
our tongues cleave to the roof of our mouths, if we remember not thee o
Sion. Psalm, 137, 6,


Passively, Sions memorial. Sion is remembered. If God has made his wonderful
works to be had in remembrance (as David speaks) then cannot Sion be
forgotten, Psalm, 111, 4.
for there is no work of his more wonderful then his preservation of the
Church. Wheresoever this Gospel is preached (says Christ) there shall this
that she has done, be spoken of for a memorial of her. Math, 26, 13,
That which was Mary Magdalens lot, shall befall the rest. Ever shall be
remembered Abels offering, Noah's obedience, Abraham's faith, Joseph's chastity,
David's zeal, Salomons wisdom. The righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance, Prover. 10, 7,
but the name of the wicked shall rott.

4 The fourth Meditation, is, Sions privilege. There was Mount Sinai, Exodus
19, 1. Psalm, 87, 1, Lyrae in Psalm, 86,
as well as Mount Sion, but yet his foundation in Sion (says the Psalmographe)
that is (as Lyrae expounds it) God laid the foundation of his Church in Sion.
In Sinai, was the Law given, but in Sion, the Gospel. In the Law, Heb, 12, 21,
God speaks words of fear and trembling, but in the Gospel, 2. Corinthians, 5,
18,
the word of meekness and peace. When the Lord visited Elias in the Cave,
there came a Wind, and the Lord was not in the wind: 1, King, 19, verse. 11,
12.
and an Earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake: and a fire, but the
Lord was not in the fire: Then at last came a soft and still voice, and there
the Lord was: So is the Lords love to be felt, not so much in the thunders of
Sinai, as in the comforts of Sion. And though his Power is seen in the
swelling waters of Jordan; Ierem 13 5. Isai, 8, 6,
yet is his delight, rather in the soft running waters of Siloe (a fountain at
the foot of Sion) and therefore mount Sion above all others, is called Gods
Hill. Psalm. 68.15.
The schoolmen do make God to be the object of Faith, and it is true in his
kind; but if they mean it Personally of the Father, they rather draw wretched
souls out of the way, then direct them to the mark: for without Christ, the
Father is an angry Judge, therefore He says, John, 14.6,
No man comes to the Father but by me. He is Jacobs ladder, Genes. 28, 12,
Isai, 59, 20,
which joyneth heaven and earth together: and this is that Redeemer which came
unto Sion: So that here is our privilege, We are not come to mount Sinai,
Galat. 4.24.
which gendereth unto bondage: but to mount Sion to the City of the living
God, and to Jesus the Mediator, Hebr. 12.22.
whose blood speaks better things then that of Abel.

5 The fifth Meditation, is, Sions Promises: That, Romans 3.1.
(...) (as Paul speaks) the preferment of Sion: for the Jews, they had the
Adoption, and the Promises: Romans 9.4. Romans 3.2. Aug. in Psalm.
and to them were committed The Oracles of God. Augustine says, that the
Jews, were the Library keepers of the Christians: and to this end it is
thought, (...) Ios. 15.15.
they had their Kiriath-sepher, the City of the Book. And in the first
Council of Constantinople (being the second general) by 150. Bishops,
Jerusalem is called the (...), Theodor. li. 5. c. 9.
or Mother City of all Churches. If such terms and promises, had been given
to Rome, all the Pulpits of Italy would have rung at it: but we see there is
no such thing. With what impudency then did Benedict III. rob Jerusalem of her
right, and give it to Rome? Extr. com. de elect. cap. 3. sanct. Romans
For he decreed Rome to be first, and Jerusalem the fifth, among the Seas of
the Patriarchs: and of late, Trid. Conc. sect. 25. de Delect.
the Trent-Councell has called Rome, the Mother, and Mistress of all Churches.
But by this Novell Disseisin, they have weakened (nay overthrown) their
pretended Supremacy.

6 The sixth, is, Sions Perpetuity: For, it is the Hill wherein the Lord will
abide for ever, and yet we see, Psalm. 68.16.
that God was not eternally tied to external Sion; for now the Ways of Sion
lament, Lament. 1.4.
and no man comes to her solemn feasts. Let our Romanists look unto this
point. They style Rome, Aeterna Vrbs: Am. Marcel.
and (as the Jews unto Jerusalem, the Donatists to Africa, so these men)
would tie the Church to Rome. The Church, is called in the Creed, Catholic,
and in this sense, justly styled Oecumenicall, scattered over all the world:
but they would bring it back into a narrow room: The Roman Catholic
Church: Grounds of the Old and New Religion, p 1. c. 6.
and, The Catholic Roman Faith. But particulars are not generals. Catholic
Church has his Perpetuity, yet particular Churches have their Period, and so
had Sion. God promised a perpetuity to Sion. He did so, but it was under a
condition, Isai. 1, 19. Jerem 18.9.10.23.38.39.
viz. The perpetuity of their obedience, as the Prophet proves at large: But
if Sion be desolate: Shall Gods worship cease? Christ has untyed this knot,
The time shall come, when there shall be no more worshipping in this Mount
(says Christ) but the faithful shall worship God (every where) in spirit and
truth: John. 4.11.
Every Land, is Judea: Rom 2.28.29.
every City, Jerusalem: every House, is Sion: and every Person, 1. Cor. 6.19.
a Temple, to serve God in.

7 The Last in this Septenarie, is, Sions quality, viz. To be Holy: Psalm. 2.6.
My holy Hill of Sion (says the Lord) yet not holy by any inhaerent property,
but as the Place where Moses stood was Holy ground, Exodus 3 5.
by reason of Gods presence at that time: so Mount Sion, was holy, by reason of
his presence there at that time, Psalm. 132.8.13.
by the Arc, by his Word, by his Testimonies. But now, to hang out the Ivy,
when the Wine is gone, and thither to run in pilgrimage (as many of the
sons of men do at this day) it is but that (...), Colos. 2.23.
will worship, condemned by the Apostle. Oh! How many excellent things are
spoken of thee o Sion? Yet now thou art profane: (...) Isai, 13, 21, 34 14.
Zion, is turned into Zijm, and into their brethren, the Iijm, and their
companions, the Ohim. And why is all this come upon them? Even for Sin.
Takeaway the O out of Sion (to lament withal) and the remainder will show the
cause of her ruin. SIN.
But, What were the sins of Sion? even those four sins of Sodom, Pride,
Ezech. 16.48.
Idleness, Fullness of bread, and contempt of the poor, and those other
four: Profaning of the Sabbath: Idolatry: Contempt of the Word, and defrauding
of Justice and Judgment. Let us be warned by their harms: If the Lord have
not spared the natural branches, he will not spare us: Romans 11.21.
Except ye repent (says Christ) ye shall also perish. Luke 13, 3.
Oh that there were in us a wise heart, to turn unto the Lord, by true
repentance, least He take away from us the Arc of his strength, his Word, and
Sacraments, Psalm. 1^2.^.
and cause the ways of Sion to lament.

And hitherto I have spoken of a double Septenarie of Meditations, concerning
Sion. And yet me thinks we are not satisfied. I see that Sion, is the sole
subject of my Text, and therefore I will add one Septenarie more. Not that I
do (with the Schoolmen, Dionys. Carth. in sent. lib. 4. d 2. Corn. Agrip.
Occulta Philosoph. lib. 2. cap. 10. Eccles. 4.12.
and others) place any great Mystery, or Perfection, in the number of Seven;
but because I am transported with the love of Sion: and Solomon tells me, that a
Threefold cord is not easily broken.

The last seven Meditations concerning Sion, are these: viz: Her Safety: Her
Situation: Her Stabilitie: Her Strength: Her Succession: Her Visibilitie; and
Her Victory.

1 First, of Sions Safety: David says, Psalm. 74.12. Lyra in locum. Gloss.
ord. ibid. Jacob. de Valent. in locum.
that God works salvation in the midst of the earth. By the midst of the
Earth, the Papal expositors, do say is meant Jerusalem: and the Geographers,
do place Jerusalem in the midst of the earth: affirming; as the Earth to be
the Center of the World; so Jerusalem, to be the Center of the Earth. Now,
though ( Geographically perhaps) we may miss in this account, either in
Latitude, or Longitude: yet Theologicaly, it is most certain, that the Church
(which is the Typical Sion) is in Safety. Sometimes God is said to be in the
midst of His, John 20.19. Psalm. 125.2.
and sometimes They in the midst of Him, and He round about Them. They are then
in the midst: They fear not any overthrowe, by tilting up on one side,
neither are they over-runne by Borderers, for, Psalm. 34.7.
The Angel of the Lord pitcheth his Tents round about them which fear the
Lord, and delivers them. Oh! That we would be content to be compassed about,
and so gathered into the arms of Christ, that neither by blind Devotion, we
put our selves into the hands of Saints; nor by Sin, into the clutches of
Satan.

2 Secondly, of Sions Situation: it was to the Northside of Jerusalem (for so
those words Iarkethe Tsaphon, (...)
are expounded in the second verse of this Psalm. Lyra in locum.
) In times past, we were wont to say, Omne malum ab Aquilone: All evil comes
from the North: but, now we must (and justly may) change our note, Iacobi
(...).
for we have received a Basilicon Doron, from the North: and here, Mount Sions
Situation, is to the North; and this affords Two Meditations: Passive and
Active.

Passive. The Church of God, is subject to many a blustering Boreas, storm,
and rage of persecution, when others lie open to the Sunshine of prosperity:
whereof, being forewarned, let us neither envy the one, nor be discouraged for
the other.

Active. As Mount Sion being on the North, kept off the bitterness of the
wind, from the other parts of the City, which lay to the South: So the Church
of God, does keep both her own, and others too oftentimes, from many a
storm. Propter Ecclesiam in mundo (says one) durat mundus: Luther.
For the Churches sake the world is preserved, even till the number be full.

Simile.
As the Lungs, is the Fan of the Body, so the Church is the Fan (nay the
Soul) of the world. Therefore, Woe be to this misunderstanding Age. The Church
is but esteemed as Chafe, Isai. 59 15.
and the Just, makes himself a prey. Oh! That at last we would entertain
this point of wisdom, to esteem of Sion, the faithful ones, the members of
the Church, whose prayers do keep back the plagues of God. Genes. 18.12.


3 Thirdly, of Sions Stabilitie. Do you not see this to arise clearly out of
the Text? Go round about Sion, then Sion stands upright by it self, and
leanes not to this Wall, or that Building: This is a Type of the Church of God.
It must stand upright, Deuteronomy 5.32,
Not leaning to the right hand, nor to the left: not relying on Men's
traditions, superstitious vanities, foreign amities with Idolaters: Isai 36.6.
All which, are but as the Broken reed of Egypt: Let Sion stand by it self.

Again, the World is round about Sion: Sion then is In, but not Of, the World.
Let our Three mortal enemies the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, run ryott
round about our Souls: but let Us, stand upright. Do you not observe in your
journeys, that the Trees on the side of a Mountain, grow upright, though the
Mount it self have never so great a fall? 2. Pet. 3.18. Phil. 2.15.
So be you growing upright in Grace, even, in the midst of a froward and
crooked generation. Be you the Lords Ieshurun: Deuteronomy. 32.15.
that is (as Moses elsewhere where expounds it) Be you upright with the Lord
your God. And though Satan rage, 18 18.
and forage round about you; yet look unto that which is within, and say with
Christ: The Prince of this world comes, John 14.30.
but he has naught in me.

4 Fourthly, of Sions Strength. For, Do you not hear of Towers, and Bulwarks
in the Text? Towers for beholding a far off, and descrying the approaching of
the enemy: Bulwarks, for defense against the enemies assaults. Such Towers
and Bulwarks, such defense and strength (nay far greater) has the Church of
God. And that Two ways accomplished, viz. By Mediate means, and Immediate
Author.

Mediate Means, and these of Two sorts.

Romans 1.16.
First, the Word preached: for it is called the Power of God unto salvation:
Ephesians. 6.17
The sword of the spirit: No carnal weapon, but mighty through God, and
bringing into captivity every thought, 2. Corinthians. 10.4.
to the obedience of Christ: to which power, we may add the powerful, and
comfortable Seals of his Covenant, namely, the Two Sacraments; which are like
those Flagons of Wine, Cant. 2.5.
which revive the Church, when it is fallen into a swoone.

Secondly, the Preachers of the Word, they are the strength Mediatly, of Sion.
It was a dream (and naught else but a dream) that Innocentius the third, Romans
Bre. in fest. Oct. page 762.
thought in his sleep, to have seen their S. Francis the Assisinate, with his
shoulders to uphold the Palace of Lateran: but it is past dreaming, or
doubting, that the faithful Pastors of the Word, 2. King. 2.12.
are the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof.

Immediate Author, of Sions strength, is Sions Head: He from whom the Church
receives her influence, life, motion, Ephesians. 1.22. 1. Corinthians. 16 13
and preservation: This our Head, is Christ: In him we stand, quitt our selves
like men, and are strong: and He is that El, Deuteronomy, 32.15,
That strong God of our salvation (as Moses calls him.) Oh! The weakness of
the Sons of men ready to stumble and to tumble, to falter and to fall, and
being fallen, not able to rise again: but by his Power, and the Tower of his
love, we rise, and stand, and fight, and in Him, Romans 8.37.
go away more then Conquerors.

5 Fifthly, of Sions Succession: For, locally it was noe other, then only from
the Idolatrous Iebusites, set forth under the terms of Blind, and Lame; 2 Samuel 5.6
and yet in that very place did David build his City, and served the Lord
there, where once Satan had erected his throne.

Two sorts of Men, do here bear their reproof:

First, domesticke Opposites (as the Brownists, and other Seperatists) who
shun the Place, because of Abuse: but the Place has not offended. Hilar.
lib. contr. Auxent.
That which Hillarie spoke against Auxentius: Male vos parietum cepit amor: we
may here change into another Affection: and say, Male vos parietum cepit odium.
Ye do ill to hate the Walls. Sion was nothing the worse, that the Iebusites
had formerly profaned it, with Idolatry.

Secondly, foreign Adversaries, Bellar. libr. 4. de Eccles. cap. 8. Aug. lib.
2. contr. Petil. Donat. cap. 51.
who do much boast of outward succession. But S. Augustine, not only mentions
Anastasius, his succession in the Sea of Rome; but John, his succession in the
Sea of Jerusalem: even then when He wrote against Petilian the Donatist. And
their own Stapleton, tells us, That the Greek Churches, Stapl. lib. 13. c. 6.
Princip. dict.
can demonstrate their personal succession, from the foundations of the
Apostles: Yea, from S. Andrew (for Constantinople) says Nicephorus, in his
Chronology, Niceph. Chronol.
alleged by Bellarmine, Bellar, vbi supra,
in his Notes of the Church. Yet our Adversaries, will not say, that the Church
of Jerusalem, or Constantinople, is the true Church. And the same Stapleton
tells them, that Personal succession is nothing, Staplet, vbi sup,
when it is not joined unto doctrine; agreeable to that of Nazianzene (which is
a good ground among divines) (...). Gregor. Nazian, in land. Athan,
That which is of the same doctrine, is of the same Sea: but, if adverse in
doctrine, it is of another Sea. Now, though our Adversaries shall produce a
show of Personal succession (which yet we prove to be Improbable from Peter,
uncertain in the Entrance, and interrupted often, as well by the Papacy of
Pope Ioane, Plat. in Ion, 8. Anno. 855. Genebr. Chronol. lib. 4. sec. c. 10.
Onuph. Chronol. page 47.
as by the Apostacy of fifty Popes, for 140. years, witnessed by Genebrard:
as also after that, by that 29th. Schism in the Papacy, for fifty years,
when Clemens VII. and many of his successors sat in Avignion, about the year
1380.) Yet they shall never be able to prove a succession in life and doctrine,
which is the life of Succession. For, as for their Life, it is set out in a
jest by Balthazar Castilio, Balih. Castili li, de aulice. Staphil. apolog.
part. 1.
That Peter and Paul do blush at the wickedness of their Successors: and
seriously, by Staphylus, that the life, and behavior of their Priesthood, is
very scandalous to the world: And as for their doctrine, Mus in orat. in Conc.
Trid. in 3. dom. Ad.
their own Bishop Mus tells them, That Priest, and people, are fallen with one
consent, from Religion to superstition: from Faith, to Infidelity: from
Christ, to Antichrist. And as for both their Life and Doctrine, Iansenius,
Iansen. concord. page 270
the Bishop of Gaunt, tells us, That the greater part of Bishops, and Pastors,
have no Corn of Salt in their life and doctrine; for They are irrecoverably
corrupted, by whose health, Others should be helped. The Sum of this point,
is this; That as Israel was not hurt by a Local succession from the Iebusite,
whose Religion was left, and changed to a better: So the modern Popes, are
nothing benefited by a Local succession from Peter, whose Religion is left,
and changed to a worse.

6 Sixthly, we come to Sions Visibilitie. For, If Sion can be marked, and her
Towers told; then certainly Sion is visible. Here me (thinks) I see many weak
Protestants to droupe, and some ignorant Church Papist, to lift up his horn on
high. De Eccles. milit. libr. 3. cap. 12
Be not deceived: I intend not to stablish Bellarmines opinion, concerning
visibilitie, as a mark of the Catholic Church.

For Sion has Two Capacities.

First, as it is a Type of the Catholic Church, spoken of in the Creed, so
it is invisible; for That Church is believed, and therefore is not seen (as
the Author to the Hebrews argues. Hebr. 11.1.
)

Secondly, as it was a Particular Church, so it was visible. So were the
Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Philipi, and the seven Churches in Asia. So is
the Church of England, visible at this day. But some will object; where was
this visibilitie, two hundred years ago? It was not seen before Luthers
time. I answer, That the external visibilitie, and splendour of a particular
Church, does not always shine alike. You see Sion, in the Text, but yet in
Time, it is not seen. For a long season, Israel was without the true God,
without a Priest to teach, 2. Chron. 15.8.
and without Law: and yet, it was even then, the Church of God. Do you not see
that the Sun, is sometimes under the clouds? yet Who does deny even then, the
body, and light of the same? S. Augustine, Aug Epist. 48.
compares the Church to the Moon, which, sometime shines out, at another time
it is deprived of a great portion of her light, and sometime shines not at
all: yet it is, though it is not seen. And, do you not observe in your own
Element, that the fire is raked up in the ashes, and in the silence of the
night it is not seen: yet in the morning, when the ashes are removed, it is
found? So, That brightness, and splendour of the Church, which showed it self
in the time of Christ, of his Apostles, and the Primitive Church, was sometimes
darkened, by the clouds of creeping errors, which over-shadowed it, and for
many years oppressed by fraud, or force through the injury of men, and, in the
time of ignorant, and sleeping Prelates, Math. 13.25.
Tares were sown: and all, for the unthankefulnesse of men, whom God gave over
to believe lies, 2. These. 2 10.11
because they would not believe the truth. But yet in every age (since the
time of Christ, unto this day, even, in the season, when Satan was let loose)
the Lord has raised up men, Revel. 20.3.
of an heroical spirit, and divine understa^ding, who opposed the^ selves
against the doctrine of the Papacy, and either by their preaching, or writing,
or suffering, or other open testimony, gave witness to the truth. And, Though
the beauty of the Church of England, in the blessed time of King Edward the
sixth, was besmeared with the blood of the Saints, in the Reign of Queen
Marie, that our Sion, seemed wholly to be darkened: yet, even then, such a light
was kindled by the fire of their Martyrdom, that we trust shall never be put
out.

7 Lastly, we come to Sions victory. Many are the sorrows of the righteous
(says David) so, Psalm. 34.1^.
Many are the sores of Sion; but at length there is health. Many a wound does
it receive from them without, from them within; Psalm. 129.5.
but at last, it gets the Victory. They that hate Sion, Romans 16.20.
shall all be turned backward. The God of peace, shall tread down Satan
shortly under your feet: Even then, when Death, Revel. 20.14.
and Hell, shall be cast into the lake of fire.

So that now, we may inscribe this property of Sion, (as David does many of
his Psalms) Lamenat seach, (...)
Vincenti: To him that overcommeth. But, Who is this Conqueror, that
overcommeth? Is there any sensible demonstration of this victory in the word?
Yes, That so Graphicall, and lively a description, in the fourteenth of the
Revelation, Revelat. 14.1.
that nothing can be more. Jesus Christ, that Lamb, stands upon the top of
Sion. What is this that we hear? We have labored, by these XXI. steps, to
climb up to the top of Sion: and now that we are come thither, Whom have we
found standing there? Our elder brother, our Savior, our Redeemer. Socra.
Eccle. hist. lib. 1. cap. 1.
In hoc vince, In HIM overcome. Here let us cast Anchor: this is our Period,
our Haven, our Heaven. That Sion, which is the subject of our Text, has gotten
such a crest, (The Lamb of God) such a Christ (even, Jesus the righteous)
that, nothing could be told us more to our consolation. Oh! What encouragement
is this, to draw us unto the love of Sion, when Christ lies not down as
overcome, but stands up as a Conqueror on the top of Sion, to see us, to save
us, to hear us, to help us, to descrie, to destroy our Adversaries, that in
the fullness of time, he may reach forth his hand, and pluck us up unto the
beaurie of our inheritance, even, to that Triumphant Sion which is above?

We have ended now with all these Encomia (set out in a Threefold Septenarie
of Meditations) concerning Sion, whereof we make a Threefold Use. Threefold
Use.


The first Use, First Use.
to outstrip the Papists, even in their own element. They are laborious in
setting forth the properties of the Church, but We do sound forth the Trumpet
of her praises as well as they. It is but a jest of Campian: Audito Ecclesiae
nomine hostis expalluit. No Ca^pian, Campian ration red acad. rat. ^.
No: children wax not wanne to hear of their mothers name: but we blush to
see thy vanity, being more full of Rhetorical declamation, then Theological
demonstration. We know, that the Church is the Spouse of Christ, his Love, his
Dove, his undefiled: Cant 4.7.9. 1. Tim. 3.15.
The house of God, the pillar and ground of truth: But withal, we know that a
Particular, cannot be an Universal, neither can a Roman, be the Catholic
Church. Oh! How many impostures, do our Romanists vent unto the world, under
the name of the Church, making it (as a rich Arras) to cover the mud-walles of
their deformities? Leo in epistol. ad Mona. in Palest.
Their own Leo, may fitly say to them in general, (as he wrote to certain
Monks in particular) Ecclesiae nomine armamini: and contra Ecclesiam
dimicatis. Ye are armed with the name of the Church, and yet fight against the
Church.

The second Use, Second Use.
to observe the extraordinary care that God has of his Church: Sion, Sion
again: her Towers: her Bulwarks: her Palaces. He commands every Tower to
be told, nay to be bookt (for that seems to be the Etymon of the word Sipheru)
Nay, (...), Liber,
The Lord takes notice of every Pot in Jerusalem, Ezech. 14.20. Exodus 25.38.
Yea, of the very Snuffers and snuff-dishes. Oh! with what precise observa^ce
ought the Princes of the earth to take notice of these things, Ephesians. 5.1.
Psalm. 12.^.7 9.
that they being followers of God as dear children, may procure the wealth,
peace, and prosperity of Sion, of the house of God?

The third Use, Third Use.
is to stir up the sons of men, to run into the bosom of the Church, the
spiritual Sion; Psalm. 4.8. 23, 2, and 132.8.
where they may have their safe repose, their repast, their rest: that God
being their Father, and the Church their Mother, they may be nourished in his
family, until they come to their (not deserved, 1. Pet. 1.4.
but) reserved inheritance.

And hitherto, of the Subject of this Text, namely of Sion: Now to the Action,
which (being manifold) according to my first Division; I reduce it unto Two,
viz. To Compass Sion, and to Mark it.

And first of the Compassing of Sion. Hereof I must speak Two ways,
Negatively, and Affirmatively.

First, Negatively, and that Ten ways.

Compass not Sion, with Dinahs compass; only to see, Genes. 34.1.
and be seen, for pleasure, admiration, or discourse.

Nor with the Fowlers compass; to draw into your Nets, Psalm. 109.
any of the Birds of Sion.

Nor with Ioabs Compass; for glory, and ambition. 2. Sam. 24.


Nor with Isreal's Compass; Josh. 6.
to overthrow another Jericho, even the frame of Sion.

Nor the Ivy, his Compass; to eat out the Oak, the sweetness, and riches
of Sion.

Nor the Sinners Compass; Hab. 1.4.
who goes about the righteous, only to suppress them.

Nor the Sodomites Compass (that Moses speaks of) for satisfying of some
extraordinary lust. Genes. 19.4.


Nor the Thieves Compass; to rob, and kill, John. 10.10.
and to make a spoil of Sion.

Nor the Pharisees Compass; which is nothing, Matthew. 23.15.
but to make a Proselyte, and pervert the soul.

Nor Lastly, Satan's Compass; to destroy both soul, Ioh. 1.^.
and body: and to bring both Sion, and your selves to ruin.

But, In the second place Affirmatively, against those Ten, Take me but these
Five, and then

Compass Sion with Iehosaphats compass; 2 Chronicles. 19.4.
for he went about, and reformed the people, causing them to return to the
Lord God of their Fathers.

Or with David's Compass; Psalm. 26.6.
who washed his hands in innocence: and then compassed the Altar of God.

Or with Christ's Compass; for He went about, Act. 10.38.
doing good (says Peter) and God was with him.

Or with the Mariners Compass; that if (in your spiritual sailing unto
Canaan) you meet with an Euroclydon, or storm in the East; (...). ^7.^^.
you may cast about another way, until you come to the Haven, where you would
be.

Or lastly, ^um. vir^. ac vit. lib. 1. par 3. tract. 4.
with Alexanders Compass; of whom Peraldus Lugd. writes, that he compassed a
certain wood with Fire, because of the Serpents. Oh! That ye would also
compass about this our Sion, with the Fire of Love, of Wisdom, and of Zeal:
that God may be glorified, Sion benefited, and your Soule^ saved.

Thus much for the first Action. To Compass Sion.

Mark.
Now to the second, and last: To mark Sion, To Tell, Behold, and Consider: For,
those terms of Action, are in the Text: all which, we will reduce to a word
(and that a Monosyllable) Mark. Habakkuk, Habak. 2.2
tells us of a writing, that He that runs may read it: But here, in Sions
compassing, let Us make a stand, and Read: Behold, Consider, and Mark.

There are three remarkable things in Sion.

Her endowments. Her watchmen. Her friends.

First, mark the endowments of Sion. In times past, the Church had large
Donations (not like that forged donation of Constantine, Distinct. 96. cap.
Constantin.
the Decree, concerning which, Nauclerus affirms, Nauclerus Chro. vol. 2.
gener. 11.
Paleam esse and nihil probare, to be Chafe (as the Canonists call it) and
prooveth nothing: But, donations) real, and certain through the piety and
bounty of Princes, and others well affected in those ages But alas, Religion
brought forth riches, and the daughter has devoured the Mother. I know that
our mouths in this case, will soon be stopped by that of Chrsostome Chryso.
Tom. 7. orat. 2.
(...). No man is hurt but by himself. It is fit therefore, that the Law
should be unto us a bond, when our conscience has no bound. But for all that,
this shall not excuse any of you (My Christian Auditorie) if ever by
importunity, fair promises, or (as Luke Luke 19.8 Proverb. 20.25.
speaks) by forged cavillation, ye devour that, which is sanctified. If
there be any here that is guilty of this sin, let them fear and tremble,
least the Lord put a hook into their nostrils, Isai. 37.29,
and so pluck it out of their jaws again* or (leaving it with them for a
further vengeance) cause it to be unto them, Job. 31, 12. Ephesians, 4.20.
as a fire which shall devour all their increase. But you have learned Christ
better then so: Prover* 30.
Therefore (my beloved) honor the Lord with your riches. Be bountiful unto
Sion, for the repayring of her ruins, augmenting of her rents, adorning of her
Libraries. Proverb. 3.1^.
So shall your Barnes be filled with abundance, and whenever you seem to
want, God will recompense it unto you, at the resurrection of the just. Luke
14.14


Secondly, Mark the watchmen of Sion, Cant. 3.5. Ezec. 3.17. Isai. 56.10.
viz. The Pastors and Preachers of the Word (for so they are termed:) Examine
whether they be Seeing watchmen, and not Blind; Speaking, and not Dumb: that
is, whether they give warning against the enemies approach. Where you find
good Watchmen, Mark them, Book them (and no mervaile, Malac. 3.16
for God has a Book of remembrance) Suffer not proud worldlings to overtop
them. Ezech 34.21.
Balance them even. Let not great learned Augustine, be Bishop of little
Hippo, and little learned Aurelius, be Bishop of great Carthage. Encourage
them: Reward them: Hebr. 13 17.
and Grieve them not, for they watch over your souls. They are the Towers, 2.
King. 2.12.
and Bulwarks of Sion: The chariots of Israel, and horsemen thereof.

Thirdly, Mark the friends of Sion: Such as the Centurion, who was worthy
that Christ should do for him (said the Jews) because he had built them a
Synagogue. Luke 7.5. Judge. 5 9,
My heart is set upon the Governors of Israel, and upon such as are willing
among the people, and that do fly like Doves unto their windows, Isai, 60.2.
for the good of their own soul, and the increase of Sions joy. Let all such
be encouraged, again, and again: Let them have greater privileges of honor
and respect, then those that are drowned in the lees of superstition. And (if
ever you will come, to the Celestial mount) make much of them that fear the
Lord: Psalm. 15 4. and 16.3.
and, Let your delight be in the Saints that are upon the earth, and upon all
such as excel in virtue.

I have now told you of those Three remarkable things in Sion: but (as talk of
Heaven, does oftentimes bring in, the mention of Hell: so) speech of Sion, may
worthily induce some discourse of Babylon: But that field is too large in this
fall of time: Therefore I will contract my self. Only, I must needs pray
you, to mark Two things which are against Sion: viz.

The Hinderers of Sion, and, The Haters of Sion.

First, the Hinderers of Sion, and these may be found among Two Companies of
men, viz.

Amongst the Laytie, and, Amongst the Clergy.

Amongst the Laytie: including Two kinds of Men.

Simoniacall Patrons, who will do nothing without a Dish of Master Latimers
Apples or letting the thing seemingly to go free, yet will retain from the
I^cumbent, the greatest share:

Or, Devourers of Church livings, which they get others to hold, when They
themselves carry away all the gain.

among the Clergy: including also Two sorts of them.

First, They that want Vrim; Light of knowledge: Exodus 28.30.
Unpreaching Prelates: Dumb dogs: Isa 56.10.
Devourers of the flock of Christ.

Then, They that want Thummim; Uprightness in their conversation: being
scandalous in their lives, the bane, and shame, of Religion.

From the Hinderers of Sion, we pass unto the Haters of Sion. For though she
have all those Elogia, before named; yet, she wants not them that hate her,
which labor to pull down Sion, and lay her honor, in the dust. Cant. 2.15.
Those wily Foxes of Rome (and these Romanized in this Land) which destroy the
Vine. Builders of Babylon: Erecting Houses for Dagon, in the chief Cities of
this Kingdom, and with that audaciousnesse, as if they had liberty to sin.
A man need not now, to look into a hole, Ezech. 28.
and dig into a Wall (as the Prophet was commanded) for, these Houses are
more eminent then so.

In times past, there were but smoaky Chemarims: 2. King. 23.5.
but now; They are perfumed, diapred, and delicate. We may say with Jacob, All
these things are against me: yea, Genes. 42.36.
not only against us, but against the Whole Church of God: But at length (we
trust, Psalm. 119.126.
that) God will set his own hand to work: and, in the mean time, let us
wait for his promise, for He is faithful that said, Psalm. 129.5.
They that hate Sion shall all be ashamed, and turned backward.

We have compassed Sion, and have Marked many a thing therein: but, there is
One thing behind, which the Lord loves, above all the rest, even, The Gates of
Sion; Psalm, 87.2.
by no means can we pass from it, without a special Mark. The Gates of Sion.

Quat tuor, Ecclesias portis intratur ad omnes, Chamb. voca. iur. tit. de elect.

Caesaris, ac Simonis; Sanguinis atque Dei.
Prima patet Magnu: Nummosis altera: Charis
Tertia: Sed raris, janua Quarta patet.
I need not to English it, for, I speak to them that have understanding: 1.
Cor. 10 15.
Only this I add, that they which enter not into the Church through the Last
Gate, shall at the last, Luke 13.28.
be shut out of doors: and not enter (through those celestial Gates) into
that heavenly City which is above. Revel. 22.14.


After all this, there is one word in the Text, which belongs to all: viz.
That, which in the thirteenth verse is translated, Mark: The Hebrews (by an
Emphaticall Periphrasis) call it, (...)
Shithu Libbekem, 1. Put, to your Heart. Where (remarkably) I make this
Grammatical observation: The word Put, is put in the Plural number, and the
word Heart, is put in the Singular number: to teach us, That every one must
take notice of Sion, and all men, as one man, with one Heart, and Affection, to
procure the wealth, peace, and prosperity of the Church of God.

But, I see that the sickle of Time, has cut me off, that I cannot grow into
any further discourse: only, give me leave to end, with a particular
Application.

Genes. 37.11.
When Joseph had told his dream, his brethren envied him: but his father Jacob
noted the saying. The case is yours ( Most Honorable, The Lord Deputy.
and Eminent above all.) Though others do compass our Sion about, for
noveltie, or necessity; for attendance, or pleasure; for profit, or some other
affection; do You compass it, with the Foot of Compassion: and (when others
Sleep) do You Behold it, with the Eye of Wisdom.

Set your Heart, upon the ornaments of Sion, on the right hand, and her ruins
on the left: and (from this ground of the Heart) Set your Hand to work, in
due-season. You are not come hither for naught, but with conscience, and care,
to mark Sion: For so (by the way of an Anagramme) you shall answer to your
own Name, HEREIN I CARE. HENRY CARRY. 1 Samuel, 5, 7
And if from hence, you take away The blind, and the lame, (as David did from
the Fort of Sion) even Idols, Idolatry, and every thing that does offend;
Then, shall you do a work, Mat: 23, 41
acceptable unto God, comfortable to your own Soul, profitable unto Sion, and
exemplarie to all Posterity. It is true, that this cannot be accomplished,
without toil and difficulty: But remember, that there are Towers, and
Bulwarks in the Text. And if all this be not enough, there is a greater
strength then that; even Elohim, (...)
Elohenu: The Lord, our Lord. His Power, shall assist you: His Wisdom, shall
direct you: His Staff, shall comfort you: and (as David ends the Psalm, so I
end the Time) God will be your guide, even unto death.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 56. in stead of lin, 4, 5, 6, read thus: Platin. in Clem, 5 and Gregor 11
Onuph. Chronol. page 50. and 47
when Clem. 5. ( An. 1306) and his six successors sat in Lions, and Avignon
for 70. years, as also by those 3^. schisms (which Onuphrius acknowledges in
the Papacy) whereof the nine and twentieth lasted 50: years) Yet they shall
never, etc.


