A godly meditacion upon.xx. select and chosen Psalms of the Prophet David, as
well necessary to al them that are desirous to have ye dark words of the
Prophet declared and made plain: as also fruitful to such as delight in the
contemplatio^ of the spiritual meaning of them.

Compiled and setfurth by S^ Anthony Cope knight.

Imprinted at London in Sepulchers paryshe a little above Holborne Conduit at
the sign of the Resurrection by Ihon Day.

Anno. M.d.xlvii.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

The preface. To the most virtuous Lady and gracious princes Katherine Queen
of England, France and Irelande, her humble servant Sir Anthony Cope
Knight desires long life with health and much honor to the pleasure of God.
THe use of gyuyng gifts by men to their friends the first day of the new
year (most noble Lady and virtuous Queen) has of long time continewed
within this Realm of England, with an opinion that the luckie beginning is a
good token of like prosperous success during the rest of the year. Which manner
of presentyng gifts, as I do right well allow, if they be given as a
declaration of mutual love and hertie benevolence: so the opinion thereto
annexed, I think not so commendable, which is, that the gift should be a
token or presage of good fortune to come: no more then mondayes handsel of a
penny given to a poor beggar, should be so esteamed, that the happy beginning
of the weke must draw to it also a fortunate end thereof.

The good intent of the gyuer of the penny: is to releue the poor man's
necessity, not to be an augurie of things that shall follow. So in likewise
ought the new years gifts to be delivered, only as a testimony of the hertie
service or loving minds of the gyuers. And for so much as the most number
of the giuers do search to present such things as they judge should be most
acceptable to the receyuers thereof: I long imagined with my self what thing
I might best offer unto your grace at this present, wherein I might in some
part declare my loyal and obedient heart toward you, of whose heaped goodness
I have so much tasted, that I can never be able to deserve the thousand
part, but only with my prayer and hertie service. At the last when I
considered your gracious intent and godly purpose in the reading and study of
holy scripture, and the auauncement of the true word of God: I thought I
could in no thing do your grace a more pleasant service, then to make an
exposition of certain psalms of the noble prophet David, whose harmony is
so sweet and pleasant, that the ears of the faithful, may scantly therewith
be fully satisfied. The poets feign that Orpheus made so pleasant harmony on
his harp that he caused the beasts and stones dancing, to follow him. Their
meaning was, that his language was so plesau^t, and his intent so reasonable,
that he brought the people to good civility, which before were rude and
beastly. But our celestial Orpheus the prophet David has so set forth his
songs that they have strength and force to cause men which be carnal and
beastly, to become spiritual and heavenly. Who so will learn to give to God
dew honor and praises: may in them take a perfect patron. Again to give
thanks for the benefits received, to call for grace, to pray for the
deliverance from all enemies spiritual and temporal, to live in the heavenly
meditation of gods laws, to despise the vanities of this world, to become
mere spiritual: may men, in them abundauntly, be instructed. In conclusion
there is nothing necessary for any christian to do, think, or say, but in
them as in a myrroure he may behold the perfect image thereof, bisyde the
plain prophecienge of Christ's coming our very Messiah, his nativity,
passion, death, resurrection and ascension, as lively as they were in colors
set forth before our eyes, with so many tropes, figures and allegories, that
there is almost no word which lacks na hid mystery, as the Apostle
Paul says, all things happed to them in figure, and were dark and obscure.

But now that the things are come whereof it was spoken: the veil is taken
away from the face of Moses Now are few things leaft undiscussed by good
holy fathers, who having a good zeal to bestow their talent of knowledge
given them by God, to the profit of his people have earnestly trauayled in the
manifestation of such secret and hid things being helped by the holy
spirit of God to thachiuing of their gostly purposes, whom I having very small
learning, but only to gratify your mind and to auoyed idleness have followed,
setting forth a rude exposition (in our maternal tongue) upon twenty psalms
which I have chosen forth, reducynge the same to the kind or fashion of
prayers and contemplatife meditations, which I turste your grace of your
accustomed and natural goodness: will take in good part, sinse there wants in
me, not will but knowledge to do better. Nevertheless I trust (conferring the
paraphrase to the text) ye shall have great light of the meaning of the
Prophet, and thereby find his diffuse dark words made open and plain. To
move your grace and al other of the flock of Christ to the reading of psalms,
may it please you to read the Chapter of the book of Kings, where David by
playinge on his harp and singing thereto expelled from King Saul his father
in law (for the season while he played) the wicked spirit which was entered
into him and sore tourmented him.

And this thing I trust none will judge to be done by the virtue of the sound
of his harp, but through the power of the noble Psalms that he sange playinge
thereon: which Psalms he undoubtedly being inspired with the spirit of God
had before made. Much more may we think and assurdly judge that for our own
deliuerau^ce from the power of our spiritual enemies, God will not fail to
send his holy spirit to assist us and comfort us, expellynge utterly the
temptations of the wicked serpent, if we in fayeth ernestly and hertely
prayinge and trustyng to him read or utter the said Psalms. And I shall pray
to God who is the authoure and geuer o^ all good gifts, so to illuminate the
eyes of you^ graces heart, that ye may proceade in the path o^ his laws
wherein you are al ready entered, acco^dyng to the ardent desire which ye have
hithert^ had to atteyne to the knowledge of them, so tha^ when ye shall leave
this transitory world (whose pleasures in all your time ye never esteamed) ye
may ascend to the place prepared for Gods elect, there to receive joys
perdurable world without end.

DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ D^OVT


An exposicion upon the first Psalm. This Psalm of David is first set in the
book, Bea^us vir.
as a Prologue to all the rest. In which he exhorts al men to the study,
following, and teaching of the law of God.
O Most holy father of heaven, the only living God, of power inestimable, of
wysdom incomprehensible, to the be honor, glory and thanks given for thy
noble work in the creation of mankind, and also for his redemption out of the
captivity and thraldom of the devil, by the passion of thy most derely beloved
son Jesus Christ. The final cause where of was to bring him to beatitude,
that is, to make him have the fruition of thy deite and there by to taste of all
kinds of joy in thy heavenly mansion world without end. But to the
atteinement thereof, of thy godly pleasur, thou gave him certain laws, to
labor and travail in them in the present pilgremage of this life. Which if
he did observe, and continue in the^, thou did promise him the said
beatitude. And for good skyl lord. For as man lost Paradyse and his original
justice by disobedience, and transgression of thy commandment: so was it mete
that he (wyllyng to recover the same) should stand fast in faith and hope of
thy promises, with the obedient keeping of thy laws, after the way and gate
to the said heavenly place was set open by the mean of thy blessed sons
death and passion. Wherefore, with the Prophet Dauyd we may well say, B^^tus
v^ qui non a^^^ in concilio impioru^ et in ^ea p^ccatoru^ non sre^^^et in
^^^h^dra pestilencis non sedit.
that blessed is the man that goes not in the counsel of the ungodly, or
unfaithful persons, that stands, or aabydeth not in the way of sinners,
and sits not in the chair or seat of pestilent and skornefull persons. By
faith we believe in the, and in thy merciful promyses, by charity we work
toward our neighbor according as thou have commanded, by the influe^ce of
thy grace we teach other truly thy laws and godly precepts and live thereafter
to the good example and edifyinge of other. No man lives without sin, no not
the child of one days age: but happy and blessed is he to whom thou geueste
the grace not to abide and sleep in sin: but by penitence to come to a godly
conversion. In ye chair of Moses satte the Scribes and Phariseis, Math^^ ^^
to whom apperteyned the teachinge of the true law of god, instead whereof
for ye most part they taught their own traditions. But in case they preached
at any time truly: yet was their evil example of lyuinge a mockage and a
pestilent infection to all the beholders thereof. But what danger then
merciful God, shall they run in, which neither by godly living give good
example, neither yet truly teach thy holy word?

S^^ in le^^ commi do (...) eius, ^ in lege eius ^^^^tabitur die at no^^^.
To all such lord we beseech the send grace to repent and to refourme that
they have untruly taught: and to us send a will to hear and an heart to delyght
in the folowinge of thy law when it is taught us, or when we read it: so yt we
may exercise our selfs therein all the days of our life. In youth and in
age. In prosperity and in aduersite. The knowledge of thy laws, Psalmo.xix.
brings us to the knowledge of thy goodness and of our infirmite. The readyng
in them does make us to account all wordly things to be but vain, as they are
in dead, and to set all our delyght in the consideracion of heavenly things
which be perdurable. Thy law is pure without spot, and has a secret operation
to convert the reader thereof from the evil way wherein he walked before: and
teaches him wisdom. Et erit tanqua^ lignum quod plantatu^ est sec^ decursus
aquaru^ quod fructu^ suum dabit in tempore suo.
Who so keeps thy laws is like a tree planted by ye water side, that brings
forth his fruit in dew season. All trees and herbs that are planted in bareyn
dry grounds: be nothing fruiteful. May a rushe be grene without moisture?
or may the grass grow without water? no truly. Job.viii.
It is the moisture of thy grace that makes us fruiteful in good works. And
the dew season of our workynge is while we be in this present life. Mathei.
iii.
The tree that bri^geth not forth good fruit shall be cut down, it serves only
to the fire. Mark.xi.
The tree also that brings forth but leaves, Proverb. xi.
that is to say fair words without works, or else hipocritical works, only
to the show of the world: shall be curssed as was the fig tree that Christ
cursed coming from Bethany. But the kepers of thy law lord for the fruit
which they bear here in this world, shall receive the fruit of everlasting
glory in another world. Ye the leaves of this tree shall not fall of. For as the
fruit it self is good, that is, Et fursum (...) non de^^u^.
as his works do profyt his neighbor, so does his leaves, that is, his
doctrine also edify. Like as the snow and the rain co^myth down from heaven
and retourneth not thither again, Esai^. ^^.
but waters the earth, making it fruitful and grene, that it may give corn
and bread, to the sower: so the word that comes out of the mouth of thy
faithful, Et omnia quecumque ^a^^^ prosperabu^tur.
shall not return again void, but shall accomplish thy godly will. And what
so ever he does shall prosper. Roma. vi^^.
All things work for the best unto them that love God. But it works fare
otherwise with the ungodly, for they are like the dust which the wind blows
and skaterith away from the face of the ground. Non ^^c impli non sic: sed
tanqua^ puluis que^ proucit ventus a facie (...).
They have ever loved the world and the pleasure thereof, and that have they
inioyed, which stands to them in stead of a reward for the good deades
which they have done (if ever they did any) They were inconstant, light and
wauerynge with every wind of temptacion, not regardinge the heavenly things
which are sure and permanent. They were dry without moistur of grace, and
bareyn of good works, wherefore like light and unprofitable people they shall
be blown from the land of the, that art the living God, (...)
and from thy holy habitacion. They are put forth of the book of life by just
reprobation, and shall be blown from thy face lord at the last judgment:
Mathe. ^^v.
when by thy blessed son shall be said to the^. Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire. Ideo non resurgde impii in iudicio, n^que peccatores in
congregatione iustorum.
This judgment shall be so terrible that the ungodly shall not be able to stand
there in, nether the sinners in the congregation of the rightuous True it is,
and we do believe that al thy reasonable creatures shall at that general day
arise, i. Corin. xv.
both, bodies and souls, Ezechiel.vii.
then to receive according to their deades, but after diverse fashions. i.
Corinth. vi.
The rightuous to be as judges to the other, the sinners to be judged the
elect to the perfection of their glory, i. Tessalo. iiii.
the souls being then unit to their bodies. The ungodly to their greter pain
both of souls and bodies. At which great and dreadful day the sinners shall be
severed from ye just, and shall be set the one on the right hand, Matthew. xxv
the other on the left hand of thy victorious son as the shepherd does
disseuer his sheep from his goats. And by good reason, for as there is no
match between light and darkness, ii. Corinth. vi.
no more is there any equal match in company between the righteous and the
ungodly. Quonia^ nouit dominus viam iustorum et ite^ impiorum peribit.
The way of the just is known to the Lord, and well allowed of the. Wherefore to
Moses thou saidest: I know the by name. Exodus.xxx. Jeremy.i.
Even so did thou know Hieremy thy Prophet before he was begotten or
borne. And all by thy Godly approbation. In like manner do thou know the
days of the godly and elect. Psalmo. xxxvii.
And there inheritance shall endure for ever The other (that is) the ungodly,
thou know not, Math. xxv.
no more then thou knew the five folyshe Virgyns which were unprovided of oil
in their lamps against the coming of the brydgrome Thou know them not to
their comfort or election, but to their reprobatio^. Wherefore they were shut
forth of the gates of glory, and departed with the workers of iniquity, whose
way is the way of death and damnation. From this paynful way save us good
Lord, and make us to be as the fruitful trees planted by the water side, for
thy blessed sons sake, who to save us suffered bitter passion and death. To
whom be laud and praise for ever. Amen.

The Prophet Dauyd in the person of the faithful congregation which are
penitent for their offenses made this Psalm. Psalm.vi. Domine ne in futore.
And declaryng his infirmity and contricion, desires remission of his sins.
Apoca. ^i.
O God almyghtie, Lord of heaven and earth, from who^ nothing can be hyd or
kept secret. Lord that searchest the hertes and raynes, that is the thoughts
and delectations of al men. When I remember thy justice in judgment I tremble
and quake for fear, considering the burden, weyghte, and filthiness of sin to
be so great, that for one proud thought a great number of Angels fell from
heaven to perpetual pain. Ge^os. ^^
For breakyng thy commau^deme^t Adam and his wife were expelled out of Paradise
and purchased death to al their posterite. Rome ^i.xv^.
The yerth also was not able to bear the burden of Corah Dathan, and Abyram,
but for their rebellion against the and thy servant Moses and Aaron It opened
and swalowed the^ up quycke, with their adherentes. For the sin of David and
for that he of a pride no^bred or mustred his people puttyng trust in the
multitude of them rather then in the, that art the living God: ii. Reg. x^iiii
there died of the pestilence in Israel.lxx. thousand people within.iii. days.
This considered what creature living can but tremble and fear. Seeing that our
sins now daily, are no less in number and in haynowsnes then were theyrs,
but rather mooe and greater. And remedy have we none but to fly from thy
wrath: into the bosom of thy most dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, making
him a bulworke and a shilde of defense between thine anger and our offenses,
Most humbly besechyng the for his sake, and for the bitter pains that he
suffered for our redemption to be merciful unto us And not to rebuke us in thine
anger, Domine ne in furor^ tuo arguas me neque in ira tua corripias me.
nor to chasten us in thine heavy displeasure, Let not thy sentence of
everlasting damnation take place which thou gave against Adam and all his
posterity for his disobedience. Thou art meke, gentyl, and long sufferyng of
thy self. It is our grievous offenses heaped together one upon another, that
provoke the to anger. Not that thou art angry or furyous thy self: but we
felyng thy dreadful judgment upon us, given to pain everlasting, or thy heavy
hand in punishyng us here in this world: judge the to be angry in the
pronunciation of that sore sentence, and in the execution of the same, we speak
and judge of the, after the sort as we that are worldely, do speak and judge
one of us by an other. And with such words as we declare our own passions,
and affections: we also declare the contents of our hertes unto the Lord,
desiryng the not to punysh us in the rygour of thy justice, but after the
swetenes of thy mercy to have pity upon us. Apoca. vi
Else shall we in that terrible day, desire mountains and rocks to fall upon
us to hyde us from the face of him that sits in the throne of judgment, and
from ye wrath of the lamb. Whose wrath we are well assured will not be then
aswaged by any peticion of frindes. ^ophony. i.
Nether shall silver or gold be able to deliver us in that wrothful day.
Wherefore we acknowledgyng our offenses humbly desire the merciful father to
have compassion upon us, and to consider the weakness and imbesilitie of our
nature, A^^set ete mei domine quontem infirmus su^.
which nature is wounded in all her powers with the darts of concupicence.
Where through we are prone and ready to all vice, feeble to resist tentation, and
unable of our selfs to arise: ^^tio ^ue domine quoniam conturbata sunt omnia
ossa mea.
being once drowned in the filthy mire of sin. It is thou Lord, and thy
blessed son that must heal our infirmities, for all our bones are vered. The
strength that we have is not able to withstand the temptations of our stiff
and sturdy enemy. ^a^^w. xliii.
Thy son Christ must reach us his hand, as he did to Peter walking on the
water, when he was in perel of drownyng. The^ shall we have strength to arise,
his Passion is our medicine and health. Thy grace and his ar all the remedies
in our infirmities. Et anima mea turba^a est valde.
Our souls that is our reason and our conscience are troubled through ye
multitude of our sins, which trouble surely is not small. For we find an
other law in our me^bres stryuinge with ye law of our mind, Roma. vii.
and subduynge us unto the law of sin, which is in our me^bres. We are al
carnal sold under sin So yt what we should and would do, that we do not, but
what we should not and would not, that we do. And why? Truly for ye in us
(that is in our flesh) dwells no goodness. The crabbe tree can bring forth
none other but sower crabbes, their natural fruit, onles better fruit be
graffyd thereon. No more ca^ we do any good, but by the graffynge of thine
abundaunt grace in us. Consider therefore, good lord, our contrite hertes and
penitent minds. Sed tu domine vsque quo?
And let it not be long before thou do cure us, Let it not be long before
thou mercifully do hear us, and amend us. We doubt not also but thou that
haste made our stony hertes to be fleshye and soft, with a will in us to
desire thy grace: wilt not now stay, but proceed further to the full and
perfect healinge of us, although for a season thou do defer the execution of
thy graciouse purpose: to the intent to make us more fervent in the pursuyte of
our requests: and that thy goodness may be had in more estimation when it
comes: and the more surely and fermely holden when it is come. For surely,
good lord, our nature is such, that we lyttel esteem great things which are
sone obtained, but things gotten with diffycultye, we do much set by. So yt if
thou should at the first grant our peticio^s we would not depely
consider the greatness of our offenses and the hard cure of our wou^des.
Wherefore hope bids us still to cry and call unto the for help as the woman of
Canany cried still upon thy son Christ, Mathei. xv.
for the help of her daughter, and at length was hard to her own co^tentatio^.
At the lest if we knock and call still, we doubt not but thou will grant our
desire, as the man granted to lend his neighbor.iii. loves, Luke ^^.
who knocked fast at his door at mydnight, not only for that he was his
frynde. But chiefly for his importunity in knockinge. Which importunitye of
prayer is to the, very acceptable. Thou dydest promis by ye mouth of thy
blessed son, that if we would knock you would open the door. Mathei. vii.
If we would ask we should receive. Wherefore trusting to yt infallible promis
we cry, we knock and call to the. Yea we will never cease knocking and crying
till you lord turn toward us and deliver our souls. Turn, Cond^^te^e domine
et ^ips anima^ mea^.
we hertely beseech the, from thy wrath to pitye, from vengeance to mercy.
Deliver us from the manifold troubles which we have in our co^scie^ces. ^o
Titum (...).
Oh save us for thy mercies sake, not for our merits, which are none, not for
ye works of righteousness which we have wrought. But of thy high mercy and
through the renewing of thy holy spirit. Our debt is so great to the, yt we
are never able to make just reco^pense. Of thy mere goodness therefore must you
acquit us there of. Else must we lie in prison perpetually without redemption.
(...) no est in morte aut memor sit tui. In inferno ^^^e quis ^^nfitebitur tibi.
Where after our death we ca^ have no remembrance of thy holy name, for who
will give the thanks, being in hell, for the manyfold benefits receyuyd of
the, both to thine honor, and to the profit of those that are living. The
pains their are so intolerable, that no man can there remember god, and
confess his faults to his profit, nor magnify God, but curse and blaspheme
through his dolorouse pain. Ecclesi. xv^.
There is no time nor place of repe^tau^ce and tha^kfulnes: but of pain and
torments This knowing while we are here lyuinge we confess before the lord
our offenses, being very sorry for the co^mittinge of the^. Laboraui in gems^
meo lauabo per singulas noctes lectu^ meu^ lachrimis meis stratu^ meum rigabo.
And are weary of groninge and lame^ting for the^, every night we wash our
beds and water our coutches with tears, not openly weapinge as hypocrites
do, but in the night secretly. For that we would not be seen: and that not
only with the tears of eyes, but also with tears fet from the botome of our
hertes, Hi^re. iiii.
with which water we wash our hertes from al malice yt we may be sauid. And
as we have made our bodies, servants to uncleanness, from one iniquity to an
other: Roma. vi.
even so will we now (by the help of thy grace) give the same body to be
servant unto righteousness that we may be sanctified. In this bed of the
flesh and in the coutche of sensuality, did the poor soul of mankind lie,
from the fall of Adam to the coming of Christ, syck and sore wounded. But by
his cominge and lying in the same bed of our fleshy nature: he healed the
said sick soul of all her infirmityes. But our coutche (lord) he lay not in
nor midled there with. No spark of sensuality, no spot of sin was ever
found in him. He never did unright, Esaias. iiii.
another was there ever disceptfulnes i^ his mouth. He left yt coutch of
sensuality for us to ly in, to strive and wrastyl there with all the days of our
life. Turbatus est pre me tore oculus meus.
And this causes our countenance or mind to be changed for very inward
grieff, we are so troubled with our said coutch of sensuality, for when we
seek in it most ease and rest: it tourneth after to our greatest pain and
gryeffe. It is a serpent with a fair face, but in his tail is hid a sharp
and venomous stynge of everlasting pain. Thus do we consume away being
veryd with so many enemies, Inuetetaui inter oe^s municos meos.
as our fyerse enemy the devil, who seeks still matter of occasion to lay
against us. The world draws us to follow her delectable deceptfull vanities,
And the flesh ready to follow sensuality and to run headlong into al kinds of
iniquity, beside the company of wicked people, able to seduce us from our
godly purposes. These dreadful enemies can we never be able of our selves to
subdue, Apo^a^^
but the noble victorious lion of the trybe of Judah, is our whole refuge who
is come to our reskew and succoure. He has killed death suppressyd ye
devil, and through his grace and power, given us power to ouerco^me all our
said enemies. Wherefore being now truly penitent for our offenses, and
fightinge under the baner of the merits of his passion, we will boldly say.
Disce^^te a me oe^s qui operamini iniqui^ate^: quo^a^ e^audiuit dominus voce^
fletus met.
Away from us al ye enemies and wicked doars, for the lord has hard the voice
of our weping. Ye wicked spirits and evil lyuers, that are yt me^bres of the
devil avoid ye now from us. Your great master ye prince of this world, Ihon
^^
the prince of darkness is now cast out and has lost his power. Although ye
have long holde^ us in prison and captivity yet are ye now ouerco^me and your
venomous stinge pulled out. Ephesians. v.
We yt were so^time darcknes are now become light in ye lord, who has hard
our humble peticio^ and has received our prayers. Eradiuit dominue
doprecatione^ mea^: dominus oratione^ mea^ suscepit.
We prayed to the for grace, and thou full louynglye have sent us down dewes
thereof in great abundaunce. We prayed for remission of our sins and
delyueraunce out of all our tribulations, and thou lord most mercifully have
hard and granted our peticio^s. Wherefore al our enemies shall be co^fou^ded
and sore vexed. Eruhesca^t and conturbe^tur inimici mei: co^uertaetur et
erubesca^t valde velociter.
Yea they shall be put to flyghte and to shame. And that right sone and suddenly.
For they have lost in a short space (through our humble contricion) that
which they have of long time had in their possession. They kept with wrong,
that thy blessed son has dearly boughte. But he like a strong and mighty
warrior has thrown them all out of their possession. And throwgh our
humility granted to us that felicity, which our said enemies throwgh
their pride has lost. Wherefore Lord we thy poor faithful creatures being
through thy grace and the battle of thy son upon the cross, restored now
to thy favor: and having the houses of our hertes and souls, swepte and made
clean from all vices which were wont to inhabit in us, we now (fearing lest
ye sturdy tyraunte our enemy finding no rest in places where he walks
return again into the houses of our souls, Luke.vi.
from whence he is already by force of thy son cast out, and fyndyng it
clean swept, bring with him seven other such as he is him self, to dwell
there, and thereby make us in worse case then we were before) we most humbly
beseech the to give us strength and force to keep our said houses of our
souls from every violent invasion of these wicked enemies. And sense thou
have said by thine apostle Paul, 1. Corin. iii.
that thy faithful are the temple or habitacio^ of god, and that ye spirit of
god dwells in the^: we therefore most hertely beseech the to dwell still in
us by thy continual grace, whose assistence is sufficient to put to flyghte
all wicked spirits. Ephesians. ^.
Make us to be of thy householde, build us upon the foundacyon of thy blessed
son Jesus Christ, yt is the head corner stone. In who^, every building
coupled together, growyth to an holy temple in the Lord and is made an
habitacyon for God in the spirit.

The Prophet considering the corrupt manner of living of the greatest sort of
people, and forseyng in spirit the darknyng of holy scripture through men's
tradicions, in the person of the faithful congregation prayseth the law of
God, and desires to be delivered from all false doctrine, and from the company
of the wicked.
Psalm.^^. Vsque quo domin^^
O Most holy, most glorious and ineffable trinity.iii. persons in one godhed By
whose goodness al creatures have their being, before whose eyes all things (as
well that are paste as yt are to come) are acco^ptid as prese^nt: to thy mighty
majesty, we thy poor faithful subjects of thy church here militant, show
forth our lamentable prayer. Beseching ye, pitifully to behold the miserable
estate thereof, which never had more neade of thy godly assiste^ce the^ at this
present it has. For where to Adam (father of all man kind) in his creacio^
thou gave a participacion of thy wisdom, goodness and justice, which all by
his transgressio^ were greatly diminished, and after by the incarnacion and
passion of the second person in trinite, thou dyddest restore again mankind
to his original justice, through the sacraments of baptism and penance: if
he did abide in the observing of thy laws and the verity of the^: It is now
come to pass (most merciful lord) that not only our said father Ada^
being made just and holy, did fall from the verity of thy laws (in which
laws, as in a mirour: thy verity, justice, and goodness are declared) but also
all other (very few except) since that time have also erred and left thy said
verities. Saluum me fac domine quoniam defecte sa^ctus.
There is not one saint or good man left. few have continued in thy faith, and
given the thy dew honor, puttinge all their hope, love, and trust in the as in
the most chief goodness: but have fallen from the, even from the beginning,
unto this day. For as Ninus erectid an image of his father, which he caused to
be honored of all me^ that were under his dominion, wherbye ydolatry grew
among al other nations, so that at length every city and contrye chose the^ a
peculiar god: even so has it ben sense the coming of thy son Christ unto
this day. For the honor only dew unto thy majesty, has been, and yet in most
places is given to stocks and stones. Superstition and ydolatry remainith yet
among ye professoures of ye christian religion. Diminute sunt veritatis. a fi
us hominum. Michee. iii.
Whereby thy verities are diminished, and few are faithful among ye children of
men. The verity of justice is gone. For rewards and affection blyndeth
justice. The verity of good lyuinge is decayed for very few are found
which give good example to other by there godly life and conversation. The
verity also of doctrine has taken her wings and is flowen away. The priests
and prophets preach and prophecy for lucre, and please for promotion. Ese^.
iiii.
They peruerte scripture to their imaginations. Neither are men loving to their
neighbors for thy sake as thou have commanded them to be, but every man
tells lies to other. Every man is glad to deceive his neighbor in bargayne.
^lana loquuti sunt vnus quisque ad protimu^ suum.
No man lends without gaynes Yea (that most pity and harm is): they lie
upon the true testament of Christ, by wrestynge thereof making light to be
darkness, Esaye.v.
and darkness to be taken as light. Labia dolosa in cord and cordeloquuti su^t.
They do flatter with their lyppes, being disse^blers and double of heart. They
have one heart to think one thing, and an other heart, causing the mouth to
utter the contrary. Jacob.i.
Al which sort of men yt have double and chaungeable minds, are inco^stant in all their ways. And as their hertes are double eue^ so are their to^ges. But we
doubt not but that thou will rote up and vterly destroy such deceptfull
tongues and lyppes, Disperdat dominus vniuersa^^abi^ dolosa and lingua^ magni
loquam.
specially if they at any time speak proud things in contempt of thy name,
as thou did co^founde the building and tongues of those that builded the
tower of Babel in the land of Sinear. Psalm. lx^^
Which tower they of pride intended to erecte up to heaven. These crafty
people whet their tongues as men do the edges of their swerdes to do myschyef.
Adders poison is under their lyppes but their language (to the utter show) is
fair painted: yt thereby they may deceive and prevail. Qui di^^u^t lingua^
nostra^ magnificabimus labia nostra a nobis sunt, quis noster dominus est.
Yea they say their tongues are in there own power to speak therewith at their
pleasure, as though they had no lord over them. They think their eloquence to
be the gift of nature and not of god. All such fight against the high majesty
of thy godhed, which attribute unto the^ selves ye good gifts that thou have
sent the^. Esaias. li^^
But all tongues (that resyst against the) thou shall ouerco^me and conde^pne,
as thou dydeste the wyckid propose and blasphemous tongue of Nichanor, whose
tongue (after that he was slain) was pluckyd forth, cut in small pieces, and
thrown to the fowls of ye air. Psalm.liii.
The nature of man is so corrupt and abominable in wyckednes: that few or
none upon the earth do good. All me^ are set on mischyef. Propter miseriam i^^
opum et gemitum pauperum nunc exurga^ decit dominus.
They despise God and oppress the poor. Wherefore Lord, we beseech the to
arise up for the troubles sake of the oppressed: and at the co^playnt of the
poor help them and set them at rest. Pona^ in salutari auxilium little.
Thy son Christ is our sauinge health, in whom who so trustith, restith in
suertie and can not be deceyuid. Psalm.xliiii.
Arise we pray the merciful God and sleep not over long. Cast us not away for
ever. Thou slep test very long after the fall of Adam, or thou diddiste awake
to send thy derely beloved son for the redemption of mankind. Galathians.
^i^.
At the last when the time determined by thy godhed was full come. Thou did
awake and send thy son borne of a maid to redeame the^ yt were bond under
the law and to releaue thine elect which abode sore longinge for his coming.
So now Lord, at the last arise to the comfort of thy small flock, and to the
confusion of thine enemies, make us thorough thy grace able to keep thy laws
which are pure even as the silver, Eloquia domini eloquia casta argentu^ igne
examinatu^ probatu^ ter purgatu^ septuplu^.
which from earth is tried and purifyed.vii. times in the fire. Thy law was
prophesied and spoken of by the holy patriarchs and prophets long before it
came. It was promised to Moses, Deutero. xviii. Esaias. xx. Luke. i^
and prophesied by Esaias. It was approuid by the most holy father of heaven,
willinge all men to give ear, and to believe the words of thy well beloved
son. The words of this law are pure and rebuke al vice. They were by thy
holy ghost tried to be true. For at his coming he taught the Apostles all
verity, Ihon.xvi.
and nothing but verity. They were also confirmed with miracles. Thus have
they ben vii. times (that is) many times or perfectly tried as silver is tried
and purgyd by fire, the earth and earthly things are clean consumed thereby.
Concupisce^ces are asswagyd, the old man is kyllyd and the new man is entryd
in his place. The ceremonies of the old law are blowe^ away, as is chafe by
the fan of Christ's word. The holy scripture is lykened to wine, Esaye.xv.
for that it reioyseth and comfort the heart, and makyth men (through
delyght yt they have therein) to drink much thereof. It is also likened to
milk, for yt it norysheth the soul as milk does the body. This preciouse
jewel ought to be bought with out money, or any manner of other ware given by
way of exchange (that is) it ought to be preached without lucre or having
respect to any person. In thy godly laws (most loving father) do we (thy
faithful people, by the influe^ce of thy grace) trust to live, and to work
after the^ at al times. Tu domine seruabis nos and custodies nos a generatione
hac ineternum.
Not doubtinge but thou Lord wylt perform all that thou haste promised in
the^ to us, for the observing of the^: and that thou wilt preserve us from
this wicked generation for ever. Thy blessed son Jesus, said he had kept al
those who^ his father had given him to keep, and left not one of the^, save
only ye son of perdicio^. With no less dilyge^ce we trust, Ioh. xvii.
that you and thy blessed son will also keep, save, and defend us. From all
yuel of ye dyuel and of al his children. From those ye err^ from thy true
faith, and swerve from the veritye of thy word, and from al unjust persons. In
circuitu impit ambulant, secundu^ altitu dinem tua^ multiplicasti filios
hominum.
The number of the ungodly we know to be greatly multiplied. Yea they have
gotten the upper hand among the children of men: and that is the cause why
the wicked walk about in surtie (as the^ semythe) fearing nothing, but still
labourynge about for honor, riches, and worldly pleasures. As ye mylhors
labors to the gryndynge of the corn in the myll, not ceasinge (onles he be
taken out) till he fall down for weryed: no more do these gredy people leave of
their busy study and cure in getting: till death suddenly stryke the^. Genes. xv
They go still about, as the sodomites (being stryken with blindness) did about
the house of Loathe, and could not find the door. They have not grace to see
their own folly, and to know their myshyef which is at hand. So blinded they
be with temporal goods and pleasures. But thy faithful people regard another
the multitude of such wicked do ars, nor yet their prosperity: knowing that
all though they be magnifyed up to the heaven, so yt their heads retche up to
the clouds: Io^. ^
yet they perysh at the last like dounge, they vanysh as a dream, and pass
away as a vision in the night, so that the eye which saw them before, gets
now no more sight of the^. And why? They have oppressed the poor and not
helped the^. Their bealyes could never be full, therefore shall they peryshe in
their covetousness etc. For when they have gatherid so much that they have
no more space to lay their corn and goods in, Luke. ^^
but are feign to build new houses: the^ shall thou lord say unto them. Oh ye
fools. This night shall your souls be fet from you, and then whose shall those
goods be, which you with great carefulnes have prouidid? Saying therefore that
the nobility riches, and power of such endure no while, but pass away like
a shadow: we thy faithful congregation, another esteem these worldely
pleasures, nor desire the company of such gredy worldely rulers. We only styck
fast to thy word and promises, therein reposyng our full hope and trust, and
leave unto thy majesty the dyscussynge of ye cause, why thine elect are so
few in number and in small estimation of the world. And on the contrary part
why the ungodly do enjoy and prosper in their worldely procedinge, and are
also so many in number, the cause whereof does far pass our capacities, and
are known only of the deep secret knowledge of thine inco^prehe^sible wisdom.
Wherefore with thine apostle Paul we say. Oh, Roma. xi.
the deepnes of the abu^daunte wysdom and knowledge of god, how unsearchable
are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? for who has known the
mind of the Lord? or who was his conseloure? or who has given him first, that
he might be reco^pensyd again? for of him and through him and for him are all
things. to him be glory for ever. Amen.

The Prophet being very sorry for his offenses, prays for grace and to be
delivered from his enemies Wherein he puts himself as an example for all true
penitentes to follow.
O Merciful Lord that art the sure sauegarde and defense of all ye earnestly
trust in the, The.xiii. Psalm.
and desyrest not the death of sinners, but their co^uersyon and amendment of
life: I acknowledge unto thine highness all mine offenses by me committed,
which if I would hyde from the Lord, I could not. I consydre also ye
miserable estate, where unto, through sin I am brought: for there by I have
worthily lost thy favor, and am fallen from thy grace, which while thou
wythdrawest from me I can do no good thing, nor think one good thought. My
sin causethe the to put me out of thy remembrance, and to forget me,
delayinge to give me yt which is my strength and my comfort. But how long
will thou forget me lord for ever? How long will thou hyde thy face from me?
Vs^^ quo domine obliui^^etis n^^ in fine^? Vsque quo auct^is s^tie^ tuam a ^e.
How long will thou withdraw thy grace from me? Thou know my herty
co^tricio^ and sorrow, for that I have unkindly forsaken thy service and served
thine enemy the devil and sin. But trusting assuredly in thy promis made to
all me^, by the mouth of thy prophet Ezechiel. Ezechiel.xviii.
That is, if the sinner will turn a way from all his sins yt he has
committed and keep al thy commandments, doubtless he shall live and not dye.
As for all his sins that he did before: thou wylt not think upon the^. I
most humbly beseech ye, that as my sins were the cause why thou dyddest put
me out of thy remembrance: even so let my hertye penitence for them, cause the
to put my sins out of thy remembrance. Suffer me not long to remain in
this perplexitye of mind, Quam diu ponam consilia in anima mea: dolorem in
cord meo perdiam:
and to take sorrow inwardlye in mine heart from day to day: continually
fearing the punishmente dew to my sin, and lokynge still for thy coming
into my soul by grace to deliver me. Hope has caused me long to look for
the, that art my life and my health. Thy long delay in coming has much
increased my desire. My fervent desire at length is now turned to a vehement
pain. Wherefore make haste Lord (I beseech the) to help my syke soul,
Psalmo.xi.
and tarry not. Let not mine enemy the devil long tryumphe over me, Vsqueauo
craltabitur inimicus meus superme.
whose property is to tread under his fete, like a cruel prince, all those
that he vanquyssheth. And that treading is dangerous and terryble. Ihon.xviii.
For he treads them down to the pytte of hell, and to eternal death. He
did long hold in captiuitye all mankind, until the coming and passion of
Christ for our redemption. And sense, through his crafty traynes, has
brought to utter confusion, many of those that profess, thy sons religion.
Respice et eraudi me domine deus meus. Illumina oculos meos ne vnquam
obdormian^ in morte:
Wherefore behold Lord and consider my miserable estate, and hear mine humble
peticio^, touchi^g my delyuerau^ce from out of his danger. Lyghten the eye of
mine heart and understanding, with the light of thy grace and comfort, thereby
expellinge the darkness of ignorance. Lyghten also one other eye of my soul,
which is the eye of the affection. The syghte of this eye is so dyme that it
has no perfyte and true judgment. Yea it is so blinded with the vanities of
this world that one thing, in apparaunce, seems to be.xx things, like the
sight of disceitful eyes of glass. Yea sum time the co^cupisce^ce thereof is so
great: that the eye is clean put out and the sight lost. Mankind enters into
such leage of amity with the devil: that he is contented to have one of his eyes
put out to have his favor: as the inhabitau^tes of Iabes were agreed to have
there right eyes put out, i. Regum.xi.
according to ye desire of Nahas king of the Ammonites, had not king Saul and
the prophet Samuel saved the^ there from, and overcome the said Nahas and his
host. Even so (most merciful God) I beseech the save my said eye of affection
that it be not put out by our enemy the devil: that it sleep not in sin,
which is the cause of eternal death. Man may fall by frayltye and arise
again. Yea the custom of sin makyth a man ready often to fall. But to lie
still slepyng and slumbring in sin, as does the swyne in the foul mire:
engenders obstynacie in ame^dement, and delay of penite^ce till the later
hour, at which hour, who ca^ be sure to have thy grace at his pleasure? That
is only at thy will Lord not at our commandment. Wherefore, I most lowly
pray yt to send me the light of thy grace while I have here time and space of
repentance. That at my latter end mine enemies say not (reioysyng and
boastynge) that they had the vpperhande over me. ^equa^do dicat inimicus meus
preualui aduersus eum.
As the Phylistians (the figure of the wicked spyrites) after the death of
king Saull in the mount of Gelboe, i. Reg. xxxi.
cut of ye head of Saull and sent it with his harneis through there country for
a show (they bare it also into the temple of their gods of a pride and joy
that they had of his death) in such fasshyon will those cruel enemies that
trouble me, Qui tribulant me erul tabunt simotus fuero
rejoice if I be cast down, or if I do ones swerve from the and thy faith,
and so dye without repentance. They assault mankind by pleasau^te suggestion
to sin, they wrestle with us causynge delectation there in. They stryke us
and wound us when we consent thereto. They foil us and bring us on our knees
when we do the act of sin. And by the custom thereof: they give us a great
fall, with such violence: that we have much to do, to arise again. But if we
happen to dye therein impenitent: the^ have they the victory over us. The^
rejoice they thereat as the conqueror does of his conquest. Then will they
cast us into a pit, Treno.iii.
and lay a stone of obstinacye upon us, that we shall not arise again. And as
there is much joy in heaven when one sinner forsakes his sin, and
returns to the by penance: in like manner is there joyful triumphynge among
the wicked spirits in hell, when one soul forsaking ye dies in deadly sin.
Ego autem in misse^^ cordia tua spetaui
But all my trust is in thy mercy. For although thou hyde thy self in a cloud
that my prayer should not go through it unto thine ears: yet are not thy
mercies clean gone, Creno.iii.
neither does thy loving kyndnes cease. Thou art therefore lord my porcyon,
and in thy mercy still will I hope and in none other creature, knowing for
certain, that (as God) you only may help me, and as my loving father, thou
will help me. Exultabit cor me^^ i^ salutari tuo.
Wherefore in the my heart shall be joyful and in thy saving health, which is thy
son Christ our savior and redeamer. The Philistines knowinge the presence of
thine arc to be in the camp of the Israelites the day of their battle: i.
Reg. iiii.
were sore afraid, saying, who shall deliver us out of the hand of this
mighty God? Much more will I be glad and take sure trust, having the presence
and comfort of thy lively grace. And in toke^ of the victory which thou haste
given me over mine enemies: Cantabo domino qu^ bona tribuit mihi et p^allam
nomini domini altissimi,
I will not cease (as I have good cause) to sing the praise of the Lord, that
so lovingly has delte with me, and praise the name of the most high all the
days of my lyffe.

The.xxiii. Psalm Dominus regit me.
The faithful man gives thanks to God for his manifold gifts and graces.
Whereby he is governed to the heavenly Jerusalem.
WHat lyuinge reasonable creature can give condynge thanks unto the (most
gracious heavenly father) for the manifold gifts, which thou, of thine
infinite mercy and goodness, have given him. First for his noble creation,
wherein he excels all other earthely creatures, and then for his redemption
through the bitter passion and resurrection of thy most louinge son, for the
which, I, as one of thy poor creatures, most humbly give the thanks For had
not our redemption ensewed our creation, it had been much better for us that we
had never ben made. This thy love was above al other most fervent, when thou
did not spare to give thine only begotten son for us: washing away al
our fylthines in the blood of that meek lamb. Thy only natural son
(being God) was made man, to thinte^t that we (who naturally are ye sons of
men) by him, through grace, might be made the sons of God. And not being
contended with this kyndnes, thou also Lord consyderyng our weak and frail
nature ready to sin: Dominus regit ^ut et ^idiluti^^ deerit.
do with thy grace guide us and govern us as the shepherde does his sheep,
sufferynge us to want nothing, defending thy poor flock from the rauenyng
wolves, that would else devour us. Esaias.xi. Esaias.lxv.
Thou causest the wolves and the la^bes to dwell together, and to feed together.
Our enemies through ye, are made peaceable. Without this thine aid, we were no
more able to govern our selves well, the^ is the ship without a governor able
to avoid perils, Jacob.iii.
being driven where the violence of wyndes does lead her, but having a wise
ruler at the helm: she is turned at his pleasure. Even so lord (thou being
our guide) we are more sure then the ship is in the haven.

We can want nothing (that is necessary for us) having the with us, who art
al in all things. i. Corhin. xv. In loco pascu^ ibi m^ collocauit.
Thy blessed son has put us to feade in the pleasant, grene, and bateful
pasture of his holy church, making us to rest in the unity there of by a
lively faith and hope in him. In which church is plentiful abundaunce of
spiritual meat, of ye word of God, which nourishes and gives life to the
soul, as bread and other food feadeth the body. Mathe. v. Ezechiel.iii.
With this food thou did feade thy prophet Ezechiel when thou dydest cause
him to eat a book where with his bowels were filled, and it seemed in his
mouth sweter the^ honey. Super aqua^ refecti^nis educauit me:
In this pasture also runs a fresh and a pleasant water of godly doctrine,
wherewith we ofttimes do refresh our weary souls. In this also, is a water of
spiritual washing by baptysme, whereby we were wonderfully refreshed in our
youth when thereby our souls (being made soul through the devil and sin)
were repaired and made beauteful according to their first creation, that is, to
thy lykenes and image. Ma^hei. iii.
And by this water we are replenyshed with thy holy spirit. This water saw thy
prophet Ezechiel long ago, Ez^ch. xlvii.
gushinge forth of the right side of the temple, and grew to a great river that
no man could wade over, to which water who so would come: was made hole and
lustye. All fyshes are bred and nouryshed in water, and without water: can no
long while endure on live. Even so in the water of our baptysme we were borne
again, in the water of godly doctrine we are nourished, and with out these, we
are but dead in sin and wickedness: and at the end, shall go to everlasting
death. But these waters are to us, John. iiii
a well springinge up into everlasting life. And in case at any time by the
frayltye of nature, we fall into sin: yet is thy merciful son ready to
receive us to his grace, ^^smam mea^ co^uettit:
and quicken our souls, being sorry and penitent for it. By which grace also:
he makes us to know how to love him, and not to esteem the pleasures of this
world, but to have our eyes only fyred upon him. Philip iii
In so much that, with thine apostle Paull, we account al things but dounge so
that we may win Christ, and be found in him, Sebutit me super se^ntas
iusticie:
not having our own righteousness, but that which springs of the faith
which is in Christ. To walk in the paths of his justice and way of
ryghtuousnes is: first to love the above all things, and that for thy self
and thine only goodness, not being unkind, but to show love for love. The other
pathe, is to love our neighbors as our selves and according to the love,
John.iii.
with ye which thy son loved us, that is, to dye if need be for his sake, as
he dyed for mankind, when all men were his enemies. Propter nomen suum
And all this he did for his names sake, for his own honor, and of his own
goodness, for no goodness that was in us, for to be a sauyoure was the cause of
his coming into this world, and having the assiste^ce of his grace, Nam et si
ambulaueto in medio vmbremortis: non timebo mala.
although we should walk in ye valey of ye shadow of death: yet we fear none
euel, for you art with us. This life is a shadow of death, after which we
trust by faith to dwell with the. Sin also is a shadow of death, Esaias.ix.
and so dark a shadow that mankind could not se to get out thereof, till thy
loving son came into this world geuynge him light to see the way to heaven.
And as sin is the shadow of death, so do al sinners, as members of the
devil, walk in the same shadow, which cause temptacions and raise
persequutions to assault thine elect. Quoniam tu mecsi ^^.
But al their co^berous company we nothing fear, because thou art with us.
If we walk in ye water: thou art with us, that the strength of the floudes
drive us not away. If we walk in the fire, the flame shall not burn us. And
why? Because thou our god art with us and thy son has also promised to be
with us unto the end of the world. Esaias. xliii Mathei vltimo Virga tua et
bacuius tuus ipsa me consolata sunt.
His rod of discipline and correction does chastise us when we swerve at any
time out of the right way. And there in, we judge that he does love us, for
who^ so ever thou and he do love: Hebr. xii.
them do ye chasten, and ye stourge every sone that you receive. Christ's
strong shepherdes staff does stay us when we are weak, as a sick man is
hoden up by his walkyng staff. That is to say: the gifts of thy holy spyrite,
are our strength and our comfort in all infirmities, tribulations and other
encombraunces. Thy rod does direct us to know what we should do. Thy
staff is our strength to stand fast thereby against al invasions of our
enemies. And to have us more sure cute of ye danger of those that trouble us:
thy said louinge son has prepared and set before our eyes, the table of holy
scriptures, Parasti in conspectu meo me^sam aduersus eos quit^^bulant me.
wherein we may trauayll and learn to drive away from us all kinds of
temptacions, Mathe. iiii.
as he him self drove away the devil that tempted him in desert by the
allegations of holy scripture. Impinguasti in olco caput meum: Psalm.xliiii.
And through these scriptures: our heads are anointed with oil, that is,
our minds are made joyful with spiritual gladness. With this oil was thy
son Christ anointed most pri^cipally above al other. For in him, as in the
head, rested that joyful oil from whense it ran down to the other members,
Psalm ^xx^ii.
that is, to all other faithful people, as the oil that fell on the bearde of
Aaron, dropped from thence to the skyrtes of his garments. Ihon. i. i. Collos.
i.
In Christ is the fulness of grace, from who^ distilleth all the grace, Cali^
meus mebrians qua^ pre^latus est,
goodness and comfort that we have. Through holy scripture, also our cup is
filled full to the brimme of pure liquor: it causes us for joy of heavenly
contemplacion to forget al ye troubles and miseries of this world. The dregs
of earthly pleasures and carnal affections, remain not in this cup. For as
thy mercy has gone before us plentifully geuinge us aboundau^ce of thy great
grace so we trust and doubt not but it will follow us all the days of our
lives, kepinge us, Et misericordia tua subsequetur me omnibus diebus vite me.
that we fall not from faith and from the good purposes and good mind where in
we are. Thou lord must build our house or else we labor in vain,
Psalm.cxxvii.
if we think we can build it. Thou must found it upon faith and that is
thy gift. Thou must also send thy grace afterward to establysh our work or
else it will fayll and fall, and when it is ones erected thou must also keep it
by the continual influence of thy said grace, or else our kepinge, were but a
yelding up, there of to our enemies. Thou must be our beginning, Et vt inhabitem
in domo domini: in longitudinem dierum.
and also our ending. And then shall we be sure to dwell in the house of the
lord for ever, that is, in the heavenly city of Jerusalem. For we know
surely that if our earthly mansion, where in we now dwell, were dissolved: ii.
Cothin. v.
we have a buildinge ordained of God, and habitacion not made with man's hand
but eternal in heaven where is perpetual joy and beatitude without end.

Dauyd in the person of every penitent Christian, confesses his offenses,
The.xxxii. Psalm.
attributyng to God his conversion, but nothing to his works or deseruinges
Among all the beautyfull sloures of virtue that grow in ye gardyne of man's
soul: one of the most pleasant, most necessary and most acceptable, is
humility. Whose power was so great, yt it drew the son of God, the second
person in divinity, from heaven into the womb of the meek virgyn Mary, whom
of all other he chose to be his mother, specially for her humility. Wherewith
she, among many other virtues, was syngulerly endewed. In this humbleness of
estate, Christ our sauyoure, being lord of all the world, walked all the days
of his life, and there in ended, humblynge him self unto the vile death of the
cross. The wise humilitye of Abygayll pacifyed the furye of David, i. Reg xxv.
when he was minded to kill all the men of the house of her husband Naball.
The humble submission of wicked Achab, assuaged the wrath of god, ii. Reg. xxi.
and kept the plage of vengeance from his house, all the days of his life.
The great goodness of this virtue is made manifest by openyng the hainousnes of
the vice contrary thereto, which is pride, for through it: the bryghte aungelles
fell from heaven. Pride of the minds of Adam and Eve to be as gods knowing
boeth good and evil: Genes. ^
caused them to break the commandments of God, and therefore were cast out
of paradise Pride caused the wicked people after the floude, to take in hand
the building of the tower of Babel, Genes. xi.
whose top should reatche unto heaven, to get them thereby a perpetual name.
Pride made A man to inuente a way to destroy the people of God, H^ster.vi.
which at le^ght, turned to his own destruction. iiii. Reg. xix
For the proud blasphemous words of Sennacherib king of Assiria, against God:
the angel of the Lord slew in one night.clxxxv. thousand of his host, and
he shortly after in his own country was slain by two of his own sons.
Pride caused Nabuchodonosor to be cast by god, Daniel.iiii.
from his kingdom, and to feade like an ox with grass in the feldes the space
of seven years, till he knew and confessed that all power comes of the
Lord. This vice is yet the destruction of many christians at this day. Who
think they may do good of there own power, and when they show any good
works: they glory of them, not geuinge thanks to him that gave them the grace
to work well. Roma. iiii
They consider not that by grace through faith, the wicked sinner is made just,
for all men were found in sin, and justified by grace through faith, which
boeth, are the gifts of God freely given, and through the^: are all ye worckes
of man made good. Luke.xviii.
The proud pharesy made boast in his prayers of his good deades, and dispysed
his poor neighbor, which caused his prayer not to be hard, when the poor
publicane standinge a fare of, of humility, durst not lift up his eyes to
heaven, but hertely knocking his breast, said, lord, be merciful to me
wretched sinner, which herty confession of his sins: was cause of his
justification. Wherefore, most graciouse Lord our heavenly sather, I
(considering ye power of humility, and the acknowledginge of a man's offenses
with a penitent heart, to be of so great efficacy: I thy poor creature
unworthy to appear before thy mighty majesty) do pour down, even here
before the, my sack that is full with sins which I have committed even from
my youth. They are great and many with out number. Nevertheless trustyng of
thine accustomed and natural property to be merciful to all sinners, that
being sorry for the committinge of their offenses, with all there hertes call
and turn to the, Marc. ^
and knowinge that thou did send thy loving son, not to call those that
seem in there own conceytes to be just, but to call those to repentance, which
confess themselves to be sinners. I therefore lord, willing (by the help of
thy grace) utterly to forsake sin and to fulfill thy holy will here after:
desire the humbly of forgeuenes, Beati quorum remiss sunt iniquitates and quo
it is terta sunt peccata.
and to admit me among the nu^bre of those that are blessed, and their
unrighteous forgeuen. I will not hyde from the my sins, neither yet
excusse them. But I pray the Lord to hyde them in the bloody wounds of thy
son Christ, where they shall be put in perpetual oblivion. Ezechiel xvi
For who so covers his own iniquity: you will dyscouer it to all the world
at the day of judgment to his shame. Os^^^^
Thou will then have him striped as naked as he was borne, that is, his shame
shall not be hyd, but manifest to al men in that day. Wherefore I will not hyde
my wound my self, to thentent that thou, my good surgeo^, may lay a
plaster thereon to cover it, that ye devil mine enemy shall never espy where it
was. Beatus vit cui no^ imputab^^ dominus peccatu^: nec est in spiritu^^s dolu^.
Blessed is the man unto whom thou imputest no sin, and in whose spirit there
is no gyle. If I did feign my self to be sorrowful, and were not: the^ were
there gyle in me. But from the botome of my heart, lord, I am sorry, and ask the
forgeuenes. If I think I am just, having my conscience loded with sins: then
were there gyle in me, but I know, there dwells no goodness in me. For if ever
there were any: it was thine, and thine handy work and not mine. But, sin, I
know, I have had and have many, and they be mine own workma^shyp, not thine:
and while I held my tongue not co^fessynge the^: my bones, that is, Quonia^
tacui inuetarauerunt ossa mea, o^clamarem tota di^
my strength: consumed away through daily co^playninge. The powers of my soul
waxed faint with my silence, which with declarynge my sins, through
penitence: are become strong and of force. I kept close the faults that I
should have declared, or else I excused them, and my good deades which I
should have kept close: those, ever I publyshed. The sins that I hid:
remain still with me, but the goodness whereof I boasted: iiii. Reg. ^*
that I lost and the reward for it, I am there in served as was Ezechias the
king of Judah. Who showed to the messengers of Berodach Balada^s, son to the
king of Babylon: all the riches of gold, silver, jewels and all that was in
his treasorye. Wherefore the prophet Esaias prophesied unto him, that the day
should come, when all that was in his house, and all that his father, had laid
up in store: should be carried to Babylon, which was found true not long after
in ye days of zedechiah. In likewise, I did set my good deades (which were my
treasoure) forth to ye sale. Wherefore I lost the^, and well worthy, Luke.xviii.
for he that humbles him self: shall be exalted, and he that exalts him
self: shall be brought low. But al is for the best, to those that will
consider thy callynges, for because thy hand was so heavy upon me both day
and night, Quoniam die ac nocie granata est super me manus tua: connersus sum
in ersina mea du^ configitur sp^^a. Job.xix.
scorging me with tribulatio^s, my moisture was like the drought in somer: thy
hand toutched me causyng me to take sorrow and thought, nevertheless I was
thereby brought to know mine infirmities, and thy mighty power. This weight of
thy hand was cause of mine humility, my conscience was pryked with the pryke of
remorse, it was never quiet: till I had acknowleged my sin and all mine
iniquity to thy majesty. I said in my heart and mind, I will acknowledge mine
offense and accuse my self unto the lord: Delictu^ meum cognitu^ tibi feci^
et iniusticiam meam non abscondi.

Di^i confitebor aduersum me iniusticiam meam domino et tu remisisti impietatem
peccati mei.


and thou incontinently, forgauest me the wyckednes of my sin. So soon as I
was determined no longer to hyde them: you Lord streyghte way forgaueste me.
Thine ear was in my heart before that my voice was in my mouth. Thy mercy
washed away my sin or ever my confession were in my mouth. Luke xvii.
The ten lepers were healed of there leprosy in the way as they were going
to the priests for there judgment of the cure, as Christ commanded them to
do. Thou art as ready to hear and forgive as we are to confess, so that we
accuse our selves and not the, ^^m. i^
as Adam did, when he said, the woman whom thou gave me to bear me company:
she took me of the fruit, and I eat it. Some of us also accuse other and
boast our selves, as the pharisei did, Luke. ^vi^
and as al hipocrytes do. They would disguyse them selves as Rebecca did her
son Jacob, Genes. xxvii
puttyng the skynnes of gootes about his neck and his hands, to make him
rough, as was his brother Esau, to disceiue therewith his father Isaac. But thou
Lord can not be so disceyued nor blinded. Thou will say as Isaac said. The
hands be the hands of Esau, but the voice is the voice of Jacob, that is, in
apparaunce thou art a penitente, but in dead thou art an hipocryte. Some
other blame the devil as the causer of there sin, many their desteny, and
some other say their complexions be such that they can not forbere to commit
certain sins. But I Lord, leaving all such vain excuses: do say with thy
prophet David. It is I Lord, ii. Reg. xxiiii.
which have offended. It is I that have wrought this iniquity. It is I Lord,
not thou, nor yet the devil, nor destenye, for they may only entyse me but
they can not enforce and compelle me. Psalmo.xl.
Wherefore I pray ye heal and cure my sick soul, for I have offended the. And
I doubt not but thou have forgeuen me the wyckednes of my sin. I will in my
confession: give example, to other to follow me, Pro hac orabit ad te omnis
setu^s in tempor^ oportuno.

Veru^ tamen in diluuio aquarum multaru^: ad eu^ non approximabu^t. Roma. vii.


for it is necessary for every saint or just man to pray daily for the
remission of his sins in dew season, as I do. Which being ones obtained: the
great water floudes shall not come nere him. Al we are holden under the law of
sin, and may say with Paul. O wretch that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of sin and death. It is thou, lord, that must do it, and wylt do
it, if we call to the in dew season, which is, while we are in this life. This
is the acceptable time, ii. Cori. vi
in which thou will hear us, and ye day of health, in which thou wylt help us.
In this day we may work, Ihon. xi.
but when the night comes: the^ may no man more work, after death is no time
of prayinge, it is then to late: for thou wylt not the^ here our prayers. Seek
the Lord (says the prophet Esaye) while he may be found, Esaye.lv.
and call upon him, while he is nere you. Thou art nere Lord, to all that in
this life call upon the faithfully, and thou kepest the^ from the rage of water
floudes, Psalm.cxlv.
yt they come not nere them. Being in this world, we are in the middle of
waters of te^ptacions and vices, and in the company of the proud and wicked
people, in many tribulations. We see ye vanities of this world that are able
to move men, which are worldly, we suffer persequutions, which are able to
bring some to desperacion, but thy grace keeps us that they come not nigh us.
We behold the darts coming upon us: and are not wounded. We are in the water
and are not drowned. Their entiseme^tes we esteame not and al through thy might
and power, Tu eo refugium mesi a pressura que circu^dedit me. Psalm.xiii.
who art and shall be: my refuge and defense in the trouble that is to come
about me. Thy son Christ is the strong rock, in which all birds that
build, do rest out of all ieoperdy. Mathei. xi.
To this al sinners may fly for succor and confort, being werye: there have
they refreshynge, being laden: they may lay upon him al their burde^s of
sin and be eased. This rock, the devil can not under mine nor skale: no
water of tribulation can drownde those that dwell on this rock: no wind of
temptacion can overthrow them. The devil and his wicked flock may well
assault them, but he shall never have power to hurt them. Pharao king of
Egypt, with a great host purshued the children of Israel that went out of
Egypt, Exodus xiiii.
but he could not hurt the^. Thou, lord, wast their defense, and destroyedest
al their adversaries. E^ultatio mea, crew me a circu^da^tibus me.
Eue^ so art thou our defense, our hoope, and our comfort, Thou wylt compass
us about with joyful deliverance. Job.xix.
The house or tabernacle of our body, is environed with enemies: but thy
providence will defend us and deliver us out of al dangers. Intellectum tibi
dabo et instrua^ te in via hac qua gradieris.
Thou wylt inform us and show us the way where as we shall go. This life is a
pilgrimage, and a journey for us to travail in. The end of this way, art thou
lord. Thou art ye mark that we should shot at. To this end, we ought to
have al our respect and till we come to the end of our journey, which art
thou: we must never rest, but still go forward merrily and lustely, in hope to
have joy and rest when we come to our iorneyes end. To be able to perform our
viage, you geuest us instructions, first to know the country wherein we do
trauail and the manner thereof, with the dangers that we must pass in ye journey,
and that therein we ca^ not long have our abiding, although it were never so
much to our co^te^tacion, but must neades proceed forth to an other region.
The^ geuest you us knowledge and instruction by faith, that if we pass well
through this world: we shall have joy everlasting in an other world. Whereunto
all wise and good people will covet, and so run their course here: Hebre. x^^^.
yt they may have one of ye games for their running which is you croune of
righteousness and imortalitie The love of this reward should give al me^
courage to endure pain and travail in their course. At the lest let the
third instruction serve them* that is the pains appointed for them that are
slow in there course, and lie down in the middle of their way other by
disperacion saying this instruction is to hard for us to learn, or else
loving ease and pleasure: will choose to rest here welthyly for a season:
though they suffer intolerable pains therefore in an other world, contrary to
the example given us by thy blessed son Christ, whose journey here was all
paynfull and at no time pleasant, and the same way took his apostle Paul,
saying that by many tribulatio^s we must enter the kingdom of heaven. Actu.
xiiii.
These rules or instructions of our journey: are very good true and perfect,
but our infirmity is such: yt we can not have the^ still in our
remembrance. The hand is set at a cross where diversity of ways lie to
diverse towns, to show which is the ready way to the most used town of most
estimation or resort, but if the man peregryne being in a talk with his fellow
or having his mind earnestli set on other things, do pass by and see not
his rule and his directour which is the hand: he anon erreth and goes out of
his right way. And why? because the eye of his mind or heart, is fyxed on other
things, not on his ways end. But thou, Lord, willing to keep us in the
right way and not to swerve on the right hand nor on the left hand, Firmabo
super te oculos meos.
beside these before said instructions, have thine eyes of protection and of
mercy ever firmly upon us, to thyntent we should set the eyes of our
minds earnestly upon the. For if you should turn away thy face, and not
look with thy merciful countenance upon us: we should never be able to look
upon the or to turn unto the. This thy gift of grace, and of understanding,
holds us ever with in the bounds of reason, according to our first
creation, when the wicked people lackinge this thy louinge look: Nolite sicti
sicut equus and mulus in quibus non est intellectus.
are become like horses and mules that are unreasonable beasts, without
understanding. They are proud, and take scorn to be rydden by the, and to be
ruled by thy holy laws. They are given to follow the sensual lusts of the
flesh, without discretion or measure. They are hipocrites, showing a godly
apparau^ce: and are within full of iniquity. But such stobburne, wild and
vnrewly beasts mouths: thou must pluck in, lord, In cha^o and freno maxillas
coru^ constringe qui non approximans ad te.
with a byt and a bridle if they will not obey the. The mouths that bosted
their natural power and their merits, and kept close their offenses, must be
broken with tribulacion, adversity and chastismentes to make them to know the
and to humble them selves. Put a ring on their noses and a bridle in their
mouths as thou dyddest ride that proud king of the Assyrians that set up his
brystels against the. Esaias.xxxvii. iiii. Regu^. xix Multa flagella peccatoris:
sperante^ autem in domino misericordia circundabit.
Send among the^ many plages to scourge them, to the intent by penite^ce they
may return to ye: leaving their wickedness, their presumption and evil
lyuinge, and make them to walk straight in the way of thy commandments, as
thou dyddest of thy grace with thy punishments and scourges, call me and
pluck me from my ungodliness, make them gentle and meke to the rider, as ye
ass was, that was brought to thy meke son Christ by his apostles, I^on xi^.
and then will he ride on them to Jerusalem, the city of peace and joyful
rest. They shall by that means know the, love the and put their hopes wholly
in the, and thou that gave the^ plages to their correction: wilt also give
the^ thy mercy to their comfort and consolation. ^et ^^^ni in domino et
^^^tate ^ust^
Be glad therefore all ye that are rightuouse, and rejoice in ye lord. Ye were
before styfnecked and proud, now are ye made just by his grace, not by your
own merytes. Et gloriami^^ omnes terti cord.
Rejoice therefore in him, not in your self nor in your acts. Be joyful all
ye that are true of heart, and put your wylles to gods will, being joyful in
adversity and tribulation, Roma. v.
as was the apostle Paul, and that is a sign of a right heart. For to be
joyful, when all things have success to your mind: is an easy thing to do,
given to all worldly men. But the other is a declaration of a right heart. The
will of God is just and right, the will of man is froward and crooked.
Wherefore it must be directed by the right rule of god, so that we may say when
we sustain loss, or suffer any adversity, Io^ ^.
the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away. Blessed be his name for
ever. Amen.

The xiii. Psalm.
This Psalm is set forth by the Prophet against those that over much love the
world, exhortinge al men to be ware of the deceytfulnes there of, to provide
wisely for them selves before their death, and to fear the last dreadful
judgment.
THe great wise clarke Jesus the son of Syrach willing to instruct all men in
wisdom according to that he had herd and read in the books of the law and
Prophets (which no fail proceaded from the Lord of wisdom inscrutable: as
from the fountain and spring of al sapience) exhorts us to remember the
end, Ecclesi. vii.
whereunto al mankind by the obligation of nature, must come. Which if we do:
we shall never do amysse, we shall then have small pleasure in sin and
wickedness, which rule, among men: is forgotten, or at the lest, little
regarded. Wherefore, to put the^ again in remembrance thereof: I will lay before
the^ the same lesson, taught also by the prophet Dauyd, Audite hec oe^s genies
auribus percipite qui habitatis othem. Quique terrigene et filii hominu^ simul
in vns^ dives et pauper. Os meu^ loquetur sapientia^, et meditatio cordis mei
prudentiam. Inclinabo in parabola^ aure^ meam, aperia^ in psalterio
propositione^, mea^, cur timebo in die mala?
who warns all that dwell in this world, both the high and the low, the good
and the bad people, the rich and the pore the one and the other, to take heed
and apply the ears of their hertes to hear godly wisdom. And not to say
every man within himself, what cause have I to be afraid of the spendyng of my
time in this world to my pleasure? Or what need have I to fear the last day of
judgment? Yes truly we ought to be afraied of our works, in the days of
this present life. For the days be evil, Ephesians. v.
not of themselves, but we may (if we work euel) make them evil to us.
Wherefore we should bye and redeame ye time. That is to say, speed it in well
workinge, yt we may bye again that, which through our wickedness was sold from
us, and so to change the days from badde, making them good and to our
profit, for if the wyckednes of our heales, Iniquite^ calcanes mel circumdabit
me.
compass us round about: if our works be wicked to the latter end of our
lives, as the heel is the nethermost part and end of our body: we shall
then by them be condemned at the latter day of judgment, which day shall be to
us the^ an ill day, a bitter day, and a miserable day. Because the serpent
deceived Eve, Gene. ii^
and in her all her posterity: thy sentence against him was, that ye sede of
her: should tread upon his head. And this was fulfilled in thy loving son
Christ, who subdewed him and his power. Thou saydest further that ye serpent
should tread upon the heel of her posterity. And that, lord is daily seen
in us, for our flesh and the sensuality there of, which should be governed
by reason, as the lower part of ye body ought to be governed by the head: is
often trode^ on by the subtle serpent. It is enflamed to wrath, it is kindled
with concupiscence, it is holde^ down by avarice and made foul with all other
kinds of vices until it be washed again with ye water of thy grace. Yea he
yt is most just: had neade to have his feet (that is his fleshly
concupisce^ce) washed therwyth. ^ohn. xii^.
In figure whereof, and to teach them also humility: thy son Christ washed
the feet of his apostles. And likewise he must do with us, to the intent the
nets and trappes that the devil has set in our heels (that is) in the
flesh through concupiscence: might be overthrown and broken, and we not
entangled with them at the latter day, ^ui conti^unt in vir^te ^^a et^^
mu^^itu^ine diuinarum suatu^ storiantur. I^cob.i.
which day shall be terrible to those yt put there trust in their goods, and
boast them self in the multitude of their riches. They are resembled to ye
fresh flower that keeps his pleasant color and sauoure for a short space:
but the heat of the sun makes it to wither, his beauty to perysh and the
flower to fall away. Eue^ so is it of all such as put their confidence in their
riches. They shall peryshe together with there great abundance. Their goods
may serve the^ here for their profit: but then can they serve the^ to no
purpose. No man can, with money, Frater non red^^it, redimet homo? non dabit
deo placatione^ sua^: et precium redemptionis anime sue.
save his brother from death or from dampnacion (no not the most holy and
just man that lives) nor make a grement with God, offeringe great gifts for
the redemption of his soul, for neither death nor hell will be entreated for
any gold. The wrath of God will not be assuaged that day with gifts: Sopho. i
Whether can the soul of man be valued with money. The price of it is very
great: only ye death of thy son was the redemption there of. Which pryse if it
will not serve the wicked for that they end in sin: he will not pay for them
by dyenge again for their redemption, but shall leave them, to be tormented for
ever. Et laborabit ineternu^, and viuet adhuc in finem
Their bodies shall dye the corporal death, but the souls shall live in
co^tynual fire and pain without end, being at the general day of judgment:
united to the same bodies and suffer ever after together. Apo. ix.
They shall then desire to dye and shall not find death. They shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death. Right sore and terrible is this pain, and can with no tongue be
expressed. Mad therefore are al men, Apoca. xxi
and merueylously blinded that will more regard small pleasure here, then great
pains there. Or more esteame temporal joys for a season, then the heavenly
joys that are ever permanent. But ye worldly people are sore blinded in one
thing. They se the wise man and the fool dye one kind of temporal death,
Sapi. vii
they perceive that all men have one entrance into life, and one going out in
like manner. Wherefore they, judging al things carnally: consider not that
follows (that is) after death: ye one to go to glory, the other to pain and
none of them both shall carye their riches with them, E^ relinque^t alienis
diuitias sua^.
but leave it here to strangers, they know not to whom. Yea all though they
leave them to their own children that be wicked as their fathers were: they do
leave them to strangers, for that they can nothing help their fathers there
with. For the parable of the man that was robbed and wounded in the way as he
went from Jerusalem to Hierico: Luke i
declares plainly that none be our neighbors or friends, but those that do
us good: which after the death of the wicked person none can do to him, another
brother nor son, friend nor kynsma^. Therefore all such men's gods are left
to strangers. But the wise men do make friends therewith while they are in
this present life, Luke.xviii.
as the wicked servant did, that they may have friends to receive the^ into
everlasting tabernacles when they are departed from hence. Proverb vi
The littel Emmet has learned to gather her food in harvest, that shall serve
her in the winter, and men that have reason are so assotted, that they provide
not here for that shall serve them in winter (that is) in the last day of
judgment. How fond are they that may and yet will not, so lay it up here in
the hands of Christ (the sure treasure house) that is, in the hands of ye
poor: that they may be sure to find it again with great gain when they are
departed out of this world? They shall lay up in store, i. Timo. vi
temporal things and receive again eternal. If they would be rich in good
works and ready to give and distribute, they should lay up in store for them
selves a good foundation against the time to come, that they might obtain
everlasting life. But the folysh sort of people, are more desirous of
honorable fame to remain to their succession: then to have heaven after this
life. Et sepulchra co^u^ domus coru^ in eternu^* tabernacula coru^ in progeny
and progeny vocauerunt nomina sua in terris..
They make the^ costly pleasant and substantial tombs to be their houses, as
though they should dwell in them for ever, which are a memorial of them to
their posterity. Yea their names and acts are engraued thereon with solemn
Epitaphes. Some have made cities and towns and called them by their names, ii.
Reg. xviii.
to augment their glory, as Absalom raised up a pyllar to keep his name in
remembrance, because he had no children, and called it after his own name,
Absolo^s pyllare. By these means they acquire to them a fame, their souls
burning continually in hell. Hiete. xvii
Their names be written in the world, as becomes worldly people to have, but
their names are clean put forth of the book of life. Et homo in honor no^
commorabitur, assimilatus est iumentis and ad equatus est eis.
How can these men be well esteamed of the wise? their honor can not endure,
but they are compared to brute beasts, and become like unto them. They were
naturally made to the Image of god (toutchyng the soul and the qualities there
of) but now they have made them selves (by following carnalitye) to be like
beasts. Yea the very vilest and cruelist beasts that are. As to swyn, for
fylthy lyinge in sin, to asses for there folly, to bears for there cruelty,
to fores for their craft and subtilty, to horses for their inordinate desire of
the pleasures of the flesh. O lord how unlike is this there facion to thy
noble creation of man? Hec est via insipientie c^ru^* et post eos iurta os
coru^ curre^t semper.
How great folyshnes is this way of theyrs? And yet their posterity praise it
with their mouth, and follow the steps, Prouer xvii.
in which they saw them walk. This way worldly men think to be right
pleasant but ye end thereof leads unto death. Sicut oues in inferno spositi
sunt mors depas^et eos
They shall lie in hell like sheep. Death shall feed upon the^. The wicked
worm shall gnawe still on the^, and not kill the^. This is a cruel shepherde
that leads his flock from pain to pain, as the loving shepherde leads
his sheep from one pasture to another. Job xxiiii
First he swylleth them in waters, colder then the snow water. Then,
transportith he the^ to heat intolerable. A mete shepherd for the wicked
persons that had no mercy nor pity on other in this world. Ihon xiiii.
Death everlasting is their cruel guide, as to the faithful, thy son, that
is very life, John.i.
is their merciful, loving and good shepherde: which did suffer death for
his flocks sake, to make the^ to triumph the^ over ye wicked, Et dominabuntur
eis ^e^s ^ec^i mane.
which now are here in great glory. And why? They are here in the night, their
works are hyde and appear not: but at the great judgment, when Christ
(which is their life) shall show him self. Collos. iii.
Then shall the just also appear with him in glory. Then shall it be clear
day light, all men's works shall appear as they be. The tree that in winter
showed no freshenes: shall then receive sap from the rote and appear
beautiful, where the flower and herb that was in sight, pleasant for a while:
shall wyther away and fall. Aurilium eorum vet^ rasset, in inf^rno g^ori^ eorum.
The^ shall the strength of the wicked: consume. Hell shall be their dwelling.
In this morninge, thou will destroy all the ungodly of the land. In this
morning: we have a sure hoope, Psalm.xi. Veru^tamen deus red^ met anima^ mea^
de manu inferi cum acceper^ me.
that thou wylt deliver our souls from the power of hell: and receive us to
the, by thy grace here in this world, and after when thou shalt come to the
last judgment, to take us to thy self into glory, Ihon.xiiii. Ne timueris
cu^ diue^ factus fuerit homo, e^ cum multiplicata fuerit gloria domus eius.
yt where thou art: there we may be with the. Another do we malygne at the
ungodly, nor be afraid when they are made rich and the glory of their houses
increased. We know that it endurethe but a small season, and vanished away as
does yt smoke. They are persons whom thou regardest not, and therefore thou
geuest them things of small estimacion. Gene. xxv
Abraham gave to the sons of his concubines, gifts, and sent them away: but
to Isaac he gave his possession and all that he had. So Lord, to the wicked
thou geuest temporal things of no value, but for thy faithful: thou
reseruest thine everlasting and heavenly enheritau^ce. This is a sure and a
permanente reward* the other sone slyppeth away. Quonia^ cum interierf^ no^
sumet omnia, neq descendet cum eo gloria eius.
Their time here is but short, yet when they dye they shall carry nothing away
with the^, another shall their pomp follow them. Like as the smoke vanishes
away: so shall you lord drive them away, Psalm. ^xv^^.
and like as the war melts before the fire, so shall the ungodly perysh at
thy presence, and then shall thou change their honor in to shame to their
confusion. While they lived, they were counted as happy men, and so long as
they were in prosperity: Osee. ii^.

Quia anima eius in vita ipsius benedic^tur, confitebitur tibi cum be ^efetetis
^i.

Introsbit vsque in proge^^^s pa^ru^ fuoru^ vsque in^ternu^ non videbit lumen.

Mathe. xxiii.


men spoke good of them, but when they follow their fathers generation: they
shall never se light any more. They were the children of Cayn, come of a wicked
progeny. They have fulfilled the measure of their fathers iniquity, their
deades were evil, they loved darkness better then light, for they wrought the
works of darkness and not of light, Ihon.iii.
wherefore they shall have everlasting darkness with torments, they shall have
fire, but it shall give the^ no comfortable light. Homo cu^ in honor esset non
in^^llerit, assimu^^tus est ^umentis and ^dequ^tus est eis.
These pains are ordained for men, such as when they were in honor and had
riches in aboundau^ce: considered not their estate, and for lack of knowledge:
they were led in captivity. Esaias. v
They led a beastly life, wherefore they became like unto beasts to their utter
pain and perdicio^.

The Prophet David; being very sorry for the adultery, (...) Psalm. Wise^^e mei
deu^s.
which he had committed with Bethsabe, and for the death of her husband Vrye:
made this Psalm, in the person of the hole faithful congregation, and also in
the person of every penitent sinner privately.
ii. Corhin. ^
O Lord almighty, father of mercy, and God of all comfort, Sapi ^^
which in the treasure of thine infinite mercy disposest all things: Psalm
^xv.
not only among us thy poor creatures hear on earth which is bountefully
replenished therwyth, Psalmo. cviii,
but also among thy holy aungelles and blessed spirits in heaven, who thereby
are preserved and established in grace: Lord, whose natural property is to be
merciful to all that love the, and in faith call upon the, in so much that
thou saydest by ye mouth of thy prophet Esaye, that the mountains shall remove
and the hills shall fall down, Esaias.liiii.
but thy loving kyndnes shall not move from those that trust in the, Lord,
yt of thy mercy, Genes. vii. Genes. xii. and ^^
sauedest Noe from the general floude, Abraham, in his pilgrimage through
Egypt, and through the land of Gerar, Loath, Genes. xix.
from synkynge among the sinful Sodomites, Joseph, Genes. xxxix and.xii.
from the danger of his wicked lady and mastres* and after from danger,
Exodus xii. and.xiiii.
when he was cast in prison, the Israelytes, from the boundage of Pharao, and
from many other dangers in their long journey, Daniel. vi, Jonas.ii.
Daniel.iii.
Daniell from ye cruel lions, Jonas from drownynge being in the bealy of the
whalle, three days and three nights, the three young men from burning, that were
put into the flammynge fornaice, with many thousaundes mo, whom of thy natural
mercy, of thy merciful custom, of thine accustomable goodness and gentle promise
thereof made: thou have here to fore, daily do, and never wilt cease, to
draw to the through grace, unto thy high majesty, I (most miserable and
wretched sin) call for mercy and grace. I do acknowledge my self grievously
to have offended the eyes of thy deity, so many ways: that I am not worthy
to bear the name of a man, much less of a Christian man. Mine offenses are
huge, and the burden of the^ is great. Wherefore discharge me of them, Mi^et mei
deus secundu^ magnam miseri cordiam tuam.
lord, according to thy great mercy. For small offenses, thy small mercy
suffiseth. But my great sins, require thy great mercy. Et secundu^
multitudin^m m^serationu^ tuarum de^^ iniquitate^ me^m.

Da^^^l ii


And as mine offenses are many in nombre: so is there of thy mercies a great
multitude. Yea they can not be nombred. But of one thing, I am assured. That
it lies not in man's power so much to offend: as it is in thy merciful
power to forgive. My wounds ca^ not be so great and noisome: but thy
medicines are more preciouse and healthesome. Et multum ^^name ab iniquicat^ ec
a pet pato meo mudame Exodus xix.
Wherefore wash me well Lord, from my wyckednes, and cleanse me from my sin.
The Israelytes durst not come in thy sight, being ones defiled with any
vnclea^nes: till they were sanctified by washing their bodies and garments.
Yea ye priests among them also were washed and cleansed, or they came to thy
presence, for fear, lest they should perysh. How much more need the^ have
I, to desire the (Lord) to wash mine unclean soul, that the fylthines
thereof appear no more? But as clothes, that are very foul, have neade of
much and often plungynge in the water and great rubbyng, so has my soul
neade of many dewes of thy grace, and many secret drawinges to the with
spiritual violence or ever it can be made clean of the old spots that
long have remained in it, by ye old festred sores, wherewith it is grievously
corrupt. ^ v.
The leprosy of Nama^ of Syria could not be cleansed, till he had washed him
seven times in the river of Iordayne. How many waters shall I have neade to be
washed in or I be fair purged of mine uncleanness? Ezechi. xxxvi
But thy mercy (Lord) is a frettinge lie and a scouringe soope. Thy grace
makes a stony heart to be a fleshy heart, in a sturdy stomach, it bredyth an
humble spirit, of a fyerse lion: it makes a meke la^be, as of Saull a
persequutor: Actu. ix
it made Paul an elect apostle. Why then should I despair of thy goodness:
consideringe that thy justice wills me to trust in the? Thy promise is to
have mercy on all those that are penitente for their offenses, Ezechiel.xviii.
Mark. xiii
so that thou wylt no more remember the^. This promise (no doubt) shall stand
fast and sure, when both heaven and earth shall pass away. Wherefore I offer
now unto thy majesty, an heart contrite and sorry for the wickedness, by it
conceived, with a body subject to the with all humility, and penitence for all
the sins by it committed. Quoniam iniquitater mea^ cognosco^et pecca tum meum
cora^ me esemper.
I acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me. I punysh my self
with contrition: because thou should give me grace and remission. I have it
ever in remembrance, and set it up in my sight, because thou shoulded forget
it and put it out of thy sight. Against the only, against the, Tibi soli
p^ccaui, and ^^lu^ coram te ^eci.
have I sinned, and done evil in thy syghte, in whose power it is to punysh at
thy pleasure and from the can not mine offenses be hid. But it is my sure
hope that thou wylt forgive me, Vt iustificeris in se monibus tuis and vine cum
iudicaris.
for thine honors sake. That all the world may know the to be a most just
judge, in fulfyllynge that you have promised to me and all penitent sins. That
is, to forgive us and to put our sins clean out of thy remembrance, and in
condempninge all those that obstinately remain in their wyckednes. Thus shall
thou vanquysh and stop the mouths of all such as speak evil of the, saying.
Thou regardest not the promise that thou haste made, but art a fyerse and a
cruel judge. Considre, lord, I pray the, the frayll metal whereof I am made.
Ecce enim in iniquita^^bus conceptus sum et (...) peccatis concepit me matter mea
Behold I was borne in wyckednes and in sin has my mother conceived me.
This sin is drawn from our first father Adam, where by, I am made prone and
ready to do al evil, but feable and weak to do any good. ^^ma vii
Yea, I am drawn sumtyme to do that I would not do, and to leave undone that
I would do. Such is the force of my natural concupisce^ce, but much greater,
lord, is the force of thy natural propertye, which is to show mercy, when
thou art humbly required. Thine honor is more in saving through pytie, then
in condempninge by justice. for what is man that thou shouldeste show thy
power against him? Hercules, being but a man, would have taken great skorne
to wrestle with a child of twelve years old. Much more dishonor were it
to thy mighty majesty, to put forth thy strong arm against me, Job. xiii
that am of no greater force, then a leaf that is carried away with every wind,
and may well be compared to dry and withered stoble. Receive me therefore (thy
simple creature) into thy favor. For before ye I accuse my self, to the
intent thou should excuse me. I show forth my misery: because thou
should show forth thy mercy, as thou have promised, and I mistrust not the
perfourminge thereof: for never yet wast thou found untrue in thy words,
neither may thou, now begin at me to be untrue in thy promises. Ecce
enim veritate^ dileristi. Psalm. cxix. Psalm. cxvii. Genes. xxii. Hebre. vi.
Thou haste ever loved truth, thou art verity it self, all thy promises are
faithful, and thy verity endures for ever. Thou dyddest promise to Abraham
to multiply his sede as the stars of heaven and ye sand upon the sea side:
which promise at the last, he enjoyed. Even so dyddest thou promise Isaac and
Jacob: and have ever ben found true. Exodus vi.
Thou did promise to Moses to deliver Israel by his hands, from the
bondage of the Egiptians, which thou did perform, and that in showing thy
mighty power and many maruailes to thy great honor. Iosue.i.
Thou didist promise Joshua to be with him and to stre^gthe^ him as thou wast with
Moses: and eue^ so it came to pass, for he slew the inhabitants of Canaan,
and divided thy land to thy people Israel. Thou made promise to Gedeon,
Iudi. vi.
to deliver Israel out of the hands of the Madianites by his hands, which
also was done. When Ezechias was sick unto ye death, iiii. Reg. ^.
you didist promisest him health and to live yet.xv. years: Hiere. xxv
and this did thou perform, for thy names sake. Thou dyddest promise the
retonrne of thy people Israel from the captivity of the Babilonia^s,
Daniel.ix.
by the mouth of thy prophet Hieremie: which after the wickedness of the people
was consumed: you broughtest to pass, with innumerable other thy merciful
promises made to thine elect, which ever have been performed, because they
were spoken and made by the that can not lie. Even so, lord, keep thy promise
now with me, that am one of ye pore sheep of thy flock, which have long
strayed away from the, yet now, am returned to the with hertie repentance,
which is of thy graciouse calling. And therefore I trust, it is not begone by
the in vain. (...) occulta sapi^^ (...) ^^nifestasti^^. (...) xi.
Thou have given me knowledge of thy laws and commandments. Thou haste
showed me secret points of thy wysdom, which thou have hyd from worldly wise
men and uttered them to babes. (...). xi.
That is, to the simple plain meaning people, and all because of humilitye.
For where that is, (...)
there is ever wysdom. The secret mysteries, hyd in thy holy scriptures: are
now manifested through thy blessed son Christ and his apostles. (...). iv.
They have enstructed me in the wisdom thereof, whereby I am fed with bread
of life and I have received the water of understanding for my drink. (...)
vviii.
Wisdom has cast out from her, great floudes, and watered the gardines of
her young plants, she lyghtenyth al those lord, that put their trust in the.
Of this floude, dra^ke thine apostle Paul, (...) ii
and uttered unto us thy wysdom, which lay secret and hid, as thou before
dyddest open unto him by thy holy spirit, which sercheth even the botome of
thy secrets. Of these, lord, I thank the, I have tasted some part. I am by
them taught to know mine own infirmity, and thine excellent goodness,
beseching the that the good work which is begone in me, through thy grace:
may take sure rote and increase in me, so that the light which is now kindled
in me: become no more darkness. Asperges me domin^ hyssopo and mu^tabo^
Sprinkle me with Hyssope and I shall be clean. This herb grows low and
betokens humility. It is also hoote and is a figure of charity. This herb
was bound together and dypped in the blood of a sparow or of some other
clean bird upon runninge water, and herwith the leper was be-sprynkled in
the old law, when he was clean: Leuiti. xiiii.
in token that our iniquities cannot be purged but by the virtue of thy son
Christ's passion, whom of thy hot and fervent charity: thou did send down
to suffer bitter death for our redemption. Wherefore, Lauabis meet super u^uem
de albabor.
being purged with this Hyssope and washed with thy grace: I shall become more
white the^ is the snow. If thou pour this clean water upon me: Ezech. xxxvi.
I shall be purged of all mine uncleanness. Though my sins be as red as skarlet:
they shall be whiter the^ snow. Esaye.i.
Though they be like purple: they shall become like white woollen. Auditui meo
dabis ga^diu^ et leticiam.
Then shall I hear words of joy and gladness, the words spoken to David by
thy prophet Nathan. That is, that my sins are clean put away from me. I
shall hear the words spoken by thy son to the man that was sick of ye
palsy. Son, thy sins are forgeuen the. Mark.ii. Job.iiii.
Then shall I also hear the speak sweet words inwardly in my soul by thy
secret and gracious inspirations, whereby I shall be much comforted, and the
bones that thou have broken shall rejoice, Et exultabu^t ossa, que confregisti.
That is, the powers of my soul, which through sin, had before no power nor
force to do any good thing: shall now recover their strength that was lost.
The bones which were dry: receyuinge the quyckenynge of the spirit, shall
live. Wherefore turn thy face away from my sins and put away clean all my
misdeades. A^ier^^ tanem tua^ a peccatis iuris, and oe^s iniqui^^t^^ m^^ del^.
Turn not away thy face, good lord, from me, but from my sins, and sense I
acknowledge the^ my self unto the: take thou no knowledge of the^ thy self.
Thy prophet Ezechiel saw in a vision, Ezechiel xi.
that in ye buyldinge of the temple, should be one Cherub, yt should have two
faces. The one should be the face of a man, the other the face of a lion: and
this trewly was a figure of the two faces or of the.ii. lokynges of thy godhed.
The one is thy face of mercy with which thou graciously beholdest thine elect.
Psalm. xviii.
This face must thou not hyde from me and other pore sinners, lest thou forget
our misery and oppression. Psalm. cxxiiii
The other is thy face of justice, wherewith thou beholdest the^ yt do evil to
destroy the remembrance of the^ out of the earth. This face, lord, I pray
the turn from my sins and of thy mercy put away al mine iniquities, so that
none of the^ remain in me. For if thou be extreme to mark what is amiss:
Psalm. cxxv.
who can abide it? for what am I wretch being destitute of thy grace: but all
carnal soulde under sin, and abondman to sin? Roma vv.
Every man destitude of thy grace: shall be betrapped in the snares of his own
sins, his heart shall be hardened as was the heart of Pharao, he shall hear in
dead and not understand, Exodus ^
he shall se plainly and not perceive, Esa^^ vi.
his ears shall be stopped and his eyes shut, that he shall not se nor hear,
another yet with his heart understand, for to convert and be healed. His heart
shall be as hard as any stone, it shall leave the love of the and love thy
creatures. Such an hard heart, lord, have I long had in me, which can not be
mollifyed by my natural power, John.vi.
but by the operacion and drawing of the and thy grace. Cur mu^^^ ^^ea in me
deus.
Wherefore I hertely pray the, lord, to remove from me this stony heart and
make in me a new heart, a fleshy heart that shall be soft, meek and flexible.
An heart to know that thou art the lord, without whose grace: I can do no
goodness, Hieremi. xxiiii. Spiri^um rectum innoua in vis ceribus meis.
neither can my wauerynge heart return unto the. Thy grace it is that must
revive a right spirit in me. Mine own spirit is crooked through sin, and
it is al inclined to worldly things. Make it therefore to be vpryght, and to
aspire so to heavenly things: that neither adversity, neither worldly pleasure
or abundance may pluck it down ward. Cast me not lord away from thy
face, Ne proiicias me a facie tua, et spiritum sanctu^ tuum ne auferas a me.
and take not thine holy spirit from me. Cast my sins away behynd the, but
cast not me from thy merciful contenaunce as thou dyddest cast wicked Cayn,
for sleaynge his brother Abel. Genes. iiii.
Neither cast me out of thy favor as thou dyddest cast king Saul for his
disobedience. For if I lose thy graciouse presence: I am then sure thou will
also take from me thy holy spirit, as thou dyddeste from Saull. It went into
David, and in stead thereof: the wicked spirit entered into Saul and still
tormented him during his life. Sapien. xii.
O how gracious and sweet is thy spirit in all things? It passes the
swetnes of honey. It leads those that love the: Eccles. xxiiii. Psalm cxliii.
into the land of ryghtuousnes. With this thy spirit were thine Apostles
replenished, which gave them strength to suffer patiently, all opprobries and
wrongs for thy sake. This thy holy spirit I desire may remain still with me,
John.xv.
to teach me all verity, to confirm me in goodness, Sam. viii
to make intercession for me unto the in all my necessities and infirmities.
Read mi^i leticiam sa^utaris tui, et spiritu ^rincipall co^firm^ me.
Give me therefore again, the conforte of thy help, and establysh me with thy
principal spirit. Because of my sin: I lose the helping confort of thy
grace. Thy spirit also went from me, which was no small loss, for in
comparison there of: all losses of worldly things are to be accounted as
nothing. I lost all goodness and received all euylles. Light and darcknes may
not at one time be in one subject. No more may grace and sin, god and the
devil: dwell together. Wherefore the consideracion of my great loss: causes
the greatness of my sorrow. I never delited so much in the committyng of mine
iniquities: as I am now sorry and asshamed of the^. Behold therefore (merciful
God) the inward contricion of my heart, and restore to me, of thy great goodness,
that which I have lost through my great wyckednes, and for that the powers of
my soul are weak and feable: and mine enemies strong, fierce and cruel: I,
most humbli beseech the, to confirm me in grace through the power of thy
principalle holy spirit. Let him no more have cause to depart from me, but
make me an holy temple for him to dwell in continually. D^^^o (...) vias (...)
et impri an te co^uertinenus
Then shall I steadfastly teach unto the wicked. the way whereby they may come
unto the. I will put my self to all sinners, as an example to cause them to
return unto the, by humble penite^ce. I will not cease to declare thy
justice, to put the^ in fear of thy judgment. And then the aboundaunte
treasour of thy mercy: to pluck the^ from desperation. I will teach them thy
ways, that is, thy precepts, and none other man's tradicions. I will ever
put them in remembrance of thy laws. This shall I be able to do, being
confirmed by thy holy spirit. Moses was afraid to go on thy message to king
Pharao, Exodus iii.
till thou promisedest him to be with him, after which: he left doubtyng and
accomplished thy commandment. Nume. xi.
The.lxx. elders of the host whom Moses chose out to bear with him, the
burden of the people, were nothing able to govern there subjects: till thou
had powered part of the spirit upon them, which before was in Moses. And
then they prophesied and ruled the people in truth and justice. Luke.xxii.
Peter the apostle of thy son Christ was afraid at the voice of a woman and
denied him, he was ever ready to forsake hi^, till he was endewed with this thy
noble spirit. Yea the whole company of thy sons apostles, Actu. i.
were commanded to abide in Jerusalem after his resurrection until they were
fulfilled with thy holy spirit from above. After whose cominge, the word
prospered in their mouths, whersoeuer they preached it: and they were after
sufficient witnesses of thy sons resurrection and ascension. Ecclesi. xx.
A wise sentence shall not be allowed being spoken by the mouth of a fool. No
more shall thy laws be regarded, being declared by me being so greauous a
sinner. Libera me de sangumi bus deus deus salutis ^nce.
Wherefore send thy noble spirit to lyghten me with thy grace, and deliver me
from the gyltynes of bloudes (o God ye art the God of my health) I mean
deliver me, from a multitude of sins by me committed through concupiscence,
Job. xiiii
engendered of the corruption of my flesh and blood. This corruption is in me,
Job.xxv.
of my corrupt nature. For who ca^ make it clean that comes of an unclean
thing? How can man be clean that is borne of a woman? the child of a day
old is unclean. Corin. ^^
The flesh and ye blood bring forth works of corruption, and can not enjoy
the kingdom of God, for corruption ca^ not inherit incorruptio^. Therefore,
lord, from these bloudes I beseech the deliver me, power forth thy grace upon
my corrupt nature, and I shall be purged from all my wyckednes. I am dead in
sin, quycken me and give me life again, sense thou art God the authoure of
life and health, and none can do it but thou, Laudabit ^ugua mea ^^^^^ciam tuam
that my tongue may praise thy ryghtuousnes. In that thou show mercy to me,
being asynner, geuynge me grace to be penitente for my sins, and making me
just that now am unjust, wherein thou art found true in perfourminge thy
promise thereof made which is to hear all that ask forgeuenes of the in
faith. But before my tongue may praise this thy ryghtuousnes, thou must open my
lyppes or else can not my mouth show forth thy praise, Domine labia mea ape
ries et os meu^ annunci ^b^t laudem tuam.
for sin has stopped my mouth, and praise is vnsemlye in ye mouth of the
ungodly. Ecclesi. xv.
Yea thou would say unto me, Psalm.l.
why do thou preach my laws and take my couenaunte in thy mouth? Exodus
vi.
Open therefore (oh God) my lyppes as thou dyddest the lips of Moses when
thou sendest him to king Pharao. Esaias. vi.
Thy prophet Esaias also had unclean lyppes, till one of the Seraphins, with a
pair of tongues, took a hot cole from the altar and toutched his mouth there
with: whereby his unrighteousness was taken away. Of such facio^ Lord, toutche
my mouth that I may be worthy to set forth thy praise. To offer to the,
Quoniam si voluisset sacrificiu^ dedisse^. Vti que holocaustis non dilectaberis.
sacrifice or burnt offringes: it were in vain. For I know you have no pleasure
in the^. They were but figures of the sacrifice of thy blessed son to come
for our redemption and the purginge of our sins. The shadow of a thing does
cease, when the thing it self is ones come. The promises cease and are gone,
when the thing is come which is promised. To offer to the gold or treasoure:
it neadeth not, se^ce thou art most rich thy felfe, lord of all ye world
whose contents are at thy commandment: Yet will I not come void and emptye
into thy presence. Sacrificium deo, spu^s contribulatus, cor contritu^ et
humiliatu^ deus non despicies.
I will offer unto the my troubled spirit for mine offenses, mine heart
contrite and broken for my sins, and this sacrifice, I know, thou will not
despise. To this sacrifice thy prophet Esaias also tells me that thou will
look, Esaias. lxvi.
above all other that I can give the. And for that there should nothing be
left behynd: I do (according to the mind of thine apostle Paull, Roma. xii.
offer unto ye both my body and also my soul as a quycke and holy sacrifice.
iii. Reg. xx
This sacrifice offered Ezechias and recovered health, and had thy favor. The
same offered Mary Magdalene, the theffe on the cross hanging, with innumerable
other and were received in to thy favor. And I (through thy grace being
penitent) claim no less mercy to be showed unto me. Genigne fac domine in
^ona volo^tate tua Si^n
And not only unto me, but I desire the also to be favorable and gracious unto
Sion (that is) to thy whole christen and faithful congregation, which only
depends on the goodness of the and nothing on their power or merits. Esaias.
lxii.
Upon the walls of this thy castle thou lord must set watch men
continually. Thy holy angels must have the keeping thereof or else are not the
inhabitau^tes able to defend the^ selves from their craftye and mighty
enemies. Thou know Lord, how weak and of small force mankind has been
ever sense the fall of Adam. iii. Reg. xv^
We more delight in the building of Hiericho, then we do to defend the
fortress of Sion. I mean we more regard the pleasure of this world and the
temporal commodities thereof the^ we do to make us strong against our
spiritual enemies and to become thy well-beloved children and servants. So
weak we are, so frail and unable of our selves to do that good is, and so
prone to do that is forbydde^ us. Help us therefore merciful God with thy
noble grace, whereby we shall so remain here in the buyldyng of Syon,
beholdynge the by faithful hoope in this present life, that we shall through
thy mercy be hewed, squared, and made mete stones for the buyldinge of thy
heavenly city of Jerusalem, Vt edificetur mutt Jerusalem.
whose walls are erected and made of the lyuelye stones of thy faithful church
here militant, which thy grace has chosen and prepared among us thy earthly
congregation, for the receyuynge of that thy heavenly edifice, where thine
elect shall offer unto yt incessauntly such burnte offrynges as are acceptable
unto the, Tunc delectaberis sacrificiis iusticie o^ lationibus et holocausti^.
which is the sacrifice of pray^e and thanks geuynge unto thy majesty
continually. This is the sacrifice of justice, which all thy reasonable
creatures of dewtie owe to yield unto ye. This is the oblation of the bullockes
of our lyppes (that is) the fruit of our lyppes, whereof the prophet Osee
speaks: Osee.xiiii.
that we shall yield unto the by confessinge the praises of thy name: which
shall be to the much more acceptable then any sacrifice of fat bullockes was,
in the old time. Tunc imponent super altar tuu^ vitulos
Grant us therefore Lord of thy grace to be of the no^bre of thine elect,
Psalm.cxii.
which shall present this worthy sacrifice as a preciouse incense of sweet
savor, upon thine aultare whyh is Christ our high priest and mediatuour unto
thine hyghnes in that glorious habitacio^ world without end.

In this Psalm the Prophet warns all men not to regard the prosperity of
the wicked, The.lxxiii. Psalm.
and the small pleasure of the just men in this world. He shows the first
to have a short time in his prosperity, the others reward, to be eternal.
O God eternal, the geuer of al felicity, whose love is like the evening and
morning raygne upon the earth, Osee. vi
whose mercies can not be nombred, whose wysdo^ and divine providence is such,
Sapi^n. v^^
yt it reaches from one end to an other myghtyly, and lovingly does order
all things, although through ignorance, we can not know the causes of thy
said order. Yea to such as be weak: thy godly determinatio^s seame also
unreasonable and iniust, as the bryghte son to sore eyes, seameth noysom and
unpleasant, where, to clear and hole eyes the light thereof is confortable.
Thy goodness, lord, to all mankind, is so manifest, that no reasonable
creature can say but that he has tasted thereof. i. Co^hin. iiii. Quam bonu^
Israel (...)
For what good thing has man that he has not received of the? Thou art good,
I say, to all men, but specially to Israel. This people have thou chosen for
thy peculiar flock. Psalm. lxxvi
In Iewry only wast thou known to be the living God, and in Israel great was
thy name, but what is this Israel now, sense the Jews have forsaken the, and
thou art conuertid to the gentiles? Israel verily, by interpretacion is the
fear or beholder of god. Matthew.v.
This none can do onles he have a clean and pure heart, void of malice and
sin. So that in conclusion, thou art good by thy principal chyefe goodness to
the^ that have an vpryght conscience, His qui tecto sunt cor^e
a straight heart, a mind not bowynge down to carnal and te^porall things,
but aspiringe to heavenly and eternal things. Now all that profess the name
and religion of thy son Christ: are come in place of the Jews. Yet be they
not, all, Israelites. Only those that have a pure heart, are Israelites. For
they shall se god as he is. The other, for their wickedness are abject, as
were the Jews for their incredulity. Al are not the sede of Abraham that
descended carnaly of him. But in Isaac only was called his sede by
promission. But there is one thing, lord, Roma. ix.
that causes me and other such weak persons as I am, to doubt and muse much
of. ii. Paral. xix.
Thou being our god and a just god, in whose doings, none iniquity or
injustice can be found: that such as are wicked and most miserable sinners: are
most esteamed in this world. They have treasure at will, and pleasure beyo^de
all measure. All things prospeare here with the^, when we se thy faithful and
elect people: wrapped in all kinds of misery, accounted as fools, vile and
abiecte, yea thou put them to tribulation, persequutio^ and in opprobrie to
all other. This being plain before our eyes: Mei autem pene moti sunt pedes,
pene effussunt gressus mei.
causes our feet and treadynges all most to slyp. The feet of the mind: are
ye thoughts and imaginations, by which it is carried from place to place. These
thoughts and judgments, had almost erred, seeing the prosperity of ye
wicked. Our treadinges were unsteadfast, after the sort of them that go upon
the slyppye yse. Our affections are much inclined to riches, pleasure, ease,
and other vanities. Yea we judge not well of thy godly providence, we fear
least thou that dwell in heaven: takeste no care of those that love the,
but that all is governed by unsteadfast fortune, Job.xxii.
or that the clouds will not suffer the to look so low as the earth. On this
manner, are our feet (that is) our judgments, waueringe. Quia zelaui super
m^quos, pacem peccatoru^ videus.
We stand in doubt whether it be best to follow their ways or not, seeing
the^ continue in such prosperity yt all things, are safe and quiet about
them. They live a long life in pleasure, Non est respectus mortreou^, et
tirmamentu^ in plaga ^^am.
never thinking of death. And if they chance to be sick: or to be plaged
any way, their affliction endurethe no while. They are soon cured. All the
help that may be done by man: is found out for them. Their riches causes
all men to run for the curing of the^. Another do they travail like other,
In labor hominu^ non ^unt, e^ cum hominibus non flagellabuntur.
but live pleasauntly, in all wealth and ease, not fealynge the grieffes and
displeasures which the most sort of men are subject unto: which causes them
to be puffed up in pride, Ideo tenuit supeybia, ^nperati sunt in equita^te et
impletate sua
and overwhelmed with iniquity. They are odious to God, and grievous to their
neighbors. Their wyckednes is multiplied, it couerith them as a clooke. The
web of this careful garme^te was begone by Adam, sense whose time: every man
has put to his hand to make it up. These men have finished it and put it on
their back, it has wholly covered them no part excepted: as closse as their
bodies are covered with their skynnes. They bread coccatrices eggs and weue
the spiders web. Esaye ^^^.
That is, they work mischefe, and imagyne vain and tryfling things. Who so
eatheth the coccatrices egg: dies. And of the spyders web: no man can make
him a garment, Mathe.xxii.
to wear at the great wedding, in which no man is allowed, but he put on him
the garment of health and the mantle of ryghtuousnes. Esaias ^^.
The garmente that the sinners have made them, Apoca. xvi.
will not hyde them at the dreadful day of judgment: but they shall be found
naked, and all men shall se their fylthynes. Processerunt a pirgus dine oculi
corsi, transierunt in affectu^ cordis:
Their eyes swell for fatnes, they have even what they lust. What is this
fatnes? the abundance of riches and long prosperity, Osee.xiii.
which makes men so wanton, that they kycke and wynche at the rider, they
both forget the and despise the. Deuter. xxxii.
The children of Israel received of the: many great benefits, and anon became
so fat: that they kicked at the. When they were fat and smouth: they let the^
go that made the^, and despised the rock that saved them. Such is the power of
aboundau^ce, that it makes the possessoures thereof, Cogitauerunt et locuti
sunt nequitia^ iniquitate^ in excelso locuti su^t
to arise against God in pride and against there neighbors by cruelty and
violence. The poor man often times offends, driven thereto by poverty, as to
steal to satisfy his present necessity. This offense, comethe of leannes
and is more tolerable, the^ the harms or wro^ges done by those that are fat
through their couetise. Yea when they have done wyckedly: they are not ashamed
thereof, but make boaste thereof. Posuerunt in celum os suum.
They also speak proud and presumptuous words against thy godhed,
stretchynge forth their mouth unto heaven, as did ye proud king Nabugodonosor
commanding to have his image honored as god. Daniel. iii
The power of such men is sore dredde: Lingua eorum deambulauit terram.
their tongue (that is) their commandments, go through all ye world.
Therefore we that are pore, weak and waueri^g: and yet love the and believe in
the, seeing the great wealth of these blasphemous and wicked people: we, I
say, Ideo conuerientur populus meus huc et dies pleni inuenie^tur in eis.
have earnestly given our studies to know the cause of thy liberal gifts in
this world, to such as they be. We have spente many days, only about the
serching of thy meaning: In that thou suffer the wicked to live their full
age in such pleasant wealth. Et direrunt quomodo scit deus, et si est
scientia in excelso.
Sumtyme we doubt whether thou doeste know and perceive their wickedness. And
if thou do know it: then we marvel wherefore thou doeste suffer them so long
to continue. Ecce isti impitet abim danteom seculo multiplicauerunt diuitias.
Wherefore have they riches and all pleasures that they can devise in this
world, while we endure much trouble, pain and misery? Et diti ^^me causa
iustificau^ cor meum et laui inter innocents menus meas
In vain do we travail to cleanse dure hertes from all evil and idle
thoughts, and to wash our hands in innocence from al wicked works. Aslonge
as I do serve the: I can feel no such pleasant reward I live well and lack.
They live nauhgtely and have abundance. I do the best I can to keep thy
commandments, and am punished daily and chaystened every morning. Et tut
flagellatus tota die et increpatio mea in ma^utinis.
If Jones err: incontinent I am punished. Where upon I was in mind to have
said eue^ as they said. Si diceba^ narrabo sic, ecce generationem filiorum
tuorum reprobaui.
But lo, then had I condemned the generation of thy children. Then had I
despised the way in which thine elect have here tofore walked, for so said not
Abell, Job. vii
Noe, nor Abraham, Isaac nor Jacob nor any of thy prophets. Tobiah and Job
spoke in the trouble of their spirits and praised thy chastisement, Psalmo
xviii.
David was troubled and called upon the and was hard, (...) xvii.
Paull also says we must enter into thy kingdom by many tribulations, not with
ease, pleasure and abundance. They said also that thou beholdest every
man's deades, and there after doeste justly reward every man. The^ thought I
to have knowledge of this doubtful case by mine own reason, Existimab^ vt
cognos cerem hoc, labor est ante me.
but it was to hard for me, my wit could not comprehend it: until I went
into thy sanctuary of holy scripture, and therein considered the end of these
men. Donec intrem in sanctuarium dei et intelligam nouissima eorum.
In this thy holy scripture do thou speak and declare hid mysteries. It
is thy very word what so ever is therein written, and therefore is it holy. In
this I, the^, searched deapely, Apoca. xx. Psalm. xxviii.
and I found that all good deades shall be rewarded, and that all evil deades
shall be punished. I found also that many times tirauntes and the persequutoures
of thine elect, all though they have prosperity here for a ceaso^: yet at
the last, they are punissed in this world and make a miserable end, as it was
proved by Pharao king of Egypt, Exodus xiiii.
that scurged the people of Israel, by Achab king of Israel, by Aman,
Holofernes, Alcimus, Antiochus, iii. Regu^. xxv Hester.vii. Iudi. xiii. i.
Macha. ix. ii. Macha. ix Actu. x.
and Herod. And this do thou to show thy power for thine honor, to the
fear of the wicked, and comfort of thine elect. I found also that thou
reseruest for thine elect, Everlasting rewards for the short pain that they
take here in thy service, and therefore doeste thou not reward them here with
light rewards of transitory things, but thou rewardest the wicked of thy
great liberality with prosperity here and other light tra^sitory pleasures,
which endures with them but a small season: Esaias.lxv.
and then thou punishest them for their wickedness with pain everlasting. Thus
in scripture I behold as it were in a miroure or glass: thy great justice and
infinity goodness, which to thy faithful lovers and friends, wilt not turn
their long and everlasting reward, into a temporal and short reward:
neither from thine enemies, will thou withdraw those temporal rewards which
worthily have lost their eternal heavenly rewards. ^^^men in luh^sco
po^^^sti co^ detecisticos ad interliu^.
Thou set these fat sinners in a slyppery place: that thou may cast
the^ down hedlonge and destroy them. The higher a man buyldeth a tower, when
the same through decay falls: the greater and more terrible is ye fall
thereof. Even so the higher a man climmeth: the sorer is his fall, yea many times
they are skarcely clomben to the hight of their honor: but anon their fall
is showed, not unlike to ye smoke of a chynney which ascends high and the^
suddenly vanishes away. It is a wonder to se, how suddenly they consume, Q^omodo
vastati su^t subito defecerunt, consumpti sunt quasi non sint.

1 Thesssloni. v.


perish and come to a fearful end. When they shall say, peace is, and no
danger: then comethe on them sudden destruction, as the trauaylynge of a
woman with child, and they shall not escape. Luke thine evangelist, puts to
this purpose, a parable of a rych man that had gathered together great
abo^dau^ce of gods, and then said to his soul: O my soul, thou have much
good laid up in store for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink and be
merry. But thou lord saydest unto him. O thou foul, this night will the wicked
spirits fetch away thy soul from the. The^, whose shall those things be,
which thou have so paynfully provided, and so carefully kept? O lord, what man
that has wit, would not be afraid to have the use of thy goods here being
bound to render account: both for the gettyng, keeping and bestowyng of the^.
Considering the small time he has pleasure in the keeping of them and how
suddenly he shall leave them. The possessours of them are likened to one which
dremeth that he is lift up in great honor, Quasi somnium egila^tis.
in riches in his princes favor, and enjoys all kinds of pleasures. But
when he awaketh: he fyndeth no part of his dream true. The vanity of his
dream came of his idle fantasy. It was pleasure for a while, but after he is
sorye for his feigned loss. In like manner when the rich man dies: he
perceyueth he was not rich in deed, but as it were in a dream. Esaias. xxix
He is never the rycher for all that he was ruler of. When the hungrye man
dreameth that he has plenty of meat and that he is eating his fill, and then
awaketh: fyndyng no food he is faint and his soul impatient. So is it of ye
rych man, after death he has nothing. Job.i.
He came naked into this world, so shall he depart out of it again, nothing is
his of all that he had, Luke.xii. i. Timo. vi.
but that which he bestowed charitabli, which lies in store for him in heaven.
The rest is vanished away from him, the glory thereof was but a shadow of
glory, not glory it self, it was the image of a thing, not the thing it self.
Thus their image of felicity, that is all their pomp, pride, and false
prosperity: Domine in ciuitati tu^ imaginem ipsorum ad nihilum rediges.
shalt thou bring to naught, and banyshe them out of thy city with those that
took pleasure in them here. They shall not enter with their glory into thy
heavenly city of Jerusalem, and good cause why for in their earthly cities and
mansions they nothing regarded thine image, they considered not the necessite
of the poor. For this cause rightfully thou shall shut them with their image
of prosperity out of thine eternal mansion. Thus have I showed before thy
majesty, how through their prosperity I was almost drawn to follow their
ways, (...) c^u^nest co^m^^ts ^^ me^ (...) ^u^ apud t^ Et eram semper (...)
tenebis manum de^teram m^am.
my heart being sore moved, and my reins perced with the delectation thereof,
so foolyshe I was and ignorant, and as it were a beast before the Nevertheless
though I passed the bonds of reason: in considering thy power and divine
providence: yet I thank the, Lord, I went not from the, but did cleave still
to the by faith. Though I slipped and almost fell from the: yet I did not
forsake the, and thou full mercifully, knowing my good will toward the: did
hold me up by my right hand, as thou did Peter when he was in ieoperdy of
drownyng. Thy goodness brought me to the knoledge of mine infirmity. Esaias ^^^.
Thy grace called me from mine error into the right way. Thou tokest me by
the right hand and did save me, Barteus
as thy holy angels took Loathe and his wife by the hands, and led them out
of the sinful city of Sodom that perished. And as the loving mother ledeth
her young child by the hand to cause him to keep the most fair and easy way,
and to save him from falling. In constitum ^uum educes me e^ preterea in (...)
suscipice me.
Thou did lead me with thy counsel, preseruyng my weakness in this
present iourny of my life, wherefore my trust is thou will not leave me but wilt
receive me into glory. Thy favor did guide me. Thy grace did direct all my
doings, i. Corhin. xv.
by which I am all that I am, It was not I nor mine act, but thy grace that
was with me, which held me still through faith. Wherefore, my trust is, that
thou wylt not leave me, but that thou will after this life bring me into glory,
where is al joy, pleasure, rest, quietness, and al things that may be desired.
What wretched fool therefore was I to desire of the, Quid enim mihi est in
celo, et a te quid volu^^i super terram.
temporal, frail, vain and deceytfull prosperity and pleasure, knowing by
faith that thou have prepared for me and for all that faithfully love the: such
rewards as never eye has seen, ear has hard nor heart can imagine. But what
is this that is so precious a gift ordained for me? i Corhin. ii.
For soth even you thy self, Lord, and the fruition of thy perfect Godhed,
wherein is encluded all the joy that may be devised, a tresure that is immortal,
it endures pleasant for ever. Shall I then be so mad and so beastly to desire
of the (most merciful God) worldly honor, pleasure, ease or riches temporal,
more then is requisite for the necessities, of this present life? Should I
desire of the that love me, those gifts wherewith thou rewardest thine
enemies? The most wicked upon earth have these temporal trifles of thy great
liberality and goodness, But there is nothing upon earth that I desire, but
only the. The swetnes of thy goodness has made my flesh, that is, Consu^pta
est cato me^ et cormeum.
all carnal desires to fall and to cease in me. The worldly concupisce^ce
which my heart desired: is gone, and thou Lord, Robur cordis mei and pars mea:
deus in eternu^
art become the strength of my heart, thou art my porsion for ever. Thou art
my reward thine own self where with my heart is suffised. For whosoever serves
the: for to have prosperity, or temporal reward in this world: does more love
that reward then the. Of that, they make their God, and refuse the that art the
living God. But, loo, all that forsake the: shall perysh. Quid omnes qui
elongant se a te: peribunt, pedes omnes qui fornicantur abs te.
Thou wylt destroy all them that commit fornication against the. All sin
puts man from the. It makes a deuisio^ between him and the, It causes the
to turn thy face from him for that thou would not have mercy on him. Esaias.
l^.
It drives the from man, thou wylt not approach nere unto him by thy mercy to
help him. Nevertheless thou art nere him through thy justice, to punysh him.
But above all, thou obhorrest them that commyt fornication against the, that
love the world better then the, Sapini. ^ii^
that honor thy creature with the honor dew to thy majesty. That serve the
devil and leave the. This fornication of infidelity have thou ever punished
above bodily fornication or any other offense, Exodus xxxii. Iudi ii.iiii. and.
vi
as it appears in all the journey of the Israelites in the desert and also
when they were come into the land of Chanaan Also in Hieroboam, Achab, Iesabel,
Ammon, and many other. For such that run from the by infidelite: remains
death everlasting. They perish worthily that chose death, and lean the that
art very life. In who^, whosoever believes: shall have life everlasting,
^rouerb. viii ^^^n. v. Mihi aute^ propinquaded bonum est, ponein deo spem meam.
and shall not come into damnation. Wherefore it is good for me to hold me fast
by ye, to draw nere unto the by faith, from whence good works do spryng
toward my neighbors, and then to put my hope and trust wholly in the, as in a
sure and immovable anchour, from whence no blast of wind of temptation shall
drive me. Romans viii.
Through hope I trust to be delivered out of this corruptible body into thy
heavenly glory, and this by patience, I now abide and look for. During which
time of mine abiding in this present life: I will not cease, to declare and set
furthe all the noble works which thou have wrought, Vt enarrem omnes lauds
tuas.
to thine honor and praise and to the profyt of them that shall profess thy
son Christ's religion, while the world shall endure.

In this chapter are declared the joys of the heavenly mansions to be
ineffable. With the ardent desire which the prophet David, and in him,
The.lxxxiiii. Psalm. Quam dilicta.
all the faithful congregation, have to atteyne the same.
O Most mighty prince of power, Lord of hosts, Lord of the heavenly army of
angels that are thy ministers, which after a long journey through deserts and
other dangerous places by the space of.xl. years, wherein thou wast a guide
to thy people Israel, at the last thou brough test them to a land flowyng with
milk and honey a land of fertility and abundance, Deuter. viii.
where being in rest and peassible possession thereof: thou gave them a
commandment to observe yerly a feast in remembrance of thy goodness showed to
them many ways during that their dangerous peregrination. Deutere. xvi.
Which feast thou did will to be called the feast of the tabernacles. For
that long while of.xl. years they dwelt in no houses or tounes, but only in
tents and tabernacles. This did thou our love to be everlasting, and as the
love shall have no end, Seati qui habitant tu ^o ^io tua, adhuc lauda^unt t^
semper.
so shall the praise be without end. Blessed therefore are they Lord yt dwell
in thy house, who have occasion ever to praise the. They have none other work
to do in that joyful place, but to tha^k and praise, and good cause why. For as
in this world all our acts proceed of necessity, whereby we are enforsed to
work for our health, wealth, co^modite profit, and pleasure, or for the
commodity of our neighbor: so in thy house where no necessity or need is:
thy blessed spirits and saynctes have none occasion to work, but to thank
and praise for having the fruition of thy glorious deity, John.iii
they are all replenished with abou^dance of al things that they desire. They
are made like unto the, they behold the even as thou art, of which syghte
they shall never be fully satisfied. Such joy and love shall they conceive of
the beauty of thy glorious majesty. But to this beatitude can we never
atteine (merciful God) of our strength and power, but through the strength of
thy gracious assiste^ce. Beatus vir cuius forti^udo inte est.
Thou must engraue in our hertes thy laws. Thou must direct us in thy ways,
And when we are once brought by the into the right way: thou must also by thy
continual grace: stay us, keep our fete from slippyng and still preserve us, else
are we sure to slide and fall. Eccles. the last Chapt.
Who so trusts to his own power or to the help of man: is much deceived,
and leans to a rotten staff, which fails when it is most trusted unto. But
he yt trusts in thy gracious power: ^sce^tiones in cord suo ^sposuit, in
valle laeri ^arsi in loco quem po^^it.
wants never socoure at need. Thou have put us into this present world to
fight, and to strive with our enemies who continually assault us. But thy grace
makes us able to repel al their invasions. Thou suffer us not to be tempted
above our strength. And for our triumph: thou rewardest us with a crown of
glory and immortality. For this purpose of thy bountefull goodness have you
appointed us this place, that is, this world to travail in, to the intent
that so often as we do fall from the: in this place we should lament, mourn, and
weep for our offenses, not doubting but thou through the merits of thy son
Christ, wilt mercifully receive us again into thy favor, and give the
blessyng of thy grace, whereby we shall have a good will and disposition to
ascend up to the. Etenim benedictiones dabit legis lator.
And increase of strength to cleave fast unto the. Ibunt de fortitudine in
fortitudinen.
The ungodly fall from the, descendyng douneward from one vice to another: but
thy faithful elect increace daily in goodness. And of the, Lord, comes al our
power and strength to do good, and of thy son Christ Jesus our master, our
teacher and governor, Luke. vi
who promised that if we weep and mourn here in this vale of myserye for our
sins: Psalm.cxxvi.
we shall here after laugh and be joyful in eternal glory. If we do sow with
heuines, we shall reap with gladness. If we perceauer good and strong champions
here in battle: we shall for our reward, behold thy glorious face in Sion that
heavenly mansion, Videbitur deus deoru^ in Sion.
we shall se the face of thy son Christ, who is thy wisdom and thy power,
which whosoever sees, enjoys all joys and pleasures. To se that delectable
sight, i Corhin. i.
our hertes do much desire of the that art the Lord of hosts. Domine deus
virtutu^ exaudi orationem mea^, auribus petelye deus Jacob.
For this we make humble peticion to the that art the God of Jacob, Genes. xxxii
who wrestled with thine angel and prevailed, whose name thou did change
and did call him Israel (that is) the fear or beholder of God. Eue^ so make
me of Jacob, that is, of a strong and good wrestler against al mine enemies in
this world, to become Israel, that is, that I may after this life se thine
incomprehensible deity Lord of Lords in Sion, to the full contentation both
of my soul and body. We are much unworthy to obtain any thing of the,
considering our unkindness showed to the, and our wretched estate wherein we
remain. Protector noster aspi^e deus.
Nevertheless, Lord, we pray the to be our defense and protection through thy
grace, not for our merits, but for the merits of thy most entierly beloved
son Christ thine only anointed above all other with the oil of joy and
gladness. Collos. i.
He is our head, we are the me^bres of his body. He dwells in his faithful,
and they in him. Who so receives any of his elect: Mathe. ^.
receives him. He was incarnate for us, suffered death for us, bare all our
iniquities on his back, and arose again for our justification. Wherefore
Lord, we doubt not but thou through the infusion of thy grace: Respite in
facie Christi tui. Roma. v.
wylt look upon him in us (that is) to show us mercy for his sake. So that
where abou^dance of sin has been there may now reign more plentifulnes of
grace through him, that all the works of darkness being thrown away: and all
vanities of this world being cast behynd our backs: we may enter into the
court of thy bright heavenly Jerusalem, Quia melior est dies vna in atriis tuis
super milia.
where one days abydyng is better then a thousand days being in this world.
For here is continual trouble and disquietnes, there is perpetual rest and
tra^quillitie, yet many there be, who^ the being still here in this world,
would well content and satisfy, and all for lack of faith. They think, of
this life they have knowledge and experience, so have they not of the other.
They are loath to lose a thing certain for a thing uncertain. But thy faithful
know through faith, that when in this world the day passes sone away, and
then comes the night and darkness according to the revolution of time: Apoca.
xxi.
in thy celestial city is continual day and never night All is, there, but one
day, a day eternal, a light everlasting. The absence of the sun in this
preasent world: causes the night. But in thy city: thy son Christ, which
is the son of justice, is ever continually present, causyng there one
continual day, which day encludeth many thousand years. Yea, it endures for
ever, sense time there has no place, for as thou wast without beginning before
time: so shall thou Lord, Titus i
be without endyng after time, regning with thy chosen and blessed spirits in
joy everlasting in thy noble palace full of bliss and of al cou^fort. In which
house, Elegi ad limen sede^ in domo dei mei, mag^ quam habitare in tabernaculis
impietatis. Mathe. xi.
I had rather be a door keeper then to dwell in the tents of the ungodly. Thy
holy servant Ihon the Baptist by the testimony of thy son Christ, was the
greatest and most perfect man that was upon the earth. Never theles, the lest
in the kingdom of heaven, which was angel: was greater the^ he. Exodus ii.
Moses was brought up by the daughter of Pharao, and reputed as her son,
where he might in great wealth have continued if he had would. But when he was
great through faith, he refused to be called her son, and chose rather to
suffer adversity with the people of God, ^breos xi
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and al for that he had
respect to the reward to come in thy heavenly house. All honor, al pleasures
and all things in this world are mouable and transitory as are tents and
tabernacles. The joys there are steadfast and perdurable, and given of thy
goodness, ^athe. v. ^uia misericordiam and ^ritatem deligit deus, ^tiam et
gloriam dadominus. Non pribit bonis eos qui ^bula^t in perfectione tu^i^
^athew. i^
to those that are meke and humble in spirit. Thou do grant to thy faithful
(merciful Lord) of thy great goodness: both grace and glory, so that no good
thing shall be witholden from them that live a godly life. Thou first show thy
mercy and geuest grace calling sinners to repentance as thou did call
Paull from persequution, and Matthew from the receiuyng of custom. Then, of thy
verite and justice: thou geuest to those that thou have called: the reward of
immortality, which reward or crown of glory: Timo. vi.
thy said Apostle Paull claymed as a duty after his battle. Thou art
therein dettour to al just people of thy promise, not of their deseruinges.
Thou, of thy mere beneuole^ce have promised a crown of incorruptible glory,
^eter. v. ^o. ii.
to those that love the and serve the, which thou can not but perform,
because thou can not be but true, thou have ever showed mercy to many that
were sinners. Wylt thou the^ forsake and be found untrue to those that are thy
servants? Wherefore most myghtifull Lord of hosts, ^omine deus virtutu^
^atus homo qui spent tu te.
thy faithful dout not but thou will ever assist them, guide the^ and bless
the^, that put their whole and sure trust in the, who art the living God, and
geuest aboundauntly to them all things necessary in this present life, and
afterward fruition of thy Godhed in heaven eternally.

The prophet, despising the vanities of this transitory and short life:
The.lxxxx. Psalm. Domine refugium fa^tus es nobis.
desires the merciful favor of Christ. Whereby all faithful people may be
directed through the hight of his grace in all their acts
O Most benyng Lord and savior Jesus Christ, that art the very natural son
of thy myghtie heavenly father, God of God, and light of light, God, that art
without beginning a Lord from everlasting, before the mountains were brought
furthe, or ever the earth and the world were made, Domine refugium fa^tus es
nobis a generatione in generatione^ Prius quam montes fiere aut formaretur
terre orbis, a seculo and vsqu^ in seculum tu es deus Philip. ii
whose kingdom likewise shall endure world without end, thou Lord, I say,
that art equal with thy father in power and glory, dydest not disdain to
become man among men, to the intent thou would by sufferynge paynfull
passion: be the refuge of mankind from one generation to an other. The young
chickens, when the kyte strikes at them: have none other refuge but to run
flickeryng under the wings of the Hen for socour. No more has mankind any
other defense against his rauenyng enemies, but only ye coueryng of thy grace,
Psalm.lxi.
and shaddowe of thy said passion, which is unto him as a strong toure and a
sure sheld of defense against al invasions. Philip. iii.
This grace merciful Lord, we humbly beseech the to send us, that by tourning
thy favorable countenance toward us: we may know our own infirmities, and
leaving al pleasure in vile temporal things we may turn to the that art our
savior and redemer, ^acha. i.
our God and our brother. Make us, Lord to know in what myserye, what
trouble, and in how many kinds of displeasure we lead our lives here
continually unto the time that age or sickness come upon us, Deduces hominem
vsque ad contricionem, ^unc dices, reuertimmi filii Adam.
at which time thou will call us, saying: ye children of Ada^ return ye now
again into the earth from whence ye came. This is the debte dew unto nature.
Job.xiiii.
Of earth we were made, in ye earth we trauayl, of the earth we live, and into
the earth we must return, and that or ever it be long. For the days of man
are but short He that lyuede the longest life of all men in this world: was
Mathusalem. Who lived.ix. hundred lxv. years. But what is a.M. years compared
to eternity? Quia mill anni in oculis tuis, tanquam dies hesterna que
pertransiit.
For soth as yesterday that is past, no time can be called great, that shall
once have an end It is but short in comparison and ought to be regarded but as
time that is past. Et vigilia nocturna.
The life of man, may be likned to a night watch, or to the.iiii. part of the
night, according to the division of men of war in the old time. Who dividing
the night in.iiii. parts: appointed to every part.iii. hours Which hours
being past: the watchmen of that watch took their rest, and new watchmen came
in their places, during other.iii. hours, and so passed they forth the night
by quarters. So that from one to an other: the time passede away shortly.
Thus fares it by the life of man, whose first part passes away in chyldhod,
the second in youth, the iii. in manhod. The.iiii. watch begins in age, and
vanishes away, like the smoke that passes out of a chimnei. Al these watches
are in ye night that is, in death. For as soon as men begin to live: they begin
to dye. As Soon as thy pleasure is Lord to skatter them: Percutiente te eos vt
somnium erunt
they are even as a sleep that passet away and is not felt. Mane quasi herba
per tran^iens mane floruit et abiit, ad vesperum conteretur atque siccabitur.
They fade away suddenly like the grass which in the morning is grene and
grows, but in the euenyng it is cut down and withered. In youth we are
pleasant and lusti: and spryng up grene as does all corn. But when heruest
season comes: it rypeth, Esaias.xviii.
withers and is felled. When age comes the body of man dries away, the
natural moisture being consumed and spent, the^ age and death, overthrow all
sorts of people, other to joy or to pain everlasting. This remembered: Who
can take any cou^fort? Who can be merry that remembers the last end? Death is
terrible, nevertheless many have dyed without any great fear thereof, but after
death is a more terrible end to the ungodly, which is everlasting
dampnation. Consumpti enim sumus in furore tuo, et indignatione tua conturbati
sumus. Posuisti iniquitates nostras coram te, negligentias nostras in lumine
uultus tui. Job.xi.
This is the sentence given by the heavenly father for the punyshement of
sin. Wherefore the fear of thy displeasure and wrathful indignation makes
us to consume away. We pass away our time in continual fear, knowing that
thou set our misdeds before the, and our secret sins, which we thought
should never be known: are manifest in the sight of thy countenance. Thou
do well consider them with thine eye of indignation and punishment, to put
away the memory of the wicked from this life by death corporal and from the
land of the living: by death spiritual. For when thou art angry: al our days
are gone. We bring our years to end, as soon as a tale is told,
Psalm.xxxiiii. Omnes dies nostri tra^ ^eruni in furore tuo ^on^umpsimus annos
^ostros quasi sermone^ ^quens.
which delights for the while it is in tellyng, but it is sone at end, and
sone forgotten of most of the hearers. The spyder labors alo^g season to
spynne him a copwebe, he weueth his thredes in good order, all the day long
with great business, ^nni nostri sicut ara: ^ea meditabu^tur
and al to little purpose, for a blast of wind or a thing of small weight:
defaceth all his long work. Even so fares it by the busy worldly people. They
labor for goods, for honor and dignity, for lands to leave to their
succession to endure for ever, and for praise of the world. But when al is
done, it is but a spiders web, gotten with labor and kept to small effect,
for or it be long al is taken away, other by some unhappy chance, or else by
death. Which infallibly approaches, and unmercifully strikes, Dies annoram
nostro um in ipsis spetuagin (...) annis. Si autem multum oc^oginta anni, et
quod am^lius: labor est et dolor ^uoniam transiuimus ito et auolauimus.
few men there are in this our time, which live to se.lxx. years, But if
thorough the strength of their nature they attain to.ixxx. years: (which is a
very rare thing seen.) Yet live they then all in pain and sorrow, and tarry but
a short space after. For as the bird clippeth her wings and flies away when
she espyeth an hawk coming a far of: so does the aged at the appearing of
death. These punishments by short life in these latter days of our time,
which live far under the age of men that lived in the beginning of the world,
and also of our myseries during the said short life, and last of all of
death, of thy wrath and of pains eternal: are for that our sins he more
grievous then were the sins of men in the old time. Matthew.xxiiii.
Charity is more cold, iniquity is more abundance, Quis nouit fortitis nem
ire suer
which causes thy wrathful indignation to be more fierce in punishment. Thou
have strycken us to cause us to know our selves, but we have not repented,
for in stead thereof we have murmured, and been impatient. Hebreos.v.
Thou have beaten us and we have refused to receive discipline We have nothing
done our duty unto thy majesty, as we ought to have done. Et secundum timore
tuum indignatione^ ^am.
Whereby we have stirred up thy mighty displesure against us, which we can by
no means assuage, but by submyttyng of our selfs wholly unto thy great mercy
and goodness. For who is able to stand with the in judgment Or can for fear,
Hiere. ii
number or express the execution of thy displeasure against sin? Like as no
eye has seen, no ear has hard, nor heart can imagine the joys prepared for
thine elect: no more can any tongue express or mind, think, the number of the
grievous turmentes which are ordained for the wicked sinners after this life.
Job.xxxi.
The wrath of God is to be feared, as are the swellyng and raging waves of the
sea, which cannot be noumbred. Psalm.cxxx.
The weighty burden which he may lay upon us, if he will charge us according
to our acts: Vt numere^tur dies n^stri sic ostende et ven^emus cord sapienti.
no man can sustain. Wherefore teach us, merciful Christ to noumber our
days, that we may apply our hertes unto wisdom, Give us grace to have in
remembrance, the short days of our life, with the dangerous passage of our
time in this world, So that having no trust or affiaunce in the uncertainty
thereof: we may wholly apply our selves to the conte^plation of heavenly
wisdom, i. Cori. i.
yt we may consider ernestly thy goodness showed unto us, who art the power and
the wisdom of God thy father, and as by thy punishynge of us for our sins,
^nuertere domine us quo et d^precabilis e^ super seruos tuos
it seemed thou did turn thy face from us. So beholding our hertie
repentance for our offenses: we beseech the to turn the mercifully and
louyngly unto us be gracious to us that are thy servants. For although we
fall oftymes from the through the frailty of our nature: yet we forsake not
the utterly, but return to the, as the wastful son returned to his father
after long absence, ^uke.xv.
and was received and much made of at his return. We are thy servants ready
by thy grace to serve the. ^hreno. iii.
Here therefore our humble prayer, and as thou will not here the prayers of
sinners that continue in sin and provoke the to anger: so to us who are
returned to the by penitence: show thy mercy and thy grace, and let thine anger
assuage. Exodus xxxii. Imple nos matutina ^isericordia tua.
Oh satisfy us with thy mercy and that early in the morning, that is, right
sone and shortly. In the night of the old law the wrath of thy father reigned
upon men, by reason of his sentence given upon mankind for his inobedience.
ii. Peter. i
But when thou Lord, did arise after thy passion, then arose also mercy and
grace. Then the day appeared, and Lucifer that bright morning sterre began to
shine in the hertes of men. With this mornings mercy, satisfy my soul
gracious Lord. ii. Corhin. v.
For which all thy faithful, sore hungre and thryst so long as they abide in
this life. But they shall be perfectly and fully satisfied when thy glory shall be
manyfested unto them in thy heavenly habitation. Psalmo.lxvi.
Laudabimus et letabimur cuntis diabus nostris.
Then shall we rejoice and be glad all the days of our life. The days of this
world pass away like a shadow. But all our days in that glorious life are
but one day of eternity. In those days the su^ne never sets, night never
approaches, but al is bright day without end. With yt joyful day comfort us again
good lord, Letifica nos pro die^ quibus affliristi nos, pro annis in quibus
dimus mala.
in reco^pe^ce of the years wherein we have suffered much auersitie and endured
the manifold plages which you have sent us. As after many dangrous passages and
great adversity, thou broughtest at the last, thy people Israel into the
pleasant land of Chanaan, let thy noble work of our redemption appear to us
and take effect in us thy faithful servants, Appereat seruis tu opus tuu^, et
gloria ti super filios eorum.
and suffer not the benifit of our reconsiliation to be hid from our children
and our posterity, but that they may know it and enjoy it to the obteining of
thine everlasting glory. Cause the bright majesty of the, Lord God: Et sit
splendour domi, dei nostri super nos.
to be upon us, that is, let thy grace shine upon us, let it be ever assistent
unto us most merciful Jesus, which art the bright light of God thy father. Et
opus manuum i^ stratum dirige super nos, et opus manuu nostrarum confir^^
The^ shall we be sure, that what work soever we take in hand: it shall surely
prosper. Our intentes shall be so directed, yt nothing shall be done for vain
glory nor for any temporal reward, but al for the love of the principally, and
then to the profit of our neighbor for thy sake, lord, to who^ be honor and
glory with ye father and the holy ghost: world without end.

The prophet David beholdynge the fall of Adam, being for sin cast out of
Paradise, The.Cii. Psalm.
and his sorrowful penance made after to God therefore: set forth this psalm
of penance, in the person of Ada^ mete to be said by all his posterity, that
are penitent inwardly for their offenses to his hyghnes committed, and desire
to be restored to the favor of God, which through sin they have lost.
O most blessed father of heaven, ye fou^tayne of al grace and goodness, Ephesians.
ii. ^mans.x.
that art rych in mercy and plentiful in geueyng the same to al yt faithfully
call upon thy name, lord, that haueuyng a son no less rich in power,
wisdom, knoledge and mercy the^ thou art thy self, did not spare to se^d
him from thy heavenly palaice down to the earth eue^ into the womb of a
virgin for ye salvation of mankind, to declare thine abou^dau^t love toward
us: you did make him pore which before was rich, Corin. viii.
to the intent yt we which before were very poor: should by his poverty, be
made rich, that he who before was all one with the in thy divine substance:
might now be made one with us that are members of the body whereof he is the
head. Domine exaudi orati^nem meam et clamor deus ad te ueniat.
Harke^ good lord, and give ear unto my prayer Let my cry and hertie peticion
ascend up before the sight of thy majesty. The coming of thy merciful son
did make me very rich. But the vileness of mine own acts has cast me down
and made me very pore and miserable. The greatness of mine offenses has caused
the to turn away thy face from me, withdrawing thy grace which was the
cause of al my good will and good works. Thou can find no good thing in me
worthy of thy favor. Wherefore, Lord, behold the face of Christ thy dearly
beloved son my brother and my mediator For his sake, give me that, which of
my self I am much vnworthi to obtain of the. Ne abscondas faciem tuam a me.
In die tribulationis me inclina ad me aure ^uam.
Show thy delectable countenance unto me. Look on me with thy pitiful eye. And
in the time of my trouble, incline thine ear to me. I am never without
trouble. Mine old enemies daily assault and ver me. Wherefore I will not
cease daily to call upon the. But specially at the hour of my death, Lord,
hear me and defend me, at which time, my said enemies will most busilye invade
me. Roman. ii.
Indignacion, wrath, tribulacion and anguishe shall then come upon the soul of
every man that does evil. Before that troublous time, lord, hear me. But with
which of thine ears? With the ear of thy justice? No I beseech the. For that
ear must hear mine accusers to my condemnation. My prayer must be hard by
thine ear of mercy, from whense comes forgeuenes to those that are gilty, so
that penitence follow the iniquity. With this ear, Inquacumque die innocauero
te: uelociter exaudi me.
Isaye, hear me when I call unto the, and that with speed, So that according
to the greatness and multitude of my tribulations: may be the spedye receiving
of my peticion. Which shall not be to crave of the aboundau^ce of earthlye
goods above that honest necessity does require. But the abundaunce of thy
grace in this life, and for thy glory everlasting in another life. This have
thou, of thy mere liberality promised to grant to all that in steadfast faith,
call upon the. Iaco. i,
This hasty calling upon the, doste thou delight in, Esaye.lviii.
and (as thy prophet Esaias says) thou art as redye to answer me, as I am ready
to call unto the. Wherefore make speed in hearing, as I am driven by necessitye
to be hastye in calling, considering the short time of mine abidyng in this
world.

Thou did indue man in his creation with immortality, but sin brought in
death to all that bear life, Consumpti sunt sicut fuin^dies mei.
so that my days are consumed away like smoke. Age ouertaketh youth before I
am aware of him, youth steals from me preuely as the smoke does vanysh away
after it is once out of the chymney. Yea, many times before age comes, death
privily wounds, keaping none order in his arresting, but al according to the
time only to ye before known. Job.ix.
Thus my time passes away more swyftly then a runner, or then a ship that is
good under sail, and as an Egle that hastes to get his pray. For this cause I
have more neade of thy spedi help. Also my bones are brent up as it were a
fire brand, Ossa mea quasi frira contabuerunt
or as meat over dried that sticks to the friyng pan. As my bones do
sustain or uphold the flesh of my body: so do the powers of the soul,
sustain the soul. Which being moysted and mayntained by the fat moisture of
thy grace: are liuelye and quick, able to work acceptably. But thy grace being
once with drawn: all remains dry burned to the pan They have no power of
them selves to work any good work, or to think any good thought. And if that
which is of most force in me, be of so small force and efficasie: Alas, in
what case then is the corrupt flesh, bred naturally in concupisce^ce? What
goodness ca^ we look to find therein of it self, more then we would look for a
throne to bring furthe pleasant apples? Percussus sum quasi tenum et
arefactum est cor meum.
Full well may mankind be like ned to grass. For so long as he through thy
grace, works the works of justice: so long is he grene, flourishing and
lively. But so sone as sin (which is the sithe or sickle of our enemy the
devil) does cut of the grass by the root, causyng man to fall from the
obedience dew unto thy majesty, and from thy laws: he the^ waxes dry
withered and with every temptation falls from vice to vice, and becomes
very barre^ of good works. The cause is, for yt when man leauith the
fou^datio^ which should be his norishyng, his strength and his life he must
needs consume, wast and dry, Quia oblitus sum co^medere panem meum.
I have left thy holy word and commandments which are as bread to the soul
giving nutriture and moisture by faith and charity, and have eaten of the fruit
of the tree which thou forbadest me. I have with our father Adam followed the
illusion of the serpent and tasted of sin. Wherefore my leaves wyther, my
fruit is destroyed, Ecclesi. vi.
and I am left as a dry and a barre^ tree without any goodness. Wherefore I left
the lively food of thy holy word that seemed bitter at the first taste and in
stead thereof received sweet poysen (that is) death of both body and soul,
through the desolation of sin. The voice of thy terrible sentence given to
all mankind for his transgression: caused me to lament, mourn and to groan,
for fear thereof, so that my bones will scarce cleave to my flesh. A voce
gemitus met uix ossibus heret pellis mea
Thy displesure defaceth al my strength, and al my power. I have no comfort nor
joy of any thing that I was wont to have comfort of. But like the Pellicane I
draw me to solitary places, Similis factus sum pellicano solitudinis.
bewayling the evil which I have done against thy highness. The Pellicane (as
some report) kylleth her own birds, For which unnatural act: she
mourns.iii. days after, and then with her beke, plucketh away the flesh of
her own breast till it blede, which blood she lets drop upon her dead
birds. With ye heat whereof: they revive again. Thus do I lord with my birds,
that is with the good works, which (by thy grace) I have brought furthe, my
sin afterward committed, has caused them to be dead and of no valor. But
yet by penite^ce and humble prayer for thy grace: which comes of grace: the
said dead works are quickened again and receive their pristine force. Job.
iii
This thing to bring better to pass: I, learning of the Pellicane do a void
the company of worldly people, which should draw me back from my good
purpose. I banysh also from mine heart or mind: all delights, all pleasures, and
the troble also of worldly business, desyryng quietness in body and mind. Our
first father Adam was a Pellica^, toutching some part of that birds
properties. For through his dissobedience, he slew all his birds (that is)
all us that came of his progeny, in which death we had still remained, had
not one other gentle, loving, and natural Pellicane, thy blessed son Jesus
Christ, shed his blood for our viuication whereby he has restored us to thy
favor, and mercy through the sacrame^te of baptism and through the hertie
repentance, and quickened us again who were before: dead in sin. He sleyth
and ca^ raise again. Deute. xxxii.
He strikes and after heals, as he did Paul in his persecution. How much
therefore are we bound to his grace yt without any of our deservings,
willingly offered him self to the death for our redemption, and to thy majesty
also. Who did not spare thine only begotten son, but of thy pure pity
sendest him down to suffer all opprobry and vile death on the cross for our
sakes. Wherefore, I am much ashamed to hold up mine eyes to heaven toward thy
hyghnes, being so unkind to the again so many ways. Shame causes me to
withdraw me from al company, as does the night crow or the shricke oule,
Factus sum quasi ^ubo solitudinum.
to old for letten houses, sekyng my food out of al light and sight of men.
And if I could, I would also hyde me from the as did Adam when he had trespased
against ye in paradise. Genes.iii.
I loved the works of darkness and therefore I fled from the light of the
bryghte son of justice. For this cause do I sygh, sorrow and bewail my
wretchedness. So that I can take no sleep in the night. Vigilaui and factus sum
sicut passet solitarius ie tecto.

Tota die exprobraba^t mihi intenici mei.

Et qui laudabant me: aduersum me iuraba^t


I mourn as does the sparrow that sits alone under the eues of the house
wantyng her comfort. And to augment my grief: mine enemies revile me all the
day long with open rebukes and slanders. Again, my feigned fryndes laugh me to
scorn and are sworn together against me. Many give me fair words, and yet
intend my destruction. As did the Pharisees and the Herodians to thy blessed
son Christ, Matthew.xxiiii.
when they said unto him they knew him to be true and to teach the way of
God truly. Wherefore they would know his mind whether it were lauful to pay
tribute unto Ceasar. They praised him first but that was to trap him in his
answer by the liberal showing of his mind. Such false fained friends are more
dangerous and also more odible then open enemies. Esai. iii.
But both these sorts are a plage sent unto me for mine iniquities. I am
never quiet but in continual fear. Quia cinete tanquam palem ma^ducabam.
I eat ashes with my bread, that is I consider that I was made of earth and
there unto, I shall return. In the bitterness of such thoughts I eat my
bread, and I myngle my drink with the tears that fall from mine eyes and all
because I perceive the to be angry with me. Et potum meum cum ^leru miscebam.
Knowing that at the time of thy coming to the dredful general judgment: the
storm of thine indignation shall go furthe and shall fall down upon the
heads of the ungodly. A facie ite indignacionis tue. Iermie. xxiii. Quia
eleuasti me et elisisti me.
Thou have lyfted me up of a great hight in that thou made me like unto thyn
image toutching my reasonable soul, and have given me power by thy grace to
inherit the everlasting joys of heaven both body and soul, if I did live
here after thy commandments. What greater gift can thou give me Lord,
then to have the fruition of the that art al in all things? How can thou
lift me higher then to eternal beatitude? But then alas, Sapien. ix.
thou have letten me fall down again. For thou have joined my noble soul
with an earthli, heavy, and a frail body: the weight and burden whereof:
draws down my mind and heart from the consideration of thy goodness, and from
well doing, unto al kinds of vices and to the regardyng of temporal things
according to his nature. The earthly mansion keeps down the understanding.
Job.xxx.
Thus setting me up as it were above the wynd: thou have given me a very great
fall. I am in creation, above al other kind of earthly creatures, and almost
equal with angels. But being in this estate: thou have knyt a knot there to,
that for breakyng the lest of thy commandments: I shall suffer dampnatio^. So
that with out thy continual mercy and help: I am in far worse case herein
then any brute brast, whose life or soul dies with ye body. And what is the
time of the abydyng of mankind in this world? Of truth but short. All
though we have not the grace earnestly to think thereon. My days pass away
like a shaddowe, and I am withered like grass. Grant me therefore, Lord, Dies
mei sicut vmbra declinauerunt, et ego sicut fenum atui.
that in the shadow of this life, I may have grace to se light (I mean) to
have knowledge of the, of thy ways, and of thy holy word. Psalm.C.xviii.
Which gives light and understanding unto babes. For after this life, there is
no place nor time left of repentance, and sense my time is here but short:
continue thy grace, lord, toward me, who endurest past al time, that is for
ever and ever and thy remembrance through al generatio^s? Tu autem domine in ^
ternum permanes et memoriale tuum in generatione and generationem.
Thou ye art eternal must save me yt am but temporal. But what is thy
remembrance through al generations? It is nothing else but thy natural
property to be merciful, which you have ever put in execution in all times from
one generation to another. Thou art more ernest in the remembrance thereof:
then is the natural loving mother of her own natural child, borne of her
body, as records thy prophet Esaias. Esaias. xlix Tu exurgens domine miseteberis
Sion
Arise therefore, merciful God, and have mercy upon Sion, that is thy church or
faithful congregation, for it is time to have mercy upon her, yea, the time is
come, Quia tempus miseren di eius quoniam venit tempus.
she has long suffered pain and persecution. Now give her joy and
consolation. But what is this time? was there ever any time in which thou
did not show mercy to thy servants? no truly. For from the fall of
angels unto the end of the world, thy mercy has ever been and shall be
abundaunt to al mankind. But chiefly it was showed, when thy holy son was
sent into this world to suffer death and thereby to enter the glory of his
father. Whereby the gates of heaven were opened, which before were fast shut,
that no man might enter. This time was the beginning of grace and called the
time of grace, and was certainly appointed when the fulness of time was come,
Galothas* iiii
which was before seen by ye inscrutable wisdom of thy deity, whereby thou
do al things in most perfect order. This time of grace we trust shall
continue ever to those, that are penitent, for the time of penitence requires
a time of mercy. Wherefore, we pray without seasing, unto the to have mercy on
Sion, the faithful congregation, Q^^oniam placitos feceru^t serui tui lapides
cius.
which was made of lively stones gathered together both of the Jews and also
of the Gentiles. The faithful christians were derelye beloved of thy servants
the Apostles. Who builded them upon a sure rock. Thy son Jesus Christ was
the foundation. They builded not upon man, nether yet upon angel. These fair
stones were hewed square and set by their preaching, and were allowed and
acceptable not only to them, but also to the, Lord. For thy Prophet zachary
witnesses of the that thou will have the stones of thy Sanctuary set up in
thy land and wylt deliver the^ in ye stormy day of thy judgment, zachari. ix.
as the flock of thy people which shall be prosperous and goodlye. But the earth
or ye dust of Sio^, that is, the wicked worldly sort of people that have
received the name of thy son only. Et puluerem eius nuscrabil^m.
yet in living are the children of Pharao (that is) of the Devil, to whom they
have builded a temple: such shall by the preaching of thy servants not be
amended, but shall remain more wicked and miserable, they savor only of the
earth whereof thy come, and as dust, shall be blown away from the face of the and
thy blessed son at the general judgment. But as the Heathen, Lord, and all
the rulers of the earth shall tremble for fear of thy name and the justice of
thy majesty in judgment: Ettimebu^t gentes nomen tuum domine, et omnes rages
terre gloriam tuam. i Corh. iii.
so shall Sion thy faithful church or congregation buyilded by thy servants in
the name of the and thy son Christ: be glad and joyful, for to them thou
shall appear in thy glory. Thy noble son shall then show him self, Quia
edificauit dominus Sion et videbitur in gloria sua. Esai.xxxiii. Esaie. liii.
to them as a king of power to their great rejoicing He came first into this
world poor and despised having no beauty in him. Then shall he appear glorious
and triumphing. Wherefore, most loving father: Resperit in orationem humilium et
non spreuit precem eorum.
turn the unto the prayer of us that are pore and destitute of any help, but
only through thy mercy, despise not I beseech the our humble desire. Behold
our peticions with thy merciful eyes, Genesis iiii
wherwyth thou beheldest the oblasion of Abell, and did receive it
thankfully, and where with thou beheldest the prayer of the Israelites, being
in bitter bondage in Egypt and did deliver them. Also with which thou
saw the prayer of Judith to the destruction of Holofernes and to the
sauegarde of thy people. Iudi vi.


With those same merciful eyes vouchsafe to look upon us, and our prayers,
whereby the noble fame and praise of thy mercies shall be written for those that
come after, Seribatur hoc in generatione altera, et populus qui c^cabitur:
laudabit dominum.
that the people which shall be borne in faith by Baptism and penance: may
praise the, Lord, and thy holy name, sense more honor it is to the to save
those that are in bondage of synnne and in death through thy mercy taking
their hertie penytence in satisfaction of their offenses, then utterly to leave
them destitute of thy grace and straghtly to condemn the^ This mercy is
annexed to thy deuyne nature, it is also thy wonted custom, Quia resperit de
ercelso sanctuario suo, dominus de eclo terram contemplatus est. Vt audiret
gemitus compeditorum et solue ret filios mortis. Hebreos.ii.
for when al mankind was lost and dead in sin: Then did thou, sittyng in
thy celestial throne, look down to the earth upon our miserable estate, the^
did thou hear ye mournyng of such as were in captivity and thraldom of
the Devil, and sendest down thine only begotten son, that by his death he
might deliver from death such as worthily were the children of death. i.
Corhin. xv
He thereby put down him that had the lordshyp over death (that is) the Devil.
For death was consumed into victory. His venomous styng which was sin: was
plucked away. All this did thou Lord, to give occasion to al me^ to have
remembrance of the, Vt narretur in Sion nomen domini et laudatio eius in
Jerusalem.
and thy great goodness, and to declare the glory of thy name in Sion, and to
set forth thy praise in Jerusalem. That is, in thy church when the people are
gathered to gether in the unity of one faith and the kingdoms also to serve
the Lord, Cum congregati fuerint populi et regna vt seruiant domino.
with one accord that art one in substance and.iii. in persons, giving
thanks to the and thy blessed son for the benefit of our redemption. Thou
have oftimes called the first earthly Jerusalem and her children to know the as
their Lord and creator, Mathe. xxiii
and thy son as their redemer, and that with a great loving affection as the
hen calls her chickens to crepe under her wings, but she refused the. She
would not answer unto thy call, She followed straung Gods. She did not work
according to thy laws. But thy second Jerusalem thy holy church our mother,
gathered of thy faithful beleuers: does answer, Lord, unto thy call.
Respondit ei.
Thou sendest the dewes of thy grace upon us, and we bring forth the fruit of
good works to thine honor and the help of our neighbors. But whereby else,
Lord, In via fortitudinis sue.
but in ye power and strength of thy grace not of our own power, nether for
any our merits, but freely of thy gift. We kept thy laws through thy might,
not of our infirmity, which of it self, is strong to nothing but to sin.
Paucitatem dierum meorum nuncia mihi.
This thy church desires to know how long it shall abide here in this world
sufferynge great tribulation and temporal afflictions, by antichrist and his
accomplices the enemies of thy faith. To whom thou have made answer by the mouth
of thy blessed son, that thy power and his assiste^ce shall be with her unto
the end of the world but she and her children being desirous with thine
apostle Paul to be losed and to be with the and thy son Christ, Philip. i
knowing surely that if this earthly mansion wherein they now dwell were
destroyed: that they have a buyldyng ordained of the for them, ii Corhi. v
an habitacion not made with hands, but eternal in heaven. They (I say)
acco^pte all the time from Adam unto the end of the world to be a short time,
as it is in deed, to be compared to eternity. It is as a drop of water is in
comparison of the sea. Ne reuoces me in dimi^io dierum incorum.
The desire of thy sight in this joyful eternity causes al us that are her
children to desire the, to bring us to the end of this short time, of the
abiding in this world, and till yt hour to continue thy grace and loving
favor unto us, and not to leave us at any time in the mydle of our age. But
bring all our time by thy gracious assistaunce to an end, that after our
short temporal days: In generatione et generationem anni tui.
we may se thine eternal years, which endure through all generations. Al times
pass away quickly, but eternity abides for ever This must of reason be true,
for eternity is thy very substance which suffers no mutabilitie but abides
ever without alteration. Which substance whosoever seeks to know: it is the
same that it is. Exodus iii.
Wherefore to Moses desirynge (when thou sendest him to the Israelites) to
know thy name that he might declare it unto them: thou did answer him that
thou art even the same which thou art, Initio tu domine terra^ fundasti and
opera manuum tuarum sunt celi.
and that is thy name. Thou wast before the earth was made. Thou, Lord, have
laid the foundation thereof, and the heavens are the work of thy hands, thy
word made them, thy hands (that is) thy power created the^, Ipsi peribunt.ii.
Peter.iii. Luke.xxi.
and al they shall perysh. The earth and al creatures here in this base region:
shall at the last perish by fire. The heavens shall also peryshe not in
substance, but in that they shall leave their mocions and natural operations.
For there shall be no need of the use or service of them when the number of
thine elect shall be fulfilled for whom they were made. The bodies also of thy
reasonable creatures shall perish and shall be raised again clean of another
sort, so that all things shall peryshe according to thy godly institution.
The order and fashyon whereof: to us is unknown. But thou, Lord, Tu autem
permanes et omnes quasi uestimentum, atterentur.
shalt endure in thy glory everlasting, almyghtie, eternal and omnipotent
God, having knowledge of all and power to do al things, they shall wax old
and wear as does a garment. And as a vesture shall thou change them and they
shall be changed. As clothes are a garment to cover ye body: Et sicut pallium
mutabis eos and mutabu^tur
so are the bodies garments, to the souls. This garment of the body, will in
short space, wear away and perish, and shall be changed from corporal to
spiritual, i. Cori. xv
from mortality to immortality. But the soul being made like thine image
touching the spiritual qualities of the^: Tu autem idem ipse es ei anni tui non
deficient.
shall remain as me^bres of the and of thy son that is their head. That is to
say, as thou lord art immortal and invisible and abydest still the same which
thou wast in the beginning and as thy years shall not fail but abide
eternal: so shall the souls of thine elect enjoy pleasant immortality. The
souls of the wicked be also immortal, but in pain. Thy lovers and servants
shall be immortal in joy and felicity. The risyng of thy son Jesus Christ
their head, from death to life everlasting: is an assured token of their
resurrection at the last day to joy everlasting. Filii scruotum tuoru^
habitabunt et semen eorum ante faciem tua^ permanebit.
And the children, of thy servants shall continue and their sede shall
prosper in thy sight. Thy servants were the prophets and the Apostles of thy
son Christ, of whom all that sense their time have been faithful: have been
engendered through faith by their holy preaching, which children with their
fathers the Apostles abide fast in the hope of thy promises to receive at the
last: joy everlasting, and why? truly for their sede (that is) their
faithful works, are allowed of thy majesty. The barren tree is not allowed of
the but the fruitful. Joseph the son and the good seed of Jacob, went
before his father into Egypt, Denai. xiv
to prepare for him (by thy providence) all that should serve for the
auaunceme^t of him and his succession. So Lord, we beseech the send us thy
grace, that we may so sow the sede of our good works in this world, that
they may declare us to be thy faithful servants and that they may be
acceptable frut in thy sight, for that they are planted in faith, for which
thou have prepared a place for us in heaven where thou abidest still as thou
art with thy blessed son and the holy spirit proceadyng from you both, in
everlasting beatitude, world without end.

The prophet exhorts every faithful person to give praises and thanks to
Christ for the manifold benefits of him received. The.Liii. Psalm

Praise the Lord, o my soul, Benedit anima mea dominum et omnia in teriora
mea, nomen sanctum eius.
and all that is within me, praise his holy name. Enforce the with al thy
strength to deuyse and to set forth his noble praises. Thou have within the
many goodly gifts of nature and of grace, which give the occasion never to
cease from geuyng thanks and speaking of praises. Benedic anima mea dominum et
noli oblinisci omnes retributiones eius
Forget not these benificial gifts which he has given the. For of
forgetfulness, comes vntankfulnes, which unkindness makes the not worthy to
enjoy that is freely given the. Consider my soul, first the bare and miserable
estate, wherein thou wast brought by sin, Thou wast the enemy of God, Qui
propiciatur omnibus iniquitatibus tui^
the bondseruaunt of the devil, and subject to death everlasting. From these
has thy merciful brother Jesus Christ, being both God and man, delivered ye,
satisfiyng for thy sin through his vile death and paynfull passion. What more
love could he show to the then to dye for the, whereby he drives away thine
offenses as the wind does the clouds, and thy sins as the mystes. Esaye.
xliiii
If thou set before thine eyes the multitude and abomination of thine own
sins: then shall thou also behold the benefits and the goodness of thy
redemer. Every sin has death annexed as stipend, Rmans. vt.
wherefore, so often as thou offe^dest: remember no less, but that so often he
gives the a new life, upon thine humble and hertie penance. Give him
therefore the sacrifice of praises and glorifye him, for therein he deliteth,
not for his profit, but for thine, not for that he is any thing thereby
auaunced. But that doing thy duty by faith thou may be made partaker of joy
everlasting with him. Again, after that he has forgeuen the thy sins: yet
remain there in thy weke flesh, many perturbations, many redye inclinations
to sin, and no power to do good. Many perilles through violent temptations
and pleasant suggestions: yea, and many concupiscences, which draw toward
eternal death. But al these sores and infirmities, the good Samaritane Christ
expels through the preparacio^ of his grace and gives health by the virtue
of his passion with the medicine of Baptism and penance. Et sanar omnes
infirmitates tuas.
No soore is incurable, but when thou refusest to show thy gryfe and to
receive his salve. Sometime thy festred old sore requires sharp incision or
a bytyng corsyfe, that is, thine accustomed sin will not be refrayned, onles
he violentlye scourge the with syckenesses, loss of goods, loss of wife,
children, faithful servants, or by many other tribulations and persecutions,
Yet (I say) refuse not his hand though it seem heavy to the at the first, for
all is for thy health and wealth. Thynk that if he loved not the he would not
chasten the, but leave the to syncke in thine own sin, to thine utter loss
both of body and soul. But he has saved thy life from everlasting
destruction. Hui redimit de interitu vitam tuam. Roman.iiii.
He has redeemed the with his precious blood. He dyed for thy sins and rose
again for thy justification. Love him therefore my soul and magnify him all
the days of thy life. Put thine hole affiance in him and fear no violence of
enemies. For although they assault the: yet can they not vanquyshe the. For he
that through his great mercy and loving kyndnes has given the power by him
to vanquish thine enemies: Qui coronat te in misericordia et miserationibus.
will not fail after thy fight and victory to reward the with a crown of joy
and immortality. i Corhin. xv
When death thy last and fierce enemy shall be overcome: then shalt thou as a
ruler or prince, receive thy said croune or garlande. The^ shall al thy desires
be satisfied with good things thou shall be admitted to the joyful company of
saints in the heauenli Jerusalem, Qui replet in bonis de sidetium tuum.
there to have more joy and comfort: then thy heart can wish. When the glory
of the Lord shall appear: then shall thou be fully satisfied to thine assured
contentation. His countenance shall replenysh the with all joy. Wherefore, my
soul, Psalm. xvii. Psalm.xvi.
while thou art in this present life joined with the frail and heavy carkas:
give thanks louinglye to thy gentle redemer, for his unspeakable kyndnes. His
grace is ready at hand at thy call. Fight therefore mightily against al synful
concupiscences and vices, Put of the old man and leave all the works of
darkness. Romans xiii Ephesians.iiii.
Put on the a new man and arm the with ye armor of light, begin a new life.
Learn of the Eagle, whose property is to restore himself to youth and
strength again after he has lived a great age. Renouabitur vt aquile iuuentus
tua.
The mean of his recouerye is this His over beeke through age, is grown so
long that it lets his fedyng. So that what for age, and for lack of food,
he is become lean, and feeble and almost unable to fly. Then of nature being
also driven thereto by necessity: he flies to the rock of stone, and thereon
knocks his said long beke, and wheteth it still till it be broken and made
handsome to feed with. Then falls he earnestly to feding. Wherbi in short
space, he recouereth his strength, has pour to fly as high sa ever he did,
waxes lusty and in apperau^ce, seems young again. So thou, my soul, that
art old and withered in sin: fly up to Christ the strong and sure rock.
Leave al worldly pleasures and vanities: yea, leave the trust of thine own
self and thy power, call for his grace. And thereby on him, stryke of thine old
beke, thine own cancred living, not doubtyng but he will make the able to live
a new spiritual life, renuynge thy mouth which was stopped for age. i. Corhi.
iiii
He will open it again making the able to eat the lively food of Gods word:
yea, through faith thou shalt eat him, who said, John. vi
I am the lively bread that descended from heaven. Who shall so comfort the
that thou shall not only in life be endued with the grace of the holy ghost,
to thy strength and comfort, and power to resyst all thine enemies: but also
when thou shall put from the, the burden of this miserable body, which before
was heavy and oppressed the: thou shalt fly to that sure rock Christ, by
whose resurrection thou shall obtain immortality both of soul and body in
heaven euerlastyngly. Sapien. ix.
Beholding continuallye the pleasant face of God to the fulness of all thy
joy, and contentacion of all thy desires, and to the intent thou should
stand fast in hope of that I have said, and not mystrust the mercyes of God
that are ineffable: call to thy remembrance the ancient goodness of the father
of heaven. Faciens misericordias donimus.
Which is all one with the mercy of his son and the holy ghost. Behold how
merciful and benificiall he has ever been, to those that believed and trusted
in him. As to Noe, to Abraham, Isaac and, Jacob, to Joseph, Moses, Iosue,
Gedeon, David, Solomon, Hezechias, and to other innumerable in the old time to
whom was plentifullye showed the experience of his mercy and goodness. And as he
has declared his pity in helpyng his servants: Et iudicium omnibus iniuriam
patientibus.
so has he expressed his power in reuengyng them on their enemies which
oppressed the^. As of Pharao king of Egypt. Of Achab king of Israel.
Senacherib, king of the Assirians. Haman the Macedonian, Herod and many
other, it has been plainly showed. Wherefore, think surely that the same
merciful God, that was so benificiall to his fryndes in the old time: is,
nether wylbe less benificiall almaner of ways to them that believe and have a
sure trust in him, being of his Church here militau^t. He showed to Moses
his ways, Notas fecit Moysi vias suas. Filiis Israel voluntates suas.
his laws his precepts, and to the children of Israel he she-his power and
declared his will. But by Christ his only son he manifested to us his divine
pleasure, in the euangelical law. And as great wonders has he showed to the
declaration of his power, confirmation of his laws and to the punishment of
the enemies of his spouse the church How full of compassion, and mercy, is
the Lord to all those that are sinners? How great is his patience? how rich
is his goodness? how gracious is his sufferance? so long to abide the
conversion of sinners from their iniquities. Roma. ii. Esaye. xxx.
He suffers and abides to the intent he might have mercy on them. If they
amend not: he then gently scourges them to call them unto him. Answer
therefore when he calls. Roma. ii.
Take no day for thy conuertyng least thou raise his wrath in the day of his
anger and just judgment. Trust not so much to his mercy that thou despeyse his
justice. Let not his long sufferyng of the for thy conversion turn to thine
utter destruction. Repent in time. Ask grace and mercy earnestlye and he will
not fail to give them unto the. He cannot do against his nature. Non
imperpetuum ita sectur neque meternum comminabitur.
His anger endures not for ever. His thretenynges cease in a short while, if
thou cease from thine iniquity. A little while does he forsake the, Isaye.liiii.
but with great mercifulnes will he take the up to him. When he is angrye: he
hides his face from the for a season. But through his everlasting goodness will
he pardon the says the prophet Esaye. Non secundum peccata nostra fecit nobis,
neque secundum iniquitates nostras tetribuet nobis.
Another does he deal with us according to the quantity of our sins, nor
reward us according to the multitude of our iniquities, for our sins excede
the number of the sands of the sea, ii. Paral. xxxiii. in oracione Manasses
regis Jude.
and our iniquities are multiplied very sore, but God, in place of great
plages: sends small punishments, And where our infinite sins require pains
infinite, yet to call us to penance, he sends many temporal afflictions in
this world, to keep our souls from destruction and to cause us to enjoy the
light of the living. Job.xxxiii.
The light of everlasting bryghtnesse, and the true light that never shall be
dimmyd. How can thou therefore, my soul, give co^dyngne thanks or praises to
God for his inestimable goodness and grace to the showed. Quantum enim excelsius
est celum terra: ta^tum co^firmata est misericordia eius super timentes cum.
For look how high the heaven is from the earth: so great is his mercy also to
them that fear him. God has appointed the heaven to cover and compass the
earth on al parts, and to send down sometime wind sometime rain, sometime
heat, sometime cold, sometime fair, sometime foul weather, according to the
necessities of man. And as it is impossible but the heaven should cover the
earth, and cause the benefits thereof to be showed: so is it impossible but
that God will cover, defend and govern, his servants which live in the
fear of him. For he does ever compass, his people and saves them,
Psalm.Cxxiiii.
as the ball of his eye from all danger. And he says by his prophet
Hieremie, Hierem. xxxiii.
may the covenant be broken which I have made with the day and the night: that
there should not be day and night in dew season? Then may my couenaunte also
be broken which I made with my servant Dauyd, that is, with all that well and
trewlye serve and fear me. The son also of God the second person in
divinity being in heaven eternally, ineffable, impassible, and equal in power
with his father: vouchsaffed to come down from his celestial throne, into the
base region of this world to be incarnate of the virgyn Marie and to suffer
death for the redemption of mankind: so did his mercy stretche from heaven to
earth and raised us up to life again which before, were dead in sin.
Quantum distat orie^s ^b occidente: long fe^t iniquitates nostras ^ nobis*
And as the wind dryueth away thycke mystes from the face of the earth: so by
his death he drove away our sins, setting them as far from us as the East
is from the weste. Likewise as when the sun aryseth: the world receives
light. Again when it is auayled: darkness of the night approaches. Even so
when grace comes: Ephe. ^
the soul is made bryghte and shynynge, which by sin again is made foul,
and dark. Remember therefore my soul, what displeasure it is for the mortal
body to live in darkness lacking the sight of the carnal eye in this world,
Tobie. ii.
as did blind Tobie. And thereby thou shall know what hurt the spiritual
darkness of sin brings to the soul of man. Eccle. ^.
Whereof in figure the stoborne Egyptians had one plage of darkness thycke and
palpable, according to the darkness of their sins and disobedience against
God. When the children of Israel (that is) the faithful beholders of God: had
in the same country light in all places, where they dwelled. The grace of God
expelled from them all such darkness of sin. They feared God and served him
faithfully in their hertes during the time of their oppression by the
Egyptians, but after being at liberty: they waxed wanton and kycked against
the Lord that had delivered them. Be thou therefore glad when adversity
comes. For that is the most sovereign medicine for the soul, given by the
high physician to suppress the proud flesh that rebelleth against the
spirit, and thereby to make man call for his grace. Sicut miscretur pate^
filiorum: misertus est dominus timentibus se. Hebre. xii.
And herein think the most bound to the father of heaven, and think that
he loves the then as the natural father loves and pitieth his son. For
every good son that he loves he will beat and correct to cause him to
stand in fear of him. Another think that he has forgotten the because he
punishes the. For sooner will the mother forget the child borne of her womb,
Esaye. xlix
then the Lord will forget those that fear him. His merciful eyes never
depart from them. When need requires: Psalm. xxx.
he appears unto them. He knows the weakness of his frail metal whereof man
is made. Quoniam ipse cognouit figmentum nostrese recordatus est, quia puluis
sumus.
He co^sidereth that he is but dust made of the earth, and to earth shall
return again. And for that he would have the perfect knowledge and
experience of our nature: he sent down his son Jesus Christ to take upon him
the same nature. Who has proved and seen the frailty thereof, Hebre. ii.
he was in all things tempted as we are, and made like unto man (sin and
ignorance excepted) he feared the approchynge of death that was contrary to
the nature of his flesh, and in all other our infirmities he had the
experience. Wherefore, think not that he does or will forget it, Homo quasi
herba, dies eius sicut flos agri si^ florebit, quia spiritus per ransiet eum et
non subsistet et no^ cognoscet eum vltra locus ei-
but does consider that our strength is like the grass. Our ioly time is like
the flower of the field, which being toutched with a blast of cold wind
wythereth and is gone, and the place where it grew, knows it no more. All
the prosperity of this world all honor, riches, nobility, yea the very life
of man endures but a while, in comparison of eternity, and shortly after
death: all is put in oblivion. Ezech. xxxvii.
The place of the soul in this world is the mortal body, which after death,
goes to corruption, and is no more known of the soul, till the last and
general resurrection, when by the almighty power of God the same body shall be
joined to the same soul and go to joy or to pain everlasting. God I say,
considering the body of man to be frail and subject to corruption, his age
or his life to be like the grass which shortly wythereth, also all his
prosperity and his glory to be as the beauty of a flower: that sone fades
away: has in his godly prescience establyshed his merciful goodness,
Misericordia aute^ domini ab eterno et vsque ineternum super time^ces eum.
to endure for ever and ever upon them that fear him, he has sent down his
only son to take upon him our mortal nature, to become grass as we are. His
godheade that is eternal, is become partaker of man's mortality to make man
partaker of his joyful immortality, to make grass that will sone wyther: to
endure grene and pleasant for ever. But be not thou proud of this my soul,
but humble thy self and thank him of his great grace and mercy. i. Corhinth.
iiii.
Whereby thou art that thou art, for what good thing have thou that thou
haste not received? it is not of thy self, wherefore glory not in thy self.
Osee.xiii.
Thou can work none other but only thy perdicion, it is his grace that
works thy salvation. Exalte therefore his mercy and praise his ryghtuousnes,
which is showed on his faithful servants and upon their chyldernes children
such as keep his covenant and think upon his commandments to do them, Et
iusticia eius in filios filioru^: His qui custodiu^t pactum eius ^ recorda^tur
preceptor^cius ad faciendum ea.
of his mere liberality: he promised rewards to the fulfyllers of his laws.
Which of his truth and justice: he will not fail to perform, but to whom?
only to the doers of his commandments, not to the only hearers, or the
reasoners thereof, or to them which only have them in remembrance. Jacob.i.
For such are like to a man that beholds his bodily face in a glass and
immediatlye goes away and forgets anon what his fashyon was. But the
faithful folowers of his precepts are dearly beloved of him. And not they
only, but also their childerns children, the whole congregation of elect
persons. Such as have applied their hertes to be faithful folowers of the
good steps and example of their faithful parents. Psalm.Cxxviii.
This is the blessyng of God, whereon David speaks, that they which fear the
Lord: shall se their chyldernes children, and peace upon Israel (that is)
peace everlasting in heaven, for the reward of their good works. There can no
good deed be unrewarded: Neither any sin be left unpunished. For Christ ye
judge of the quycke and also of the dead has prepared his seat, Dominus in
celo pa^uit sedem suam, et re^num ipsius, omnibus dominabitur.
in heaven and his kingdom rules over all. In this seat shall he judge every
man according to his acts, without having respect to any person. Apo. v.
To him that sits on this seat shall all creatures which are in heaven and
on the earth and under the earth give honor and glory for evermore.
Benedicite domino ^geli eius fortes robo^ facientes verbum cius obedientes voci
sermonis eius.
To him the holy angels that be mighty in strength give laud and praise, they
fulfill his commandment, they obey the voice of his words, they acknowledge
him to be their Lord and their maker, and that by him they have all the power
that they have. Benedicite domino omnes exercitus eius, ministri eius qui
facitis volu^tatem etus.
To him all the hosts of heavenly spirits give thanks and praise, they are
his servants, and do his pleasure. As did the angel that went before the
children of Israel out of Egypt and went between them and the host of Pharao,
Exodus xiiii.
which followed to have destroyed the^. An angel also was sent to Balaam and
stood in his way as he went with the Lords of Moab. Numeri. xxii.
An angel of the Lord, iii. Regum. xix.
ministered unto Elias in the wyldernes. Danie. xiiii.
Did not an angel of the Lord carye Abacucke the prophet by the here of his
head from Jury to Babylon with meat and drink for Daniel who was in the den
of the lions? They are al ministering spirits sent to minister for their sakes
which shall be heirs of salvation. Hebre. 1
They bring knowledge of the Lords will to his faithful here upon earth, and
are desirous that we should as surely and obedientlye do his said will here
on earth as they do it in heaven. Benedicite domino omnia opera eius in omni
loco dominationis eius.
Yea all the works of the Lord, magnify and speak good of the Lord, in every
place of his dominion. His power and his dominion extends to all places:
Esaye.lxiiii.
wherefore in all places ought he to be honored and praised. Man is the handye
work of God, and that the most chief work next to angel. Wherefore sense
angels the most excellent creatures of God do not cease to praise him day
and night: much more thou my soul and all mankind are bound to magnify him
in all places. Benedic anima mea domino.
By whom thou have and daily do receive so many benefytes. Let the inward
love of thy heart break forth to praises and thanks, by thy mouth. Say unto
him that sits upon the seat and unto the lamb that opened the book which
had seven seals. As the four beasts and the four and twenti elders with the
whole company of saints sing and say (that is) worthy is the lamb that was
killed to receive power and riches wisdom and strength, Apoca. ii.
honor glory and blessyng to him being revived again and lives for
evermore, and to the lord that sits upon the seat: be honor and praise
for evermore Amen.

The soul of every faithful christian, beholding the goodness of God,
The.ciiii. Psalm.
daily showed without ceassynge to all his servants: ceasseth not to praise
God again expressing his merueylous power and wisdom by the show of his
merueylous works.
OH. How much is my soul desirous to praise the noble power, Benedic anima
mea domino.
wisdom and goodness of the, most myghtie Lord, that art my God and my king,
my hope and my comfort? who have by so great providence created and ordained
all thy creatures, Domine deus meus magnificatus ea vehementer.
that the beauty and excellency of them declare thy myghtie magnificence to
al us, which are thy reasonable creatures. The power of thy majesty before to
us unknown, is by the contemplacion of them made manifest, causynge us to
praise and magnify the with al our possible powers. We acknowledge thy power,
Confessionem et decorem induisti, amietus luce vt vestimento.
thy wisdom, thy honor also and thy great glory wherewith with thou art
garnished on al parts. Thou deckest thy self with light as it were with a
garment. ^. Timo. vi.
Yea thou dwell in the midst of lygyte whereunto no man can atteyne. Which
passes far the bryghtnes of the sun in this world. Esaias. lt.


And if we consider it well: Thou thy self Lord, art the everlasting light,
Sapi. vii.
and thy wisdom is the brightness thereof, which shall never be quenched. Thou
art compassed about with bright angels and with the saints shynyng in
clearnes, Collos. i.
whose enherytaunce, is to enjoy light. Thou spreadest out ye heaven as a
pauilion. E^^endens celu^ vt ten ^ortum.
It covers the whole earth as a rent covers those yt are lodged within it.
Qui regis aquis supe^iora eius.
Nevertheless it is set so that, as the elemental waters are under it: so are
the celestial waters above it. Thou have spread abroad thy holy scripture over
all the world by the preaching of thine apostles. The mysteries whereof were
hid and covered with the curteyne or veil of the letter: but now to thy
faithful they are uncovered.

Ezechiel ii.
This is the book which the hand delivered to Ezechiel closed and fast
clasped before to the unfaithful. But to the Prophet it was opened: and the
priuities thereof disclosed. These mysteries are also the waters wherwyth thou
couerest the heaven. The deape secrets are in the scripture so low hid that
few have nets to retche the deapnes thereof. Only, they, can atteyne thereto,
to whom thou gyuest the gift thereof, and such as have it: are charged to utter
the same to the unlearned. Qui penis nubem astensum tuum.
The preachers are the clouds that fly in the air, where upon thy honor,
and thy faith are carried as it were in a charet, to all parts of the world.
Thy grace makes them apt to power forth the sweet dewes of thy holy word, to
water therwyth the vyneyarde of our souls, Esaye.v.
that it may bring forth right and pleasant grapes: not brambles, thorns or
wild grapes. For lack of which waterynge: the ground must neades be baryne
and unfruitful. Like to the land of king Achab: king of Israel, iii. Reg. v.
which lacked rain during the absence of the prophet Elye. How miserable
are they Lord, from whom thou takeste away thy holy word? Mathe. xxi.
There can be no greater plage in this world sent to men for the ponishment of
their offenses, then the wythdrawynge thereof from them. But as thy punishments
of the wicked are many and secret: even so, also are thy mercyes past number
to those that love the.

Thou bestowest them according to thy holy will beside al expectation of men.
Qui ambulas sup^^ pennas venti. Qui angelos tuos spiritus et ministros tuos
ignem vrentem.
Thy power in bringyng of the^ quyckly to pass: exceadeth the swiftnes of the
wind. The angels whom thou have created spirits: are thy messengers to
execute thy will with al speed. Thou have made them thy ministers: like to the
flame of fire. To some they bring ponishme^tes. To some they bring secret
inspiration to know thy pleasures and to work thereafter. In some they burn
clean and consume up their synful and carnal desires, causing them to be new
men by the infusion of thy merciful grace. Such is thy myghtie power to work,
when where, and how so ever it lyketh the. Qui fundasti terra^ super
stabilitatem su^^, non commouebitur in seculum secul^.
Thou have laid the earth, her foundation which shall never move at any
time. Where the foundation is sure: all that is set thereon is sure and
stable. The church or congregation of thy fayethfull earthly people here upon
the earth, is founded upon a sure rock and a sure foundation, i. Corhinth. iii.
which is thy son Christ, beside whom no man can put any other foundation.
Wherefore it must needs abide immovable: as the whole earth is immovable. Not
able to be hurt with the waves of the water of temptation, neither with the
stormy tempests of cruel persecution. Thus is thy power showed to al things
which thou takeste under thy protection. Abisto quasi vestimento operuisti eam.
The deape waters naturally are a couerture to the earth, as is a garment to
the body of man. Super montes stabu^t aquc Hierem. v.
Yea they should surmount the heyghte of all hills. But through thy word
they fall to their appoynteed places. They flee as things rebuked and dare not
do contrary to thy commandment. Ab increpatione tua fugie^t a voce to nitrui
tui formidabunt ascendu^t montes et descendunt campi ad locum quem fundasti
eis. Terminum posuisti quem no^ transgredie^tur: nec reuertentur vt operiant
terram.
They are a fearde thereof as we mortal men are a fearde of the noise of
thunder. The hills and the valleys appear according to thine appoyntmente.
And the waters dare not pass their bounds to turn again to cover the
earth. Of this thy power the experience was showed at the general floude when
the waters covered the highest hills the heyght of fyftene cubits.
Nevertheless when thy pleasuse was they returned again thither from whence
they came, so would the sea now drown all creatures living upon the earth,
if thy pleasure were not to stay it. Genes. ix.
But thou mercyful God haste made a covenant with thy servant Noe to the
contrary: That thou wylt no more destroy all the world by water. In token
whereof thou haste put thy rain bow in the clouds. And as the sea and the
waters would cover the earth onles thou dyddest stay them with thy word:
Even so would the tyrants heathen and unfaithful people cypress and utterly
destroy thy church, and thy servants. If thou Lord did not keep and
defend them. But when thy church seems most oppressed: yet do thou reserve
unto the a great number of faithful that to the world are unknown: iii.
Regum.xix.
as thou dyddeste in the days of Elias thy prophet, preserve seven thousand
which never bowed their knees to ydolles. Thou make them strong against al
persecutions. Thy word makes their enemies afraid. They have no further
power to hurt thy faithful then thou permittest them to have. Wherefore
although the waters (that is to say) the wicked, swell never so high: yet we
fear not a general floulde. They may invade thy church and hurt many of
thine elect members of the same church. But they shall not utterly destroy
it. For thou, Lord, Matthew.xxviii.
haste promised to abide with thy faithful people to the worlds end. Thy
grace will not leave the^ that love and serve the. They are the valeys low
through humility, Qui emittis foutes in conuallibus.
but great in virtue and mighty in operation. Among which the wells of the
word of God do spring. They preach and declare thy holy scripture among
all, that will hear them. Inter medium montium pertransibu^t aque.


The waters of these wells have their original among the hills, and from
thense discende to the valyes. These hills be the two testamentes from whens
al scriptures which declare thy will: are derived. And who so ever utters any
other law contrary to that is contained in thy said testamentes: Genes. xxvi.
dyggeth new wells with the servants of Abimaleche, and stops the wells
of Abraham which conteyne the water of life. With these waters of holy
scripture is the ground of thy faithful christians watered, and it brings
forth good fruit in dew season. Of these waters all the beasts of the feldes
may drink. Sotabunt omnes be^ie agri and reficiat ona^et sium suam.
Of these also the great wild asses may quench their thyrst. The gentiles,
the Jews, the christians, all men, of al countries, and al degrees may
quench their thyrst in the reading of thy holy word. Which if they do with
good intent: thy grace shall be ready to work in them their salvation. Thy
grace is locked from none but from such as will remain thrusty, dry and
bareyne of good will and good works. The strong and the weak, the wise and
the folly she may refreshe them at these waters to make the^ able to perform
their journey in the pylgrimage of this life. Who so will with the woman of
Samaria, ask of Christ drink: John iiii.
He will not fail to give him water of life. Which, who so drynketh: shall
never be thirsty after. O noble waters. O clear fountaynes. Send us Lord of
thy grace that we may fervently desire, Psalm.xxiii.
greadely receive, and plentiouslye be fulfilled. Yea that we may be drunk,
with the much receyuyng of this noble drink. Whereby we may forget al our
wanton and ydel lives that we have hitherto led: and now begin to lead a
new life, a spiritual and a godly life, building our nestes in the rocks of
the fayed hills, Super ea volucres celi morabuntur: de medio petrarum dabunt
vocem.
and over these delectable waters, leauyng al base and earthly places, resting
in them as in a sure habitation. The precepts of these two testame^tes are
fast and surely grounded upon the strong rock which is Christ. What soul
so ever dwells or bydeth on this rock: will sing and put forth his voice,
as he has learned in the scriptures, contained within these two testamentes.
Christ did refer his sayings to the scriptures: so did his apostles and
other holy me^ build upon the same foundation. Their songs were ever agreeable
to the scriptures. Mathe. xiii.
They were like the good householder, that brings forth of his treasure,
things both new and old. Rigans montes de renaculis tuis, de fructu operum
tuorum satiabitur terra.
Wherefore the dewes of thy grace came down from above and watered their
hertes. They were first earthly men, and sauored nothing but that was earthlye
and temporal. But thy grace made them become spiritual, and so wrought in
the^, that they brought forth good works. For the which, they gave to the:
the honor and the praise. They accounted al their good deeds to be thy works,
and al their good thoughts to come of thy gift and goodness. When the glory
redounded to thy majesty: then were they satisfied, and but reasone. For what
goodness had they that they had not received, i. Corin. iiii. Roma. iii.
and that freely without any of their deservings? Wherefore to the Lord be al
honor and praise world without end, who haste so mercifully declared thy
great goodness to mankind in orderyng al things in this world to his most
comfort that could be devised, and to do him service. All beasts thou made
subject unto him and for his use. Producens fenum iu^^is. Et berbam ser^^^
hominum.
Which to noryshe and to feade: thou causest the ground, naturally to bring
forth grass, and all kinds of other herbs. Thou bryngeste through the
travail of man: ^ducens panem de ter^^.
food out of the earth, both for man, beasts and fowls. But to exercise him
in labor thou requirest his industry to be put to thy power. O how great is
thy liberality daily showed herin? No time can be found wherein the earth
brings not fruit, to serve man. But specially Lord, thou have ordained the
earth to bring forth three kinds of things, much to his strength, comfort
and relief. Which are corn for bread to make him strong and able to
travail. Et vinum letificet cor^ominis, ad exhilaran^um faciem in oleo, et
^anis cor hominis cor^oboret.
Wine to quench his thyrst and to make his heart glad. And oil to make him to
have a cheareful countenance, to make his body fat and his limbs nimble.
These are liberal and very necessary gifts to the body: But much more noble
spiritually to the soul. For man lives not only with material bread, but
also with the word of God. Luc. iiii.
Whereby the soul is made strong and comforted, against al his enemies. It is
able to do good and to auoyed evil. It receives spiritually thy blessed son
yt lively bread, John.vi.
which descended from heaven, and by him receives after this life, life
everlasting in heaven. By the wine is signified the passion of thy loving
son our master Christ. For which man thyrsted full sore a long season.
But when the time determined by thy godhead, was come: he came and suffered for
our redemption. He then quenched our thirst. He thereby made mankind merry, that
before was sad and out of al comfort. And where he satte in darkness:
Esaias.xiii.
he thereby received light. He was before in captivity, and then was made fre
and his ransom paid. But the frailty of his nature is so great yt onles he
be still holden and helped up he must needs fall again to sin. Wherefore lord
the oil of thy grace is ever ready to anoint him, thereby to make him able to
resist through the, which of him self is weak and cannot stand This oil
of gladness, this oil of comfort, springs in thy deity, as in ye head, and
from thence desce^deth first to the manhood of Christ as from the head to the
beard. Psalm.Cxxxiii. Psalm.xlv.
Whom thou have specially anointed above al other, to the intent he should
therwt anoint al other faithful people. Which are ye garments of Christ, when
leaving al vice, they put on them the garment of his faith and live according
to his laws. Saturabuntur lign^ campi et cedri libani.
The moisture of ye oil is of the sap wherwt the common sort of trees of the
field are fulfilled: and also ye high trees of the mount of libanus: yt is
as well the common and base sort of people as also ye noble high and mighty lords
and princes of ye world are replenished with this oil of thy grace and gladness,
such as thy deity has planted, quas plantasti.
and predestinate to salvation. For all other pla^tes which are not of thy
pla^ting: Mathei. xv. Illit aues nidificabi
must be plucked up by ye roots. In these hye trees of libanus ye birds do
bread Such as are spiritual persons and live after ye spirit: are sucoured,
brought up and defended by ye princes and nobility of the world. The holy
devout persons sow to them their spiritual sede and reap therefore temporal
things necessary for their living. For who will mosell the mouth of the ox
that treads out the corn. i. Corhint. ix.
Nevertheless, so many as are spiritual: Deuteronomy. xv. i. Timo. vi.
are contented with food and raiment. For such of them as will be rich, fall
into temptations, snares, and into many fooly she and noisome lusts: which
draw them unto perdition and destruction. But so many as are very spiritual:
Herodit domus dux est eorum.
learn of the faucon to bread in the rock which is Christ. Although they
have their necessaries of the nobility for their true preaching of thy word:
yet do they not preach to please me^, but to please and do their deutie to thy
majesty. ^. Corin. ix.
For woe be unto the^ if they preach not. The rock which is the house of the
faucon, that is to say Christ, is their leader, their guide and their
gouernoure, Mo^tes excelsi ceruis, petra refugium hexina ^tis.
to whom only they have respect. To this rock in the mountains: flee the
hearts for succor. To it flees the hedgehogge: a beast with pricks for
refuge. The perfect man and the sinner that is loded with the pricks of sin
in his conscience, run al to this rock for succor. The one to be preserved
in the grace and goodness that is given him: the other to discharge him self on
this rock of al his burden of sins. Esaye.xxxviii.
For behind on Christ's back does he lay all the heavy burden of his
iniquities, and is then become a new creature. So sone as man is weary of his
burden: Christ is ready to receive it, Matthew.xi.
and to ease and refreshe him. As the moon receives her bryghte light by the
approaching of the sun, Fecit luna per te^pora.
and a gain by the far departing of the sun from her, she loses her
light: so does thy church here militant and the members thereof knytte
together in fayeth, by the approchynge of the son of justice thy son Christ
Jesus and the influence of his grace, receive light of true knowledge and
power to work well to the example of other. But if thy grace and his be ones
wythdrawen for their iniquities, Sol cognouit occas^^ suum.
then remain they in darkness not able to do or think any good thing. To the
just elect people, this son aryseth, from the wicked, Sapi. v. John.iii.
it sets and hydeth it self, showing them no light. And why? for they love
darkness and the works thereof, better then light. Wherefore they shall seek
light and not find it. The night and darkness shall enuirone them, Posuisti
tenebras and facta est nox, in ipsa mouibuntur omnes bestie sylue.

Catuli leonis rugientes ad predam, et quere^ res a des es^am sibi.


wherein all the beasts of the foreste do move. The young lions roaring then seek
their pray and ask their food of God. The wicked spirits greadely gape to
devour the wretched sinners, being destitute of the light of grace. The
iniquities of men are their most pleasant food. Nevertheless they have no
further power to tempt nor to hurt the^, the^ thy power Lord, does permit
them to do. For if Satan might have done his will on thy servant Job: he had
at the last slain and devoured him. Luc. xxii.
So had he done to the apostles of thy blessed son. So would he and his
wicked accomplices destroy all mankind were they not by thy Godly power and
wisdom restrained.

Some men thou suffer to be tempted for their probation and coronation. Some
for their punishment and dampnation. But specially in the night where sin
rayneth, there our enemy tryumpheth, Orient sole: retedent et in sp^luncis
suis cu^abunt.
and in the hertes of the wicked: he makes his den or resting place. For
where the son of justice by grace does arise in the hertes of thy faithful:
they anon depart and flee away. Egredietur homo adopus suum et ad seruitutem
suam vsque ad vesperam.
The man may sauely go to his works and till the land unto the euenyng. The
faithful may without danger work al works, by the commanded to be done,
encreasynge in virtue and good living all the time of his life unto the
euenyng. That is, unto the time of death, and the last end when every true
labourer in thy vyneyarde shall receive of the for his wages a penny for his
days work, Math. ^^.
that is, the kingdom of heaven for his reward, what time so ever he begin
to work in thy work: as thou have promised of thy mere liberality and free
goodness. O merciful Lord, Quam multa sunt opera tua domine? ommi^ in
sapientia fecisti.
how noble and manifest be thy works, passing far the capacity of all thy
creatures to comprehend. But thou full wisely have wrought all things by the
same wisdom that has been with the before any thing was created, and before
al time, by the which thou haste numbered the sands of the sea, the dropes of
the rain, and the days of time, by which also thou haste measured the heyght
of heaven the breadth of the earth and the deapnesse of the sea. Eccles. i.
This wisdom is thy very son the second person in trinity, i Corhin i
Coloss, ii.
he is thy power and thy wisdom, in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. By him haste thou wroughte thine own work according
to thy nature, which is to have mercy and not to show cruelty. By him have
thou wrought the work of our redemption, and delivered us from eternal
dampnation. And although thou be sometime angrye with us for our wickedness:
yet is it to the intent to show thy mercy after, which is thy proper and
natural work. Esai. xxviii. Impleta est term possessione tua.
On this manner do thou fill the earth full of thy riches. Not only by the
order and disposition of thy earthly creatures thereof: but chiefelye in that
thou causest man by thy help, to leave the inordinate love of the world and
the wanton pleasures thereof, and to become a new man, aspirynge to the
heavenly things. In this thou causest him to be just and perfectly thy
possession, to be of thy peculiar flock, of which thou take great cure.
Thou haste ordained thine elect to walk and travail in this great and wide
world, Hoc mare magnum (...) spaciosum. Illic reptilia innumerabilia, animalia
pa^^ua cum magnis.
which may well be compared to the great sea. For as in it are innumerable
things creapyng, both great and small beasts. Even so in this world are
many terrible dangers, and dangerous temptations. Sometime by flatteryng
pleasures. Sometime by cruel displeasures, which appear therein.

Sometime by prosperity. Sometime by adversity. Sometime by cruel manifest
enemies. Sometime by subteltie of false feigned friends. So that there are many
mo dangers to men that live here on earth, then be in those which pass over
the seas. Yet for all these fearful dangers, let the fayethfull never be
afraid. Ibi naues per tra^sibu^t
For as the sure ships fliete in the sea under their sails: and pass
through the stormy te^pestes without drownynge: so do thine elect pass
through the fearful perelles of all their enemies in this world by the means
of the ship of thy church and the true faith thereof. Of which ship,
Christ is the sternes man the guide and the sure ancour to be cast in all
necessities. Who so trusts in him shall be brought to the fair haven of
perfect beatitude. Who so keeps him within the bourdes of this faithful
ship, neadeth not to fear the great whales or other monstres, much
terrible to shyppemen, neither yet the dreadful dragon that sturdy strong
leuiathan whose sporting place is in the deape of the sea. Deaco iste quem
formasti ad illudendu^ ei. Job.xli.
To whose power, no power on earth may be compared. For he is so mad that he
fears nothing, and is the king over all the children of pride. Esaias.xiiii.
Luc. x. Genes. iii.
This is that lucifer which fell from heaven. This is the serpent that deceived
in paradyse, and brought death to al mankind. He was first made by thy
majesty a bright angel, but through sin he is become a cruel devil. And has
power, through thy sufferaunce to illude, to tempte and to deceive mankind.
Nevertheless when thy faithful people are penitent for their offenses, resist
his temptations, follow thy laws, put their whole trust in the, and thy
blessed son: Job.xi.
the^ do they mock and discerue him. They put a ringe through his nose and
boar his chaftes through with an awle, and as Christ mocked him layenge an
hoke for him bayted with his humanity, which when he thought to devour causing
him to be put to death of the Jews: he was trypped in his own turn, and
taken with the hook of his divinity. In like manner do the fayethful members
of Christ also mock and deceive him. For when he thinks them surely in his
danger: they turn to their head Christ for refuge, i. Corhinth. x.
and by his help do va^quish him. Great therefore good Lord is thy mercy and
goodness, yt suffer not thy faithful to be tempted above their strength. But
in the mids of their temptation make away for the^ to escape out. The enemy
has no power of him self but such as thou suffrest him to have. He with all
other creatures hang al upon thy will and commandment. Omnia a te expectan vt
des illis escam in t^pore suo, dante te eis colligent.
Al wait on the that thou may give them meat in dew season, when thou
give it the^: they gather it. The meat appointed to that serpent which
deceived Eve: was earth. Of ye earth therefore and of earthly men that love
better earthy things then heavenly, Genes. iii.
is the food of yt fierce leuiathan. Such as are left destitute of thy grace
and depart from the: are left to be the food of this serpent or dragon. But I
hertely beseech the, most merciful and mighty God, keep this dragon long
empty. Let him not devour those, for whose redemption and salvation, thou
voutchsafedest to send thy most entierly beloved son to suffer death and
passion. They have (the more pity) to great ple^tie of food of infideles.
Bring the^ also lord, I beseech the into the true faith of thy holy church, yt
they may know the and him yt thou have sent, Io. x.
for the salvation of all the world. That there may be on both sorts one
shepeherde and one flock, and send us al lord, Aperiente te manu^ tua^
replehuntur honitate: abscondes vultu^ tuum ^et turbabuntur.
thy merciful favor. Open thy liberal hand and fyl us all with thy goodness.
Hyde not thy face from us for our offenses. For then have we cause of sorrow
and mourning continually. No creature can live without the nourishing of
corporal substance, but must dye and turn to earth and corruption. Neither
ca^ the soul of man abide in life spiritual with out the influence of thy
grace: Auferes spiritum coru^^t deficient et in pulue^em suum reuertentur.
but it must needs dye the death through sin. When thou dyddest command thy
prophet Elias to depart from Achab, there ensued in all Jury great drought and
barre^nes. Jacob.v. iii. Regum.xviii.
It rayned not by the space of.iii. years and.vi. months. But when thou
dyddest turn thy face toward the country again se^ding thy said prophet
thither: Emitte spiritum tuum ^et creabuntur.
they had ple^tie of rain, and great fertility. Send forth therefore
merciful God thy sweet breath upon us, make us new again, that we may leave
our old naughtines and become new creatures. Genes. xviii.
We knowledge our selves to be dust and ashes. Et renouabis faciem terte.
Send therefore thy holy spirit to renew the face of our souls, making it
confirmable to thine image, according as thou did first create it, which
through sin we have made very foul, Sit gloria domini in sempiternum.
^etabitur dominus in operibus suis.
and defourmed. Then shall we give glory unto thy majesty, which endures for
ever. And thou Lord, shalt rejoice in thine own works. Our work is
iniquity, thy work is mercy and for gyuenes. Esaias.xxviii.
Thou art our justice, whereby thou make us just, which before were wicked
sinners. Thou make us, Qui respicit terram et facit eam tremere.
thine earthly creatures, to tremble for fear of thy myghtie power and thy
justice. Our pride is thereby abated. We acco^pte the good deeds which we have
done to be of thy gift and goodness, nothing presuminge of our own frail
power. Esoy. lxvi.
For we know yt thy holy spirit rests upon those that have a lowly troubled
spirit and stand in awe of thy words. But the great hills do thou
toutche and they smoke. Qui tangit moutes ei fumigant.
The proud and stiffenecked people do thou toutche by scourging and
punishinge them, and the^ they come to the knowledge of the and of thy myghtie
majesty. Daniel.iiii.
Then will they say as Nabuchodonosor said after his punishment, honor and
praise be to the God of heaven whose power endures always, and his kingdom from
one generation to an other. In co^parisone of who^ all that dwell upon the earth,
are to be reputed as nothing. The^ will they send forth a smooke of sacrifices
and praises to the, confessing their weakness and thy mighty magnifice^ce.
Psalm.Cxli.
Their prayer shall ascend up into thy sight as an incense and the lifting up
of their hands shall be an evening sacrifice. i. Corhinth. xv.
Cruel Saul was toutched of thy hand and became Paul a well-beloved apostle
and through the help of thy grace, labored more abou^dau^tly the^ al the other
apostles. Such is the power of thy gracious influe^ce. This thy noble grace
se^de me (most merciful god) whereby I shall have a loving desire to honor ye,
lord, and to praise ye, my god. Cantabo domino in d^ta mea psala^ deo meo
quoddiu sum.
So long as I have any being, I will not cease to confess my sins to ye,
and to lament mine iniquities, and then shall my words be pleasant and
acceptable to ye. Placeat ei eloquium meum. Ego vero letabor in domino,
And as I joy wholly in the ye art my creator, and in thy son which is my
redemer: so shall you also delight in me ye am thy poor creature and ha^dy
work: granting me ye fruit of thy son christ's passion, ^uc. xv.
which he suffered for my rede^ptio^. And sense, lord, ye thou and al thy
heavenly company, rejoice so much in ye co^uersio^ of siners: yt it is more joy
in heaven of ye turning of one siner to penance the^ it is of.lxxx. and.xix.
just me^ which need no repe^tau^ce. I most humbly require ye to consume ye
vpgodly and al siners out of ye earth, Deficien^ peccatores a ^erra. Et impli
vltra ^on sint.
not yt thou should destroy the^: but consume their sines through ye power of
thy grace, so yt from hence forth they be no more sinners, but return to the
through herty repe^tau^ce. Let their ungodliness be brought to an end. That
they and we in perfect unity of thy faith: may praise and magnify the with thy
son Christ and the holy gooste, Benedic anima mea ^omino.
from you both proceadynge, world without end. Amen.

The Cxvi. Psalm.
The faithful man considering the benefytes by God to him given: breaks
forth to giving of praises, and workynge good works: and, for the love which
he bears to God, is contented gladly to suffer al persecutions. Yea very
death: So that the honor of God be thereby increased.
WHo so ever ente^deth to be the son of the (most merciful God) that art so
good and so loving a father, and to enheryte the kingdom of heaven as heirs
together with thy blessed son Jesus Christ: it is above all things first
requisite, that he beleaue trewly in the and in tharticles of thy faith: Roma.
xiiii. Hebre xi.
which thou have in holy scripture, commanded. For what so ever is not of
faith: that same is sin. Faith is the sure and perfect foundation of all
christen religion, whereby thy faithful, hope surely that all thy promises
made to them of thy mere liberality, shall surely and undoubtedly, be fulfilled.
Luc. xxi.
So ye heaven and earth shall perysh, rather then one of thy words or promises
should be unperformed, By faith Abraham was justified, and by faith, Gens. xv.
Genes. xx. Exodus iiii. Exodus xiiii.
he was ready to make sacrifice of his only begotten son Isaac. By faith
Moses under took to do message unto Pharao king of Egypt, and by faith he
entered the red sea, with all the Israelites Faith saved all the holy Patriarchs,
Prophets and the good Judges of thy people. Upon the faith full only, did thy
son Christ work his miracles. In so much that in his country of Galile,
Mathw. xiii.
he did not many miracles because of their unbelief And by this faith with the
help of thy grace, at this day and to the end of the world are and shall, al
Thy chosen people, besaued, Ephesians. ii.
and that freely without any deseruyng. Of this being fully persuaded by thy
holy scripture, I believe in the, my most myghtie God, three persons in one
essence, Credidi.
and in all things contained within the limittes of thy said holy scripture.
And the same thy faith I will not let to confess before all the world. I will
not do as many of the princes of the Jews did, which believed in thy son, yet
durst they not boldlye confess him, another be acknowne of their faith lest
they should have been expelled out of the sinagoge. John. xii.
They more esteemed the glory of this world then they did the glory of God,
but through the help of thy grace, Lord, I will nothing speak but that I
fermely believe. Propter quod locutus sum.
And that which I do believe: I can by no means hyde, but have and will boldlye
speak. Mathw. x.
For I know that who so does confess the before men: him will thou confess
before thy father which is in heaven. Faith causes me to love the for thine
own sake above al creatures. Love causes me to confess the before all the
world, and for thy sake to work toward my neighbor, as thou have commanded
me, trustyng for my so workyng, to have the reward which thou freely have
promised and annexed to my work. But as the vtteryng of verity, commonly
bredeth envy: so does envy bread much trouble. Ego autem humiliatus sum nimis
To the true confession of thy godly word is annexed persecution, trouble, and
vexation, with out which few good men have escaped sense the beginning of the
world. Act. xiiii.
The faithful must enter heaven by many tribulatio^s. Paul suffered much
trouble as an evil doar, ii. Timoth. ii.
and was in bonds for the Gospels sake. But the word of God was not bound.
It is a true saying (says thine Apostle Paul) that if we dye with Christ: we
shall live with him. If we suffer patientlye adversities for him: we shall also
reign with him. Adversity is the right way to the kingdom of Christ. Who so
take not their cross on their backs and follow him: Lu. xiiii
cannot be his dysciples. Persecution and trouble, bring the fear of God,
and the knowledge of ma^s own infirmity, and led him as it were a man rapt
in a trance, Ego dixi in excessu meo.
to the only conte^plation of heavenly things, whereby he shall know and boldly
confess, that all his power and sufficiency comes of God. All vice and
naughtiness comes of his own corrupt nature. God only, Romans iii. Omnis homo
me^da^. Math. xxvi.
of him self is good and true, but al men are liars, the children of sin and
damnation. Peter presumed of him self to stand fast by his master Christ, but
sone after he denied him and was found a liar. It is thy grace that makes man
to be true and to be good. Sapen. xvi.
Thy grace is the nurce of al good things. It ledeth man from one virtue to
another. It keeps us from falling and helps us up again when we are fallen.
Thy loving kindness has been from everlasting, and endures for ever. Quid
reddam domino pro omnibus que re^erbuit mihi?
What shall I therefore give again unto the Lord, for the manifold benifites, yt
thou have done unto me? when I remember thy tender love showed to man in his
noble creation, next in power wisdom, knoledge, and understanding, to the
nature of angels: made also, touching the soul, like to thine own image,
who^ thou did pla^t in that most pleasant garden of Eden a place of
pleasure where he might have lived ever if he would have kept thy
commandment. Genes. ii.
I cannot but still lament his frailte in yt he so shortly did break it, for
which he deserved death everlasting, yet of thy mercy and gentleness, thou
did not straight, execute thy sore sentence upon him, throwyng him down to
hell as thou did ye angels for their offense. But thou did suffer him to
dwell in this world to lament his fall, and to abide the time by thy majesty,
appointed, for his reconcilatio^. Thou did ge^tly consider his frail nature
and substance, wherefore thou dydest more pity him the^ thou did angel
whose nature was made pure and excellent and therefore, of presu^ption, minded
to be equal with the Then, Lord, at length thou sendest thine own only son
to become man, and wylledest him to suffer death for man's redemption. What
more love might be showed to him then thou have showed. What more could be done
to thy vineyarde then thou have done. Thy charity was fervent to us when we
were all sins, Esaie. v
Few men would now gladlye die for their ryghteous friend, Rom v
but thou sendest thy son to suffer death for thine enemies, that were
sinners. Yea, when we daily now do fall still from the by commyttyng al kinds
of vices: yet do thou mercifully suffer us, and gently receive us so often as
we do return again to the by penance. We forgive our neighbors scarsely one
or two displeasures, that they do to us But thou Lord forgeuest us not.vii.
times only, but seventy times seven times, that is, so often as we fall, and
eue^ so willest you us to forgive one another. Mathw. xviii.
Wherefore, to the intent I would not be found unthankful: nor unkind: I do
search busely to find some mean to recompense part of thy loving gentleness often
showed to me, and the more I search the more I find my self unable. I find
in me nothing that is good. I am environed with mysery, vanity, and sin,
having no good thing but that I have received of the. So that if I yield to the
any goodness, i. Corhin. iiii.
it is a rendryng of that thou gave me before. The most pleasant things
that I may do to thy majesty: is first to receive the cup of salvation,
Colicem salutaris accipiam.
that is, to give the hertie thanks for thy great benefits, and to be
inwardlye sorye that ever I did any thing which should offend the, Ephesians.
iiii. Romans xiii.
then to mortify the concupiscences of the flesh, to put of the old Adam and
put on Christ, to leave to be carnal, and become spiritual, Yea, I will not
love the frayl flesh so much, but that as thou have caused thy son Christ to
dye for me: so will I not let (taking example of him) to suffer al kinds of
pains and persecutions, yea and death (if need require) for thine honors
sake, But I know right well that I am much unable this to do and suffer of mine
own self. Et nomen domini inuocabo.
Wherefore I will call on thy name for thy grace, for thine aid and assistence,
to help me and to strength me in this my good purpose, Psalm. l.
not doubtyng but thou will graciously here me in the day of my trouble and
deliver me, my heart and all my hole body I offer willyngly to thy service,
which al though it be of small valor in deed: yet I do not mystrust but that
it shall be as acceptable in thy sight, as was the offryng of two minutes which
the poor woman threw into the treasury at Jerusalem. Which small some of her
poverty: Mar. xii.
thou did more esteem and praise, then thou dydest all the great gifts of
the rich men. Besechyng thy highness to accept this gift of my poor soul and
body, not for that thou shall any thing be auaunced thereby. But for the
declaration of my loving mind toward the, Vota mea domino reddam.
and yt thou may vouch safe, so to work in them by thy grace that they may
will and work that may be acceptable in thy sight, that I may truly perform
my vows before made unto the, that is, to keep thy laws and commandments,
which I and every true Chrystyan profess to keep, which if I observe
faythfullye: thou haste promised me thy kyngedome of heaven as my reward.
Jacob. si.
And if I break but one of them, I am gyltie of breaking them all. Great
is the vow that I have made and far passinge the possibility of man's power,
to fulfill. Marc. x.
But that is impossible to men is not impossible to the. Marc. x.
Wherefore, thy helping hand Lord reach unto me, as thou dyddest reach it
to Peter, and as he was thereby made able to walk upon the waters: so shall I
be able thereby to perform all thy holy laws, Math. xliii.
which my heart is desireous to do in the presence of al thy congregation,
Coram omni populo eius.
that other may take example of my doings and gloryfye thy majesty for thy
noble gift. Strenghthen me with thy holy spirit, give me an heart and will
rather to chose to suffer death then to break any of them, Preciosa in
conspectu domini, mors sanctoru^ cius. Romans viii.
knowing that the death of thy Saints is right dear and precious in thy
sight. Thy faithful servants which suffer with thy son Christ: shall
also be glorified with him. In this they show them selves to be thy sons
and shall be therefore heirs together whyth Christ in his reign. Sapien. iiii.
Although they be overtaken with death yet shall they be in reaste. O how
excellent a reward is this, a joy eternal for a small pain temporal. But
as thy power is inestimable: so are thy rewards, ineffable, to those that are
thy true servants, of which company my desire and trust is to be one. O
domine quia ego seruus tuus. ego seruus tuus et filius ancille tue.
I am received into thy service, by thy loving son Christ. I have the badge
of his faith and the livery of Charity, whereby his servants be known from
the servants of his enemy, and all is of thy gift and his mere goodness. Not
of mine own merytes. For I have long served the Devil and sin, following the
desires of the flesh, and the world, in so much that I was bond servant
unto them, fast locked and cheyned in their bonds. Dirup^ti vincula me
But I thank the, Lord, of thy mercy. Thou have broken al my fetters
wherewyth I was tied, and made me fre through the death of thy loving son.
Who has paid my ransom and redeemed me out of captivity. Wherefore he
may claim me to be his servant. But I am farther in thy bondage and his. For
I am also the child borne of your handmayde which is the holy church, thy
faithful congregation. Who is now thy servant, and thy handmayden. She
has does, and will serve the from the beginning of the world to the end
thereof. Psalm. Cxxiii.
She has her eyes as ready waityng upon the, as the eyes of servants are to
their masters or as the eyes of a handemayden is upon the hands of her
maistres. She knows only thy voice, as the sheep do know the voice of the
right shephearde and follow him. John.viii.
But to any stranger: she gives none ear. She receives no laws nor
commandments but only thine, Lord, that art the very good shephearde. All
this does she hear in her pylgremage, in this world. But after the latter
day of judgment: the^ shall she be the well-beloved spouse of Christ, she shall
then rest in his arms. Jacob served for Rachel.vii. years to get her to be
his wife. Thy son served above.xxx. years to have her to his pure wife,
Ephesians. v.
and to make her with out spot, or wrinckle. This is that bright heavenly
Jerusalem the wife of the lamb so pleasant to behold. Whereof in revelation
thou did show a figure to the blessed Apostle of thy son, saynct Ihon,
Apo xxi.
she shall then never after sustain sorrow or pain, but al joy and perfect
beatitude. This thy great and merciful goodness considered: I do acknowledge me
many ways to be bond servant to the and thy gentle son. First by nature for
my creation, then by birth, for that I am borne of thy handmaiden, and also by
redemption: for that I was dearly bought with the blood of thy son, i.
Corhin. vi.
and reademed at a high ransom, where else I had gone to everlasting
dampnation. For all these thy benifites, I can no more yield again to the, but
the sacrifice of thanks giving, which I know is to the very acceptable. Vota
mea domino reddam.

Tibi immolabo hostia^ laudis.


Thou would have none unkindness showed to the on our parties. Thy name
therefore will I call upon and honor it all the days of my life, Et nomen domini
inuocabo.
I will also (as I promised) fulfill my vows which I made unto the. I will give
up my self to the as an oblation which is due to the, seeing it is thine image,
as the coin of Ceser, Mathw. xx.
or of any prince, is due to him because his figure and inscription is
therein. I will also keep thy precepts so nere as thou wylt give me grace, and
that openly in the sight of al thy people, Coram omni populo eius.
thereby to allure the^ to serve the faithfully, and to win them to the. I will
not cease to declare unto them, how merciful thou haste ben, and daily art in
receyuyng us to thy grace, forgeueinge al our offenses, if we repent. I will
still acknowledge all the goodness yt I have: to come of the. And al naughtines,
to come of my naughty corrupt nature. Thus thine honor will I ever magnify
in the courts of the Lords house, that is, before all thy faithful
congregation, In atriis domus dom^ni.
before thine elect people in ye mids of thy church, that is, my mother: and
in the mids of thy City of Jerusalem, whereof we are now Citizins. In medio
tui Hieruslem. Ephesians. ii.
Not foreners or strangers, but of thy holy household through ye means of thy
son Christ Jesus

The faithful person desires the help of God against all his enemies:
The.Cxxi. Psalm.
and therein only puts his sure trust.
O Father of heaven, of power almighty, which with thine only word, Genes. i.
dyddest create and make all the whole world with the goodly contents thereof.
And al for the profyt and service of man whom thou dyddest create, of al other
a most noble and perfect creature, gyueynge him power upon the earth, and in
the waters, and of all the fowls and birds of the air. Thou made him also
after thine own similitude, or lykenes. Endewynge him with a reasonable soul:
and the noble powers thereof. Thou also dyddeste put him into that pleasant
garden of paradyse, nothing exceptynge from him but the eating of the only
tree of knowledge of good and badde: Genes. ii
and further for his help, comfort and company, of a rybe of his side, thou
made for him a woman, and gave her to him to be his wife. There had they
instructions given them and the law of life for an heritage. Before them were
laid both life and death, ^cclesiast. xv.
good and evil, with a free will given them to take whether so ever liked them.
But their frailty was such that they through a small intisement, chose the
evil and least the good, they leaft life and chose death. Thus, Lord, through
sin and breakyng thy commandment: man lost the free will that was given him
in his creation, and purchassed death to all his posterity. In the way as he
went from Jerusalem to Hiericho: he fell in the hands of thieves, ^ic 1
who hurtynge and woundyng him sore: departed leauyng him half dead, there
could he of none, have help, but only of the good Samaritane who passed by
the same way. He poured wine and oil into his wound and took the cure of him.
This Samaritane was thy most loving son Christ, which took upon him all the
iniquities of mankind, and laid them on his back, ^say i^^
by his death, purgynge and cleansynge him not only from the sin original
of our forfather Adam: but also from al our actual sins by us committed,
from time to time, by the virtue of his passion and the Sacrament of Baptism
and penance. For as by one, Roma. ^.
that is, our first Adam was death sent in to all mankind, so by one other
our second Adam Christ, was mankind restored to life. For the which great
and high benifite of thy sons blessed passion for our redemption, we thy
poor creatures most humbly praise and thank the, and acknowledge his
inestimable love toward us. In that he vouchsaffed to dye for us being then
sinners, and in that we were sinners: we were both thine and his mortal
enemies. Nevertheless (most merciful father) the sparcles of the fire
kyndeled in us by our old father Adam: and the dregs or remnau^tes of his
sin remain in us, that we are become so frail and weak, that we can do no
good of our selves, no not once think a good thought. And in case we by
thine assistence will do any good act: Roma. vii.
yet are we not able of our selves to perform it. But the will and the
pefourmynge of the same, Phillip. ii.
does wholye depend upon the, and the help of thy most kind son our
loving brother, it lies not in us now, to chose and take what way shall be
best, but all our steps and procedynges toward goodness, must be directed
by the. We wander here miserably in the valeis and low parts, our strength
will not serve us to clyme to the heyghte of the hills where thou dwell,
Lord, in the mount of Syon, a place prepared for thine elect, a chosen
enherytaunce of thy faithful servant Abraham and his sede, wherefore sense we
being burdened with the affectes of worldely pleasures, and also with other
cares and troubles, ca^ by no means ascend to the, that art on the top of
so high a mountain, accompanied with so many legions of angels that still
attend upon the: we have no remedy, but with thy prophet David now to list up
the eyes of our hertes and minds toward the, ^enaui oculus meos ^u montes.
and to cry for help to come down from the to us thy poor and wretched
servants, we wander here allow as lost sheep, having no shepeherde. We are
assailed on every side with manifold enemies. ^. Petri. v.


The devil rauenynge and hungry seeks whom he may devour. The world
blandishynge and alluryng us to her disceytful vanities. The flesh also which
we carry about with us being a domestical enemy ready and prone to draw us
to all vices and pleasures, from these, can we by no mean be defended, but by
the Lord. Send us therefore thy help from the high hills. Vnde veniet
autilium (...)
Send us thy holy angels to assist and strengthen us, by whose help we may
by steps of virtues clime up to the, to enhabite among these noble hills,
the country of all fertility and abundance.

To these hills after long labor thou broughtest the Israelites, among
these hills: thou causedest thy chosen City of Jerusalem to be builte, to be
through them the stronger and more sure against al assaults of enemies. From
these hills descended the sweet sprynges and fountaynes of water, to ouerflowe
the low valyes, and make them both pleasant and profitable. Thus of the,
most mercyful father, Au^^^m meum a domino qui fecit eclum et terram.
flows all bounty and goodness. Thou made heaven and earth for thine own
honor and man's commodity. Establish therefore, good lord, the chose^ work
of thine hand with thy eternal help from heaven, send us down the well
spring of thy grace. Send thy strong angels to aid us, by whose help, no
assault of our spiritual enemies, Non dei in commotinem pedem tuum.
may prevail against us. No not once be able to remove our feet or
thoughts from the obseruyng of thy godly will and pleasure. The bryghte
angels stood not fast, but through pride, slypped and sustained a great fall.
Our father Adam also brake thy precepte, and his foot slypped. He fell from
paradyse of pleasure into this world a place of travail. He fell from
immortality to mortality. Take away therefore from us, Lord, that proud
slyppy fete so that no temptation of sin remove us, causing us to fall from
the. Make us to be true Israelites, Roma. ix.
that is, seares of God. Make us the true sede of Abraham by faith, and of
Isaac by promission.

So that by the help of angels: we may dwell here in the City of
Jerusalem, that is, in thy true church, here militant, continewinge in thy
true faith, without swarueuynge, abiding in hope of thy promise made to al thy
faithful, and workyng by ardent charity, Math. v.
as thou have commanded us, to the good example of other, and to the
glorifiynge of thine excellent majesty. And then neade we not to be afraid of
any power of enemies. Thou being our keeper and our watchma^ we are sure from
al sodeyne invasions. Thine eyes are and ever will be open upon us, Neque
dormitet qui custodit te. Ecce non dormitabit neque dormiet qui custodit Israel.
thou never slepest nor none of thy holy angels, but intentiffely do attend
to the saffekepynge of thine elect, and chose^ people that are the lively
stones of thy church or congregation. Al men be they never so holy do sleep
and slumbre, but Christ sleapeth not, he sleapt once and arose again from his
sleep, so that he will never more sleep but preserve ye true Israelites, i.
Corhinth. xiii. i. Io. iii
from al perils. They shall se him here by faith as it were in a glass, and
after this life: they shall se him, (...) ^it te do (...) ^o tua ^u (...) ^num
dexteram cu^^.
even as he is. Thy strong defense is much more sure for us the^ we our selves
ca^ wish or divise. All the works that we ca^ do are nothing worth to our
protection. Those we clearly refuse and appeal to thy mercy, and call for the
help of thy grace. Through the which we shall be (as it were under the shadow of
thy wings defended) from the heat of the son in the day time, Per diem sol
non v^et temeque suna per nocie^.
that is, from vayneglory and al other te^ptacions in prosperity, and also
from the coolnes of the moon by the night, that is, from slackenes and not
doing at al times those things which we ought and are commanded. The first
would move us to the contempt and forgetfulness of the and thy will. The second
would lead us to desperation. But from al these evils Lord, thy word
defe^deth us, both toutching the body and also the soul, yt the temptations of
our enemies shall not prevail against us. Thou have ben our protector, Dominus
custodit te ab omni malo, custodiat animam tuam dominus.
eue^ from the breasts of our mother hitherto, and our trust is that thou will
no less do all the rest of our life, and specially in the hour of death. So
that when we shall put of this sack of mortality this body corruptible:
Dominus custodiat in tronum tuum, ex hoc nunc et vsque in seculu^.
we shall put on the garment of immortality, and ascend to thy heavenly City
of Jerusalem, where we should rest in the bosom of our father Abraham, the
father of al faithful beleuers, in joy that may not with the tongue be
expressed, nor with the heart be comprehended. There praysyng the with thy
loving son and the holy gooste procedynge from you both world without end.
Amen.

The sinner being drowned in the flouddes of sin, cries to God for his
help, The.Cxxx. Psalm.
and prays to be delivered from the danger thereof.
When I do ernestly behold mine own estate whereunto I am brought through
sin: (that is) not only to be naked and bare of all goodness, but also to be
overwhelmed and drowned in the deapth of al fylthy iniquity. I cannot but
lament, Esaye.xxvi.
mourn and cry for help as does a woman whose time draws nere of ye birth
of her child. She ca^ take no rest til she be discharged of her burden. No
more can I Lord, so long as I feale my self looded with my heavy burden of
sin: The weighte whereof draws me down to the deape botome of al misery
from whence I ca^ by none be delivered, but only by the yt art the guide and
the eye to those that are blind through ignorance the socour of the oppressed,
Io. x.
the comfort of the weak and the life of those that are dead, so yt they
repent and call unto the. It is not the long distau^ce of us from thy highness,
which keeps our prayers from the.

Thine ears are ready in the hertes of all that are ready to cry for ye help
of thy grace. Ione. ii.
Jonas was in the botome of the sea, in the bealy of a fish.iii. days, from
which low deapth, he cried unto the, and thou mercifully hearing him did
deliver him. who so is made far from ye through sin: by repe^tau^ce is made
nere unto the. He that is in the botome of the sea of misery (if he begin to
call for thy help) incontinent begins to arise and flote from that deapth,
and ca^ not be suffered to sink. There is no thing that draws a man down
so much as does continual prosperity and fal^e felicity, which seame to
hold a man up by the chynne, but at length by them he does synke, and not
swyme to the banks of assured health. De profundis clama^i ad te domine,
domi^e eraudi vocem mea^^iant aures tue inten^entes in voce depreca^ionis me.
From al these deape dangers (most merciful God) I cry and call piteously
unto the, which art only able to help me. Here therefore (I hertely pray
the) my sorrowful prayers, and let my poor peticion pearse the ears of thy
Godhead, and sense thy son Christ dyed for to release us of sin, let not my
sins be a stay whereby my prayers should not be hard, but wype the^ clean
away that they never more appear. For if thou, Lord, will behold the
iniquities of mankind which abound in us as flowers do in the feldes at the
spring time of the year: Si iniquitates obseruaueris domine: domine quis
sustinebit?
no creature shall be able to abide the hardness of thy judgment. No eye may
endure the sharpnes of thy countenance. Malach. iii. Job.xxvi. Psalm. Cxliii.
The thunder of thy sentence none can sustain. The most just man shall not be
able to enter with the into judgment. Who so ever presumes of his own
justice to endure the violence of thy justice: shall be as sone, overthrown, as
one that stands in the rage of a fierce water floude in a strayte place, his
own conscience will shortly accuse him and condemn him. Leaving therefore the
rigor of thy true justice, I most vile and miserable siner, do flee to ye
gentleness of thy favorable mercy, Quia apud te propiatio est
whose natural property is to have pity and co^passio^. From the (as from the
welspring) flows all mercy and grace, which was so great that it caused the
to send thine only son to dye for our redemption. Wherein thy justice was
satisfied, and thy mercy found that which it sought. Oh how fervent was this
thy noble charity to us vile wretches. It took root and original beginning in
thy mighty deity, and from thence is derived to mankind. Et propter legem
tue^ sustinui te domine.
To this charity thou did bind him first by the law of nature, written
in the hertes of men, and then by the law written in tables, and after
approved by Christ and his Apostles in the Euangelical law which was that one
of us should bare the burden of another, Galathi. vi.
and thereby fulfill thy holy will and precept. Knowing this thy godly law: I
am gladly contented to remit all injuries done to me as it has plesed thy
goodness to forgive me much greater offenses committed against the, Yea, when
soever it pleases the to scourge and punyshe me, I gladly receive thy
chastisment, knowing that it proceadeth of love, for my wealth and surety.
Trusting that after my long abidyng and sufferyng in this life, Sustinuit
anima mea in verbum tuum.
I shall surely obtayn the reward by the promised to me after my travail. Such
sure hope have I ever had in the Lord, Sperauit anima mea in dominum.
Psalm.xxii. Romans viii.
even from the breasts of my mother, and by the same hope I trust fyrmely to
be saved. The good husband man ploweth his ground, sows it, reapith and
thresheth his corn, and al upon hoope of the profit, i. Corhint. ix.
which thereon arises. Even so Lord, will I abide in hope and trust of thy
glory that is to come and that not only in youth, A custodia matutina vsque ad
noctem.
or one time only of my life, but continually, from the morning watch unto the
night, from the time of youth in which thou gave me first my descretion, unto
the last end of my life. For whosoever casts away his hope before the night
of death come, loses all that he watched for before. Genes. xii.
The wife of Loath kept well her way of a great while still lokyng on forward,
but at the last she could not forbear but looked back upon her country wherein
she before had pleasure, and was turned into a saltston. It was not without a
great misterye that the Levites were commanded to offer unto thee Lord,
Leuit. i
both the head and the tail of the beast offered for sacrifice. Whereby is me^t
that thou do not allow a good beginning unless there follow also a good end,
For he that continues to the end: shall be saved. This hope in thy promise has
my poresoule firmly reposed in her bosom or breast, Matthew.xxiiii.
and this hope, it is mete that al Israel, Speret Israel in dominum.
that is, all christen men (which by faith se God) should have. For blessed
is the man which trusts in the merciful God, and curssed are they that put
their trust in man. Of thy grace and mercy only comes al our goodness Thy mercy
forgeueth daily our sin, Quia apud dominum misericordia.
and the painful death of thy son Christ, delivered us from all the pains
dew for our offenses. Et copiosa apud eum redemptio.
Thou boughtest us not with gold and silver or any such vile price nether yet
with the blood of a goat or any other beast. 1. Peter.i.
But with the precious blood of that lamb without spot, thy blessed son.
Whose death had been sufficient for a hundredth thousand such worlds. The
greatness of thy love caused ye plentiful payment of the price of our
redemption. Ecclesi. xxxix.
Thy blissing did flow upon us as a mighty flodde, whose great inundations do
moysten all the ground. The charity of thy son has burnt up and consumed
by his death, al our iniquities. Wherefore the faithful, being thus delivered
from all dangers by thine only goodness, may now give praises and thanckes
unto thy myghtie majesty, restyng in hope to have after this life the thing
for which they so long have hoped, which is joy everlasting through the
perfect vision of thy blissed deity, even as it is. Which who so sees:
enjoys all things that his heart can desire. The.C.xxxviii. Psalm.


The faithful man gives praise to God with thanks for his mercy showed to
him, and exhorts all other to do the same.
THe myghtie power of thy divine majesty O Lord of Lords and God of al Gods
with the plentiful aboundau^ce of thy goodness daily declared to al mankind,
Deute. ^.
enforces me to consider mine own weakness and insufficiency in yeldyng to
the any recompense. Thou Lord art omnipotent and made all things of
naught. I am thy simple creature made with thy hand and without thy help,
iiii. Reg. v.
I am able to do no good thing. Thou art the God eternal beside whom there is
no God. I am a worm of the vile earth not worthy to bear the name of a
chrystian man for that through mine own act of sin I have defaced the
beaultie of the principal part of man which is my soul made to thy godly
image. Nevertheless, since thou art the refourmer of men's hertes and the
inspiratour of all grace and goodness, I most humblye beseech the to correct
by thy power that which through my frayltie is a mysse. Redres by thy pity,
that which I have marred through my follye, make me able to yield unto the
that which thou requirest of me, (that is) to acknowledge mine own
insufficiency, Co^fit^bor tibi domine
and to render unto the noble praises and loving thanks for thy manifold
gifts of grace, wherewith thou have of thy mere leberalitie endued both my
soul and my body. Make me worthy to laud the, which by no means may be but
by wyping away al mine iniquities. Ecclesi. xv. In toto cord meo.
For thy praises be not semely in the mouth of a sinner. Yea, Lord I pray
the, inflame my heart with the love of the. So that from the botome thereof, I
may speak them, and thine honor to extol, not mine nor to love any thing in
this world but the and for the. Thou art the true God and savior, and there
is none else but thou. Esaye.xlv.
Out of thy mouth comes the word of ryghteousnes which no man may turn.
Wherefore al other Gods set a side, to the only will I sing praises, and
confess the only to be the living God, and that will I knoledge before the
hole congregation of the faithful. ii. Corin. vi. Adorabo conuersus ad templum
sanctum tuum.
Thou know the inwardes of ye heart of man and in the hertes of the faithful
is thy seat or resting place. The souls of the just are the temples wherein
thou do inhabit. To this temple will I turn my self by considering the
estate of mine own soul, which when by thy grace I make clean of vices: then
am I mete to receive the, to honor the, and to give praises to thy high
majesty. Acts.xvii.
Since that thou being Lord of heaven and earth, and of all that therein is
contained: delitest not to dwell in temples made with ma^s hands. David would
have made the a temple and was forbidden by the Prophet Nathan to who^ thou
saydest thou wast not used to dwell in any house. ii. Regum.vii. iii. Regum.v.
And although thou did afterward cause Solomon his son to build the a
material house for the congregation to assemble in, and therein to honor the:
yet chifely Lord the heart or soul of man is thy pleasant habitation.
Wherefore, Christ thy son said to ye woman of Samarie, John.iiii.
that nether on that mou^tayn nor yet in Jerusalem should men worship the, but
that the true worshippers should worship the in spirit and in truth. The true
worshippers must leave earthly affections, and inwardlye behold the spiritual
heavenly joys desiryng to be the pertakers of them with the angels. So shall
they being thy holy temple here on earth, behold thy noble spiritual temple in
heaven. Et confitebor nomin^ tuo super misericordia tua et veritate tua
Thus shall we worthily praise thy name for two, the most special benefits that
thou have showed us (that is) for thy great mercy whereby thou have forgeuen and
put away al our sins, and then for thy verite of justice, whereby thou will
vndoutly perform thy gentle promises made to us, in rewardyng us for the
obseruyng of thy precepts. And as these be the ways by which thou show thy
self to us and do approach near us: even so grant us (Lord) that we showing
the same to our neighbors may also approach nere unto the. I mean that thou will give us grace to have compassion on those that have need of our help and
sucour and also to be indifferent and vpryght in judgment to all men. So that
these two virtues may appear to be planted by the in us. O how plentiful is
thy goodness to all that love the. Marc. xiii.
Thy promises to them made are merueilous great, yet never was one jot of the^
unperformed, although to men they seem impossible. As for example among many I
will only take Abraham the father of al faithful, to whom was a child
promised to be borne of his old wife Sara, Genes. xvii. Genes. x^i.
which against the course of nature thou dyddest perform. Thou did also
promise him that his sede should be increased to the multitude of the stars
of the firmament or as the sands of the sea banks (that is) to a nombre past
numbering which after beside all men's expectation thou broughtest to pass,
Genes. xxii.
And all this Lord dyddest thou for thy names sake: Quo niam magnificasti
super omne, nomen sanctum tuum.
thou wylt ever have thy word found true and also magnified, for thine own
honor and glory, and for our comoditie. Upon the therefore will I still
call, In quacunque die inuotau^ro te exaudi me.
trustyng that thou wylt shortly hear me. I will also call upon the myghtie
name of thy son Jesus Christ. Marc. xvi.
In whose name the faithful have and daily do cast out deuyls from the
possessed, they have spoken and do speak with new tongues. They kill the
serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them, that
is, they leave their wicked minds and deuylyshe works, in which they before
led their lives, they speak thy holy word and set furthe the verity,
leaving all lies and deceyte. They do suppress the suggestions of the old
serpent Satan: pluckynge out the stynge of his tail wherewyth he was
accustomed to wound them, and if at any time they have consented to sin and
received his poysen: it shall not hurt them. For Christ, on whose name they
made invocation, purges them clean thereof after their hertie repentance.
So that, to the good faithful people, their faull into sin is now turned
to good to them, and to their profit. Multiplicabis in anima mea virtutem.
Their souls thereby receive greater force and strength ever after. For this
strength of the powers of my soul, I call most humbly unto the (merciful God)
whereby I may be able to vanquyshe the said subtyl Serpent and al his
illusions. Perform in me that which thou have promised, Farebuntur te esse
dominu^ omnes reges terre, vbi audieru^t omni^ verba otis tui.
whereby all people, yea, the myghtie Kings Princes and rulers of the earth
hearing of thy merciful promyses and power in perfourmynge them, shall take
occasion to praise the, and to magnify thy name. Yea, Et cantent in viis
domini quod magna est gloria homini.
with songs and hermonye they shall set fourth, and praise thy ways, and
bear witness of thy high majesty. Al thy ways are mercy and truth. Phal.
xxv.
Thy mercy reaches to the heaven and thy faythfulnes to the clouds,
Psalmus.xxxvi.
and thy righteousness stands like the strong mountains.

This considered, needs must all the rulers of the earth confess that great
is thy might and thy glory. Excelsus dominus et humilia respicit and alta
eminus agnoscit.
Nevertheless although thou dwell above the heavens, yet have thou a loving
respect unto the lowly and meke of spirit, Psalm. xxxiiii.
thou beholdest them as one looks on his frynde. Thou drawest nere unto them
to hear their prayers. Yea, thou art their shylde and protection in all their
necessities But what shall we then think? Do thou not behold also those
that are proud and work iniquities? Yes truly. Thou see them perfectlye.
But it is a far of. Thou see them with a fyerse look to their confusion,
Psalm.xxxiiii.
to destroy and rote forth the memory of them cleave out of the land of ever
lastyng beatitude. Who so therefore will have thy majesty come nere unto him:
Mathw. xv Si ambulauero in medio tribulationis uiuirabis me.
must pull down his hye mind and become low in heart. The meke and humble
people be those that shall enjoy the heavenly country. And though they walk
in the mids of trouble: yet shall thou refreshe them and quicke^ them. This
world is a place ordained for trouble, not for rest. Here we are appointed to
trauail. In this place no man wants tribulation. But thou ever, graciously
refreshest and co^fortest thy faithful. Thou suffrest them not to be overcome
in any tribulation. Yea, although they be committed by tirauntes to temporal
death: yet through the shall they vanquish al their enemies. Psalm. Cxvi.
The death of thy saynctes is right dear and precious in thy sight. Mathwe. x.
They need not to fear those that have power only to kill the body. But let
them fear thy myghtie hand, Lord, which have power to slay both body and
soul. The temporal death is a way to bring us from much trouble, to the
haven of everlasting health, into the land of livers. Yet let the unjust and
cruel enemies of the faithful, stand in dread of thy stretched forth arm,
Supet iram inimicorum meorum extendisti manum tuam.
wherwyth in thine anger thou wylt stryke them. Of thine infinite goodness thou
suffrest long, abydyng their conversion, but at length after long taryinge,
thou strykest very sore, throwyng both soul and body into the pit of hell,
there to be tormented with plages and receive double as much to be poured forth
to them of the same cup, which they filled to other: Apoca. xvii.
such measure of cruelty as they showed to other: such measure of punishmente
and sorrow shall be measured to them again, which shall never cease nor be
diminished. This knowing and beleauyng (most mercyful God) what reasonoble
creature would not tremble and quake? who will continewe in sin, co^sideryng
the peynes dew to sin? wherefore, Lord, power out thy mercies I beseech the
upon thy flock, deliver us from all our enemies spiritual and temporal. Salu^
me fecit dextera tua.
Let thy right hand save us (that is) lead us through thy grace, into
eternal felicity. As for riches, ease, honor, or any kind of temporal
pleasure, which be thy gifts also (but of thy lift hand) we nothing
esteem. These, many times thou bestowest upon thine enemies. The other thou
reseruest for thine elect to receive after many their tribulations. And the
same, Lord, I humbly beseech to keep in store for me thy poor servant.
Regard not the wyckednes, which I daily commit, but thine own goodness,
whereby thou freely dischargest such as offend against the. At the least,
behold the merits of thy son Jesus Christ my God, and my Savior, Dominus
retribuet prom^.
who has made good for me yt I was not able to make good my self. He has
paid my debt. And upon my repentance therefore thou, Lord, haste sealed mine
acquittaunce. The only cause thereof was thy mercy and mere liberality,
which, as it has been from everlasting: even so will it endure without end
for ever. Domine misericordia tua in seculum.
And as through thy said great mercy thou dyddest send thy son to dye for
thine enemies: so I trust that thou will not leave to save us that are thy
faithful servants. Consiore I pray the that whether we be sinners, or else
by thy help, made new men and justified, yet always are we thy creatures,
the work of thine hand, which thy work, Opera manuum tua^um ne despi^ias.
we beseech the mercifully to behold, and not our own work, which we have
added thereto. Thy work was made good, but the works of our hands have made
foul that thou have wrought. May it therefore please thy majesty of thine
abu^daunt goodness to take away that we have wroughte, and let nothing remain,
but that is only of thy creation. So shalt thou acknowledge us as thine own,
and receive us to the, and call us to thine everlasting glory through Christ
Jesus. So be it.

The Prophet David made this Psalm properly in the person of Christ speaking
to his heavenly father (as the head of his church). The.Cxxxix. Psalm
But it may be applied unto the faithful members of his congregation,
returned to God from all evil ways in which they have walked.
Lord God almighty the creatoure and maker of all things, whose power is an
everlasting power, which shall never be put down, whose kingdom endures
incorrupte for ever, and thy going out has been from everlasting, great art
thou, high and unmeasurable, thou only know the ways of wisdom, Psalm.
lxxix Math. v. Baruch.iii.
none other is there that seeks out her paths but thou the mighty God,
which haste found her out with thy forknowledge, and by the same thy godly
wisdom and prescience have created al things according to thy noble will and
pleasure. This thine omnipotent power, Lord, I thy poor subject do honor:
and thy wonderful wisdom I have in great veneratio^. By the one thou made
al things. By the other thou knew what thou woundest make long before they
were made. In both these have thou declared thy self to be the living God, and
although our acts which be past, present, and to come, be al open before thyn
eyes: and our thoughts manifest in the light of thy divine prescience,
Domine probasti me et cognouisti me.
yet do thou daly search and prove thine elect people. Sometime by
adversity, sometime by prosperity, not for thincrease of thy knowledge, but to
cause us to be known thereby to other. Genes. xxii.
Of this sort dyddest thou prove Abraham in the oblation of his son, to the
intent his obedience might be an example to all that should come after him.
^o^. xxiii.
Thus also dyddest thou prove thy servant Job, as gold is tried by fire in the
fornaice, and he was found both faithful, constaunt and just. Thou know
what me^ be before thou triest them, but after the trial thou hear them,
and their prayers, and alowste their good acts and intentions. By such proof
Lord, have thou tried me both within and without, and although through frailty
I have erred wandering a little from the: yet at length have I been found to
return again to the that art the perfect way, to believe faithfully in the as
in my very God, to trust wholly in the, and to love the as my merciful father,
and all through the gift of thy grace, not of mine own strength or will. Tu
cognouisti sessio^em meam, et resurre^tionem m^am.
Thou know my down sitting and mine vprysinge (that is) whether I sit or
stand, rise or fall, whether I go forth to travail in any worldly busynes, or
else return from labor to take my rest: thou know and considerest al
things better then I do my self, when so ever I sit restyng in sin
according to the miserable condition of my nature, or else arise again out of
sin through the goodness of thy grace: al is manifest unto the, yet are al my
evil acts sone put out of thy godly remembrance, so that I acknowledge my
self to be a sinner against the.

Thou requirest that I should accuse my self or ever I be justified by the.
Psalm.Cxxvii.
I must first eat the bread of sorrow for that I have so long sitten in
sin, and then art thou ready mercifully to raise me, Thou art a God in whom
no ignorance can fall. The carpe^ters and masones who entende to erecte an
house: first devise and buyld the form thereof in their mind before the
foundations be laid, or else shall their works sometime be racid down to
amend that was omitted or vicious. And shall I think the to be so ignoraunte
and indiscreet a workman of the work of man's body that thou dyddeste not in
thine eternity conceive and know, not only al mine acts, Intellexisti
cogitationes meas de long.
procedynges and end, but also my thoughts which I should at any time think?
This were as great an error as to t^ynke the not to be God. Since it is a
part of thy divine nature to se things a far of, and to know my thoughts
in thy forknowledge, before they come into my heart or mind? which who so
thinks not to be in the, takes from the in his heart, a part of thy
Godheade. And as the good workman makes his work perfect and true by his
line and his measure: so do thou measure all my ways, that is, Semitam meam
et finiculum meum inuestgasti, omnes vias meas preuidisti.
al mine acts by the line of mine intent conceived in the workyng of them,
which intent is aprarent to thy Godly consyderation. Nothing can escape the
untried, neither the deeds of thy people for to receive therefore their heavenly
reward, neither the works of the badde to receive for the^ dew punishment,
Non est sermo in lingua mea.
there is no word spoken by me but it is first known to the before it is
come in to my mouth. And as thy wisdom is incomprehensible in knowing al
things: even so is thy power ineffable in the workynge of them, of which the
more that I devise to search out the grounds, the more do I remain wrapped
in ignorance If I should muse how deape dwellynges are in the sea, ^i.
Esdre. iiii.
or how great waters are above the firmament, or how great water sprynges are
in the beginning of the deape, or which are the out goinges of Paradyse: I
might well judge them to be far beyond my capacity. For that I never went
down into the deape, nor yet clymed ever up into heaven to have knowledge of
any so hyd secrets. But when I only consider thy workemanshippe in the body
of man which thou have fashioned both behind and before, ^etro et ante
formame.
whereof I feale daily the experience: and perceive the secret operations of
nature therein to be such that they pass far my capacity, I leave of to
search further of that, whereof I by no means may atteine the knowledge. The
sinews both the hard and the soft, the gross and the fine, fetch from the
head, and the brain their original, by which al other parts have their
fealyng and their moueinge, the veins convey the blood from the liver which
is the great receptacle or stoore house of the blood, from one part of the
body to an other, whereby the whole body is norished. The joints are firmly
knytte, which join (as it were by a mutual amity) one membre to an other,
one part serves the necessities of the other, the mouth feadeth the stomache,
the stomache prepares a concoction to the liver, the liver works it again
more perfectly to the veins, the veins labor it also and bring it to all the parts of the body. The heart which is the founteyne of lively heat and
wherein the vital spirits do rest: has his place in the mids of the
body, as in the most assured place thereof for the sauegarde of all the
rest, with many other lively qualities belonging to the body, which to express
passes all men's capacities. As the eyes, through the glasye and cristalline
humors with the help of the two small sinews, to se things far distaunt,
the ears to hear any soune, the mouth to taste, the nose to smelling, the
hands and other parts to feel, which are wounderful to considre But nothing
in comparison of the noble spiritual gifts of the soul, as of memory,
imaginations, fantasy, opinion, discretion, wisdom, understanding, and
above al, reason, set in the highest part of the head as indifferent judge or
ruler to all the rest. All these Lord, thou which lyuest everlastingly have
created together. And yet when thou haste created them they could no while
endure but must needs perish, if thou dyddeste not help them, Posuisti
supor me m^num tuam.
keep them, and with thy migytie hand or power from time to time preserve
them, the house of man's body will sone decay, unless it be repaired
continually by thy merciful grace, by which thy grace sometime thou layest
thy heavy hand upon me plagyng and punishing me whereby I am brought to the
knowledge of the. Psalm.xxxii. Eccle. xviii.
Who ca^ therefore be able to express thy works, Job.xxxvi. Mirabilis facta
est s^entia tua super me, cofortata est et non potro ad came.
or who can declare the power of thy greatness? who has sought out the ground
of thy noble acts? Such knowledge of thy handy work is so wounderful, so
excellent, and of such force that I can not atteine unto it. I ca^ not but
wonder at the excellency of thy works, and honor the that art the maker of
them. For by the merueylouse nobleness of the creatures: is set forth the
honor of their maker. So much as the creature is high in worthiness: so much
greater is the honor of the creatoure. And as thy knowledge and power excede
our understanding: so does thy presence so largely extend that all men ought
to honor and also to fear the. We thy wretched creatures which daily
tresspasse against the, fearing thy justice in judgment: John.viii.
seek ways to flee from the. We have walked in darkness leauyng the which
art the very light. Wherefore we search all places to hyde us from thy
presence, but all in vain. For thou art not local, thou can in no place be
included, yet in all places art thou present, being all one in thy self
without mutabilitie or variation. Quo ibo a spiritu tu^? aut quo a facre tua
^ugiam? ^. Corhinth. ii. Sapi. i.
No man can go from thy spirit, neither flee from thy presence, thy spirit
fulfylleth the whole world, thy hand can no man escape. Who in this world
can hyde him self from the, with whom the whole world is filled full? Si
ascendero in celum ^u illit es.
If I clyme up in to heaven thou art there as in thine especial habitation,
that place also is fulfilled with the and with thy glory. I know that in that
thy house there are diverse and many mansions, but all are so full of light and
bryghtnes, that I can by no means be there hid from the. Si descendero in
infernum ades.
Again if I would descend down to the lower parts of the earth, yea to the
deep botome of hell, thynkyng there to be kept closse from thy presence: I
were much more deceived. For there art thou also potencially, thy power does
there extremely punish the wicked for their offenses, according to the
severity of thy divine justice. If it were possible for me to take me wings
and to flee over the sea to the vttermooste part of the world with such
speed as the sun in space of one day is carried from the east unto the
extreme part of the west: Si sumpseto penna^ meas diliculo et habitauero in
extremis m^ris.
yet can not I that way escape thy presence. For I shall never be carried
thither but thy sufferau^ce, thine almyghtie power must carry me thither, or
else I shall fall and perish by the way, Etenim illuc manus t^ a deducet me.
and if I might by any mean come thither, thy hand will there arrest me as an
unfaithful traytoure that seeks to flee from his worthy master. Etenebit me
dextera tua.
Furthermore, if I would be so unwise to think that thou being the very
light of the world, Esaye. ^^.
and an everlasting light do not see things which are wrought in
darkness, and for that cause I would desire to cover me with the dark
clooke of the night, and therein follow the concupiscences of the flesh more
freely, this were surely the most fooly of al. For our darkness is no
darkness unto the, Quia tenebre non su^t tenebre apud te, nox s^cut dies lucet
and similes sunt tenebre et lux.
thy presence causes the night to be brighter then is the sun to us in the
middle of the day, so that al my delight, al my pleasuant desires and my works
of darkness, be made as apparau^t unto the in the night time as in the day.
The light of the sin does nothing increase thy syghte, no more does the
darkness of the night let thy sight. And that more is, thou Lord do
inhabit the inward parts of my body, my reins are thine. My delectations
were wont to be in sensual pleasures of the flesh, but now of thy goodness, I
only joy and delight in the, thou have so stayed me yt those parts of my body
which served before thine enemy: are now become ready to serve, to
sanctification, and are become thy proper possession. Rome. v^^
For what am I miserable wretch being destitute of thy help? I do consydre
thy goodness and thy godly providence: by which thou waste the cause of my
first being, thou dyddeste lay the foundation before I was first begotten in
the womb of my mother, and before I received any shappe of man, thou dyddeste
with thy help cover me. In process of time thou gauyst me my form with
liniamentes of the body, proportioning in me the shappe of man that I now have
which a certain space before: was a rude piece of flesh without any comely
fetures, at the last thou dyddeste brathe into my body thy lyuelye breath,
thou dyddeste there nurishe me and keep me from perilles during mine abydyng
there. Afterward when the time of my birth was come: Suscep^sti me de vtero
matris me.
thou tokest me into thy favorable protection, and have from time to time
according to the quantity of my growyng and the time of my years given unto
me strength of body, and brought me unto the just perfection thereof. The
co^ning masters in the crast of grauyng, caruyng, payntyng or any other
worldly faculty, when they have with diligence acheued any work which they
have taken in hand: they then set it on side as a thing which neadeth no
further labor or industry. But it fares not so by thy work in the making
of me, and other thy reasonable creatures, we have daily neade of thy gracious
healpe, thou must ever engraue in us thy precepts, must frame in us a heart
desirous to keep them, thou must lay upon us a color of thy grace, whereby
we shall be strong and able to fulfill them. Greatly therefore are we bound unto
thy majesty for the love, Co^fitebor tibi quta te ribilitet magnificasti me.
thou bear unto us, which is much more abou^dauntly showed in the
preservation of us, then it is in our creation, much ought we to praise the
and to thank the for our wonderful creation, but much more me^ueylouse are
thy works in our daily protection, assistence, inspiration, Mitabilia opera
tua.
redemption and reconciliation, Et anima mea cognoscet ea.
which the spiritual eye of my soul does right well considre For without
those all that was before wroughte, was to little purpose for our profit.
Wherefore we must humbly pray the Lord, to regard what shall redound to thy
greatest glory, and that to set forth for thine own honor and also for thy
profit, sense thine honor is more auaunced in saving of one poor miserable
and sinful creature through thy mercy then in the dampnation of a thousand by
the rigor of thy justice. For in hell can none praise the but curse, wayle,
mourn and lament their miserable estate incessauntly. Thou know what is
within us to the vttermoste be it never so closly and secretly hid. Non est
occultatum o^ meu^ a te quod fecisti in occulto.
The bones both great and small in all parts of my body thou haste nu^bred them
all, although they be with the flesh and the skin full privily hid from the
sight of our carnal eyes, yea thou know the earthly mattier whereof my body
was made, ^^ substa^la mea in in^rioribus terre.
and did devise the fashion thereof in the earthly place of my mothers
womb, long time before it was made, thou did behold the imperfecte
matteir of my body long before any shappe were put therein, ^mperfec^um meu^
vi^etunt oculi tui.
or any life given there unto. All that ever concerns me from my beginning to
the end, is written in thy book of godly forknowledge. ^n libro tuo omnia
scri^^ntur. Luce.xii.
The here is of my head thou know by number. The days of my life and of al
other thy reasonable creatures both good and badde, are written in that thine
eternal book, which is nothing else but thy godly mind and thine everlasting
memory, which sees a far of all the acts, not only of those that have been
or now are living on the earth, but also of all that shall succeade us. For when
all that are now in life shall be taken by death out of this transitory world,
paying the general det dew unto nature, so yt not one that is now in life shall
tarry to see the days and time that here after shall come: ^ies firmabuntut et
^emo in eis.
yet shall other increase and come in their places, whereof none shall escape thy
most perfect knowledge. They are al written in thy book of eternal
prescience, as we are which shall pass away before that time. Great therefore
and inco^prehensible are thy ways in my judgment. Qua^ preciose mihi fueru^t
cogitationes rue?
Right precious are thy counsels declared unto ma^kinde, so many ways yt no
tongue is able to express, neither heart to imagine them. The sum of them is so
great, that when I entende to tell them: Quam ingentes fact funt sum eorum.
they are mo in nu^bre then the sands or grauel of the sea banks. If I would
endeavor my self thereto al my life time, my work were al in vain, and why?
Si enim numerare coner eas: super arenan multiplicabuntur. Ecclesi. i.
For that thine only wisdom has devised them, whose ground no man can seek
out. No man have thou ever made thy counselor in thy noble proceadinges,
Esaye.xl.
the swetnes of thy goodness and wisdom, when I have thus earnestly
considered, from who^ nothing can be keepte closse: I determined incontinent
to leave al mine old manner of evil living, Exsurrexi et adhuc siterum.
to arise out of sin, wherein I lay wallowing as does the foul swine in the
mire, to cleave unto thy laws and to fulfill thy precepts. And my hope
strayghte said that taking sure hold of the and of thy grace: I should at the
last general arising of the body joined with my soul: enjoy thy blessed
presence in thy heavenly kingdom, having comfort of the clearnes of thy bright
majesty, and being made partaker of thy joys perpetually. These great and
unspeakable pleasures should I have lost, if I had continued in sin. Si
occideris deus pe^catores.
In stead whereof I should with the wicked sort of people have been thrown into
hell, there to receive death everlasting both of body and soul. Wherefore (most
gracious God) I hertely beseech the to give me grace to flee the company of
the cruel blood thirsty people, Viri sanguinum de^^ nate a me.
to banishe out of my company al such as speak untruly of the, Qui
contradicunt ti^ scelerate eleuari su^t fistra aduersarii tui.
and of thy holy will and word, and also of al such as exalt the^ selves
presu^ptuously against the, lest by being co^uersau^t in their wicked company,
I might fall from the and from the right way wherein through grace thou haste
directed me. For who so toutcheth pytche: shall be fyled withal, and he that is
familiar with the proud: Eccli. xiii.
shall cloth him self with pride. He ye does evil is worthy of death, and not
he only, but those which comunicate with him, Roma. i. ^onne qui odetunt te
Domine oderam et suet inimicos tuos taescobam.
and have pleasure in them that do evil. I hate them therefore (O Lord) that
hate the, and I may not away with them that rise up against the. Thou art a
mighty God and a jealous God, you wylt not have any part of thine honor given
to any other, but reseruest that to thy self. Thou requirest our whole love,
our service and our whole hertes. He that serves thy enemy the devil or the
world: can not also serve the. No man can at one time please two masters,
^uce. xvi.
which are so diverse of natures and wylles. Wherefore such as hate the: ^efecto
odio oderam ^os inmici facti sunt ^ihi.
I will hate right sore. Those that are thine enemies: shall also be mine
enemies. All that only hate me and are mine enemies: I clearly forgive them,
and will forgette the displeasures which they have done unto me. Math. v.
Yea I do pray unto the (my merciful father) even from the botome of my heart
to forgive them. But those that are thy cruel enemies Lord, which
maliciously resist the and thy holy word: I can not but hate them. Moses
seeing the idolatry of the people of Israel in worshippyng the golden calfe
while he was above with the Lord, Exodus xxxii.
in the mount Sinaye: waxed wonderful angry, and in his anger slew about
three thousand men with the help of the Levites, and therein he assuaged thine
anger.

Wherein I do mark Lord, that he loved the people, as thy creatures and prayed
to the for them, but their execrable sins against the, he so hated that he
could not forbear to revenge thy quarrel. Even so did Phinees the son of
Eleazar, being iealouse for thy sake, Numeri. xxii.
slay an Israelite whom he found openly with a madianitishe wife to the evil
example of his brethren, and the plage ceased from the children of Israel,
through his earnest punishing of the wicked. Wherefore I taking of them example:
do not so love the persons of the wicked, which are of thy creation, that I
shall also love their vices, neither do I so hate their wickedness, that I
shall also hate their persons, but rebukyng and punishyng to my power their
vices, I do right hertely pray unto the for amendment of their lives, and for
the salvation of their souls. Considre Lord, the frailty of our nature,
none can stand fast in thy right way, but shall slide and fall, unless
thou give him the staff of thy grace to lean upon, and to stay him thereby. I
have wandered from the as a straye sheep from the flock, but thy goodness
has found me out again, and brought me unto thy fold, yet I feel that I
can not do my dewtie unto the as I am bound to do, I feel my conscience to be
sick and wounded with the darts of concupiscence. Proba me deus et scit cor
meum explora me cognosce semitas me as.
Wherefore I beseehe the (my merciful God) to try me with all kinds of
trialles whereby thou prouest thine elect people, beat me scourge me, and so
correct me that thou may refourme me, search the goound of my heart prove
and examine my thoughts, and where thou find in me to be any way of
wickedness hid: play the part of a good physician, Et vide si via iniquit
it is in me est.
purge me thereof, make clean my soul of all the uncleanness thereof, consume the
darts wherwyth my soul is wounded, thou Lord (I say) must heal me and
none other, through the may I be helped and by none other. The way Lord, that
I of my self shall enterprise to walk in, is the way of sin and the way of
death, a way which much displeases the eyes of thy deity. But thy way is
the way of health, Et dedue me in via ^^terna.
the way of everlasting salvation. Lead me therefore Lord, out of mine own
wicked way into thy blessed way, through the merits of thy blessed son
Christ, John. xiiii.
which is the very true perfect way, to all beatitude, by whose healpe I may
so direct my steps, and so set forth my paces in the way of this life, that
I may keep the straight way into the life everlasting.

Al creatures reasonable are exhorted to give thanks and praises unto God both
for the erection of our earthly Syon the Christen congregation, Psalm.Cxlvi.
and also of the heavenly Jerusalem.
Most merciful God and heavenly father by whom the whole world and all the
co^tentes thereof are governed, of whose heaped goodness no man can so much
desire as thou art able to give, neither is any man able by his acts to
merit the hundredth part of so much as thou of thy mere liberality do
reward him, Lord, that do exhort us thy faithful to ask of the in the
name of thy son Christ, things expedient for our salvation for our
worldely necessities, not doubtyng but that we should receive the same at thy
merciful hands. This thy great love and charity, most myghtie God, Laudate
dominu^ quoniam bonus est psalmus
moves me and also exhorts me to give to thine highness most herty thanks
and praises as the creature ought to give to his maker. Not thanks Lord which
are spoken only with the mouth, outwardly, the heart being wythinforth corrupt
with all kinds of concupiscences, and a heart grudgynge to do good to other,
but an heart and mind which loves the for thy self above all creatures, and
for thy sake, wyllyng lovingly to do to other as I would should be done unto
me, knowing that in case my works agree not consonauntly with my voice, Deo
nostro sit to cu^dade cotaque laudacio,
the praise which should proceade forth of my mouth were nothing pleasant
in thy syghte, since thou delitest not in the praises that issewe from the
mouth of a sinner. Ecclesi. xv.
But what so ever I honestly do in this world other eating or drinking,
sleepyng or wakyng, i. Corhinth. x.
working or restyng, I entende to do all things wholly to thine honor and
praise. And to extolle the with my words which may spring from a pure and
incorrupt heart, as clean water does from a clear and undefiled fou^tayne.
This am I much moved to do by the consyderation of thy goodness showed after
the fall of thy bright angels, whose places to fulfill in thy heavenly City
of Jerusalem, Edificans Jerusalem dominus.
and to repair the ruin of those stones which fell from thence, thou made
ma^kinde entendynge by him to restore at length the first noble building
thereof. But man alas when he should have been hewed to the purpose of that
noble edifice, could not endure to be squared and tried by the perfect rule of
thy godly commandments, wherefore he also fell from paradyse as a stone
abiecte and not worthy to be there placed. He followed the instigation of his
enemy the devil, wherefore he was cast from that pleasant place, to wander
abroad in this present world as in a paynfull pilgrimage, here traueylyng
long in misery both he and all his posterity, as people dispersed into all
parts thereof, till thou Lord of thine exceadyng charity dyddest send down
thine only begotten son to shed his blood for the redemption of all the
world who has erected here one temporal City of Jerusalem, his City of
peace, his holy and pure spouse the christen congregation calling to the
erection of that, his buylding his faithful people from the four wyndes, that
is from the four parts of the world, which are the lively stones gathered
together as well of the gentiles as of the Jews, John. xi Di^pertiones
Israelis congregabit.
which were before as out castes dispersed and scattered into al parts of the
world. He sought them of his mercy which sought not him, and found them
which looked not for him. Qui sanat contritos contritos cuide and alligat
contricion^s little.
He healed the grieffes of those that were bruised in the said perilous fall,
byndynge up their wounds, and laid the wholesome plaster of his passion and
the oil of his grace to as many of them as are contrite in heart.
Psalm.xxxiiii.
To such art thou Lord nere at hand, and healpest those which be of an humble
spirit. Thou healest them I say of their wounds here in this world, but not
to the very perfectnes of health, until the resurrection of the just and elect
persons, at which time they shall shine in beauty and clearnes as sterres in
the firmament, world without end, David.xii. Math. ix.
yea they shall shine as bright as the sun in thy glorious kingdom. The
sun the moon and the sterres are the noble garnishyng of the firmament. So
are thine elect persons the glorious ornaments of thy church here militant.
In which through their virtuous living, they give an example of virtue for
other to follow them, and being in the mids of the perverse and crooked
nations they shine as light in the world holdyng fast the word of life.
Philip. ii.
Qui numerat multit^dinem stellarum om^bus eis nomina imponit.
Wherefore like as thou know the number of the sterres in the firmament which
were of thine own making, by thine eternal mind wherein all things are
conceived and forsene before they were created, and gyuest them all several
names according to their distinct natures and properties: even so is the
nu^bre of thine elect known unto the: Io. xiii. Luke.x. Magnus dominus noster
et magna virtus eius et sapientie eius (...) est numerus.
and their names are written in the book of everlasting life. Great therefore
art thou Lord and great is thy power, yea thy wisdom is infinite, by which
thou have made and ordered all things in measure, number and weight. Sapi. xi.
Neades must thou far exceade our numbering, for among us, number it self
can not be numbered, much less may thou be included in number. This thy
wisdom is the bryghtnes of thine everlasting light, Sapi. vii.
the undefiled myrrour of thy divine majesty and the image of thy goodness,
through which thy goodness thy said wisdom conueyeth her self into the
souls of thine holy elect people, there workynge the riches of thy grace,
Duscipiens mansueos dominus.
graffyng in them the graffe or brau^che of humility upon the fruitful rote
of faith and making therwyth all good works to spring.

Thine apostle Paul declairng the fruits of the spirit in the good
christian: Sala. v.
puttteth meekness to be one of the principal, saying that those, which are
endewed therwyth are not subject to the law. Wrath and anger are in the bosom
of the foul, but meekness and suffering do rest in the bosom of the wise The
meke do thou defend, Ecclesiast vii.
take unto thy protection, and exalte highly in the time of thy visitasion.
^umilians autem pec^tores vsque ad terra^.
But the ungodly and proud people thou bryngeste down to the ground, that is
to utter confusion. Grant us therefore most gentle heavenly father, thy
grace to expel from us all pride of mind, whereby we are made as strangers
unto the. And give us an humble will to sing unto the with praises and thanks
gyuynge, ^audate dominu^ in co^^ssione.
for the exceadynge goodness which we have and daily do receive of the,
whereby we may move all other to the like exalting of thy mighty magnificence,
and that not only with the voice or confession of the mouth, ^sa^^ite deo
nostro in thara.
but also with the spiritual harp of good works, that as our mouths wholly
be employed to the setting forth of thy godly honor, so may our hands
execute thy holy precepts of charity to the comfort of our neighbors and
that with a glad and a joyful heart without grudgynge, ^. Corhinth ix.
knowing that thou love a cheirfull gyuer, and mercy is to be showed with
cheirfulnesse, Roma. xii.
and love without dissimulation. Worthy art thou I say most mighty God to
have honor and praise given unto the, which couerest the heaven with clouds
keeping us from the syghte of the pure element for a season, Qui operit eclum
nubibus.
through the thick darkness of the waterie substance that hangs between
it and us. I mean that thou haste covered thy holy scripture with such figures
and secret mysteries that without thy healpe no man is able to atteyne to the
perfect beholding thereof. Thy son Christ spoke therefore to the Jews in
parables and similitudes, Luce. viii.
to the intent that when they did see they should not see, and when they did
hear they should not understand. Yet have we not in that any cause of
desperation, for those same clouds haste thou prepared to rain upon the
earth, Et patat terre pluuia^
they were gathered up of a waterie substance, which at the descente or
falling upon the earth causes great fertility. Thy goodness Lord has so
plentifully poured thy grace upon diverse of thy faithful servants, that by
ensearchynge the said privy secrets, they have found the knowledge of the
most of them, and with the same have so watered the hertes and minds of
other thy faithful earthly people that they have received plentifulnes of
spiritual comfort. The earth or earthly people which before were dry, are
thereby brought to pleasant fruitefullnesse, yea even the high mountains,
that is the proud and high minded people have so tasted of the sweet dewes of
thy holy doctrine that they now bring forth the grene grass and the
pleasant herbs Qui producit in montibus fenum.
of good works. ^ouer.xxvii. iii dat pecoribus es^^ ipsorum.
Thus do thou give food unto the cattle, and all beasts, fowls, fyshes
and generally all things that bear life, have their noriture and living of
the, but specially the beasts of thy flock. The faithful sheep of thy
foulde, find them selves to be liberally repasted with the words which
proceade out of thy mouth, the dilicatenes thereof feeds the^ very fat. The
young ravens also before their black feathers do appear (as some do write) are
destitute of the healpe or nourishing of their parents, ^t pullis coruorum
^uocantibus eum.
for that they judge them not to be their birds, until they be more
asserteyned thereof by the color of their feathers, yet do thou not all that
while leave them vnholpen, when they for hungre cry in their kind and crocke
to the for healpe, thou Lord do norishe them with the dewes which fall
from the air until their said pare^tes receive the charge of feeding them.
Whereby is meant that although at the time of the coming of thy son Christ
into this world he found all the gentiles (that is to say) all the
inhabitau^tes of the whole earth in the service of ydolles (the people of the
Jews only except who as thy peculiar flock had knowledge of the and thy
divine laws.) Nevertheless by his holy preaching and merueylous works he
converted a great numble of the gentiles to beleaue in the and in him who^
thou dyddeste send. So that the young ravens being the birds of the old
ravens (that is) the posterity of the gentiles which were ydolaters (whereof
Lord we of thy faithful congregation are the sede) do now call only on the,
and thy blessed son with the holy spirit from you both proceadynge, desiryng
of the with all humility to be replenished with the spiritual food of thy
holy doctrine to the strength and comfort of our souls, knowing assuredly
that thou deliteste not in the strength or power of any man, no not although he
had the strength of an horse. No^ infortitudine (...) voluntatem habebi^
Thou neither delitest in the horse, neither yet in the ryder, neither in ye
strength of the legs of a man, whereby the force of the body does appear,
Nec in tibiis virib placitum erit ei.
nor in the shappe or proportion thereof. None of these are causes which may
move the to save man or to give him eternal life: but thy delight is in them
that fear the with a chaste, Beneplacitum est domino super timente eu^, et in
eis qui speri super misericordia (...)
a reverent, and a loving fear, and in them that put their full hope and sure
affiau^ce in thy great and tender mercy and in thy promyses made to mankind
which must neades be proved true, and undoubtedly performed. Praise therefore
the Lord, Lauda Jerusalem d^minum.
O thou heavenly City of Jerusalem which by enterpretation is the vision or
fight of peace (that is) all ye holy angels and blessed spirits the
inhabitauntes thereof, give ye continual praises unto god of whom ye
continually have the fruition and perfect syghte, even as he is to your
continual peace and peasible enioyinge in surety, without that ye shall have
any neade to doubt ever to be at any time moved there from. Thou also the
earthly Syon which by interpretation art a seear of God a far of (that is
to say) thou fayethfull church or congregation of christen beleuers which
see God a far of as it Lauda deum tuum ^ on.
were in a mirroure, yet having sure trust after this pilgrimage to be joined
with the felowshyppe of that other heavenly Hieru^alem, thou I say haste also
great cause to laud and thank God, but every one of you after his estate and
condition. Quonia^ co^fortauit vetes portarum tuarum.
To the first (that is) the celestial Jerusalem, God has locked fast thy
gates and made them sure with strong bars, so that no enemy or stranger
may enter into the, to moleste or by any way trouble thy noble Citizins.
Neither may the children which are brought up in the, have any cause of fear
to be at any time put from thyer joyful place, Benedixit fillis tuis ^ui sunt
in te.
but are sure there to remain perpetually enioyinge their blessing given them
of God, which blessing is the gift of all spiritual and heavenly beatitudes
to be received in surety for ever. Thine enemies may not enter, thy fre^des
can not get out of thy gates, which gates are not material, neither are the
locks and bars of iron as are in our earthly Cities, but thereby is meant the
admission of the elect persons into that heavenly company or the repellynge
of the slow and synful sort from enteryng into that pleasant place, Math.
xxv.
as of the ten virgins appears, of which nu^bre the five wise virgins were
admitted, and the five folyshe were put back as persons unknown. Qui fines
tuos pace onat.
God also has made peace in thy borders. Tranquillity does compass the round
about as our arthlye Cities are environed with material walls: so that thy
quietness shall never be perturbed. In this present life no man living can say
that he has perfect peace, the flesh lusts contrary to the spirit, Gala. v
and the spirit contrary to the flesh. Job.xiii.
So long as man is here living, his flesh must have travail, and while the
soul is in him: he must be in sorrow. i. Corben. xv.
The perfect quietness never comes till this corruptible body do put on
incorruptibilitie, and the mortal do put on immortality. The^ cease all
human passions in that thine heavenly place, there is no hungre and thirst,
Apo. xxi.
heat or cold there is no weepyng, sorrow, crying, or pain neither death, for all old things are gone. There is ever a bryghte light and joy without end,
which passes all joys. Thy Citizins are fed full with the beholdynde of thy
delectable divinity, face to face even as it is, which is a joyful
satisfaction of all their desires. This is the fine flower of wheat which is
delectable and feadeth fat those which are fed continually therewith. Ex
adipe frumenti saliat te.
This joy is the consummation of all joys, and the fulfyllynge of all
desires, which passes far the capacity of man to express. Nevertheless yet
art not thou, noble Syon, the church of Christ here militant, voyed of many
godly gifts, which should sterre the also to sing praises unto God. i.
Corthin. vi.
We I say (most merciful father of heaven) that are of thy faithful
congregation as members of the body whereof Christ is the head, although we
do not perfectly feale the joys of thy heavenly Jerusalem, for that we be
joined here in the mortal body whose grossenes is such that it lets the
speculatiffe syghte of the soul: Sap. ix.
yea it is heavy to the soul, for the earthly mansion keeps down the
understanding. Yet do we abide for the dissolution of that which is
corruptible, remaining in hope afterward to enjoy those joys which are
perdurable, and for an earneste thereof, Qui emittit verbum suum terre.
thou haste sent us thy blessed son Jesus into this world (being thy very
word whereby thou made al things) to be a mean of our introduction into
those eternal beatitudes. Act. ii.
Thou dyddeste also send thy holy spirit visibly in the lykenes of fyry
tongues among thine apostles after the ascentio^ of Christ, as a further
earneste, or rather as a confirmation of thy promise before made to thine
elect, Veioelier curtii sermo cuis,
who as speedy messengers, conveyed thy holy word, and doctrine swiftly in to
all the parts of the world, having power to confirm the same by straung
signs or miracles. Where upon it ensewed that the snow which before was
congeled in the region of the air above us: Qui bat niuem sicut tanam. Esaias.i.
is fallen down upon the earth and is be come as wolle (that is) a great
number which were hard herted sinners before the manifestation of the gospel,
are now not only from their foul color of wickedness become white as wolle
and beautiful in sight, but also they have received the good property of
wolle, to make of them a goodly and a warm garment of Christ with out spot or
wryncle, to the orname^t of his church here militant, and to make warm such
predestinate persons as before were cold in sin for lack thereof. So that
through that garment they shall shine in brightness as did the garments of
Christ at the time of his transfiguration before his apostles Math. vii.
Peter James and Ihon, on the mountain. Thou scatterest also the hoar froste
which is somewhat harder then snow upon the earth like ashes (that is) to the
sinner which is frosen and wants the heat of charity, Pruinem ^icut tiner^m
dispergit.
thou of thy grace by the hearing of thy word gyuest repentance, which in
old time was showed outwardly in wearing of her cloth and sittyng down in
ashes casting them upon their heads; by which thy grace, Luce.x.
they leauyng their old vicious living, are made new men and folowers of the
doctrine which they have learned, Ione. iii.
as of the king of Niniuie and his people is manifest and of many other. But
for a further declaration of thy merciful goodness showed to Syon thy
well-beloved church: Mittit Chrystallu^ suu^ sicut buccellas.
thou also sendest forth as it were morselles of hard ise, the hayle falling
upon the ground, whereby is meant the indurate and obstinate sinners, who long
have remained in their acustomed sin, and yet Lord of thy goodness even unto
many of them thou gyuest such grace and call them by such violence that of
cruel persecutours they become meke folowers and bold setters forth of thy
word and commandments, as of Paul and other has been plainly showed. Sap.
xvi.
It is thy grace Lord that is the nourse of all good things. It is thy word
which preserves the^ that put their trust in the. This thy grace, and this
thy holy word being taken away from us whereby we should be made hot in
faith and rytche in all good works, Ante faciem frigoris eius quis sustinebit.
what creature is able to abide the coldenes of the said froste. If thou wylt
suffer the sinner to remain in him self and not call him to the: he can be
none otherwise but accursed and abiecte as was Cain, Been. iiii. Exodus xiiii.
Nume. xvi. Iudic. ii. and. v.
indurate as was Pharao, rebellious as were Corah, Dathan and Abiram. Idolaters
as were the children of Israel diverse times after the death and change of
their Judges and kings, ^ Regum.xiii.
disobedient as was Saul which followed his own imaginations leauyng thy
precepts and commandments, ii. Regum.xi.
he shall fall into auoutrie and murder as did king David through the love
that he had to Bethsabe, into pride and cruelty as did Aman to his own
destruction. Hester.v.


To untruth and treason as did Jason to his friends and country. ii. Machab.
v.
To covetousness as did Simon Magus. Act. viii.
Last of al into desperation as did Judas, as one of the twelve apostles of
thy son Jesus, Act. i.
and consequently into al kinds of vices. Neades must he be frosen to
eternal death that has no heat of thy gracious goodness. Neades must the
ground be barreyne of good works where the comfortable bryghte and warm
beams of thy grace show not their heat. So sone as thy pleasure is to call
the hardest frosen sinner: anon he aryseth with Leuy the customer and follows
the. Luce.v. Emitter verbum suu^ et liqui saciet ea.
Send out therefore most myghtie God thy holy word to melt the said snow
and hard congeled ise, pour forth upon us miserable wretches, the abundau^ce
of thy noble grace whereby the stony hertes are made soft and fleshy. Call us
secretly unto the through thy heavenly inspiration, speaking to us inward in
our hertes, or outwardlye by the manifest declaration of thy word, Hierem.
xxiii.
which is a consumyng fire dryinge up in us all cold humors, the breders of
many diseases in our souls. It is also a great hammer, that breaks to
pieces the hard frostie ise of our hertes reducing us wholly to repentance and
amendeme^t of life. Spirabit spiritus eius et fluent aquae.
Blow also Lord and breath upon us thy holy spirit proceadynge from the and
thy son Christ, to be our comfort and stay after our said amendment,
that we may grow and increase daily in virtue by mean of his spiritual
gifts sent into our souls, Io. vii.
whereby the hard ise may be turned to floudes of water which may flow out
of our bealies being faithful, as ryuers of water of life. Cause the warm
sotherne wind to melte all the hardenes of our iniquities, so that the moystnes
which before was frosen in us being resolved through the breath of the warm
wynd of thy grace, Psalm.Cxxvi.
may arise to great imindations, whereof our dry souls as a barreyne ground
may receive comfortable moisture. Qui annunciat verbi suum Jacob.
This grace Lord thou gauedste ple^tefully to Abraham, Isaac and then to Jacob
who^ thou made strong to wrestle with thine angel and calledst him Israel
(that is) one that had seen god face to face. Gene. xxxii.
With him (dyddyst thou make a covenant touching his sede in faith, which
sede now we are, merciful God, of thy faithful church creapte through thy grace
in the place of the Jews, into ye possibility of thy noble promise. When they
refused the thou dyddest send into the high ways to call us to thy feast,
Iusticias et iudicia (...) a Israel.
and we gladly came unto the. To us therefore thy faithful, have thou given thy
laws and commandments prescribing unto us rules which we must observe if
we will auoyed the terriblenes of thy judgment and thy son when he shall come
to reward all reasonable creatures according to their deserts. Roma. ii.
Thou haste made us privy of thy will and haste given us thy laws with a
promise of eternal life in thy kingdom of heaven if we order our life
thereafter, Non fecit taliter om^i nationi et iudicia ^ua non manifestauit ^s.
which laws Lord the heathen nations know not, wherefore they remain in
infidelity and can not atteyne to salvation. For as at the rysynge of the
waters of the general floude, Gene. vii.
no man nor beast was saved, but only such as were within the ship of Noe:
no more is any salvation promised by thy word but only to the members of
Christ thy sons church. Praise therefore be to thy high majesty, Lord of
all Lords who haste of thy mercy sent us thy holy will and word as a rule and
a directoure of our lives, which excellent token of thy love toward us,
byndeth us to magnify thy mighty and incomprehensible deity, ^po. i.
being three persons in one essence, to whom be honor glory and dominion
for evermore. So be it.


