To the right Wors^ful and his especial friends M. G. Stock meede, Citizen
and Grocer of Lo^^ and M^^chant Aduenturer. And also, unto (...) other approved
friend M. John Fa^ter Gent^^ (...) Willam Cotes, wishes (...) health, fel^^
(...) ^ood prossperitie now al^^ (...)
WHen I remembered what great sin it is to be ungrateful, I was angry with my
self, to think (what a wretch I am) that have had neither grace, ability,
power, nor opportunity, to show some duetifull token of thankfulness unto
you mine ^speciall faithful friends. These are therefore most humbly and
heartily to crave par^^n of you, for this mine obliuiou^ (...) gross ing
^^^^^nesse, having found and felt both of you, right good and bountiful unto
me your daily Orator: but being persuaded, that a faithful liberal man is
always pos^essed with charity, and such never thin^th any evil, and also
with the mob^, royal shining pearl and preti^^^ one liberality: which ever
ouer^ ^neth and disgraceth pride and prodigality, never expects either
glorious praise or recompense, for he is nothing kin to the rich miserly
covetous carle Naball. And because you shall ^ot think that I am sufficed with
the daily remembrance of you in my prayers: I have presumed to dedicate unto
you this my rude unlearned labor. Yet hoping very profitable both for parents
and children, masters and servants, daily to acquaint the^ in the principles
of the Christian faith, and also from proph^ning of the Lords day: And also
keep them in true fear and obedience, without the which it is impossible to
please God, for miserable and most unhappy ^s the household or family, when the
master and parents are not able to teach their children and servants: to
resolve them in the principles of the Christian ^aith. For such (says the
holy Ghost) (...) the mouth of the Prophet David, ar^ no better then horse and
Mule^. And the holy Apostle S. Paul also affirmet^ them to be worse then
Infidels, for the Infidels will provide carefully for carnal provision for
their own housholdes and families. So that those Christians that cares not to
be furnished with spiritual food, for their children and families are worse
then the Infidels, and such loves their beasts as well as they do their
children and families, for they will carefully provide for their pampering to
do their business. Yea such Atheistes and Epicures there are too too many in
these days, yea belly Gods, whose kitchen is their Church and belly their God,
and glory end with shame and confusion, but God convert them if it be his will,
for such do never any good to a poor Christian, except it be either for his
glory, pleasure or profit, or else to win credit among Christians, for their
faith and charity is soon cold and frosen. Such the Preachers term winter
Protestants, for in the summer the pleasures of this world and the love of the
same, carries them far from flocking to the Lectures, as they do in the
winter to save their fire and candle, or else to keep their credit. But the
almighty that made the heart of man, sits and sees their hypocrisy, and
will judge if they repent not, unto whom I commend both you and all yours this
20. of June 1585. beseeching the same almighty to increase your faith health
and prosperity unto everlasting felicity. Amen.

Your humble Orator, William Cotes.

Unto the humble and and simple scholars in Christ's school. I a poor
scholar and the most simplest, sends these my humble and faithful
salutations, as follows.
IF the holy Prophet (of our God) King David could say, Psalm. 119
that trembling and fear was come on him, because the wicked did set light the
law of God. Oh what fear and trembling ought now to be in these our last
days, and dangerous times, that from the pessant unto the Prophet, all, (Oh
almost all) are become either Atheistes, Papists, Epicures, belly gods, or
else be settled in that pestilent chair of scorners, deriders, dehorters or
daunters of such as either profess, teach, or preach the truth. But if
either the law of God were feared, or our faith in Jesus Christ thoroughly
grounded, or his holy word or Gospel embraced, or prayers to God pierced, or
love among brethren practiced, or Christ and his preachers any thing esteemed,
then should not our Prince, peace, and country be cominazed or threatened,
neither we that live in these dangerous days be so much lovers of our
selves, yea only self lovers, and care neither for Gods law, believe Christ's
Gospel, prayer, Prince, Country, brethren, Kindred, Council, Cominations nor
threatenings from the almighty. Who would not therefore now fear, yea
tremble, quiver, and roar for very grief of heart, to see those that seem to
be gods children, to lick of the butter from Gods word, and cast the bread unto
the dogs, I mean feed themselves with the fleece, and cast the holy word at
their tails, or give the fleece unto such dogs that can not bark, and the
holy bread unto such that cannot tell how to break it, nor to whom to give
it, and therefore they feed themselves and sterue Gods children. If a lord or
king exalt a poor man and make him his steward and put him in credit and
trust with his treasure, and then command him upon pain of his high
displeasure, daily to bestow it on his own children his heirs kings and
princes: If then this exalted steward, keep that treasure and portion unto
himself, and use it at his own pleasure, and sterue the young kings and
princes. Will not (think you) this lord and King when he sees his steward
has set so light his straight charge and commandment: take this steward and
cast him in his wrath into prison, and there let him perish without either
pity or compassion. Yes verily. Even so will our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, the King of kings, and Lord of lords deal with all such stewardes
that he has given any portion unto, in this world, from the highest unto the
lowest, if they use it at their own will, but especially unto al those, whom
he has given that excellent treasure his holy word to distribute the bread of
life, which lick of that butter and cast the holy bread unto dogs: and so
provoke our good God in his wrath to take away from us the sweet bread of
life, the finest of the crop, and give us in his wrath the course, old, and
sower bread, that papisticall sower, rotten leaven of the pharisees, fit for
dogs and beasts of this word, but ye beloved let us drop down like water,
and patiencely abide our good Gods leisure, until he has tried us in this his
furnace, unto good and perfect gold. For he has promised that he will never
forsake his little worm Jacob, and will also remember poor Joseph, for the
more misery that gods children has, the nerer is their joy. As for example,
the more was Caynes cruelty, the nearer was Abels joy. The more Noe was
scorned, the sooner by the deluge he was delivered. The more that Lot was
threatened, the sooner he was rescued. The more that Joseph was imprisoned, the
sooner to a kingdom he was exalted. The more Moses and the children were
perplexed, the sooner the red sea gave place for their deliverance. The more
bitterer was Christ's passion, the sweeter and firmer was our salvation.
Therefore to conclude he that will reign with Christ, must suffer with Christ,
for by and through many tribulations, we must enter into the kingdom of
heaven. To the which God of his mercy for Christ's sake bring us all. Amen.

A prayer of the Author of the Book.
O Lord God father of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who preserves al men
by the grace and gift of thy holy spirit, give me grace (O merciful father)
from the bottom of my heart, to look unto the greeuousnesse of my own sin,
which ever condemns me before thy Majesty, and yt I may not (of my self)
presume to instruct others, and forget to examine my self, unto ame^dment of
my life, and then learn to instruct other in thy law, according unto thy
will, and my bounden duty, because thou have commanded in thy holy word,
that after thou have instructed us, we should instruct others, and not hide
the tallent which is given us, nor yet quench thy holy spirit in us. Grant
this (O most merciful father) for thy sons sake our only Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ to whom be all honor and glory for ever. Amen.

A Dialogue of diverse Quections demanded of the children to their father very
necessary, and profitable both for children, and parents, masters and servants.
The youngest sons Question. AFter that one of my Children had read a Chapter
unto me at supper, out of the Acts of the Apostles, my youngest son after
supper sitting by the fire, asked this question, father (says he) what is God?


The fathers Answer. My son, all ye wisest Philosophers yt ever were, could
never yet comprehend or resolve this question, the cause was, they never
searched to know him by his holy word, but by their own natural wisdom, by
which wisdom, it is impossible to please God, or know him, for God has
revealed himself unto us in his holy word although S. Paul says, God has
revealed himself unto us by his creatures, which are the heavens and earth,
and all things therein contained. By which they know there is a God, but yet
neither Philosopher, nor any other can tell what God is, but by his holy word.
In which he reuealeth himself unto us, what he has done for us, and how he
has so loved us before we were, that he has created all things for us, and
has also given us his dear and only son Jesus Christ, who being very God
equal with his father, came down from heaven, and disdayned not the Virgins
womb, and there took our nature on him and was made man in all points as we
are, only sin excepted, and in our natural flesh, was obedient even unto
the very death of the Cross, wherein he suffered for us, the very pains of
hell both in soul and body, was dead and buried, and rose again the third day
to justify us, and after forty days he did ascend into heaven whence he
came, and there he will sit until the day of judgment, having all power both
in heaven and earth, which is meant by sitting at Gods right hand. And then he
will come and be our joyful judge, but until then he will be with us in spirit
and power, by which spirit, we have revelation and knowledge of him, and what
God is? And without this spirit, it is impossible to understand his holy will,
that is revealed in his holy word, which holy spirit, is the holy Ghost, which
holy Ghost is the virtue and power of God, proceeding from the father and the
son, the third person in the trinity which three persons is but one God,
which God is almighty, unmeasurable, incomprehensible and without all men's
capacity and wisdom. For he is a spirit, and therefore they that will
worship him, must worship and serve him in spirit, and truth, ^m. 18. ^.
1.16. (...). 6.16.
for otherwise, he is incomprehensible, he is Alpha and Omega, that is, he is
the first and the last, without beginning or end, for no man has seen God at
any time, unto whom be all honor. Amen.


Another sons Question. Father, you say that S. John says, that no man has
seen God at any time. I pray you tell us then, why God is pictured in form
like an old man, with a long white beard and sitting in a golden chair, how
can that be except he has been seen of some man.


The fathers answer. My son, I say that God is neither old, nor young,
neither can any place contain him, for he fills all places, both in heaven
and earth, and the Sea: and therefore he is euerywhere, for heaven is his
seat, and earth is his footestoole, and therefore he must have a very great
chair to contain him. Therefore such as dare presume to paint or picture him,
in any proportion, does commit great and horrible blasphemy, and are cursed
of God himself. Much less like an old man, with a long white Beard, for that
is the weakest sort of men. But how can or dare any creature make his Creator.
Oh horrible, execrable, damnable, vile, presumptuous cursed wretch, that dare
presume to violate and break Gods holy precept, forbidden expressly in the
first table and the second verse. Good children beware of such horrible
Papisticall blasphemies.


Another Question of the son. Father I heard you once say that there was a
man in Bridewell, that affirmed by Scripture that it was not lawful to fear
God, but to love him. Must we not fear God but love him?


The fathers answer. In deed there was a vile fellow in Bridewel that
affirmed out of the scriptures, and first out of the second Chap. of S. Luke
and the 17. verse, out of the song of Zacharias, in these words, that we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, all
the days of our life, but this fear is not meant toward God, but it is that
we should not fear Gods rigor and justice: that he scourges the wicked
withal, but love him as a father: neither yet fear what the wicked can do
unto us, in all their extremities or malice, neither yet fear any of their
threats, scorns, scoffs, persecutions or tortures whatsoever, but because
God has delivered us out of the hands of our enemies, we should serve him
without fear all the days of our life, and not cast off our loving fear of
our good God, that has delivered us out of the hands of the devil, hell and
damnation for ever. Who would not fear to displease such a good God and
loving father, also diverse scriptures are our warrant against this presumptuous
villain, for God promises great blessings unto all such as fear him. As for
example in the book of Moses, it is set down how God loves his own
children that fear him, as the words of the three men or Angels affirms;
when they used these words unto Abraham: Shall God (say they) hyde any thing
from Abraham, because he and all his house fear him. Also Joshua or Jesus the
Captain that conducted the children of Israel after Moses, used these words
unto them: Deo you (says he) what you will; but I and all my house will serve
and fear ye Lord. Also the holy Prophet David has these warrants throughout
all his Psalms, to fear God, as first in the 2. Psalm, verse 11. Commanding
(says) see that ye serve the Lord in trembling and in fear. Also in the 25.
Psalm. verse 3. They that fear the Lord shall know his secrets. And in the
34. Psalm, vet. 9.10. Fear the Lord his holy ones, for they that fear him
shall lack no good blessing. And again, Come neers my children and I shall
teach you how to fear the Lord. And in the 128. Psa. The holy ghost
pronounces the^ blessed that fear ye Lord. Also in the first Chapter of
Salomons Proverbs. verse.7. The holy Ghost says, That the fear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom. And Eccl. in his 4. Chap. ver. 13. says that a
poor child which fears God, is better then a king yt doteth. Thus you proved
by warrants of scripture ye way to fear God. Yet this wretch forgeth other
places out of the scripture like the devil for his purpose. As out of the 8
Chap to To. 25. ver. in these words, ye have not rescued that spirit of
bondage that ye should fear any more: but the villain abuses the text
corruptly, for the Apostle means no such thing, but that we should not fear
condemnation nor waver or despair as the Papists teaches us, to make us dwell
in bondage and fear of our salvation in Christ's merits only, but to be ever
in doubt and despair, which pestilent doctrine makes thousands to fear God
and not love him. Fear not him that can kyl the body, but fear him which can
kill both soul and body.


The sons fourth Question. Good father who are those that fear God, and not
love him, are there any such, I pray you discribe who they be.


The fathers answer. All they are those which bind themselves to the
observation of Gods laws and the popish ceremonies, and think except they
observe and keep them, they are damned for ever. And when they see that they
are not able to keep them: the^ they live in servile fear of God and his
Laws, wyshing that there were neither God, laws, nor precept. These I say,
are those that fear God, and not love him, for they have received ye spirit
of bondage that S. Paul speaks of in his 8. Chap. to the Romans which carnal
spirit, makes them dwell ever in fear of hell, and damnation, and yet toil
and moyle themselves to obscure the law of God, by their own righteousness and
merits and by their hipocriticall ceremonies of civil life. These I say, fear
God as the wicked fear the magistrates and laws of this land, for they rather
curse them the^ love the^, such a servile fear have ye ignorant Athists, the
meritmongers, the papists and the double hearted protestants, for they fear
Gods law and his judgment for fear of damnation, but they love him not Even
as ye wicked fear ye Prince and her laws for fear of Tiborn, but they love
her and her laws as well as they love Tyborne, and all this is, because the
have neither true faith, true love, nor true fear of God or Prince. And
therefore are they never able to understand or make any true destinctio^
either of Gods law, belief, gospel, sacrament, or prayer to satisfy them
selves, or any other in affliction, but desperately void of all sweet ioies
of heavenly comfort and consolation for ever without regeneration.


The sons 5. Question. Father you said that no man is able to keep and
fulfill Gods commandments. Why should God Give such a law that no man is
able to keep, and yet you say, if that we do not fulfill and keep them, we
shall all be damned for ever.


The fathers answer. My son, (mark what I say, God that made the law, made
it as he is him self (that is) just, righteous and holy, and so made he man
also at his first creation, just, righteous and holy. And so made God Adam like
himself, and then able to keep and perform the whole law. Therefore man
must of force seek and practice all the means and ways possible how to
fulfill and keep ye same law in every point and title, which we may by his
grace working in us, be made able to do in some measure, but yet not so
perfectly, by the entering in judgment with us, he may justly condemn us, but
he will not have any to-be saved otherwise then by mercy, offered in his son
Christ, and obtained by faith in him.


The sons 6. question or objection. How is it possible, because you say that
no man is able to keep and fulfill it, much less in every point and title.


The fathers answer. That which man is not able to do, by reason of his fall,
God has so loved us before Adams fall, that he did provide for us in his mercy
and grace. A man, even God and man Jesus Christ, his only son, who came
down from heaven, from God his father, and disdayned not to be enclosed in yt
Virgins womb, and there was made man by the power of the holy ghost, in all
points as we are, only sin excepted and in our flesh and nature suffered his
passion on ye Cross for us, and on it suffered the very pains and torments of
hell unto bitter death, and was buried, by which death and passion, he has
fully accomplished our salvation, and also fulfilled the whole law in every
point and title, and also appeased Gods wrath, and vanquished the devil, hell
and damnation, and set open the gates of heaven for all faithful believers, and
brought us into favor again with God, his and our faithful father, and is
ascended into heaven where he sits, and has all power both in heaven and
earth, and there is our daily mediator unto God, his and our father for us,
until he shall come again to be our joyful Judge, but yet we must strive and
practice daily to fulfill (to the uttermost of our power) Gods holy will and
commandments.


The sons 7. Question or objection. How is it possible except you can
describe us some means or way to practice it, good dear father direct us.


The fathers answer. By these five steps or degrees which if you can keep
unto the end, you shall keep Gods commandments to please him, although not
fulfilled it, for yt Christ has done already. Which steps are these: first
to hear the word of God diligently, reverently, and lovingly. Secondly, to
learn it simply, faithfully and obediently. Thirdly, to understand it humbly,
spiritually, and truly. Fourthly, to practice it holily, constantly and
righteously. Fifthly and lastly, to persevere daily, hourly, and unto our lives
end most triumphantly, and by these five steps or degrees you may practice to
keep the whole decalog and will of God.


The sons 8. Question or request. I pray you discribe unto us, the true sense
and meaning of the Law, decaloge or precept in a brief some or exposition.


The fathers description or exposition. It is set down by Moses, as he
received it from God in ye Mount Sinai, and he received it into two Tables, and
in 10. verses or precepts it is expressed, and in the first Table is set
down 4. precepts, and in ye second Table is written 6. precepts, in which
first table is set down our duty toward God in the 4. first verses, and in
the second table our duty toward our neighbor, for in the first table, we
are taught in the 4. first precepts, to have none other Gods but God only.
Secondly, not to reverence or worship any thing in heaven or earth. And
thirdly, not to abuse Gods holy name in any exercise. And fourthly, we are
commanded straightle, to remember to keep holy the Lords day. And in the
second table in the 6. precepts we are commanded in the first precept, and
fifth commandment, for to honor our Parents, Princes, and Magistrates. And
the sixth commandment forbids murder. The 7. forbids adultery, The 8.
forbids theft. The 9. forbids perjury and false witness against thy
neighbor. And the 10. and last commandment, forbids covetousness,
extortion, usury, or any thing that shall prejudice thy neighbor. So that in
the first table practiced, is seen our love, holiness, faith and zeal
toward God. Even so by our endeavor of the second Table is also seen our
love, mercy, faith and fidelity toward our poor neighbors and brethren. The
sum and fulfilling of the whole law of God is first to love God above all
things whatsoever, which is the fulfilling of the four first preceps of the
first Table. And the second is to love our neighbors and brethren as our
selves, which is the fulfilling of the six last precepts in the second Table,
that is to live in righteousness all the days of our life, which power the
Lord God grant us for Christ's sake.


The sons 9. Question. Because the scripture says, that no man by the deeds
of the Law can merit salvation. How then is it possible to be certain and
sure of our salvation, seeing we are bound to keep the whole Law.


The fathers answer. I have said before, that which natural men cannot do,
our Christ which is both God and man, has by his precious death and passion
fully accomplished, but yet we must do our endeavor and goodwill to practice
his commandment unto the uttermost of our power. And therefore the surest wae
for us is to take fast hold of Christ by a sure and firm fath. etc.


The sons 10. Question. But what faith is that I pray you describe unto my
mother and us, the true sense and meaning thereof.


The fathers answer. It is our belief Apostolical, commonly called the
Creed of the Apostles. As we say daily. I believe in God. etc. which Creed or
belief, is set down in 12. Articles, which 12. Articles are divided into
four parts, and in the first part we confess God our father to be almighty,
and the only maker of heaven and earth, and in the second part, we do also
confess Jesus Christ to be the only son of God, and the second person in
the trinity, who being equal with God, his and our father, came down from
heaven unto us in earth, and here was enclosed in ye virgins womb, and there
was made man in all points, as we are only sin excepted, by the power of the
holy ghost, and was borne of the Virgin Mary in Bethlem, in a stable between
an Ox and an Ass, cradled in a maunger, or Crach, and after he had lived
obediently with his Mother the Virgin, and his supposed father Joseph at twelve
years of his age, he did dispute with the mighty doctors in the midst of the
Temple of Jerusalem, and there expounded the scriptures, and all that heard him
wondered at his gracious speeches, and at the age of 30. years, was baptized of
John in Iordayne, and then went into the wilderness, and was tempted 3. times of
the devil, and then came to Jerusalem meekly ryding on an Ass, and there was
received of men and children with hosanna, confessing him king of Israel, and
the son of the highest, and there he whypped out of the Temple the buyers
and sellers and money chaungers, and after he had reproved the Scribes and
Pharisees, and taught the Scripture, (unto his Disciples) he was Iudasly sold
unto the Scribes and Pharisees, mocked, reviled, scorged, buffeted, condemned of
Pilate, crowned with thorns, crucified on the Cross between two thieves, and
accurssed of God his father, and did suffer on the Cross the very pains of
hell (both in body and soul) for thee and me, was dead and buried for thee
and me, and the third day he rose again to justify thee and me. And after
forty days, when he hao accomplished his fathers will, in the sight of all
his Apostles and many other, he did ascend up into heaven, where he sits, and
there he shall remain until the day of judgment, where he makes continual
intercession unto God our Father for thee and me, who has all power both in
heaven and earth to help thee and me, and will surely come again the last day
in power and glory, and be a joyful Judge for thee and me. This is the sum of
the second part of our belief: and in the third part of our belief, we
believe in the holy ghost, and that he is ye third person in the trinity,
equal with the father and the son, and that he is the virtue and power of
God, proceeding both from the father and the son, and also the Illuminator of
his elect, yea ^^d the sanctifier and preserver of all his saints, the holy
Church of God. And in the fourth part of our belief, we believe and confess
the communion of saints, to be all those which believe that Jesus Christ is
the their only mediator and savior, which communion of saints we believe is
the universal Church of Christ, dyspersed throughout all the world, commonly
called the Catholic Church, dispersed here and there upon the face of the
whole earth, of which comyany Jesus Christ is the head, (and not the Pope)
which head will not lose one of his elect for we are as dear unto him, as the
apple of his eye although we be here contemned, despised, derided, and
tormented yet our firm faith and belief is, that our sins are forgiven us,
only by our redeemer and mediator Jesus Christ's merits, and that our bodies
and souls shall be at the joyful day of judgment triumphantly with him in
heaven, for ever and ever, and this is the whole sum of our faith. But this
faith is not man's fantasy or dream, nor the holy papists formed faith, nor
the Athistes frozen faith, nor yet any evil faith, nor an heretical faith,
but a full and firm assurance of salvation, grounded and founded upon the
promises made in the beloved mediator Jesus Christ.


The sons 11. Question. Is there any that professes any other faith but this
which you have already described. I pray you good father let us understand who
they be, and what they are.


The fathers aunsvvere. Yea, there is an Historical faith, which the devils,
Athists, Epicures, and all belly Gods have, that is, they do believe that
there is a God, and that the Scriptures be true, and also fear and tremble,
but they never practice to do his will, neither yet love they God nor his
holy word, but they love their own pleasure and bellyes more then God,
therefore they shall be saved with the devils, for their counterfaite,
hypocritical holy and evil life will not ferue. There is also ye Scribes,
Pharisees, and Friars, and Papists formed frozen faith, which teach men that by
their merits, ceremonies and holy service, that they shall escape Purgatory,
and deserve heaven. And so they shall as soon as the Athist, Epicure, bellye
Gods and devils.

There is yet an other sort of people, that persuade themselves they have a
great faith, and think that they are highly in Gods favor because they can
make great speech of scripture, and use great gravity, so that Butter would
not seem to melt in their mouths, before such as are the principal
Preachers, and will inuit them home to their house, to cloak their holy
hypocrisy, but let a poor professor meet any of these and salute them, then
they will look so lofty with their eye leddes, and speak so strangely, as
though they had never seen or known them, and yet of their old familiar
acquaintance. But let a poor man make his moan unto them of his need, then
are they dry, and altogether without any sap of Christian love and charity,
which shows their hypocritical faith and infidelity, these carnal
Protestants are all one with usurers (I will not say) Usurers, I will not say
Leasemongers, Extorcioners, and proud, profane, miserable, merciles
worldlings.

There is yet a simple sort of Protestants which think they are very
religious, but they are such as S. Paul speaks off, which are ever learning,
and yet ignorant asses: and as proud as Pecocks. All these will run as fast
to heaven, as the Athists, Epicures, Papists, and devils, these have faith, but
without repentance of life: it is but presumption, which will breed in ye end
repentance without faith, which breeds desperation, from which the Lord
keep us. There is also the Annabaptist, and the pestilent Famelists faith,
from which horrible sect, good Lord of his mercy deliver us all.


The sons 12. Question. How should one attain unto a sure and constant
faith, because you say that no civil living can please God, without a sure and
constant faith.


The fathers answer. There is no means or way to attain unto such a faith
but by free grace from God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and that only by
daily and faithful prayers unto God our father for his only sons sake, and
also for his holy spirit, to instruct and teach us how to pray, and by none
other prayer, but that prayer which Christ has taught us in his holy Gospel,
which prayer sounds thus. Our father which art in heaven, etc.


The sons.13. Question. I pray, you sir, is this prayer to be divided into
parts, as you have done the commandments and the belief.


The fathers answer. Yea, for it is divided into.6. petitions and.2. parts,
and in the first part is three petitions, and in the second part i^ other
three, and the first three petitions excels the three last, as much as the
first table excels the second, for in the three first petitions, we crave
of God all things necessary for our souls, in the three last petitions, we
ask of God al things needful for our bodies, quietness of mind, and
preservation from Satan, etc. But as touching that preamble which sounds
thus. Our father which art. etc That is none of the petitions.


The sons 14. Question. What mean you by this word preamble, is it not one
of the.6. petitions as the rest are.


The fathers answer. No, it is no more but a faithful and reverent
presentation of our selves unto God our father: in which humble and faithful
salutation, we acknowledge God to be our father and to be in heaven, but as
touching the first petition which sounds thus, hallowed be thy name, in this
we crave and pray our good father that we may reverence and with all our power,
honor, sanctify, and keep holy his name, that is that we abuse not his name,
by swearing by it in vain, neither profane it in any service or seremonie,
for that is sorcerie, although ye ignorant think they do god good service. And
as touching the.2. petition which sounds thus, thy kingdom come. In this
petition we crave of our good father that his kingdom may dwell with us and
reign with us, which kingdom is his holy word, and all his heavenly gifts
and graces thereunto belonging, in which petition we also pray, that God would
give us his holy spirit, and power to withstand Satan and all his wiles for
ever. And in the.3. petition we crave of our loving father, that we may have
power and grace to do his holy will in all our actions, affections and
conuersations in this life, even in earth as it is faithfully done in heaven.
In which.3. holy petitions, we crave of our good God all things necessary for
our souls. As in the first table we are taught in the first four precepts.
And in the fourth petition which sounds thus. Give us this day our daily
bread: In this petition we crave all things that is necessary for this life
whatsoever. In which also is concluded all things necessary for this life,
both blessings spiritual and blessings temporal, and that in any wise we
abuse it not prodigally. And in the fifth petition, forgive us our offenses, as
we do forgive them that offend us. In which prayer we ask vengance of God, if
we forgive not one another, and therein also we show our christian love and
chayity one toward an other, yea our faith and fidelity. And in the sixth and
last petition, which sounds thus. And lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil. In this Petition we crave of our Good Father, that he
will not cast us of from him to be tormented of the Devil, at his malicious
will, and so confounded for ever, or give us over to our own wills and
pleasures, but that we may by his merciful protection be be preserved for
ever. In which three last petitions we crave all things necessary for our
bodies, and safety from satan. And as for the addition which sounds thus:
For thine is the kingdom, power, and glory, for ever and ever. In this is
seen our sense and feling of God, because we confess that kingdom, power,
and all glory, for ever belongs unto god, and so we take our leave of God to
his honor and glory, so that this prayer passes all carnal capacity, and
worldly wisdom.


The sons.25. Question. Oh Lord how does many thousands pray at this day, if
it pass man's reason, capacity, and wisdom, goods father certify us.


The fathers answer. Many indeed there be that pray, but their prayers are
no better then ye prayer of a parrat, because they have neither sense nor
feeling of the holy spirit of God, without which spirit, it is impossible to
please God in prayer, neither yet to understand what prayer is, and therefore
such prayer and praying, turns to great sin, and provoke gods wrath. And
Christ calls it lip-labor and babbling. And saint James says, that they ask
and receive not, because they ask they know not what: For the most part pray
on this fashion. Oh Lord defend us from all evil. O Lord keep me from all
mine enemies. O Lord send that I want not. O Lord increase my wealth, (and
not his faith) and grant that I ^ay be able for to dwell in credit and
countenance with my neighbors, and that I may be able to bear office and
authority among my neighbors and company. O Lord bless all my house and
goods, yt I come not to misery, and bles al my friends and kindred. But no
sighing or sorrowing for sins, no craving for mercy, nor groaning in the
spirit, No sobbing in repentance, no intercession for heavenly benedictions
and blessings, no thanks for our election, creation, salvation,
sanctification, justification, and preservation. No prayer to God to honor his
holy name, no craving that his kingdom might dwell among us (his holy word)
No prayer that hi^ holy will and our wills may be all one here in earth, as it
is in heaven, but all for earthly things, to have our own wills and
pleasures fulfilled, no praying as christ has taught us, as it is expressed in
the.3. first petitions, for our souls health. And then for things necessary
for this life. No Salomons prayer, for good wisdom and his holy spirit, but
all for worldly blessings, that he may ma^e John his son a Gentleman, and
Ioane his daughter penny white, although ye parents purchate Hell for his
pains. This is the asheists. Epicures, belligoo^ and Carnal Protestants,
form and manner of prayer, and although they use to say (for order sake) the
three fiyst petitions. First, yet they practice them last or never, because
they are worldly minded which cannot comprehend spiritual things. And
therefore if God do fulfill their prayers, it is in his wrath to their greater
condemnation, although they think them selves in great felicity and happiness
above others, and so dwell puffed up with pride, because of their great
abundance, and so come to authority, and live all their time in prosperity,
and iollity, without either pity or compassion of poor neighbors or
brethren, and except they repent, they sodaynely slyp to hell. And therefore
(to conclude) as the Lords prayer is divided in.6. petitions, and as so^e say
into.7. so I fear, if yt world were divided into.6. or.7. parts, I fear yt.6.
parts does pray in vain, yea yt are called christians. Although we have been
taught and catechized more then.26. years yea some more then.46. years, and
therefore fear is come on me because the people set light thy law. Psa. 119.
ver. 53.


The sons.16. Question. How then is it possible to pray, to have our prayers
perfect before God, when we pray, good sir certify us.


The fathers answer. By a firm, constant, and sure faith on and in Jesus
Christ's merits, with a true humble, hearty, and sorrowful sobbing repentance
of our wicked life past, prostrating our selves, most humble and reverently
before Gods mercy seat, craving mercy of god for all our sins past, for christ's
sake, and then crave grace of our good and loouing father, for his grace and
holy spirit to frame in us a better life, without which spirit it is
impossible for God to hear us, and then be thankful unto God, for all his
benefits both spiritual and corporal, bestowed upon us all our life time,
unto this present hour, but especially for our election, creation, salvation,
justification, sanctification, and preservation, unto this present day, and
hour, that is to say, first, because God has elected and chosen us to
salvation, before that the world was made or created, and secondly, for that he
has created us men and women, and not beasts, but made us christians and not
infidels, or Pagans. And thirdely that he has so loved us, that he h^th given
us his only son, to be our only and alone savior, redeemer, mediator, and
advocate, between God and us, and continually be thankful unto God for that
he has given unto us his holy word, to be peaceably preached amongst us, and
that we are borne in such a merciful Princes time. And first also let us
continually pray unto the almighty, for the preservation of her Majesty's
long and prosperous raygne, for all her Counsel, Clergy, Nobility, and for all Magistrates, Cities, Corporations, Companies, and fraternities, and for all
men kinredes, Countries, and Nations, but especially, for his Church dispersed,
despised of all the world, and wicked worlings, and for the continuance of his
holy word, decrease of our faith, love, holy spirit, wisdom, grace, and
zealous preachers amongst us, for ever, and to convert or confound all
Amaziases, Zedochiazes, and passurs, all Dombe Dogs, Idle shepherds,
hippocrites, Hirelinges, Traitors, Papists. Atheistes, Epicures, Belly gods,
and all proud and profane persons, merciles, miserable, wise worldly wysardes,
and to bring into the way of truth all such as do err and are deceived. And
to be merciful unto all such as are in any need, misery, poverty, prison,
or extremity, but especially to pray for christ's Church, prisoned,
persecuted, tormented, and tortered, and for all such as are perplexed in mind
or body, in the bedds of their sickness, or in the perrill of death, and that
it would please God to forgive us all our sins, negligences and ignorances,
and to amend ^^r lives according to his holy word, that we may live in
holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our lives, and then
after all these prayers, meditatations, and thanks. We must ask boldly, of
our good God, althings necessary for this life, if it be his will for Christ's
sake, with a sure and constant faith and belief, to obtain all our petitions
and prayers at gods hand, for Jesus christ's sake. In whose name we must
always conclude all our prayers, with the same prayers that Christ has
taught us to pray. Our father. etc.


The conclusion or glass.
Thus ye see (as it were) in a glass how ye ought to pray, and in what manner
and sort, and again ye have hard^ before, how senseless and dangerous, many
thousands that are called christians pray at this day: how desirous they are of
all the worldly blessings, before heavenly and spiritual, because they are
unregenerated and worldlyminded. Unto whom all things which they possess are
unclean and cursed. You have heard also, who are those that fear God and not
love him, even such I say that does not know how to honor God, not how to
serve him, nor when they commit spiritual Idolatry, nor when they do abuse
gods holy name, nor when they profane or abuse the Lords day: neither yet
know the great difference between the first table and the second, that is
they know not holiness from righteousness, I say gods right from man's
weakness, that is, a true faith, from man's works which are corrupt active
from profound passive righteousness which is as great difference, as is
between gods almighty majesty, and man's weak imbessilitie, such I say, that
neither know the articles of their faith, nor understand what true belief
is, neither yet know what prayer is, nor do know how to pray, neither yet
know what a Sacrament is, and yet dare presume to say that they are saved,
only because they are baptized, and yet do live worse th^n Infidells, yea,
dare presume to receive the holy communion, and yet violate and pollute the
seals thereof, these are those which are a sleep, yea dead, and yet alive,
these are papists, Atheistes, Epicures, Earnall Protestants, and all those
wise wordly wisards, whose kitching is their church and belly their God, and
all their glory everlasting shame and confusion. Oh Lord reclayme them if it
be thy will with thy loud call or lure, the preaching of thy Gospel that they
may be brought into the tents of Sem, being yet rammish, haughty, haggerdes,
descended from ye vnclea^e cage of Iaphet, and as some learned affirm, the
elder brother of Sem. Grant this O God, for Christ's sake our only Lord and
savior.

An other question of the son. ^7. Father, I have heard you say many times,
when you have reproved many that swear by their faith, you have said that
they were as good swear by ye Trinity, the father, the son, and the holy
Ghost? How can that be, do we swear by them when we swear by our faith.


The fathers answer. Yea is not your faith a steadfast belief in God the
father, the son, and the holy Ghost. And is it not the whole somm of our
belief, which we daily confess when we say, I believe in God the father
almighty, and in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord, and the holy Ghost,
etc. Do you not then swear by the Trinity, when you swear by your belief,
which is the very Christians faith, and is not your faith a sure hope hold
and confidence, on and in the father the son, and the holy Ghost, by and
through the merits and passion of christ Jesus, with a sirme belief, true and
pure understanding of his holy word and Sacraments unto life everlasting.


The wife and sons answer, with an other Question. Yes verily, and so we
now confess, and are fully resolved, but now we pray you, let us understand
the sense or meaning of a Sacrament, and what it is.


The fathers answer, or difinition. A Sacrament is, when the holy word of God
is joined with an element as in Baptism the word is joined with the element,
water, and in the Lords supper the word is joined with elements bread, and
wine, the whith elements and word joined together, does make the definition of
a Sacrament, and the meaning of a Sacrament is a true and visible sign, of an
invisible grace, that is the.3. Elements to be seen, as the very water bread
and wine, is verily present in our sight, even so that invisible grace working
in our hearts, by the spirit and power of God, by faith althings necessary for
our salvation, by and through Jesus Christ, and they are also sure seals of
the certainty of our faith.


The sons.19. Question. We pray you sir, whether do the Sacraments of them
selves give grace to the faithful receyuers or no? We pray you certify us, or
ought we to worship them as God,


The fathers answer. They neither of them selves nor in them selves, does
include or give any grace, for it is the only gift and work of the holy
Ghost: neither are they to be worshipped as God, but we ought to eleuate* or
lift up our hearts unto Jesus Christ, who is in heaven our only mediator and
advocate, unto God our father for us, and that only by faith, who is the only
author of these sacraments commanding so often as we use them to do it, in ye
remembrance of his last coming when we shall receive it in full joy with him
in his everlasting kingdom, and yet they are holy signs and seals of our
faith, and as it were by an instrument, God does work and seal grace in our
hearts, only by the hand of faith, neither yet are they bare and naked signs,
but grace is truly presented to our faith, when and so often as we receive the
same with a firm faith and constant belief, in ye only merits of christ
Jesus our only Lord and Savior.


The.20. Question. We pray you sir, is there any more sacraments then two, for
I have heard some say there are five, and some affirm there are seven, but we
are taught in our church there are but only two.


The fathers answer. How many soever the pestilent papists have in their
sinful sinagogue whether they have five, seven or seven hundred, that is
nothing to us* for every seremoniall thing or seremony, or any thing else which
they think is holy in their Holy Holy Church or sinnagogue, must upon pain
of the Popes curse, be holy adorned and worshipped* for it is with them a
sacrament, or as great, yea the very dust and sweeping of their Sinagogue, but
in Christ's holy Church, there is nor never was more then two, the one is
Baptism, and ye other is ye Lords Supper, for by ye first we are received into
Christ's Church, and by the other we are nourished by faith in our souls into
life everlasting, and also remember Christ's death until he come again to be
our joyful judge.


The sons 21. Question. We pray you sir certify us more plainly what is the
true sense, substance, and meaning of Baptism.


The fathers Answer. Baptism is the holy sacrament of our regeneration or
new birth, and uniting and incorporating of us unto the body of Christ, being
thereby made a member of his Church, by which Sacrament we are purged and washed
from al our sins, for as the water washes away all our filthiness of the
body, even so, by faith, the blood of Christ sprinkled on our souls by the
hand of faith washes away all our sins, yea, and also all our pains due
unto the same, and so being made members of Christ's own body, we are
partakers of all the benefits and blessings of Christ our elder brother and
head, if we daily die unto sin, and live unto righteousness, which is
called mortification of life, for except we be regenerated into a spiritual
body, we shall never be partakers of christ's natural body, and then void of
all the benefits of Christ's passion, which is the some and effect of all our
faith, sacramonts and religion? For to be worldly minded, is death everlasting,
but to be spiritually minded, is life everlasting, says. S. Paul, unto the
which god grant us for his mercy sake.


The sons.22. Question. I pray you sir, is there any such necessity in
Baptising young children that is if they die before they be baptized, that they
are damned, as some affirm, for the scripture savth except ye be Baptized, ye
cannot be saved.


The fathers answer. Neither is salvation tied unto these that are baptized
nor yet damnation unto such as are unbaptized, no more then they were all saved
that were circumcised, and all damned that were vncircomcised, for then what
had become of all the children that dyed in the wilderness, and all the women
Jews, and all the Gentiles that never had circumcision. But that is all
Papists religion, and popish women's opinion. For. S. paul says, that neither
circumcision nor uncircumcision does prevail any thing, but a new creature,
for every faithful christian, does believe that his child is sanctified in
the mothers womb, if either of them be faithful, and also saved from
everlasting damnation, by the faith of their Parents, if either of them be
faithful Christians, or else our seed wers unclean, but if both Father and
Mother are infidelles or Papists, then I doubt what their children are.
Because S. paul so affirms to the Corrinthians, in his first Epistle the.7.
Chapter and the.14. verse. But because we are the children of wrath, by Adams
corruption, unto whom the promise of gods mercy and favor reaches unto life
everlasting, we therefore bring our children to be Baptized, in the same faith
that we protest, because they are the seals of our faith.


An other Question or objection. 23. Because you said before that the infidells
and papists children are not christians borne, as you proved by. S. Paul's
words, in the.7. Chap. to the Cor. and 14. ver. 1. Epistle, we pray you are
Papists no better then infidels, are they not Christians?


The answer to the objection. Although they are borne in christendom, yet
are they not therefore true christians, no more then they are al true English
men that are borne in England, there should not be so many Mongrills, neither
yet so many unnatural rebels, as the traiterous vile Jesuits, and filthy
papists, that are borne in England, neither loves God, Christ, Prince, nor
yet their own native cuntrie, of which sort I would there were not so many
in this land. But to our purpose and proof, is it possible for such to be
Christians, that are gods utter enemies? Is it possible for him to be a
christian that denies Christ's powes to be sufficient for our salvation, but
the pestilent Papists, and Traitors, Jesuits, denies and teaches that faith
only in Christ's merits, is not sufficient for our salvation, therefore it is
not possible that any such Papists can be christians. And except their
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, they
shall never come where Christ's kingdom is, the scribs and pharisees believed,
that because they were Abraham's children, and circumcised, therefore they were
saved. And the Papists belefe is, because they have left in them some feed of
grace to do good works by it, they deserve salvation, and because they are
Baptized, and so they shall with the unbelieving Jews that were circumcised,
and therefore (good children) of all people beware the Papists.


The sons.24. Question. I pray you good father certify us also of the holy
communion, and as you have don of Baptism, the true sense and effect thereof.


The fathers answer. This Sacrament is the sign, seal, and pledge of our
salvation, and redemption which Christ's our savior has left us to remember
his precious death and passion, and to increase our faith until he come again
to be our joyful judge, and so remember that by the merciful eating and
drinking of Christ's very body and blood, in the substance of bread and wine,
by a firm faith, we are surely partakers of all the benefits and blessings
of Christ's death and passion, for as the material bread does comfort our
hearts, and the natural wine does revive our spirits and senses, even so the
spiritual eating of Christ's body, the true bread of life, does comfort our
spiritual bodies, and the spiritual drinkeing of his precious blood, shed for
us on the cross, does revive and rejoice all our spiritual senses and powers
of the soul, unto life everlasting, if we lift up our hearts and minds unto
Christ, which is in heaven, and with all thanks feed on him by faith. This is
the true and right receiving of the Lords supper, and the true sense and
meaning, in which we must remember Christ's death and passion, until he come
again to be our joyful judge.


The sons 25. Question. I pray you sir, how must we frame our selves for to
receive this holy sacrament faithfully and worthily.


The fathers Answer. First we must remember the greeuousnesse of our sins,
from the very bottom of our hearts, and unfeignedly detest them, and ever
after frame and force our selves unto a godly, virtuous, and sober life,
secondly we must try, and examine our selves, whether we have a true, firm,
and a constant faith, on and in the promises of Christ Jesus or no? And
thirdly we must humbly, lovingly and brotherly, yea and faithfully, reconcile
our selves unto such as in any kind we have offended even unto our enemies,
and so having left our gift on the alter, we may then come boldly and offer our
gift in Christian love and charity, with out the which we must not dare
presume to receive the holy communion, this is the best way that I know, how
to frame our selves to receive this holy sacrament.


The sons.26. Question. I pray you sir, does all men that receive this
sacrament, receive the spiritual graces alike.


The fathers answer. As in Baptism, none but the faithful does receive ye
forgiveness of sins, even so, none in the Lords supper, are partakers of the
benefits and graces of Christ, but such as receive him with a true and
unfeigned faith, as for the faith les they receive, not the thing finished, but
a bare sacrament unto their utter destruction. From the which the almighty of
his mercy deliver us, for ever.


The sons.27. Question. I pray you good father, let me ask you one question
more which is this, we read in the.14. Psalm. of David, these words, there is
(says the prophet) no good man, no not one, and in his.37. psalm. he plainly
expresses both a just and a wicked man. I pray you good father make those
scriptures agree that I may be resolved.


The fathers answer. My son mark this well, and it does me good, that you
ask such questions, for it comes not from flesh and blood, These holy
scriptures are both very true. As for the first words in the 14. Psalm. That
there is none good, no not one, God by the holy prophet speaks it to the
wicked worldlinges, the senseless Athistes, and unregenerated men. That man
that says in his heart there is no God. As. S. Paul affirms in the.3. Chapter
of his Epistle to the Romans the.10.11.12.13. verses. In which he describes the
qualities of the wicked. Read that Chapter, but in respect to compare with
God, there is indeed none good but God, his only son Jesus Christ our Lord
who is both God and man. For to compare with God, there is none good, no not
one. But to affirm the words of the holy Ghost, in the.37. Psalm.
Doubtless there is on the earth both good men, evil, just and unjust,
righteous and wicked, the elect and reprobate, saints, and deuilles incarnate,
for God him self does justify Iobe to be a just man, and yet he was but a
man, and the holy ghost describes a just man by Job, saying, that such as
fears God, escheweth evil, and does good, but in the.37. Psalm. The holy
Ghost describes at large a just man, and also a wicked, for the thirty verse
of this Psalm, has these words, the just man says he* his mouth does ever
speak of matters wise and high, and his tongue does talk to edify, but
contrary, the wicked man blasphemeth the Lord, and seeks how to slay the
righteous. Also in the.^1. ver. before is said, that the wicked borrows
much and never pays again of the abundance which God has lent him, but the
just is liberal and lends, also in the 35. and 36. verse of this Psalm.
The prophet says, I have been young, and now am old, yet did I never see the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread, in diverse and many
places in the holy scriptures. For in the 33. Psalm. the Prophet says, rejoice
ye righteous for it becomes upright men to be thankful. Also in the
Proverbs of Solomon, the.10. Chapter and the.3. verse, says that the Lord will
not famish the soul of the righteous, but he casts away the substance of the
wicked, and in Ecclesiastes, the preacher says, in his 3. Chapter and 17. ver.
I thought in mine heart that God would judge the just, and the wicked, for
there is a time for all works. Also the Evangelist. S. Matthew, in his first
Chap, and 9. verse. Pronounces Joseph the husband of Mary, a just man. Also.
S. Peter terms Lot a just man in his.2. Chap. and.7. verse. Throughout the
whole scriptures, the holy Ghost justifies that there is both just and wicked
men. But it is a corsie to a cankered Atheist to hear a man speak of a good
man, then he will storm and frette and qualify you with this.14. Psalm,
saying, there is not one good or just man, no not one, and we are all sinners,
etc. But they speak it, because they would have all men like them, and they
bring in Saint Paul's words, saying, that God has lapped all men under sin
because he will have mercy on all men, and he will not the death of a sinner,
and therefore we hope all shall be saved. But yet the wicked shall all go quick
to hell.


An other question of the son. 28. Father, because that. S. Paul says, that
God will have all men to be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth, and
also as you have said defore, that Saint Paul says, that God has lapped al
men under sin, and that he will have mercy upon all. This scripture is plain
and I think that god will save al men, we pray you give us the true sense and
meaning thereof.


The fathers answer. My son, indeed the words are plain but many do err,
because they know not the scriptures, nor the true spiritual sense thereof,
and the cause of their error is because they pray not for the holy spirit of
God to teach them, neither yet give faithful ear unto ye preachers of gods
word. For. S. Paul means by this word, all men, all manner of men, that is,
God will save some of all sorts and degrees, and of all countries and kinreds,
that is of all sorts of kings and Princes, Nobles, Maiestrats, Marcha^tes,
Artificers, laborers, poor men, slaves, bondme^, Jews, Turks, Infidels,
Papists, and pagans, yea Atheists, Epicures, Jesuits, and familistes, also all
sorts of people, if they repent, and be converted unto Christ, of all sorts he
will call some for God has no respect of persons, for he would not the death of
a sinner, but ye he should convert and live, and this is ye meaning of ye holy
ghost by. S. Paul's words.


The sons.29. Question. Father, can a man shorten these days which God has
appointed, him to live on earth before his time, because the prophet David
says in his.55. Psalm. and the last verse thereof That the wicked shall not
live out half their days, has not God (says the prophet) appointed every
man how long he shall live, the which he shall not pass, and shall man's
wickedness prevent God, for he has numbered man's days how long he shall
live, good father resolve us in this.


The fathers answer. If God were not almighty, then man might prevent him,
but surely God has numbered the days of man, which he shall not pass, no not
one hour or minute, therefore man's wickedness cannot prevent God, neither yet
shorten the time and hour that God has set down, and yet the worldly
covetous, bloodthirstie and dispitefull man shall not live out half his days,
as the holy Ghost affirms in the.55. Psalm, and last verse. But the prophet
David, nor the holy ghost neaneth not by these words any of those days which
God has appointed him to live, no not to shorten any one hour of those days
although he should kill, hang, or drown him self, yea murder or steal, and by
the law be cut offe, yet can he not prevent God, for he sees and suffers
him until his hour appointed of God, who in mercy did suffer him to live and
repent, but this is the meaning of these words, half his days, the holy Ghost
by the mouth of the Prophet speaks unto the covetous wicked worldlinges,
which scrape so for the cromes that fall from gods children. I mean the
wealth, pelf, and pleasures of this present world, being so in love with it
more then God that they sell both their bodies and souls to the devil to
possess it, and so point them felues their days to live, for (say they) If I
can get and scrape to be able to live with the best of my neighbors, and then
live to bear the offices in the City, and in countenance and credit in the
world, also to live yet longer to be in authority, then I will serve God and
be merciful. But behold, or these his appointed days be accomplished, the
hour glass of dais, that god has set him is run out and accomplished so
suddenly if he repent not he slippeth down to hell, and so prevented of his
appointed days, and so the wicked lives not out half his days. Which
verifieth the words of the holy Ghost, by the prophet, in the.55. Psalm and last
ver. The sons.30. question. I would presume (good father) to ask you one or.2.
questions more, If I should not be tedious unto you, and so we will end for
this time.


The fathers answer. Say on, for it pleases me well so long as ye ask to
profit by, or to get knowledge, do not you remember Lillies verses and good
counsel, that says, qui dubitat, qui saepe rogat. etc. is qui nil dubitat.
etc. Therefore ask good questions and spare not, and I will thank God for you.


The sons.31. Question. When I had heard the 8. Chapter of the proverbs of
Solomon* as you commanded me, which Chapter describes the excellency of
wisdom, and also her good counsel with the antiquity of Christ who is from
the beginning who made all things with the father and the holy ghost, for he
is that word which God spoke, and al things were made* as the Evangelist. S.
John affirms in the.1. Cha, of his Gospel, and that is this, Christ dwells
in the round compass of this earth, which is man, I the^ turned to the.7.
Chap. of Eccl. I found. these words written, which words are these which
seemed to me very straung, be not then (says Solomon) just over much, neither
over wise and again be not thou wicked over much, neither too wise. These
words are very hard for my capacity. Does the holy ghost allow some
infirmities or some folly Also in the.29. and.30. verse. of the same Chapter,
the preacher has these strange words, my soul (says he) has made great
inquisition, but I find it not. I have seen one man among thousands, but one
woman found I not. This also troubles my capacity, also in the, 4. Chapter of
the Preacher, these words somewhat troubles me, the words are in the last
verse of the chapter, which are these, take heed to thy feet, when thou
entrest into the house of god, and be thou more meet to hear then to offer
the sacrifice of fools. These three places of scripture I would feign
understand.


The fathers answer. These places of scripture, are for the preachers and
ministers to exclaim yet so far as God has given me revelation, I will show
you ye sense thereof, for in these first words out of the.7. Chap. of Eccl. and
yt.19. verse. is comprehended great wisdom, for where the preacher says, be
not thou just overmuch, nor over wise, it is far from God, to be a little unjust
or a little foolish, or a little wicked, ye holy ghost gives very wise counsel,
for he first bids thee to be ware yt thou boast not to much of thine own
iustnes, nor yet of thine own wisdom, nor yet to tarry long in the company
of the wicked, least thou sit in the Chaper of the pestilent scorner, as for
the.29. and 30. verse of this Chapter. That the Preacher could find one man
and no woman. I take the sense is that the preacher did mean he could find
but one man with out sin, which is Jesus Christ, God and man, but of women
sect he could never find any, and with this text of scripture I stopped the
blasphemous mouth of the Papisticall Lady that kept such a stir with me in
your Aunts house, at the burial of your Uncle Temple, when she affirmed that
the Virgin Mary was without sin. I then answered her, that the only man
Jesus Christ was. But of women never could be found any, at which piece of
scripture she was qualified, and so I partly take the sense and meaning of that
place, but as for the words in the.4. Chapter of Ecclesiastes, which is, take
heed to thy seete when thou come into the house of God, least thou offer
there the sacrifice of fools. In this piece of scripture, the holy Ghost
gives us a caveat or warning to look to our steps of life, that they be not
evil and filthy before God, and so come polluted and filthy into the Church
before God, and so presume to pray, and then our prayers turn unto sin, and
so prove wicked fools to provoke gods wrath on us, and this I take to be the
sense of this scripture.


The sons.32. Question. I pray you (good father) let me ask you one question
more, in which I desire to be resolved, which question is set down in the
first Epistle of Saint John, and the.8. verse of the first Chap. The words are
these, if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth
in us. And in the 3. Chap. of the same Epistle, and the.9. verse, is written
clean contrary, for there he says, who so ever is borne of God, does not
sin, for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is
borne of God, good father make these scriptures agree, that I may be resolved.


The fathers answer. In the first piece of scripture where the Evangelist
says, if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no
truth in us. The holy ghost condemns the pure familist of love, which
affirm that they have no sin, neither yet can they sin, because they are
deeified, and also hominified, but let such pestilent puritantes pass, from
which sect good Lord keep us, and from al iustitiaries, which justify the^
selves as the wicked Papists, that have no seed of grace left in them, to
help to work their salvation, and also have works superabundant enough to
serve them selves and others to salvation, from which pestilent sect good Lord
deliver us. But as touching the words of the same Epistle, the.3. Cha. and.9.
verse. where the Evangelist says, the regenerated man sins not, neither can
he sin, because gods seed is in him. In this text of scripture the holy
ghost condemns all those Atheists, Epicures, Papists, belly gods, and
carnal Protestants, and worldlinges which cannot abide to hear that there is
any faithful christians on the earth, any regenerated man, such as green to
see God dishonored (nor truly reverenced,) such as cannot abide to hear gods
holy name abused, such as grieve to see the Lords word profaned, such as
cannot abide to hear any vain or fylthie talk, such, the wise, proud,
lofty worldlinges scorn, scoff, deride, and taunt by the name of Puritants
presitious, and are all of the spirit, and that he is gods child, as it is
said in the book of Wisdom, the second Chapter. Therefore they cannot
abide to here, that any should be called good, just or ryghteous, and
therefore with Tooth and Nail, they recyte the fourteen Psalm, sayyng, that
there is none good, but God, and the first piece of Scripture that you recited
saying, that he which says he has no sin, is a liar. etc. but they wrest
the Scripture, as Satan did to Christ, and too clooke their fylthinesse, too
dwell in their sins and naughtiness. And therefore this last piece of
Scripture that you recited in the third Chapter of Saint John's Epistle, is
written, for a just condemnation unto all these wise worldly wisardes, the
Atheistes, and belly gods, whose Ritchin is their Church, and belly their
God, and glory end with shame. And so these be true, and all men liers.


A Christian caveat.
The holy Prophet Jeremy in his.48. Cha. of his prophecy, has these words,
cursed is he that does the Lords work negligently, which curse takes hold of
all such that abuse the first table, yea the second also, but especially the
first, for the first table excels the second, as much as God excels a
man. Therefore he that breaks the first table, in any precept, commits
sin, direct against God his creator, and as the first table teaches us our
duty toward god, ye 2. our duty toward our neighbors, and brethren. And as
ye Lords prayer is divided into 2. parts, which.1. part teaches us to ask
althinges necessary for our souls, and the second part althinges necessary
for this present life, and therefore, if God has taught us in this first
table, first, to honor and reverence him, and as Christ has taught us in his
three first petitions, first to ask althings necessary for our souls, if then
we practice not first, the contents of the first table, which is to honor
God, and also if we do not first ask all things necessary for our souls, as
christ has taught us in ye 3. first petitions, and so practice them first in all our life and actions that man runs I say into the everlasting curse of
God, because he does the Lords work negligently, which he ought first to
observe and practice. As for example, God commands in the first table, first
to honor him, and in the three first petitions, Christ teaches us first to
ask althinges necessary for our souls: if then we do not first practice these
in all our life and actions, but seek our own honor and profit, and fulfiill
our own will and pleasure first, then we run headlong, wilfully, and
desperately into the danger of this damnable curse, because we neglect the
Lords work, will and commandment, as for daily example in these days to to
much practiced, if a man having servants and family, dare presume to prefer
his own commodity and profit more then the observation of the Lords day, that
man I say most presumptuously, provoke the Lords great curse upon him, and
all his house, for if God by his own mouth commanded to stone to death that
man that gathers but a few sticks on the Sabbath day, what will he do
(think you) unto those that for their own pleasure, commodity, and profit,
dare presume to break, violate and profane, the Lord gods express holy day,
will not he (think you) curse condemn, and utterly reject all such wise
presumptuous worldly wicked rebels, such Atheists, Epicures, and belly gods,
whose Kitchen is their Church and belly their God, and glory everlasting shame
and confusion. Even such (I say) that provoke their servants to work and
drudge on the Lords day, such vile Epicures that make their servants groan
under their burdens which they carry to their vile sodomite and filthy
Gardens of vanity, on the Lords day, water to water their Gardens, baskets of
victuales, or wine in bottels: and so spend all the Lords day in gluttony
and drunkenness, which servants wish rather.6. week days, then on sunday. Or
in what desperate danger lives ye devilish wretches, that drudge all the
week, and year, to spend vainly on the holy days, or else on their own
pleasure, and neither have respect to remember that which God has commanded
us to remember. Therefore I fear that king Balthazar trembled not so much when
he saw the hand writing on the wall, as these prophaners shall tremble when
Christ shall come in judgment with Ieremies curse, with ite maledicti or all
these prophaners of the Lords day, except this curse be their caveat to
repentance.

An other christian caveat to beware of.3. kind of people.
The holy Ghost says in the.16. of the Proverbs, and the.25. verse, that there
is a way which seems right to a man, and the Isue thereof leads straight to
hell. Also in the.30. of the same Proverbs, in the.11.12.13. and.14. verse. By
the mouth of Agar, the holy Ghost describes four wicked generations, which
are these. The first is a generation which curses father and mother. The
second is a generation that is pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed
from their filthiness. The third is a generation, whose eyes are hautie and eye
liddes are lift upon hye. The fourth generation is, whose teeth are as swords,
and their Jaws are as knives to eat the afflicted and poor from among the
children of men. And these four generations are to be compared unto three
kinds of Christians, the first kind are the Anabaptists, Familistes, Papists,
Libertines, Sismatikes, and Sectuaries, these are the two first generations
which blaspheme and curse God their father, and the holy Church their mother,
these think that they are are pure and yet are not washed from their
filthiness. The second kind of counterfeit christians, are the third
generation, whose eyes are hauty and eyeledds are lift on hie, these are the
proud, lofty, vain, and welthie Protestants, whose eyes and eye lidds,
disdain to salute or speak to the poor. These persuade them selves that they
are greatly in gods favor, because they have a few of the childrens cromes,
and a little knowledge and can make some arguments of the holy scriptures, and
have ability to inuit the presisest preachers to dinner, or supper, to have
familiarity with them, to cloak their deep resembled hippocrisie, but yet
they are no less proud, no less covetous, no less cursed Usurers, and
extortioners, yea full as nice, fine, and vain as the vilest Atheists belly
gods or Epicures. But as for mercy or compassion on the poor and needy, fie,
how they spy pry and practice to help the poor brother until they be too to
weary, for they fear not poverty by their liberality, but their hautie
eyes, and lofty eye lidds, bewraieth their deep, double; counterfeite,
cankered fidelity. Unto the great shame of all faithful and true professers.
The third kind, is the fourth generation are as swords, and chawes as knives
to eat up the poor. These are the great mighty, wise worldlings, whose word
must be a law, which terifie men with their hye words and looks, by which
they eat up the poor. These are the Atheistes, Epicures, and belly gods.
These godless persons break through ye laws as Lions through nets, for they
are to the^ but as spiders cobwebs, these force neither for Gods sake nor man's,
and yet they will be called christians, but yet they li^^ and spend their days
all in vani^^e, as though there were neither God nor devil, heaven nor hell,
resurrection or judgment, these differ nothing from Jews, Turks, Pagans, yea
worse then infidels, and yet they hope to be saved: because they have the name
of Christians, and are Baptized, and so they shall as soon as the unbelieving
yt were circumcised, which is not possible, without repentance. For if the
Jews with their iudisme, and Turks with their Mahomet, and turkchisme and
Pagans, with their Paganism, even when these Infidels, with their infidelity
shall be saved, so shall the Anabaptists, Fami^^^s, Papists, civil
protestants, ^^^^^es, Epicures, belly gods, and worldly wise wiswards, come
to heaven in have, but it is impossible, for without faith it is impossible to
please God, much less to come to heaven. Unto the which place of rest, God
for his son Christ's sake bring us, unto whom with the father and the holy
Ghost, be all honor, glory, and dominion, now and ever. Amen

A piece of glass taken out of the holy scripture, to be ware of pride,
covetousness, pleasure, and ambition.

Ioab striued for honor, Antiochus for gold and possessions, the Sodomites for
pleasure, pride, and wanton idleness.

But Ioab was destroyed by wise king Salomo^, proud Antiochus was eaten up
with worms alive, and the merciless vain Sodomits sunk down to hell.

Look now and see the end of proud ambition, ye end of covetous caitifes,
and such as delight in worldly pleasure.

But the faithful christians (...) for faith and true religion, obtai^^^ the
everlasting crown of immortality, there for to conclude, let us hear the end
of all.

Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole duty of man for
God will bring every work unto judgment with every secret thing whether it be
good or evil. Eccle. 12.13.14.

Therefore remember thy creator.

FINIS.
William Cotes.

Imprinted at London by John Charlewood, dwelling in Barbican, at the Sign of
the half Eagle and the keie.

POST ^ENEBRAS LVX



