CONSPIRACY, for Pretended Reformation: viz. Presbyteriall Discipline.

A Treatise discovering the late designments and courses held for advancement
thereof, by William Hacket Yeoman, Edmund Coppinger, and Henry Arthington Gent.
out of others depositions and their own letters, writings and confessions upon
examination: Together With some part of the life and conditions, and the two
Inditements, Arraignment, and Execution of the said Hacket: Also An answer to
the calumniations of such as affirm they were mad men: and a resemblance of
this action unto the like, happened heretofore in Germany.

Vltimo Septembris. 1591.

Prou. cap. 30. v. 12. There is a generation that are pure in their own
conceit: and yet are not washed from their filthiness.

2. ad Timoth. cap. 3. v. 5. Having a show of godliness, but have denied the
power thereof, turn away therefore from such.

Published now by authority.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CRISTOPHER BARKER Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.

Anno Domini. 1592.

TO THE READER.
DIVERSE have hitherto diversely reported of this Action and of the Actors in it,
according to their own several intelligences attained thereof, and to the
humors they are led by. And albeit the matter (falling out not many months
since) might seem to be in fresh remembrance of many: yet sundry there are
which hitherto know not the very particular dangerous attempts and outrages,
into which these men burst out, and the most part (I think) have not heard
what was the original cause of such their coffeehouse, or the maine drift
and purpose of all their designments, nor of any the ways and means by them
used, for furthering and atchieuing the principal scope they shot at, nor of
any their counsels and carriage of the action, nor yet who were their accomplices
that were made acquainted with the matter, in some general or more special
terms.

By want of knowledge of which things, sundry perverse and sinister conceits
and misdeemings have arisen, and are blown abroad amongst the people, which
seem meet to be abated, and reformed in them.

For the Papist our common enemy, in some late writings from beyond the seas,
has (as I am informed) wrested these men's dealings to another end. And sundry
at home, who would seem more moderate then many other of their own judgment,
yet in favor of the persons, or (which I judge rather) upon liking of their
opinion in matter of church-gouernement, have allowed their meanings to have
been good, though they mislike (somewhat they say) of the manner. Others seek to
disguise the very purposes of these me^, as if that which (in truth) was most,
had been least of all intended by them. There are some also, purposing to
extenuate the fault, and to prevent that so just a blot may not fall upon the
meanest favorer of pretended reformation, who will needs make them to have
been stark mad, and such as knew not what they said or did. And there want
not certain also, who under pretense of pity and commiseration toward them,
are said not to spare to mutter abroad, that matters are made worse and of
greater consequence and peril then they be in deed: and that these men with
some others were prosecuted with greater vehemency and sharpness, then the
cause it self or quality of their several offenses might justly minister
occasion.

All which untrue surmises and imputations, what do they else but apparently
and directly tend unto the injury, deprauation and slander of the honorable
Justice of this realm and state? for assertion and clearing whereof from such
calumniations, and to make manifest also the very truth of these matters unto
all that are desirous to be informed aright in them: it is thought meet that
this treatise (for good considerations hitherto stayed since it was finished)
should now at length be published.

Whereby I make no doubt, but it will appear to any that shall be pleased to
peruse it with a single eye, how important these causes are to be thoroughly
looked into, for the weight and danger of them: how honorable the proceedings
in them have been for manner: and how exceeding mild and merciful a course
has been holden by the state, not only with some of the chief dealers, but
also with sundry others notable concurrents in the Action, who though they be
sufficiently well known, yet hitherto have not been so much as called into
question: how far soever (perhaps) they may seem unto some (not unwise) to
have waded therein, or to have entertained intelligence of it, both dangerously
and undutifully. So far is her excellent Majesty, and the whole state from
aggravating men's offenses, yea, and from taking advantage, even when most just
occasion (sometimes) is offered.

I pray God this notable rare clemency, may be hereafter answered (by those
who both in this and other matters stand not a little need of it, how little
soever they acknowledge it) with that measure of dutiful remembrance and
thankefulnes, which it woorthely deserves at their hands. Amen.

THE PREFACE.
WHEN in the time of professing the truth of religion, such as pretend
greatest sincerity and zeal, do fall into fanaticall fancies and dangerous
attempts: then some do thereupon stagger in the doctrine, and are scandalized:
some be quite driven back: and others are carried even with open mouth to
slander and to reproach the very profession of the Gospel. The two first of
which, are of the weaker, but the last are of the wickeder sort. For these are
straight way ready to make comparisons betwixt the times, and to declaime
largely, concerning the sweet and golden quiet, with agreement in judgment,
which they (erroneously) conceive, to have continually accompanied the times of
superstition and blindness.

But though this were universally true, which is far otherwise: yet both the
one sort and the other, are dangerously deceived and transported into
misdeeming by want of due consideration, what is the very wellspring and
occasion of such accidents under the profession of the Gospel.

For when Satan the deceiving enemy of mankind, had in the times of Popery
by insensible and as it were obscure degrees (under a color of religion and
devotion) enuenomed once the very fountains of doctrine with many pestilent
errors, much superstition, and gross Idolatry, and had almost quite dammed
up the light of the glorious Gospel: then was it no marvel, though he here
rested his labors, as being (in some sort) arrived unto the maine end of all
his drifts and purposes. In so much as this once achieved, the rest were
sufficiently able to go forward of themselves. For upon corruption of faith
and doctrine, must needs ensue either open corruption of life and
conversation, or at least corruption, masked under a veil of hypocrisy:
because he that walks in darkness, knows not whither he goes, and a corrupt
tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Therefore after the victory gotten, that
he might more deeply deceive and surely retain, whom he had caught, he
thought it requisite (at some seasons) upon these corruptions, to weaue a veil
of pretended unity, and as it were to candie and sweeten them over with the
lovely show of peace and agreement: which nevertheless being without Verity,
is nothing else, but a lewd Conspiracy, and is rather a deadly sleep
wherewith men be overwhelmed, then an unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace. For where all is subdued, what needs any further resistance? And where
a strong man keeps the house, all that he possesses are in quiet, till a
stronger then he do come to dispossess him.

But when as God taking compassion of his Church in the eyes of his mercy, had
in these latter times made the day star to shine again in our hearts, no
sooner did the beams of his Gospel begin to glimpse and break forth, but
the old crafty serpent (knowing his kingdom to be invaded a fresh, and his
time but short) began in great wrath to rouse up himself again, and to hammer
over a new, all his long approved wicked experiments, and to plant new engines
for the discredit and hinderance of the passage and propagation of the Gospel.

This he plotteth (besides many other means) by seducing some that profess
it, into sedition and error: and so in their persons he brings the
profession it self into obloquie and hatred with such, as before did think
hardly of it, or were not persuaded it was the truth. For by reason of his
Angelical substance, corrupted with Diabolical malice, and by long experience
even of 5553. years continuance, he is now become (...), mille-artifex, his
perfect crafts-master in infinite devises and subtilties. So that he does at
sundry times very manifoldly and variably suggest and plot, not only several
and diverse, but sometimes even contrary opinions and actions, one to another;
howbeit all to one and the self same general end, of seducing mankind.
Therefore (amongst his infinite deceites for hinderance of the Gospel, and of
man's salvation by it) some whom he cannot pervert in doctrine, he seeks to
attaint in life. Others whom he cannot so easily seduce in their conversation,
he oftentimes sows his cockle and darnel of superstition, schism, and
heresy in their hearts, and so peruerteth them in judgment, and matter of
religion. Some whom he cannot entangle by one sin, he tempts to overthrow
by a sin contrary unto it. Others whom he cannot snare by gross and actual
sins, he gets ground of, by making them have over great estimation of their
own supposed virtues and purity: so that they grow hereby both to a conceit
and self love of themselves, and also to contemn and condemn others with the
Pharise, saying: Oh God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are: or as
the Prophet speaks touching such proud hypocrites, Depart from me, for I am
holier then thou. Others he draws into error by mistaking of the true
quality or cause of things, as when, not being able to corrupt the general
doctrine of the church, he persuades Preachers most to insist upon matters of
mere circumstance, as if they were of especial necessity, and procures the
outward government and discipline to be obtruded and beat upon, for a principal
point of doctrine. So that matters of the substance of doctrine and faith in
deed, do either wholly slip by untaught, or else are so slightly and
ignorantly slubbered over by such Preachers, that the common adversary the
Papist, is thereby rather hardened then convinced in his opinions. Which
practice may hereby appear to be the very subtlety of Satan, for that such
do use far more earnestnes and diligence to plant and bring in that their
discipline, then they do for retaining of purity and soundnes of doctrine, and
are less incensed and vehement against Papists, then they are against such as
impugn that fancy.

Out of this head springs also that error of some, who do attribute all
disorder and personal faults of men about execution of laws, unto the laws
themselves, and unto the very policy of the Church: thereupon gathering with
themselves, that the plot of Discipline (if it might come in place) will surely
serve as a Mithridate and sovereign salve, to heal (with short applying) all
diseases and sores, both of Church and Common wealth. Certain be so bewitched
(in like sort) by a kind of admiration of that, which is (in it self) most
necessary, as that in the mean time they ouerslippe matters of no less
importance in the life of a Christian, because they think it sufficient, to be
occupied only about the other.

Hereupon it comes, that sundry do attribute so much to the hearing of the
word preached, that neither public nor private reading of Scripture, works of
charity, praying, nor practice of that which is preached, is any whit almost
regarded of them. Whereby they are always learning, but never come unto the
knowledge of the truth, as if the very work wrought of hearing alone could
make them good and perfect Christians. So that where in old time there were
certain heretics called (...), who did nothing but pray: so (not without
cause) have some feared, left such persons would bring in an heresy of (...),
putting all religion in bare hearing of Sermons. Diverse also there are, who
are so whetted against the abuse of things, that the Seducer hereby takes
opportunity, to draw them to omit even the good and commendable use of them.
Such are those, that because they will not seem to confirm Gods truth by
humane testimony, do therefore despise all light and help of good arts, and
learned Interpretors, and in steed of them, do in their sermons nothing else,
but blase out their own frivolous and unsound Collections, trifling out the
time (without order and method) by an heap of earnest and resonant, but
undigested words, vain repetitions, tautologies and battologies, without any
substance of matter, to the great abuse of their auditorie, and of that
excellent work. Many also are so afraid to fall into superstitious
observation of days, commanded for abstinence and avoiding of most nutritive
diet, that at such times they do usually most pamper their vile flesh, even
with a purposed and settled contempt of good laws, in that behalf provided.
Neither will this kind of persons (for the most part) use any private fasting,
for subduing the body, but must have a whole side of a Country, or an whole
family at least, know when they fast, and will not stick to ride out a dosen
or twenty miles from home to fast with others for company (though without
public authority) there to make ostentation of great humbling themselves, by
abstaining perhaps from one meal, how plentifully and delicately soever they
do fare at suppers, or at their next meal. Likewise, to avoid opinion of
superstitious worship of the outward elements at Communion, sundry do refuse
to kneel at the perception of it: and of the contrary side do fall to a
profane and swinish (at least outward) irreuerence of that high and excellent
mystery. Others there are, who in avoiding superstition, are themselves become
little less, (...). Romans 1.
then superstitious. For albeit the holy Ghost condemns want of natural
affection, as a sin: yet such persons, when their husbands, parents, or
friends do die, are so far from moderate sorrow or mourning for them (lest
happily they should seem to do it superstitiously and excessiuely, as those
do, who have no hope) that on the contrary, they do (even with a kind of
superstitious singularity) avoid all show of sorrow, as if it were a matter
unlawful for any Christians, of their degree of perfection. And therefore they
take unto themselves at such times, Music, Rose-marie branches, and other
tokens of joy and great solace. Howbeit, the holy Ghost greatly commends the
devotion of them, Act. 8. 2.
who buried the Martyr S. Steven, and made great lamentation for him. Of whose
resurrection nevertheless unto eternal life, those mourners had as good
assurance, as any man now can have touching such, whom these do so pleasantly
and iocundly tumble into the pit. Many also he deceaueth and drowneth in sin
and impiety by some similitude and resemblance that it has unto virtue and
godliness, as, by making that which in deed is (...), will worship, to seem to
be nothing else, but an earnest care to serve God: superstition to be taken for
obedient devotion: hypocrisy, for true sincerity: a show of humbling a man's
self by a meal or twoes abstinence, and hanging down the head like a
bull-rush, for true fasting, and subduing of the flesh: calumniation, slander,
and disdain of others, for an hatred of sin: rancour and male contentment,
for zeal of Gods. glory: schism and division, for an avoiding of the works
of darkness and of pollution by them: seditious innovation, for lawful
reformation: presumptuous expostulation in prayer with God, for feruencie of
the spirit: bitter inuectiues against others in praying, for desire of
amendment in them, and to advance Gods glory: ouer-weening conceits, for
extraordinary callings and gifts: whot and bloody panges of malice and
cruelty, for motions of Gods spirit and revelation from him, with such like a
great many, more them a good number. All these and such like, are usual
practices and sleights of Satan, whereby even in the time of the Gospel, he
cunningly inueigleth and slily entrappeth many, to the danger of themselves, to
the scandal and downe-fal of others, and to the obloquie of true religion. It
is necessary (says Christ) that offenses come: yet woe be to them, by whom
they come. And there must needs be heresies (says S. Paul) that such as be
approved, may be made manifest. But of all the other, the last sort of them
(being suggested by Satan, under the visard of virtue, godliness; and religion)
are most pernicious and devilish: and the poison of them spreads and
ranckleth furthest, to the disturbance and peril both of Church and
Commonwealth, because hereby the Devil transfourmeth himself into an Angel
of light. For as the most noble creature engendered, is most loathsome and base
in his corruption: so is the untrue pretense and color of piety and religion
(things of themselves of chiefest price and excellency) the most dangerous
snare and deadly dart, that Satan can shoote-foorth. Macchiauel.
The profane politic of our age, could observe, that show of piety and
religion was the readiest and surest way, to blind and seduce a multitude. If
then this impe of his, could mark it, shall we doubt, but that Satan
himself, the forger of all subtilties, can see it, and accordingly also put it
in practice? Yea, he has put in ure this most dangerous devise, not only in
this action (whereof we entreat) done in our late sight and knowledge, by his
seduced instruments William Hacket, Edmund Coppinger, and Henry Arthington:
but at sundry other times also, by other his like factours, since the last
renewing of the Gospel, begun in Germany, in our fathers days. One or two of
the most memorable of which examples recorded in history, it shall not (I
trust) be amiss to compare with these late attempts and actions: both that the
one and the other may be better known, and avoided hereafter, and that the
efficacy of this strong illusion, may more fruitfully be weighed and
considered.

In military instructions it is prescribed, Polyaenus in Stratag.
not to use a Stratageme twice together in one age, for fear of over fresh
remembrance, and thereby of prevention. Therefore Satan an old Leader, might
not in his great policy, so soon after, have again assaied this practice so
like (in most points) to the former in Germany, had he not perfectly known
(by experience) the efficacy and rare working thereof, and therefore did
repose in it, an especial confidence for raising of tumult, shedding of blood,
and overthrow of states.

But before I enter into that Comparison, it is requisite first to make
narration of this late Conspiracy, with the circumstances thereof, as it was
plotted and carried forward by them, so near, as I could infourme my self
therein, either by depositions of others, or from their own letters, writings,
and original confessions upon examination.

CONSPIRACY, FOR Pretended Reformation.
ONE of the three principal persons in this Action (whereof we entreat) was
Edmund Coppinger, a gentleman descended of a good house and lineage, and one of
her Majesty's sworn servant, but a younger brother, having no great
liuelihood. His chief abode (as I have learned) for some years past, has
been in and about the City of London.

Another of them is Henry Arthington, a gentleman likewise, whose place of
birth and dwelling is said to be in Yorkshire: howbeit for the greatest part
of certain years past, he has remained and soiourned in or about London. It
is constantly (how credibly I know not) reported by some, who pretend to know
it, that this Arthington (at the times of his long aboades at London) did most
converse with another gentleman of Yorkshire, by whose means, he presently
stands more deeply engaged, then his mean estate might well bear, and whose
company is feared to have wrought in him small duetifull opinion of the godly
reformation planted and established by the means of her Majesty. It is
discovered by the mutual letters of Arthington and the aforesaid other
Yorkshire gentleman, that certain seditious and slanderous books against the
Counsel, Judges, and this whole Estate, were received and dispersed by them,
being printed in Scotland.

Now by such remaining about the City of Coppinger and Arthington, they fell
to be acquainted together for some years past.

These two made semblance, and so were holden to be professors of the Gospel,
neither of the coldest or lewke-warme sort, (as such do untruly term others,
who be in deed godly wise, with a sober moderation) but rather of those that
more justly may be said, to be scalding hot in desire of innovation, which
they falsely call reformation. They therefore standing thus affected, most
willingly sorted themselves in familiarity with such, as by their demeanor may
seem to repose a great part of their Christian profession and zeal in the
only reproching, and odious traducing of governors and government
Ecclesiastical.

These two having itching ears, most usually heaped to themselves, and made
choice to hear and follow such preachers, as were thought fittest to feed
their humor: which preachers, with their sad looks, frequent sighs abroad,
long and vehement conceived prayers, bitter and plain inuectiues in private,
and privy deprauing in public, of the laws and policy Ecclesiastical,
joined with their usual speeches, besides sundry infamous libels and other
pamphlets spread already for aduauncing that government (which they strangely
term The Discipline) may seem so to have inflamed these two persons, as that
they thought this Discipline a worthy subject whereupon they should spend most
of their actions and cogitations.

Their minds being thus prepared, it happened that some preachers of this
Discipline were begun to be proceeded with in the most honorable court of
Star chamber, about the same time that this Coppinger (by means of one Giles
Wigginton) came acquainted with William Hacket, the third actor and chief
setter forth of this tragedy.

Concerning the said Wigginton (because this also tends to the better
understanding of the whole action) he was borne or bred up in Oundel in
Northhamptonshire* (where Hacket dwelt) and he often resorted into that
country by that occasion. He was not long since a minister, and Vicar of
Sedberghe and Dent in the North parts, but for his intolerable insolences
and contempts against laws, and the peace of the Church, was both deprived of
that his benefice, and deposed from his ministry by authority of her
Majesty's commission for causes Ecclesiastical, a man (by report of such as
know him best, and favor him not a little) whose zeal never came behind
knowledge, nor bold-hardie forwardnes, at any time went after discretion in him.

This Hacket had dwelt also by a long space in Oundel, where first he served
one master Hussy an Esquier, by the space of ten years: and after, for some
time he served Sir Thomas Tresham Knight: he was a notable bragging and
quarelsome fellow, yet thought in truth to be but a very recreant dastard.

He long together used one lewd and ungodly practice, which was to resort unto
sermons (of purpose) to gibe, mock, and carpe at them: and having a good
memory (which was the only commendable part in him) he used in scoffing manner
to preach over again in alehouses, the sermons that he had heard, most
insisting and sporting himself and others at such passages thereof, which
pleased him least, or whereat he imagined any likely matter of deriding might
be gathered.

Whiles thus he served Master Hussy, he obtained (by his masters
countenance) the marriage of one Moretons widow, of reasonable substance,
having also a good Farm in that town. But he, following loose and licencious
company, and an idle course of life, without labor or industry either to get
or save, lewdly and riotouslie misspent and wasted in short space all her goods.

It fell so out, that at length he pretended from a Papist or an Atheist, to
be couuerted to religion and knowledge of the truth: at what time he grew to
be of familiar and inward acquaintance with the said Giles Wigginton, and was
an especial follower and disciple of his, both at public sermons and private
conuenticles. Of late times he was also consorted in partnership of
malt-making with Wigginton: their great acquaintance and familiarity may
appear by a letter sent from Hacket unto him, the third of March last, and by
his lending unto Hacket of ten pounds: the superscription is, To the
worshipful Minister of Gods word, M. Giles Wigginton at Newgate. In the letter
thus he writes: M. Wigginton I desire to communicate my spirit at large with
you, but I know not your keeper. And in the end thereof, thus: Good M.
Wigginton make my sound heart known to master Cartwright, master Snape, master
Vdall, master Lord, etc.

By his and such others (like affected men's) instructions and example of life
and behavior, he so profited, that in short space he proved one that
professed with the forwardest, and practiced with the frowardest. For falling
as fools do, from one extremity to an other, Qui dum vitant vitia, in
contraria currunt, he grew to a most insolent, proud, and contemptuous
disdain of all preachers and others whomesoeuer, that flew not his pitch, or
lay not to the level of his pretended zeal. But most gladly and with greatest
felicity that might be, he used to spend his mouth largely in inuectiues,
railings and contumelies against Bishops and other governors of the Church, and
also against the laws, orders, and whole government Ecclesiastical, not
sticking (as was probably suspected) to procure also sundry lewd infamous
libels against the^ and other preachers, etc. to be framed and set up
thereabouts.

His detestation of Ecclesiastical orders commanded, was so great, that he
could not endure to frequent the sermons which Ray the minister of that town
did preach, because he seemed to him a little more conformable in some few
matters (by authority established) then Hacket liked of. Wherefore on Sabbath
days Hacket usually did resort to a place a mile off called Stoke (where the
minister fitted his humor better) in company of some of like strain to
himself, and of certain light idle gossips, whereof some of the sincerest
were said to love and like him so little, as that she could often times be
content to take the meat off his trencher, which he had cut for himself, and
to eat it up from him. But whenever this devout flock came so near to
Stoke Church, as they might perceive the minister to be yet at divine service
and prayer: then they used to stay abroad and rest themselves in the Green
churchyard there (without going into the Church) until they heard the Psalm
begun before sermon, for fear least they should be polluted by those prayers.

One most memorable pranke (above others) was played in Oundell by Hacket,
which is renoumed far and near for the unmanly brutishness of it. It happened
that M. Hussy his master fell at debate and was offended with one Freckingham
an artificer of the town. This Frechingham had a son which was a
schoolmaster, who (as in nature he was bound) did take part with his father.
Now Hacket meeting this schoolmaster in an Alehouse or Inn, did lovingly (as
seemed) signify unto him how sorry he was, that there should be any breach
betwixt his master and him the said schoolmaster, entertaining him (that
suspected no treachery) with such good speeches, till spying an advantage, he
so grasped both Freckingham his arms, as that he might easily hold him and
throw him to the ground. Thus having gotten him down on the ground under him,
Hacket most sauagely and currishly bit off the poor schoolmaster nose with
his teeth, which when he had so barbarously performed, both the said
Freckingham and one Clement (a cunning Surgion) instantly desired the nose of
him again, that whiles the wound was fresh and green, it might be stitched
on and grow again (as they conceived it would) to avoid so foul and great
deformity: but the Canibal varlet not only utterly refused so to part with
it, but held it up triumphantly, and showed it with great vaunterie and glory,
to all that would behold it: and after (as some have reported) did in a most
spiteful and devilish outrage eat it up.

In process of time it happened that his master fell out with him, and put him
from his service (I think for no good conditions) yet it is said that he was
retained afterward in service (by what means I know not) with a very
worshipful gentleman Sir Charles Morrison knight, nephew to his first master:
and one of those, against whom he lately caused his two small prophets so vily
to exclaim, and so unworthily to charge, even openly in Cheapeside.

Besides his former virtues and good qualities, this Hacket was also a very
great swearer and blasphemer of the name of God, in his younger years: which
course, when afterward, to retain the reputation of a professor of the Gospel
(whereof he made great pretense) he was forced to leave, he turned his
single oaths (in truth) into worse and more horrible, joined with most
fearful imprecations against himself, when soever he would make any
asseuerations, wherein he desired to be credited, as namely these: so God judge
me, I renounce God, and God confound and damn me, or do so, or so unto me,
if this be not true: which was so usual, and by long custom so inueterate in
him, even till the time of his apprehension, that in the midst of his
counterfeit holiness (whereby he seduced Coppinger and Arthington) he often
burst forth into this kind of execration against himself, as an especial
motive (amongst others) to have his words to be better believed by the^.
Arthington noted this course of Hackets as a notable virtue in him, and a
matter of care zeal. His manner (says he) of praying is as it were speaking
to God face to face, denouncing his judgments against himself, if he
dissemble, lie, or seek himself in any thing, but the honor of God only. He
prayed so confidently for maistresse H. that he charged God to have given her
unto him, to restore her to her former health and liberty every way, saying,
Lord, according to thy promise thou have power, and I have faith, therefore it
shall come to pass. This maistresse H. is a Gentlewoman of London, who
pretends or fears to be possessed with a devil now fourteen years
together.

Besides these he was given to quaffing and drunkenness: being not only a
Maltster, but a Malt-worme, and was addicted also to lascivious life with
women, which commonly accompanies the other vicious excess: for credit
whereof, his own story or legend (which himself endited as a notable
monument of his excellent virtues and special holiness) may give too
sufficient testimony: for therein he tells of many temptations in this kind
with women, which (as himself confesses) he rejected not altogether, but
went further then either godliness or yet civil honesty would permit. But he
pretends that these baits were offered and laid by his enemies (who sought
matter against him) as snares and trappes whereby to take his holiness tardie,
that belike was so hard to be entangled. Insomuch as Arthington in the
forefront of that history (which he did whiles he was yet seduced by Hacket)
does stamp this brand and censure upon it, that they were profane speeches
and matters of women, which he would not have set down, but that he could
not otherwise reveal the villainous practice which Hackets enemies intended for
the overthrow of the Gospel of Christ, as he most childishly and ridiculously
excused then the matter. For further proof and manifestation of his lascivious
disposition, it is also informed from the place of his aboade, that on a time
(under color of giving godly counsel) he attempted to have wickedly ravished
a poor man's daughter, whereupon he was forced to step aside out of the way,
for a season.

Neither did the wickedness of this wretch here rest it self: for he was
vehemently holden in suspicion, for committing also of sundry robberies.

But that which makes up the heap of all wickedness, is this: that the sink
of these sins in him, he always smoothly covered and parieted over
(especially for sundry late years) with a very rare outward earnestness in
profession of true religion, and with a most entire (yea burning) desire of
reforming (forsooth) the Church and common wealth, by establishing the
Presbyteriall Discipline, which he did imagine would prove like the box of
Pandora, for it promises cure for all maladies and disorders.

But this his zeal and desire of reformation, begun then most of all to
enkindle it self in him, and to break forth, after that (by riotous
mispending and licentious life) he had wasted the wealth that he had with the
widow, whom he married, whose hap was very hard to match with him, albeit he
made more of her then she desired, for he made the uttermost penie. For then
he begun with counterfeit holiness to set out himself (amongst such of the
simpler sort as had zeal without knowledge) to be a man endued with an
extraordinary and singular spirit, such as (in old time) the prophets and
holy men of God were: making show withal, as if he had some peculiar gifts and
qualities, to be able even to tell secrets and work miracles, which many
believed: whereof some did attribute them to sorcerie and enchauntments, but
the simpler sort unto his rare spirit and holiness.

For he trusted by this persuasion to get such credit with the unstable
multitude, as that by their hands he might one day be able (whosoever should
withstand it) to bring his purposes about, for erecting of such pretended
Discipline, to his own great estimation and advancement. In this vain and
seduecing humor, he is reported (I know not how truly) to have traveled in
the North parts unto York: for among the simpler people (where he was not
known) he hoped by the visard of holiness and religion, not a little to
prevail, in setting forwards his designments. For which purpose he took upon
him there the office and spirit of S. John Baptist, affirming, that he was
sent thither by God, to prepare the way of the Lord before his second coming
to judgment. But the conterfeit holiness and lewd seducing purpose of the
varlet being discovered unto some in authority, he was welcomed not with
loss of his head (as that holy man unjustly was, whom he wickedly
counterfeited) but was well whipped and after banished yt city.

This medicine wrought not so effectually with him, as that it could terrify
him wholly from the like attempts. For it is reported, that after this he
assaied again to put on the like person or mask at Lincoln, where he also
found the same cheer and entertainment for his pains, as he received before at
York.

But this erroneous opinion (whereby through self-love and illusion of the
devil, he thought that he was reserved of God for somegreat and excellent
work, being blown forward by the show of zeal, and of an earnestness for
such a reformation) could not thus easily be quenched and rooted out of him:
the rather, for that by use and imitation of such as he most followed and
conuersed with (though otherwise he were wholly unlettered) he had growe^ to such
a dexterity in conceiving of extemporall prayers, with bumbasted and
thundering words, as that he was thereby meruailed at, and greatly magnified
by some brethren and sisters, as a man greatly vouchsafed with God, and
adourned with rare and singular endowments from heaven, so that through
adimiration of such supposed excellencies in him, he still continued to fancy
unto himself, that he had rare gifts and an extraordinary calling. For he
gave out to diverse that he was a Prophet of Gods vengeance, where his mercy
is refused: saying that If Reformation be not established in England this
present year, three great plagues shall fall upon it, the sword, pestilence
and famine. He pretended also that God had revealed unto him most wonderful
things, Which he would (he said) utter to none but such as himself knew to be
very resolute in Gods cause: But he told unto Arthington and Coppinger, that
there should be no more Popes hereafter.

Upon confidence of which spirit and gifts in himself, in places of his
resort, with an intemperate and fanaticall boldness, (even as if he had
sufficient warrant for it) he dared oftentimes to utter most vile, lewd, and
seditious speeches both of the Queens Majesty and of certain the greatest
subjects whom he thought to be hinderers of his practices. Which his outrages
being once or twice brought unto the ears of certain in authority in
Northamptonshire, and elsewhere (not sufficiently acquainted with the strange
humors of such Anabaptisticall wisards and fanaticall sectaries) and perhaps
un willing to let his words be drawn so far against him, as they justly
might: they were therefore content to attribute them to some spice of phrenesie
in him, and in that quality to be corrected, rather then to construe them to
have proceeded from any settled and advised malice, as the event has since made
most manifest they did. For in the whole course besides of other the speeches
and actions of his life, both before and after, none alienation of mind or
madness, could be noted in him.

At one of the times that he was brought in question for his seditious, and in
deed treasonable speeches, it happened that he was conuented before that
honorable counselor Sir Walter Mildmay, who commanded him (for more
safeguard) to be watched the night before he was to be conveyed to Northhampton
jail, at what time the counterfeit dissembling wretch, willed his wife to let
him lie alone in the chamber that was to be watched, for that he had to
confer with one, that would come unto him that night: insinuating unto her,
as if he were to have at that time, some special conferences with God, or some
Angel. Whereupon it was straightway blown abroad thereabouts, amongst the
credulous multitude of those, that either favored him for supposed zeal, or
feared him for sorceries, that (albeit there were no candles used) yet there
was a great light (that night) seen shining in his chamber: so that by this
tale, the erroneous opinions before conceived of him, were greatly increased.

After he had lien in Northhampton jail a good space, and was to come unto his
trial (in the absence of Sir Walter from thence) the matter is thought to have
been so handled by some (who in favor of his forwardnes, would needs
interpret his felonies to be but follies) as that (none evidence being given
against him) he was dismissed for that pull: upon band entered, for his
appearance, when he should be called for again.

Now Hacket (a man thus qualified as ye hear) was of all other men thought by
Wigginton most fit and worthy, to be recommended, and straightly linked
unto Coppingers familiar acquaintance: as most aptly consorting with his
humorous conceit, long ere this apprehended by him, whereof it seems
Wigginton was not ignorant, nor misliked.

Their acquaintance was wrought in this manner, as Hacket testifies in that
discourse (which they since call Hackets history enlarged) endited by
himself, written by Coppinger, and afterward copied out fair by Arthington,
as it should have gone to the press, being annexed to Arthingtons prophecy.
For there it is said: that the Lord brought Hacket to London (about the
beginning of Easter term last) to see what would be done against Job
Throgmorton, and partly to reckon with M. Wigginton about the making of malte
between them together: At what time Wigginton said, that there was a Gentleman
in the City, a very good man: but Hacket (as the Lord knows) did not think
that there had been one godly man in the land: and supposed the twelfth Psalm
belonged to this time. When Wigginton was describing the man, and the matter
that he was entering into, viz. that the man whom he spoke of, had a message to
say to his Sovereign, concerning some practice intended against her, from
dealing wherein, the Preachers in London had wonderfully discouraged him: then
Hacket answered thus: did you so also? No says Wigginton: then said Hacket,
encourage him in any wise: for what know you, what matter it is, he has to
say? Hereupon Wigginton sent for the said Edmund Coppinger to come to the
Counter to speak with him: who (by Gods providence) came forthwith, and
Wigginton willed the^ to take acquaintance one of the other, assuring Coppinger
that he knew Hacket to be a man truly fearing God, and such a person, as by
whose conference, God might minister some comfort to Coppinger: whereupon they
two, (viz. Coppinger and Hacket) went from thence presently unto Hackets
chamber at the sign of the Castle without Smith field bars: so soon as they
were entered the chamber, Coppinger desired that before any speech should pass
between them, they might first pray to God together, which they did: Hacket
speaking to the Lord first. After which prayer, Coppinger delivered unto
Hacket, how he had been very strangely and extraordinarily moved by God to go
to her Majesty, and to tell her plainly, that the Lords pleasure was, that she
must (with all speed) reform her self, her family, the Commonwealth, and
the Church: and that the Lord had further told him, by what means all the same
should be done: but that secret he would not then deliver unto Hacket. Then
Copp. also prayed unto God, desiring him, if he would be with him, and bless
that business (which he had committed to his charge) that then he would both
furnish him with gifts fit for soweightie an action, and knit the heart of
Hacket and his, so together, as David's and Ionathans, Moses and Aarons: for
answer hereof, Hacket took further time til the morning, at which time in the
morning (apraier being first made) Hacket laid all the Lords business (which was
to be done by himself) upon Coppingers back: telling him the Lord had
appointed him to it, and would stand with him in it. Thus far in this point
goes that discourse.

But long before this time of their two first acquaintances, Coppinger (upon
his return forth of Kent, in Michaelmas term last) had signified unto
Arthington, and to one T. Lancaster, a Schoolmaster in Shoe-lane, (both being
of his familiar acquaintance, and whom he had requested to fast and pray with
him, for success in obteining a widow) that God had showed him the said Copp
great favor, by revealing such a secret mystery unto him as was wonderful,
being in substance thus much, viz. that he knew away, how to bring the Queen
to repentance, and to cause al her Council and Nobles to do the like out of
hand, or else detect them to be traitors that refused: Al they by such
repentance, meaning and understanding (as it seems) the erecting of their
fanciful Discipline. For this phrase being usual with them in conferences of this
matter, he thereby sufficiently declared his mind to the^, and they well
understood what was meant, without further a do.

Now it had been inconvenient that Coppinger should all this while conceal
this mystery (which he imparted unto them, and after to Hacket) from
Wigginton, who brought them acquainted together, unto whom he so often resorted,
and so highly above all other Preachers esteemed, for his resolute dealings in
Gods matters, as he terms them: whom he also after aduouched unto Arthington,
as an irrefragable witness to be persuaded by, that would justify the truth
of Hackets torments, and whom he also knew more often busied, for attaining of
that discipline (which himself also labored for) then perhaps for heaven it
self. And you see, that he had accordingly done it, Wigginton not discouraging
him therein.

This proposition so made by Coppinger, Arthington says, that he and Lancaster
misliked, as a matter impossible by Copp. to be done, but by the Lord Jesus
only, and such, whereof the issue could not fall out well any way, and so put
him off for the first time: not understanding, in what manner, and by what
special means, Coppinger conceived, that such repentance should be wrought in
the Queens Majesty, and in others.

The manner and other circumstances of the first revealing of this pretended
mystery, Coppinger himself at large declares in a letter written the 4. of
February last, unto T. C. in prison: the occasion of writing it, he there
says, was the said T. C. offer to take knowledge (by writing) from him, of
such matter, as might induce him, to suppose himself to have received some
hope of special favor from God, to some special use: but yet, without warrant
from the word, direction of the holy spirit, and approbation of the Church,
he was (he said) most unwilling to enter into so great an action. The letter is
long, but to this effect: that upon some extraordinary humiliation of him, he,
with some other, and a guide of their exercise, joined in a fast: their guide
(in the evening) spoke of the use of fastes, etc. and then willed the others to
add to that, which he had delivered, either for the general, or particular
causes, which moved them to humble themselves: that a great part of the said
night Coppinger found himself very extraordinarily exercised, etc. by such a
motive, as he could not well describe: partly comforted with a wonderful
zeal, which he found himself to have, to set forth Gods glory any ways,
which lawefully he might enter into: partly cast down by such a burning fire
of concupiscence, as in his greatest strength of body, he had not found the
like: that the next day, he riding into the Country, (as he rid) fansied to
himself, that there was leave given him to speak to God, in a more familiar
manner, then at any time before: and also persuaded himself, that Gods spirit
did give him many strange directions, wherein the Lord would use him to do
service to his most glorious Majesty, and to his Church. Upon which, he had
thought to have returned presently back, and to have left his intended
journey: but going on, and after being returned back, he imparted to his
former fast-fellowes the work of God in him, and desired they might again
join in the like, which he (with some other) went forward with, to their
comfort, but without their chief guide, for he refused to join. Note.
Hereupon (he says) that he was again stirred up to such business of such
importance, as in the eyes of flesh and blood, were likely to bring much danger
to himself, and unlikely to bring any good success to the Church of God:
hereof he writ to some Preachers out of the Realm, and to some in the
Realm: at length he writ hereof to one in the City that was silenced: who
resolved him, that God did yet work extraordinarily in some persons to some
special uses. Hereupon he obtained this Preachers consent to join with him
and about four others on the Lords day, in a fast: which day was chosen, that
they might not hinder their worldly affairs in the week, and that they used
means to have notice given to some of the Preachers in prison, of the day of
their humiliation, desiring them to commend to God in their prayers the holy
purposes, Note.
which any fearing God, should (in time) attempt to take in hand, by seeking to
bring glory to God, and good to the Church: that in their prayers at the said
fast, he and others did beseech God, that if he had appointed to use any of
them to do any special service to him and his, that to that end he would
extraordinarily call them, that he would seal up his, or their such calling,
by some special manner, by his holy spirit, and give such extraordinary
graces and gifts, as are fit for so weighty an action. The night following
(he says) he thought (in his sleep) that he was carried into heaven: and there
being wonderfully astonished with the Majesty of God, and brightness of his
glory, he made a loud, and most strange noise, whereby he awaked his brother
that lay with him, and some in the next chamber. Since which time (says he) I
find every day more and more comfort: and suppose, that there is somewhat in
me, which my self am not so fit to judge of: and therefore I desire the Church
(I mean your self, and such as you shall name unto me, because I cannot come
to you without danger to your self and me) to look narrowly into me: and if I
be thought to be any way mislead, I crave sharp censuring: if I be guided by
Gods spirit to any good end, as hereafter shall be adjudged, I shall be ready
to acquaint you and them, with generalities and particularities, so far
forth as you and they be desirous to look into. At this time, the end of my
writing is only to acquaint you with the occasions of mine entering into this
great action, and to have your further answer to some questions, Note.
wherein I desire to be resolved: with your direction also, what hereafter I am
to signify to your self, concerning the matter it self. Oh the questions
wherein he thus desired resolution, I do find two copies of Coppingers own
hand: the one more large and confused, the other briefer, and in better order,
but both to one purpose, which to have set down, may give good light (in mine
opinion) to this narration.

The questions to be resolved, viz.
Whether there be (in these days) any extraordinary workers and helpers

If there be, is not their calling immediate from God, and his spirit, a seal

If such graces and gifts shall appear, whether may the Church enter

If it shall be confessed, that there may be until the end of the world immediate

If it shall be answered that none extraordinary callings are to be looked by
giving him a spirit above others, Note.
to deal with the Magistrate in the name of God: to provide that the people
may every where be taught, and true discipline executed, where the people
already have knowledge?



To these I find Wiggintons resolution made under his own hand, to this
effect briefly, viz. That God has, does, and will, from time to time raise up
extraordinary workers, and helpers, to his Church, as Apostles, Evangelists,
and Prophets, where need requires, and as Nazarites, Healers, Admonishers in
special sort, and such like: that these cannot be known to themselves, but by
Gods spirit, nor to others, but by godly effects: That he who is so called,
need not to ask many questions of mortal men for his calling, yet must be
approved godly before he enterprise his work, especially, if he have been a
known wicked person before.

That where the chief rulers of any house or Country, or the most part of any
house or Country be ignorant, and untaught, there it may be truly said, that
house or Country is out of frame, desolate, or waste: much more then, when one
part of 30. or 40. is not well framed, rightly taught, or guided, etc. in that
house or Country.

And in another paper of his own hand, he avouches such extraordinary
callings, by example of one that cried up and down the streets in Jerusalem,
before it was besieged, and by another, which (he says) the last Parliament
came forth of Yorkshire to London, saying he was charged from God by an
Angel in a vision, to signify great vengeance from God upon the whole Realm,
for certain great enormities by himself (in another man's person) untruly and
seditiously furmised. So that hereby it appears, that Wigginton is the
silenced Preacher, meant by Coppinger in the former letter, who resolved him of
extraordinary callings in those days: who consented to fast and pray with him
and others, for a seal etc. of such calling: and who (as he afterward affirmed
to Hacket) would not discourage Coppinger in his purposes.

This conceit hereupon waxing stronger and stronger in Coppinger, he often
came to Lancasters house (where also Arthington then lay) to confer with them:
specially to know the certainty, whether there were any extraordinary calling
in this last age, and how ye same might be tried? They both told him (as is now
said) that they were mere ordinary men, not able to resolve him, much less
to take trial of his gifts, and therefore willed him to keep his secrets to
himself, or else to go to others, that could better judge of them. Whereupon
Copp. sought for direction to diverse Preachers, and others in London, and else
where, of what settled disposition may easily be coniectured: for resolution
also herein (by the help of his diligent fellow laborer in this business, John
ap Henry alias a Penry) he solicited ye reformed Preachers (so these fellows
term the^) of some foreign parts.

It may also be gathered by some letters written by him to a Gentleman near
about a great Counselor, that he bare the said Gentleman in hand, as if he
had intelligence, touching some matter of great service to her Majesty, and
the Commonwealth, to be imparted to the said Counselor. For in the copy of a
letter of his, of the 28. of January last, he thus writes. Your signification
of some service, which you heard I was desirous to do, in discharge of my
duty to her Majesty, may give his L. cause to suspect, that I honor him not
so much as I do. Your revealing thereof to his L. I do assure you, does much
trouble me, because I am not furnished with such matter as I wish. My meaning
was therefore to have forborne his L. trouble, until I had learned out that,
which my heart desires to do, etc. And in another letter of his, written to
the same Gent. the 1. of Febru. after, in this sort: If you think he looks to
have me come to his L. (about any thing which you have put into his head) let
me understand from you when I may attend his L. pleasure, which being known, I
will (according to my duty) do it, though I wish my self to be freed, until
I may know that, which may give his L. cause to think of me, as I do desire
to deserve, etc.

Now that this matter was the same whereof he desired such resolution, may be
gathered by a note of his own hand, set upon the back of these two copies,
thus: viz. By these letters it may appear, what care I had to carry my self
in this action. But in his letters (about this matter) written unto Preachers,
and others of his own humor, he goes more plainly to work, and declares
another purpose, and that it is aspeciall service by him to be done, to God and
his Church, and so no civil matter, as he elsewhere pretends.

For I find by a letter of another Gentleman of the Laity, P. W.
dated the 25. of January last, and written unto Coppinger in answer: that
Coppinger had sent for him up, to receive advise of him in some matters of
importance, tending to the true service of God, wherein he was laboring: in
the end whereof are these words, viz. you are in a plentiful soil, where
you may use the advice of many godly wise: use the benefit thereof: and then
(as Joshua said) be bold, and of a good courage: fear not to be discouraged
for God, even the mighty God, will protect, and defend you.

In his soliciting the Preachers to take trial of his gifts and extraordinary
calling, it appears he used some more plainness, without much disguising of
the quality of the action, which he intended, and likewise how faintly he was
discouraged from it by them. For in a letter of his unto T. L. written the 29.
of January last, he reports, that M. E. (a Preacher) most Christianly,
wisely, and lovingly persuaded him to be careful and circumspect over himself:
to take heed lest he were deceived by the subtlety of Satan, and so mislead:
whereby he might endanger himself both for his liberty, estate and credit,
and also be an hinderance to the great cause, Note.
which he would seem to be most desirous to further, but withal, the said M.
E. concluded, that he would be loath to quench the spirit of God in him, or to
hinder his zeal.

About this time and matter, Coppinger writ also another letter to T. C. which
thing (besides the letter it self) appears also by a letter of his, written
the 24. of February last, to one M. H. The whole tenor of the letter unto T. C.
is (in mine opinion) meet to be here inserted, Note.
in many respects, viz. Right Reverend Sir, I have with much grief been put
back from doing some special service to God and to his Church, which I hope
time will manifest, that I am appointed for: which if it had been done by
enemies, it should not much have troubled me: but being done by persons as much
regarded by me, as flesh and blood can regard men, it goes near unto me. From
you I received this message, that I should attempt nothing but by advise of
those, whom you would procure to counsel me: this was done from you in the name
of the Lord of heaven and earth, and therefore I obey it with great care and
conscience, expecting at your hands, that Monday being the day appointed for
conference, that it may hold: that I may be iustifiedin my course, or
condemned. The danger that some stand in for their lives, is not unknown: and
if I had not been let, Note.
I durst have ventured my life, to have procured their release ere now. God
help us: I see wisdom, zeal, courage, and love are seen but in few, and
those who would gladly use those graces and gifts which God has given them,
cannot: but God sees what is best to be done, and he will by contrary effects
bring to pass, whatsoever pleases him. If you will answer my last questions,
there may much use be made of them. I desire them as much in regard of others
as my self, who am resolved of diverse things, whereof I crave to be resolved,
which I do to good purpose. And as you commanded me (in the name of God) to be
wise and circumspect and to deal by counsel, so, (as I may) I command you in
the name of God, that you advise the preachers to deal speedily and
circumspectly, Note.
least some blood of the saints be shed, which must needs bring down vengeance
from heaven upon the land. Return this letter I beseech you to me, that I may
show it (amongst other things) when the meeting shall be, and commend me and my
purposes to God in your holy prayers, that they may so far be blessed, as
himself is the directer of them: God keep us ever his, this 14. of Febr.
There is also this postscript. I am so full of worldly business, as I have no
time to attend this weighty action, but do only wait upon God for the
direction of his spirit, saving my heart and soul are still mindful hereof,
and to morrow (by Gods grace) I will humble my self before his majesty in
fasting and prayer, and hope, that God will stir up some other to join with
me in spirit, though few or none in person do, only one I am assured of, Note.
the prisoners know it: I leave it to them to join or not, as God mooues them,
but if ever men will fast and pray, I think it is now more then time to do
it. The superscription was this: To my very loving and reverend friend master C.

He dealt also (about this matter) with another gentleman of the laity, I. T.
in one of whose letters written in answer unto Coppingers, the 18. of the
fifth month (meaning thereby May) I find these words of some mark. I
confess (says he) I heard some buzze abroad of a sole and singular course,
that either you or some other had plotted in his head. And a little after thus:
I would wish you and all that bear good will to the holy cause in this
perilous age of ours, to take both your eyes in your hands (as they say) and
to be sure of your ground and warrant before you strive to put in execution.
Strive to put in execution.


Besides these and some others, he instanted both by word and letters (in
Easter term last) about this business, a certain gentleman. In his first
letter to the said gentleman, dated 19. of May last, Coppinger promises to him
in the name of the L. a recompense in the life to come, for that in the Star
chamber he feared God more then man, in such a glorious action, so pleasing to
God, so behoouefull to his Church, which shall also remain of record here to
all posterity. And a little after thus: If after your own holy private prayer
you find any desire of speech, with me, let me entreat you, either to send this
letter to M. Cartwright, or rather (if you can) carry it unto him, etc. The
second letter which he writ to ye said Lawyer the 21. of May (they having in
the mean time conferred together) was thus word by word. Let thy spirit (O
gracious father) direct us now and for ever, in all our ways, especially in
those, whereby greatest honor may redound to thy glorious majesty, most
benefit to thy church, and most danger to thine enemies.

Good Sir and my loving brother in the Lord, though such as are admitted to
consult with God, and have by prayer and meditation much familiarity and
acquaintance with his holy majesty, need not doubt of good success, in all
things which he sets them a work in, (though Satan and his vassals cross
their course, and hinder their labor by all the means they can) yet is it also
necessary that while we remain in the fellowship and communion of the saints,
that we communicate one with another, that as loving children we may all join
together, to help each other, to be doers of our heavenly fathers will here on
earth, as the angels do it in the heavens. The conscience which I had hereof,
enforced me to write unto you lately, and the like moved you to speak with
me upon that letter. And truly I did observe many things (in that little time
we spent together) were said and done, which might move either of us to praise
our good God, and to cheer us up, Note.
to further so holy an action as now is in hand, which must needs speed well in
the end, because it is the Lords own work. And if we adventure our selves to
do him service here, he will reward elsewhere. You may be bold, for you have
the warrant of the word, the allowance of the state, and you walk in your
own calling: But I am to be fearful and circumspect, because the dangers I
enter into, be infinite, my course misliked (though unknown) because it is
extraordinary, which callings be ceased in all men's opinion of judgment, and
have not (of long time) been heard of, or to be hoped for, but where the word
is not preached at all, or the Church in a great waste, which no body dare
affirm our Church of England to be. Wherefore it seems that every step that I
shall make herein, shall be upon thorns, and therefore I am to fear pricking:
yet for all this I am not without hope, neither is the same grounded but by
good warrant. The end why I write unto you, is this, to entreat you to give
thanks to those holy me^ all on my behalf, who are now in question. I have
reaped much benefit from them, by their carriage toward me, though they know it
not: for I durst not (in regard of danger which might grow to them) visit any
of them, since I found my self carried with a zeal to do somewhat in the same
cause, for which they suffer. If by some effects hereafter I may show it, that
is it which I desire to do, and in the mean time do what I can to persuade
the saints, that in this action I seek Gods glory and not mine own. I have
been heretofore put back and dissuaded from attempting any thing (least I
marred all) by the wisest, the learned, the zealousest and holiest preachers
of this City, great causes and weighty reasons moving thereunto. But yet
this will not make me leave it, but still I am enforced (by little and little)
to labor to make my self fit to take upon me the managing of it. Wherefore if
it please you to show the other letter and this, and beseech them from me to
lay them before the Lord, when they shall meet and join together in prayer:
and if the Lords spirit shall assure their spirits, that he has been, is,
and will be with me in this action (how hard soever it seems to be) let me by
their means be vouchsafed this favor, that I may be allowed conference with
the preachers of the City: which suit I make not for that I would seek to
have approbation from them, or any other living creature, but from God
himself: or that I purpose to do that which heretofore I have been advised
unto, Note.
namely, acquaint the^ with the courses (which I purpose by Gods assistance to
take in hand) whereby great danger might grow to them, and little good to me:
but that my carriage toward them, may witness unto them the humility of my
mind, and lowliness of my spirit, and care and conscience not to enter into
the matter, without offer to have my gifts examined, and if they shall be
supposed to be such as the church may have use of, then let all holy means be
used, which shall be advised to be fit to be done in such a dangerous time, and
weighty action. So beseching God to govern us in all our ways, and preserve
us in all our dangers, and supply us with whatsoever we stand in need of, I
humbly and heartily commend you to God, this 21, day of May, 1591.

The effect of the speeches which Coppinger had with him at their conference
(as the said gentleman himself reported) was to commend the cause of ye
preachers committed, to encourage him to the defense of it, adding that it was
the truth of God, and that in the end it would prevail. Then the said
Coppinger began to declare unto him his revelations, his great fasting and
prayer, and how God had endued him with an extraordinary grace of prayer,
persuasion or prophecy: and that God had appointed him (as he was persuaded)
to reveal the will of God touching the reformation of his Church, that he had
an extraordinary calling to do good to the Church, and what several
conflicts he had in himself before he yielded to this extraordinary motion or
calling from God. Therefore his request was, that by the said gentleman's
means, his gifts and calling might be tried and allowed by those godly
preachers, etc. What the preachers and others that were conferred with,
answered to Coppinger herein, and whether more dutifully to the estate, then
warily: so as they might neither (as they thought) endanger themselves, nor
kill or discourage the zeal of that their brother, in so pretended holy a
cause, may partly by that which is before spoken appear, and we may then
believe them when they shall tell us the whole truth thereof.

But how slender and cold discouragement he found with some preachers of London
(with whom he dealt) touching his fantastical extraordinary calling, and
dangerous plots, may also appear by these words found in a letter of his, viz.
Good master L. as master E. former carriage in this action (which stands me
much upon to deal advisedly in) did somewhat trouble me, so his Christian and
loving answer (delivered now by you from him unto me) does much comfort me, A
comfortable change.
though by reason of some particular business (which I must necessarily
follow) I cannot attend till Friday in the after noone, or Saturday any part of
the day* And after in the same letter thus: Satan by his angelical wisdom
(which he still retains) does many times prevail with the holiest to make
them fear good success in the best causes, in regard of the lets and
hindrances which himself lays in the way. It cannot be denied but Yt the
cause is good, which I desire to be an actor in: but it is said by some that it
is impossible that I should be fit to meddle therein. So that here a christian
and loving answer to his great comfort is given, further conference by speech
is offered, and the course not so much misliked, as the succes only is doubted
by reason of his unfitness yt was to be an actor in it.

But what resolution herein was also returned from the preachers of foraine
parts to this case of conscience propounded by Coppinger, may hereby (not
improbably) be gathered. Arthington at one of his examinations confessed, that
Penrie sent a letter unto him forth of Scotland, wherein he signified, that
Reformation (for so they speak) must shortly be erected in England: and herein
he said, that he took Penrie to be a prophet. Now it is sure that Penrie
conveyed himself privily into England, and was lurking about London, at the
self same time when these other prophets arose in Chepeside, attending (as
seems) the fulfilling of this his Prophecy als by their means.

How duetifully and advisedly those that be subjects have dealt, which (having
intelligence hereof) did conceal it, till it burst forth of it self, with
apparent danger to her Majesty and the whole state may thus be gathered. For
by this conceit of Coppingers (you hear) it is pretended and surmifed, that a
commendable cause, a cause to be defended, yea the very truth of God, (which
must prevail) is by the state suppressed and kept under: that it is the will
of God to have such a reformation: that impoachment of it is offered by the
Queen, Counsel and Nobles: that this is a great sin meet to be repented of
by them: that they must be brought to this repentance: that the penalty
against any of them that refuse to be brought, is to be detected as Traitors,
an offense deserving death: that this must be done out of hand: that the will
of God (in great favor for the good of his Church) was revealed to him in this
behalf, being a man of much fasting, prayer, rare gifts, a prophet, an
extraordinary man, with an extraordinary calling; such as was not to be be
judged of, or discerned by mere ordinary men, and whereinto he entered not
rashly or on a sudden, but after many conflicts with himself before his
yielding to Gods extraordinary motion and calling: but submitting himself
nevertheless, to have his gifts and calling tried and allowed of, by the best
reformed Preachers, and therefore not worthy to be suspected, or discredited:
that the way to bring them to this repentance was a secret mystery, such as
those preachers and others whom he conferred with (albeit they held it a work
to be wished at Gods hands) yet by his talk gathered the manner of bringing it
in, to be so dangerous, as that they feared the success, and refused to be
made accquainted with the particular ways and means, which he had plotted to
effect it. Thereby making choice rather that Coppinger should venture to put it
in practice (if he remained resolute herein, which they found by him) of what
dangerous consequence soever such a way might be, then that they, by bewraying
of him to authority, should be any means to break of and prevent his
resolucion, or quench his zeal. And thus (with opinion of safety to
themselves) they merchandized the hasard of their friends life, or else the
rearing of sedition in the Realm, with the hope that secretly they nourished,
to have the Discipline (which they dream of) erected.

Thus Coppinger (remaining still more confirmed and selted in this vein) by
his Pue-fellowe Wigginton about Easter term last being (as is aforesaid)
brought acquainted with Hacket (as with a most holy man) soon after would
needs bring Arthington also acquainted with him, as one, whom (upon so small
knowledge) he had observed, to be a very rare man. For this purpose he sent
for Arthington to dinner or supper unto Lawsons house necre to Paul's gate,
where Arthington met first with Hacket, together with another, whom he calls
a godly man: of whose ordinary talk then had, Arthington liked very well: but
had (as he says) at that time no further conference with him. After which
time, Arthington discontinued from the City, and remained in Yorkshire until
Trinity term, leaving Hacket and Coppinger behind him, piotting of their
purposes together: what purposes they had, what counsel they entered into and
what conferences they entertained betwixt themselves and with others, by the
events ensuing, will best be discovered. After this, Hacket stayed not long in
London, but desired Coppingor at his departure, to write unto him what success
I. T. had, and withal assuring him, that whenever he should write for him,
he the said Hacket would straight way come up again. Hereupon Coppinger writ
unto him first at the end of Easter term, and after again very earnestly to
be at London three days before the beginning of Trinity term last, but he
could not be here so soon by three or four days. When he was come, he
lodged the first night at Islington: but sent his horse down again into the
country, as purposing to stay long in London. Then after a night or two (one
of which nights he lodged at the said Lawsons house by Wiggintons direction)
he was provided of a chamber and of his board at one Ralfe kates house in
Knight-rider street by Coppingers means, and at his charges, for he cost
Coppinger there eleven shillings by the week: But Kayes waxing weary of him
(in part for that he feared Hacket was a coniurer or witch, in that the
Camomill (he says) in his Garden where Hacket either trod or sat, did wither
up the next night, and waxed black) therefore Coppinger provided at his own
charges like wise an other room for him, at one Walkers house by Broken
wharfe, where he remained until his apprehension.

Whiles Hacket was at Kayes house, he used before and after meals to pray (as
seemed) most devoutly and zealously, but never for the Queens Majesty. Hacket
also told Kayes, that if all the Divines in England should pray for rain, if
he said the word, yet it should not rain.

The first of the aforesaid letters which Coppinger writ unto Hacket to
move him to come up, does contain matter of note besides, not unfit to be
known. Brother Hacket (says he) the burden which God has laid upon me (you
being the instrument to make me bold and courageous, where I was fearful and
faint) is greater then I can bear without your help here, though I have it
where you are. The workings of his holy spirit in me since your departure, be
mighty and great: my zeal of spirit burns like fire, so that I cannot
contain my self* and conceal his mercies toward me. And a little after in
the same letter: Master Thr* is put off till the next term, the zealous
preachers (as it is thought) are to be in the Star Chamber tomorowe, the Lord
by his holy Spirit be with them: my self (if I can get in) am moved to be
there: Note.
and I fear (if sentence with severity be given) I shall be forced (in the
name of the great and fearful God of heaven) to protest against it: my desire
is, that you haste up so soon as you can: your charges shall be borne by me.
And some what after, thus: If his most holy Spirit direct you to come, come: If
not, stay: but write with speed, and convey your letter and enclose it in a
letter to him, who brought you and me acquainted (vz. Wigginton) put not your
name to it, for discovery: direct your letter thus, To my loving brother in the
Lord* give these my letters: I put to no name, but the matter you know, which
suffices. Pray that the Lord may reign, and that his subjects may obey: that
all instruments whatsoever, that shall be used, may be furnished with such
gifts and graces as every one have, or shall have need of: that it* may
appear, that the action (now in hand) is his own: and therefore he will
provide safety for his holy ones, and destruction for those who are vessels of
wrath: who have accomplished the number of their sins, which call for
vengeance from heaven. These letters Hacket carried to Pamplin scholemaster of
Oundell to be read unto him, for that himself could neither write nor read:
but I have not yet heard that he complained thereof to any in authority.

When Arthington also about the midst of Trinity term last was returned to
London, Coppinger (hearing thereof) came to his lodging, and then (with many
words) extolled and magnified Hacket unto him, for the holiestman that ever
was, Christ only excepted, and one that travailed (together with him) for the
good of the Queen and the land, but after an extraordinary manner, and not both
by one means. And albeit Arthington (as now he says) desired them to keep
their secrets to themselves, and not to trouble him with them, (who had other
business to attend:) yet Coppinger importuned him so, as he could not
avoid, but yield to hear Hacket pray before them (as a man of a singular
spirit, albeit utterly unlearned of the book.) The first prayer of his (that
Arthington heard) was about four or five weeks before their apprehension. All
which prayers conceived by Hacket (even since his apprehension) the said
Arthington praised to be so divine, sweet and heavenly, that thereby he was
drawn into a great admiration of him. In all the prayers that Hacket made in
his presence, Arthington observed this difference from other men's: that he
usually therein desired the Lord to confound him, if he did not seek only
his honor and glory in all things: which Arthington marking from time to time
in him, and seeing him still to be so perfitly sound and very well, was thereby
drawn (together with Coppingers words and experience of him) to reckon and
esteem of him, as of a most holy man.

This lesson of wishing themselves confounded, his said, two scholars (by
imitation) did so perfitly learn of him, that to the great astonishment and
horror of such (that afterward examined them) they used this execration:
wishing themselves confounded and damned, if they said not the truth, in every
matter whereof they made any asseueration, and wherein they desired to be
credited, thinking (as Arthington confesses) that whatsoever the spirit (as he
fansied) told him was a truth, he was bound to bind it upon his salvation or
damnation. These being joined with the relation of certain extreme torments,
which Hacket had signified unto them that he suffered, not only outwardly by
the instigation of certain noble and worshipful persons (as he untruly made
them believe) but more grievously a great deal (he said) by suffering
whatsoever either Devils in hell, Sorcerers or Witches in earth, could practice
against him (all which he pretended to have endured for trial and proof, that
the Gospel was the true Religion against Popery and all other sects) did so
deeply astonish, or rather infatuate them: that (after great fasting and
prayer used, which fasting they usually performed on the Sabbath days) they
all did resolutely conclude, that if Hacket endured in truth all these
torments and practices against him, for so holy an end, no doubt he was a
man, which should not only establish the Gospel in all kingdoms, but all
Kings and Princes should also yield their scepters unto him, and he should
be established chief king over all Europe. Reasoning thus with themselves,
that surely the Lord had some great good to be done by him that had endured so
much for his sake.

Now, this was the opinion, which to have firmly planted in them two (as in
deed it was first in Coppinger, and afterward in Arthington) was the main
scope and drift (as may seem) of all Hackets cunning counterfaiting of so much
holiness, piety, zeal and religion.

To work this, he handled his actions so warily with them, that Coppinger
seriously once avouched unto Arthington, how himself had by good experience
found, that God would deny unto Hacket nothing which he prayed for or desired,
and namely protested, that Hacket begged of God in a drought (that was not long
before their apprehension) a shower of rain, and that it was presently sent in
good abundance, Coppinger also so firmly believed Hacket, that he told his
own man Emerson, how Hacket being imprisoned, the boltes would (often) fall
off his heels miraculously.

But for proof that such incredible torments were in deed susfered by Hacket,
he appealed herein to some of the Nobility, and to diverse others both of
worship and good credit. This did Coppinger further confirm unto
Arthington, saying, that Master Wigginton also did justify the truth of the
torments that Hacket suffered, and could do it with a hundred honest witnesses
more, if need required. And Arthington himself also once heard Wigginton
pitifully tell, how great and extreme torments Hacket had endured.

But being asked by them, why he was so tormented, and how these could tend to
prove the Gospel to be the only true religion? Hacket answered them thus: that
his tormentors (the better to color their lewd purposes and malice) gave out
and surmised him to be out of his wits, but the truth was (said he) that
being once at table with one G. H. an obstinate Papist, and reasoning which was
the true religion (I defending this which we now profess to be the truth,
against Popery and all other sects) amongst other speeches, I protested upon
my damnation, that this was the truth, and withal prayed, that I might sink
presently down into hell, if it was not so: and that, if he the said G. H.
would say so much for his religion, if he did not sink presently into hell,
then would I take Popery to be the true religion. But he refusing so do, and
being greatly moved thereby against me, complotted with a Knight (a near
kinseman of his) and with another gentleman (being a Papist) and with sundry
others, who found such means, as that they procured Devils to be raised,
Sorcerers, witches, and Enchaunters (all which (said he) I know and can
name, and mind one day, to help to burn them) to work upon my body, with
intent to make me call back my said words of protestation, concerning the
truth of this religion, which if I would not do (said they) but could endure
the torments that they would inflict, then they all would be of my religion,
and would make me Emperor over all Europe.

This tale to them that had minds before prepared, and took Hacket by reason of
his most earnest protestations, prayers, show of zeal pretended, favor with
God, and such like, to be a man that would not tell an untruth for all the
world, seemed no way improbable, or to be discredited: so that these three
principal actors having as well among themselves, as with others often
conferred hereabouts (both by word and writing) were by the midst of Trinity
term become most resolute, for the advancing of their designements. For in a
letter written by Coppinger (about that time) to the aforesaid I. Thr. it is
thus contained. Mine own dear brother, my self and my two brethren, who
lately were together with you in Knight ryders street, do much desire
conference with you, which will ask some time. The business is the Lords
own, and he does deal in it himself, in a strange and extraordinary manner
in poor and simple creatures. Much is done since you did see us, which you
will rejoice to hear of, when we shall meet, and therefore I beseech you (so
soon as you receive this letter) hasten an answer in writing to my sisters
house* therein advertise (I beseech you) when I may come to speak with you;
for delays are dangerous, and some of the great enemies begin to be
supursued by God, as they are at their wits end. The Lordmake us thankeful for
it, who keep us ever to himself, to do his will and not ours. By occasion
also of hearing Master Charke on a Friday about that time at the Black friars,
Coppinger says, he was thereupon moved by God* spirit to write unto him a
letter, which bears date the 9. day of July last. In which letter (amongs
other things) thus he writes unto him. I do not deny good Sir, but that I
have now (a good long time) taken a strange and extraordinary course, such as
has offered occasion of susption, of my not only doing hurt to my self, Note.
but also to the best sort of men now in question, and to the cause it self.
But by what warrant I have done this, that is all: for if the holy Ghost have
been my warrant, and carries me into such actions, as are differing from
others of great note in the Church of God, what flesh and blood dare speak
against me? This is it that I desire at your hands, and at all the rest of Gods
servants, that you forbear to censure me and such others, as shall deal
extraordinarily with me in the Lords business committed to our charge, and judge
of us by the effects that follow: which if you hereafter see to be wonderful
great, then are all ordinary men (placed in callings within this land) to
fear, and to call themselves to examination before the Justice seat of God,
and see whether they have walked faithfully before God and man, in seeking the
salvation of the souls of the people, and the advancement of Christ's kingdom,
Note.
and the overthrow of Antichrists. And if all and every one in their places
shall be forced to confess, to have failed in not discharge of their duties,
let them acknowledge their sin and repent, before plagues and punishments
fall upon them. The waste of the Church cannot be denied to be great, so that
there is place for extraordinary men (though temporizing Christians will not
admit this) therefore Gods mercies shall appear to be wonderful great, if
amongst us he have raised up such, as I know he has, and hereafter I doubt
not (by Gods grace) but I, with the help of the rest, shall be able to auowe
against all gainesayers whatsoever. My desire heretofore has been to have
counsel and direction from others: but now (by comfortable experience) I
find that the action (which the Lord has drawn me into) is his own, and he
will direct it himself by the holy Ghost, and have the full honor of it, and
therefore I wait upon him, and yet most heartily crave the prayers of the
Saints, that they will beseech God to bless all his servants, that he has set
aworke in his own business. And I further beseech you, to show this Letter
to Master Trauerse, and Master Egerton, and all the rest of the godly Preachers
in the City, and judge charitably of me and others, and let every one look to
his own calling, that therein he may deal faithfully, and let us judge our
selves, and not judge one another, further then we have warrant. After this
letter, it happened that M. Charke preached in the same place again the next
Sunday after, at which time Coppinger took him self to be particularly meant
by one part of ye sermon. Whereupon he wrote a letter to another Preacher (as
I do gather) the thursday after viz. 15. of July: whereby he thus signifies.
M. Charke told the people, that there were some persons so desperate, that they
would willingly thrust themselves upon the rocks of the land, and waves of
the sea. This I took to be spoken principally to my self, and therefore I
thought good to advertise you, that he spoke ye truth in those words: but he
touched not me, but himself, and the rest of the ministers of the land, who
have not only run desperately themselves upon the rocks and waves, but
carried the whole ship, whereby they all be in danger of shipwreck, and
should have perished, if the Lord had not immediately called three of his
servants to help to recover it, who are not only sent from God to his Church
here, but also elsewhere, through the world. My calling is specially to deal
with Magistrates. Another has to do with Ministers, who has written a letter
to you of the City, but it cannot be delivered hardly this day. The other
third is the chiefest (who can neither write nor read) for he is the Lords
Executioner of his most holy will. This letter is thus subscribed, The Lords
messenger of mercy, Ed. Coppinger.

These three therefore strongly fansying to themselves such extraordinary
callings, and standing resolute by all means to advance that (which they
falsely call Reformation) and being thus seduced and bemoped by Hacket, it is
no marvel though they entered further (as by degrees) into many lewd,
dangerous, and traitorous attempts.

For first having conceived mortal hatred against two great and and worthy
Counsailors of this estate (who they thought would not a little stop the
course they had taken, and hinder the purpose which they pursued:) Coppinger
therefore (by Hackets advice) directed several letters unto some honorable
personages, whereby he signified, that certain treasons were intended even
against her Majesty's own sacred person: meaning after to appeach those two
thereof: and hoping by this means, either to take them away, or at least their
credites with her Majesty, until he and his accomplices might bring their
purposes to some better pass: or else (by this colorable pretense having
access and opportunity) to have executed some wicked practice against her
royal person. The discovery, auouching and proof of these supposed treasons,
Hacket and he did take (especially upon themselves.)

The first two letters that (I find) Coppinger writ to the said honorable
personages about this pretended matter of treason to be discovered, was the
third day of June last: both to this purpose, to have them acquaint her
Majesty, that intelligence was given unto him of some treason intended against
her own sacred person, but naming no particular. In the one of them, he
enclosed a letter of his to her Majesty and certain petitions, which he would
have had to be offered up to her highness, being to this effect: That he
might have leave to entertain the action of such discovery; that as matters
should come to light, he might resort to a certain worthy Counselor (by him
there named) to acquaint him therewith, and to have his counsel and direction:
that he the said Coppinger might confer and examine Jesuits and all
prisoners (suspected or condemned of treason) about these matters, in the
presence of certain others: That for better furtherance of his service, he
might have this favor to stay judgment, or at least execution against
condemned persons for crimes capital or smaller, until her Majesty might
have account given of the cause of his so doing: that he might be pardoned for
so bold an attempt, if in over much fear of danger to her sacred person, he
had, or afterward should go too far, and not effect that in the end, which
he hoped to do: and lastly, that this matter might be concealed from all
men. But the said honorable personage finding this to be an unlikely and
strange course to be yielded unto (as may be gathered by the answer, and by
the other letters) directed him to a more sound way: viz. To learn first the
grounds perfitely, to acquaint none other with the matter, and to do it
specdily. Hereupon the eight of the said June, he addressed another letter to
the same personage, enclosing therein a letter written to him from Hacket, and
dated the last day of May, and one other letter of his own to her Majesty, to
have been delivered unto her Highness. His letter to the said honorable
personage, is to commend the writer of that letter enclosed, not naming him,
(for Coppinger had raced out both Hackets name and the name of Oundel from
whence is came) as a man able and willing, to do her Majesty some principal
service, to offer their attendances to come before her Majesty, and to urge
the delivery of the letters, for that the matter (he said) admitted no delays.
The letter from Hacket is nothing but an inciting and animating of Coppinger,
to perform the Lords business (he had in hand) by many holy, and devout
words and hypocritical allusions to certain stories of the scripture.
Coppinger his letter to her Majesty, commends the inditer of that enclosed,
for a man beloved of God, and fearing him unfeignedly, and one enabled (by God)
to do her highness some special service: he also humbly desires thereby, that
they two might appear before here own Princely person, in the presence only
of two certain Lords and one Lady. But the said honorable personage sent
Hackets Letter again unto Coppinger, as of no moment for that purpose, and
stayed the delivery of his Letter to her Majesty, till some particular
intelligence might be had, to be first delivered to her Highness. The same day
Coppinger also writ two several Letters to the same two Lords, in whose
presence he and Hacket desired to come before her Majesty, and to deliver
their intelligence; this he did, to advertise them hereof before hand. That
which is written to the one of them, mentions a supplication, which Coppinger
sent (the day before) unto his L. to make passage to some better service to her
Majesty, which he hoped should be done shortly to her Highness good liking,
and to his L. great honor, for that he should be the chief actor therein.
Upon some answer returned from the Lady before mentioned, craving some
particulars of that which they meant to discover, Coppinger writ to Hacket
(being in London) to urge him unto some more special point of intelligence:
whereunto Hacket (the said eight of June) answering by Letter to small
purpose, and subscribing his Letter thus, As you find me, so call me:
Coppinger therefore returned in answer another Letter presently unto him,
whereby he signified, that Hacket must manifest somewhat more plainly, of some
practice worth the reueiling, otherwise they both should worthily fall into her
Majesty's indignation: for that which he had then writ, would not satisfy her
Majesty and the State, concerning the danger which Hacket supposed to be
coming upon the land, and wherewith he seemed to be acquainted.

Upon such ouerture (as before is touched) made to one of the said Lords, he had
the said two appeachers before him on the tenth of June: but finding Hackets
demeanor of himself very strange, and their imputations as frivolous, he
dismissed them (as is said) without further a do, to their great
coffeehouse. Hereupon Coppinger (in stomach so far as he durst) writ
another Letter to the said Noble man the eleventh of June: hereby he
signified, that were it not that he had been before acquainted with the graces
and gifts of the holy Ghost, which he did assure himself to be in Hacket in
an extraordinary manner, he should have esteemed of him (by his behavior)
as his Lordshippe did. Therefore what trouble or danger soeuermight come to
himself by it, he was resolute to abide it, and further charge the said
Noble man (in Gods name) to deliver the Letters and Copies there enclosed to
her Majesty, signifying, that what punishment should in that respect be
allotted to him or unto Hacket, they would undergo it, and not depart the
City, till they might further understand, what God would do therein. Sure it
is, that (being thus shaken off by him) they grew extremely malicious also
against the said worthy Noble man.

I find also a Copy of a Letter written in Coppingers hand, but meant to be
sent as from Hacket, unto her excellent Majesty: wherein (amongs other
things) he desires he may enjoy that, which God has appointed him, and
then lewdely, and falsely accuses and reuileth two great and worthy
Counsaylours. In the end he says, that if he should tell her the
judgments of God that lie at her gate (which the Lord has showed him) they
would be over fearful for her to endure, or to hear of. And if she
doubted of his sending from the Lord, he wills her to ask a sign, and if
he give it not, let him dye.

A second course taken by them besides the former appeachements, was a
conspiracy of the death of certain the Lords of the Council, when they
should be at the Star Chamber, in case they should give any judgment
against certain, that were (sometime) Preachers, and are now prisoners for
misdemeanors, perillousto the peaceable state of the Realm, as is intended.
That this deuilish purpose was rise amongs them, may appear by a letter sent
by Coppinger in Trinity term last, unto the aforenamed Lancaster. In which
was contained to this effect, that if the Lords should give a hard censure
against those parties (the next day) if God showed not such a fearful
judgment against some of those Lords, as that some of them should not go
alive out of that place, then never trust him. And albeit some yt saw this
letter, could not pick any further matter out of it, then Coppingers conceit,
that God (without some speedy and miraculous judgment from himself alone)
would not suffer such men to be punished: yet Lancaster (to whom it was
directed) justly suspected some further meaning, and that the concealing of it
might be both accounted undutiful, and further also dangerous unto him, and
therefore asked counsel of some more skillful then himself, whether he might
safely suppress it, and tear the letter in pieces.

Another devise they also had for preparing (as is supposed) of the minds of
the people, and to stir them up to be in readiness, which was by certain
seditious letters, that were purposely scattered five or six nights before in
many of the streets of London, by some of these actors, or by their accomplices
and favorers. Likewise there was found in Wiggintons chamber (in the prison
where he remains) about a thousand printed Pamphlets of two sorts: the one
of Praedestination, the other carrying an odd and needelesse title to every
man, that knows but the Author. For it is entitled on the first side, in
great letters thus: viz. The Fools bolte: and immediately under that title,
this sentence is set down worthy to be duly considered, with all his
circumstances now apparent, viz. Such as do surmize the complaynt of
Innocence to be revenge, and the report of Truth to be slander, shall never
want the due reward of their gross error, whilst Innocence and Truth shall
endure. On the other side of the sheet the title is, A fatherly exhortation to
a certain young courtier. The matter thereof is conceived into an halting ryme,
rouing lewdly not only at the governors Ecclesiastical, and at other
Ministers, but also at sundry having civil authority and high places. Amongs
the rest, the first two staves and last staue are most perilous, if ye respect
the present action these persons had in hand, their opinions of this state, and
the base condition and state of the chief of them. The first are these. viz.

My son if thou a Courtier sue to be,
In flower of youth this lesson learn of me.
A Christian true although he be a clown,
May teach a king to wear scepter and crown.
And in the last staue are these, viz.

For God will sure confound such as devise.
His ordinance or Church to tyrannize. etc.
These papers Wigginton (by the means and help of one Brown) procured
privily to be printed at Whitsontide last, and being examined touching them by
her Majesty's Counsel and others, he confessed, that they were all to be sent
to women, the weaker vessels: viz. to Mistress L. Mistress B. and to I know
not how many Mistresses, by them to be dispersed abroad: to the intent, that
every one (to whom they might come) should conceive of them, as the spirit
should move them. And Hacket also confessed, that a part of certain writings
which Wigginton and Coppinger framed was, that a Clown might teach a King to
wear a Crown.

Now that Wigginton held intelligence in these matters with the conspirators,
and that there was mutual and ordinary correspondence betwixt him and them in
all plots for advancing of their Discipline per fas and nefas (besides that
which in this behalf has been touched before) is made also manifest, by the
confession of Arthington, who says, that about the fifteenth of July, or not
long before, he heard Hacket singing of certain songs, who then wished that
Arthington had also some of them: for it was a very special thing, and (said
he) M. Wigginton has a great many of them.

Also Coppinger had once conference with Wigginton (in the presence of
Arthington) touching his extraordinary calling. At what time it is pretended,
that Wigginton refused to be made acquainted with the manner of Coppingers
secrets: and that he used these speeches to Coppinger, vz. You are known to be
an honest Gentleman, and sworn to the Queen, and therefore I will not be
acquainted with those things, which God has revealed unto you for the good of
your Sovereign. And his opinion of such extraordinary callings (set down
under his own hand) does elsewhere appear, whereby is argued, that he was
made a common oracle for such fantastiques: that he knew the matter in
generality, which by Coppinger was to be wrought upon the Queen, to bring her
(forsooth) to repentance, howsoever he refused to know the particular manner
of such secrets: that he acknowledged it to be good for the Queen, and
yielded it (without scruple) to be revealed unto Coppinger from God, so that
it could not be, but that Coppinger hereby was much animated to go forward in
his conceived wickedness. Besides, Wigginton takes knowledge (as appears by
a paper of his own hand writing found in his Chamber) that Hacket had defaced
the Queens arms, and had uttered dangerous words, importing himself to be a
King, and his mislike of all Kings now reigning, since his last coming to
London. Hacket further declared unto M. Young on the 24. of July, that he was
once (in company of two Gentlemen and of Mistress Walker and Mistress Lawson)
with Wigginton in his Chamber, where and when he heard Wigginton say, that if
the Magistrates do not govern well, the people might draw themselves
together, and to see a Reformation. This dangerous opinion of his, may be also
gathered out of a letter of his own hand writing (found with him) being dated
the sixth of November last, wherein he thus writes. M. Cartwright (says he)
is in the Fleet for refusal of the oath, as I hear, and M. K. is sent for,
and sundry worthy ministers are disquieted who have been spared long. So that
we look for some bickering ere long, and then a battle, which cannot long
endure.

A fourth purpose of theirs, was not only to make an alteration in the state
of Church-gouernement, and to plant in every congregation their Elderships or
Consistory of Doctor, Pastor, and certain lay Elders with the appurtenances:
but also to change the Civil policy of this Realm. For which consideration,
they meant to displace all the Lords and others of the privy Counsel:
therefore (in their speeches and writings touching these Counselors) they used
of late no title of honor, but their bare names and surnames, or else their
names with this addition: Late L Chapter or late L. Tr. as if they were already
disautorised, and in their steads they had nominated and set down, certain
others (in truth very honorable and worshipful persons) that should be
counselors, of whom every honest man nevertheless is persuaded, that they
detest both these and all other such vile, seditious and fanaticall persons and
courses.

Coppinger (not long before their rising as it seems) penneda letter to have
been sent to the one of the aforesaid honorable personages. In this letter he
charge a great and worthy Counselor (using only his Christian name and
surname) that he together with his hellish and infernal companions (for so he
raueth) had committed treason in the hiest degree against her Majesty. He
desires that honorable personage to effect, that the said Counselor,
himself, and two others of the Lords messengers, may be brought before the
Queens Majesty: and if he be not proved a traitor to God and her, then let
me (says he) for my pride and presumption, be hanged at the Courtgates. Then
he exclaimeth against another great Counselor (terming him but by his bare
name likewise) to who^ he had sent letters and copies to have bin showed to her
Majesty, and there shows himself greatly offended with him, because he was
not (as he hoped) brought to her Royal presence, adding thus thereto, but he and
the rest (says he) of her wicked Counselors, Note.
and ungodly magistrates, shall be forced to acknowledge, what they are worthy to
have: the Lord pardon their souls, for in their outward man, they must be
punished, though they repent: and a little after, thus. I do advise also that
every one of her Counsel be commanded to keep their house or chamber, for
fear of stir or danger. Then he does appoint to her Majesty a new Counsel,
aduising that Wigginton (a man in more favor (he says) with God, then any man
of his calling whatsoever) be commanded to be near her highness, to pray to
God, or to preach privately.

By the like resolute vain, Arthington also charge the said Counselor, as
deeply, and upon the like and greater penalty to himself, in a supplication
penned by him to have been sent to her Majesty. But I will give you a taste
how friuolously, and upon what fond proofs he groundeth his accusation, to the
end it may appear, that this was but a colorable pretense wherein they
reposed to great surety of success, but hoped at length thereby to have
brought themselves and Hacket, to her Majesty's presence. The issue he
tendereth is this, That if in her Majesty's presence he prove not the said
Counselor to be the most dangerous enemy that was discovered since her
highness reign, then let his body and soul be for ever damned: Provided
always, that if her Majesty cannot (by his evidence) judge him the said
Counselor to be so bad as he makes report of him, yet that she would give him
the said Arthington leave in her sacred Presence, to fight the combat of
prayer with him, New Trial by combat in prayer.
wherein, if it please him (says Arth.) I will first begin to pray against my
self, that if he be not as deeply guilty as I have charged him, then that
Gods vengeance may presently consume me both body and soul into hell for ever,
which if it come to pass, the victory shall be his, and he return an innocent.
But if he see me leap up for joy, as one that has discovered him to be a
traitor, then if he dare fall down in like sort, and make the same prayer, that
the like vengeance may fall upon himself, if he be so deeply gilty as I have
charged him, and if Gods vengeance fall not upon him before he depart out of
her presence* let me be hanged, drawn and quartred for laboring to empeach a
Counselors credit* but if he dare not thus enter the listes with me before her
Majesty, let him be holden guilty.

Their last and most damnable designment of al was the depriuatio^ of her
sacred Majesty from her Crown and dignity, and the destruction of her Royal
person, whom the eternal God (in mercy) long preserve, to the confusion of all
seditious wretches her enemies of all sorts.

The very particular and principal means how these devilish purposes were
meant to be effected by them, Arthington now says, that they were not opened
unto him: pretending that though the other two seemed willing to have imparted
some of their secrets unto him, yet himself was always un willing to hear
any of them. But for the special means that Coppinger had plotted to bring
the Q. Majesty and Counsel to repentance, he says that this was a secret
mystery (as Hacket and Coppinger affirmed to him) which they would keep to
themselves, and were so enjoined of the Lord. But whether soever the way to
effect these, was meant by some open violence, or secret practice: sure it is,
that popular tumult was not the least means they trusted of, to bring them to
pass, which they hoped to stir up by their pretense of so great holiness,
with calling the Realm to repentance in the open streets of London, by
offering joys and mercy to the penitent, and by their Proclamation also then
made in Chepeside, as hereafter comes to be declared.

Now that these their two last purposes were in deed the principal and maine
ends which they propounded to themselves (besides that which by the way is
noted already, and that which comes hereafter to be mentioned) let these few
proofs ensuing suffice. First for the alteration of the whole government
Ecclesiastical and erecting of the new Discipline: It is confessed, that
Coppinger and Arthington the two counterfeit prophets (on the 16. of July last
being Friday, and the self same day that they arose in Cheapeside) told
Wigginton in the morning, these words amongst many others: vz. That reformation
and the Lords Discipline should now forthwith be established, and therefore
charged Wigginton in the Lords name, to put all Christians in comfort, that
they should see a joyful alteration in the state of Church-gouernment
shortly. To which words Wigginton made no reply nor further demand, as of any
matter strange unto him, how it was so shortly to be compassed. Wherein may
also be observed, that these kind of persons do reckon and term only those
Christians; that will take comfort andioy at such an alteration. So that (by
their opinions) it skilleth not, what be attempted or done against all others,
being but as Heathens and Paynims, or at least Idolalaters.

Thus much (with their seditious purposes also) is plainly implied in a
dangerous letter written by the said Coppinger since Easter last, unto one John
Vdale a condemned man for Felony, in the White Lion in Surrey, for writing of
the book termed the Demonstration of Discipline: that letter begins thus:
Right reverend Sir, my forbearing to visit you and the rest of the Saints (who
suffer for righteousness sake) do give you all cause to think that I have
forsaken my first love, and have embraced the God of this world. But my
conscience bears me witness of the contrary: the reason of mine absence
being so great and so weighty, that hereafter when they shall be examined by
your selves (who are endued with the spirit of wisdom and discerning of
spirits) I doubt not but you will allow of my not coming, Note.
which might bring you into more trouble and danger, then it would do me good,
or breed me comfort, And afterward thus, You have care and conscience to
further the building of the Lords house which lies waste, and to seek the
final overthrow of Antichrists king dome: which being the Lords own work,
he will bless it, and all the actors in it. And this I dare be bold (of mine
own knowledge) to report, that in this great work he has diverse that lie hid,
and are yet at liberty, who are hammering their heads, busying their brains,
and spending their spirits in prayers to God, as much as you or any of you that
are in prison, Note.
and hope in short time to he brought forth into the sight of their and your
enemies, to defend the cause you stand for. And again afterward in this wise:
I beseech you cheer up your selves in the Lord, for the day of our redemption
is at hand, and pray that the hand of the Lord may be strengthened in them,
Note.
whom he has appointed to take part with you in this cause, and beseech him
that blessing may be upon Sion, and confusion upon Babel. Pardon my long letter
I beseech you, and impart mine humble suit to all the rest, to whom I neither
dare write, nor offer to see. I neither put to my name, nor make subscription:
the bringer can report who sends the letter, and let that suffice.

Furthermore that they hated deadly, and maligned her Majesty (as a principal
obstacle to their innovation and kingdom, and therefore sought to deprive her
highness of her Sovereignty and life) may be gathered by their own words and
actions: for Hacket confessed before the other two, that at a sermon of one
Egertons preaching in the Black Friars (whither they usually resort) he the
said Hacket remained uncovered all the sermon time, until the preacher came to
pray for her Majesty, but then (he said) that he put on his hat. And when
Arthington demanded why he did so, Copping. straight way answered thus, There
is a matter in that. Likewise when as (in their private prayers among
themselves) Arthington used to pray for the Queen, Coppinger would sundry
times tell him, that his so doing did much grieve Hacket, adding, that in the
beginning himself did also pray for her, but Hacket had now drawn him from
it: saying, there was a cause why, which Arthington knew not, but should know
hereafter. For (says he) you do not know this man (meaning Hacket) who is a
greater person then she, and in deed above all the princes in the world.

And when as on the very Sundry before their rising (for so themselves have
since termed that action) it happened that Arthington prayed again for the
preservation of the Queens Majesty: Hacket (not digesting this) suddenly with
indignation turned his face away from him, but when he prayed for other
matters, then Hacket cast his countenance toward him again: which he
perceiving that Arthington also marked by him, and purposing (as it seems) to
salve up this matter again, (least Arthington happily might yet have fallen
from them) therefore when they had ended their prayers, Hacket took him with
his arms about the middle (in very kind sort) affirming, that he loved the
Queen as well as either of them, and desired him not to be offended, for the
Lord had commanded it: adding further, that there was a matter in it that
Arthington as yet knew not. Hereupon Coppinger (being in hearing thereof) said,
that she might be prayed for in general terms, but not so specially as
Arthington did (whereby Hacket was grieved) nor yet to be prayed for as a
Sovereign: for (said he) she may not reign as Sovereign, Note.
but this man Hacket, and yet (says he) she shall live better then ever
she did, albeit she must be governed by another, thereby also meaning
Hacket. And to the intent they might the more assuredly retain Arthington
without suspicion of their poisonfull malice (wherein they boiled against the
Queens highness) Hacket himself (once after this time) very subtly prayed
for her Majesty.

For proof that they also meant to deprive her of life, the several
confessions of Arthington at sundry examinations may be alleged. Whereby
(upon that which he heard and knew) is confessed, that he is verily
persuaded Hacket meant her Majesty should have been deprived both of kingdom
and life, which he also gathered by Coppingers letters, albeit he denies,
that he was ever made acquainted by what special means it should be done.

Thus having in some part described the qualities, persuasions in opinion,
familiarity, inducements unto mutual crediting one of another, exercises and
designments of these persons: it rests to go on with the narration of the
rest of the action, for better persiting up of this history.

Hacket on a time recounting up unto the other two his torments (which he
pretended to have endured) told, how (amongst others) one Pigge a preacher did
so beat him with rods at a place in Hartfordshire, (whiles he lay bound there
in a sink hole) that this cost him the said Hacket more dear, then all the
rest of his torments: because thereby he was enforced to suffer for all
hypocrites also, adding thereunto, that all their best preachers (so they term
such as thirst after and persuade innouations) were no better in very truth
then Hypocrites, nevertheless he would (he said) daily hear them preach.
Hereupon Arthington took occasion to tell him, that he could prove all such
preachers to be Hypocrites and Idolaters both (albeit of ignorance) because
they do yield (in some sort) to the commandments of the governors, and unto
the laws of this Church, that they may be tolerated to preach.

This pleased Hacket so exceedingly well, as that he began highly to esteem
of Arthington, and hereby the rather he thought good, that Arthington should be
made acquainted with their letters. For about ten days before their rising
(Arthington says) that Coppinger did greatly importune him to read the
letters which he and Hacket had written, if it were but to see the style:
assuring him they tended to nothing else, but to make a way to acquaint her
Majesty with their secrets. So that when Arthington saw so great Counselors
so resolutely thereby charged with matter of so high quality, by Coppinger
especially (her Majesty's sworn servant) he was induced to believe it, and to
think they had some very good ground thereof.

Arthington also (with great contentment unto Hacket) framed certain
Syllogismes, (I believe) in a lewd Mood, and in an imperfect and fond Figure,
to prove (forsooth) one of the said honorable Counselors (whom he and
Coppinger vilanouslie afterward proclaimed traitors) to be such as they do
charge him to be. This worthy work of Syllogismes therefore being first
finished, his other treatise (to prove those preachers to be hypocrites and
Idolaters) was straightway set upon the stocks, and began to be built on the
Monday before their rising: after they all had (for obtaining good success in
this and the rest of their business) humbled themselves on the Lords day
before in fasting and prayer, for so be their words. This latter treatise
Arthington finished up the Thursday morning next after, and termed it A
Prophecy of Judgments against England, whose skill in this precipitate kind
of pistling, the other two so magnified, as that they termed him by a title
mentioned in a Psalm, viz. The pen of a ready writer. Where as wiser men
think they might have looked a little lower, and he have better compared it, as
the wise man does the like, where he says: A word in a fools mouth is like
an arrow in a dogs leg, because he will never leave wrinching and fisking,
till he have got it out.

In this prophecy he first sets down the third commandment, Arthingtons
prophecy.
inferring what plagues shall light on himself if he offend therein. Then
comes he to his nine several assertions, adding to every one of them, The
Lord to confound him, viz. that if he think not himself to be the vilest
sinful wretch living: If he take not himself to be the most ignorant in
Gods book of any man that has professed the Gospel so long: If he
acknowledge not himself most unfit and unworthy of all men to serve the Lord
Jesus: If nevertheless he be not extraordinarily called to do the message of
God more faithfully then any preacher in England hitherto has done: If the
Scripture do not justify extraordinary callings before the ends of the
world: If he know not two persons within the city of London, that have
greater extraordinary callings then himself, videlicet, Edmund Coppinger, and
William Hacket: If the former be not a prophet raised up of the Lord to bring
a message of great Mercy to the land, if all the people truly repent of their
sins: If the later be not the holiest man and of the greatest power to bring
fearful judgments upon the whole earth, that ever was borne, Christ Jesus
excepted: If the said Hacket (as the Messenger of Gods vengeance, where mercy
is refused) do not bring such great plagues upon this realm of England, the
like whereof was never seen: In these and in every of these several cases,
he prays the Lord to confound him.

Whereupon he infers that having thus denounced so many fearful woes
against his own soul, as would sink it into the bottomless pit of hell, if
he were guilty in any one of them. Then thereupon with cheerfulness he
comes to declare his message to England, accusing it to be the most
rebellious, though it have been most blessed of all other nations. Then he
affirms the city of London, and the courts of Justice at Westminster, and
the counterfeit worship of God with cross and surplesse, to be worse then
Sodom and Gomorre, or the purple whore of Rome, or else desires to be
confounded. Nay he prefers Rome before London: because at Rome they sin
only of ignorance. Of her Majesty he says, she is least guilty of the
common sins, but most abused (of any Prince that ever was) by those, whom she
has most advanced.

Then he speaks to three great Counselors, C. C. T. daring them to protest
for their innocencies against themselves, as deeply as he has done, and then,
if they be not swallowed up quick, he is contented to be hanged up in chains
at Paul's cross. Note.
Then he threatens them, that they three shall be otherwise detected ere long,
and all those that are their partakers, when her Majesty shall reign and live
to see better days, if God give her true repentance. Then he says he will
leave all other of the Clergy (as sufficiently detected already) save such as
pretend to seek Reformation, who (he says) are as guilty (in two points) as
any of the other. The first point, for not crying out continually against
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and others, as wicked usurpers in
the house of God. The second, for not crying out against the wicked Magistrates
of this land, because they keep out the Elderships out of the Church, and
maintain in their room, officers and offices of Antichrist: Hereupon
gathering thus: how can God spare this land any longer, wherein both the
Magistrates and messengers of God have dealt so unfaithfully in the Lords
service? Adding, that the fearful judgments of God shall be sure to fall on
the reprobate: being already prepared, and put into the hands of the Mighty
Messenger of the Almighty God, William Hacket, to be powered out upon this
great City of London, and upon all places, where repentance follows not this
publication. Then he goes about to prove all such Preachers to be Idolaters,
or consenting to Idolatry, which practice or consent, and suffer others to use
surplesse and cross, because (he says) they are the marks of Antichrist.
Preferring herein the Papists before them, as sinning herein only of
ignorance, seeking also to engreeue their faults in this behalf, for that
they are all hypocritical Idolaters, in that (nevertheless) they profess
Reformation: whereunto he adds (he says) a secret: That this their halting
and hypocrisy has so hardened Gods heart against their requests, for bringing
in the Discipline, that for this unfaithful and vnsingle walking in their
function, Note.
he has hitherto denied it. Neither shall any one of them, or all of them
together, have that honor given, to bring in Reformation: For (says he) I
tell you truly, the Almighty God has put his cup of vengeance into his
trusty and faithful servants hand, William Hacket, to power it down shortly,
upon every wilful and obstinate sinner that does not repent upon the notice
hereof, or else the Lord confound me. Lastly, he gives a charge to have this
Prophecy, together with the incredible, (but most certain) history of the
holiest servant of God, William Hacket, that ever has been, is, or shall be
borne, (Christ Jesus only excepted) with all speed possible, printed and
published together, as in substance true (says he) or else the Lord confound
me. This wise prophecy is thus subscribed: By the most unworthy servant, but
yet a faithful Prophet of the Almighty Jesus, or else his wrath confound me.
Henry Arthington.

Whiles Arthington was about this his task, Coppinger (as it seems) was
neither idle nor well occupied, for he was setting down from Hackets own mouth
a long Ragmans role, of Hackets torments, revelations, and (I know not what)
called Hackets history. For by Thursday morning Hacket having enlarged the
first draught thereof, (which was at first but scribled out by Coppinger)
Arthington was to write out again fair the enlarged copy, that being
perfited, it might be annexed unto the aforesaid Prophecy. All that Thursday
was spent by them in consultation and writing: Hacket being also present, and
assisting them. But with what ioyfulnes amongs them all, it is incredible, if
we may believe their own reports. Yet Arthington was forced (for the haste
that was made to have all in readiness against the Friday following, and for the
desire he had to yield unto Hacket all satisfaction and contentment, that
might be) to sit up, most of Thursday night, writing out again of the said
history, so enlarged.

But on Thursday it self (being the 15. of July) amongs other their actions:
Coppinger and Arthington writ a letter to the aforesaid T. L. which is of
this tenor: first at the top of it, thus: viz.

If this letter be not endited by the holy Ghost, Coppingers and Arthingtons
letter unto T. Lancaster.
who has appeared (in a far greater measure) to sinful wretches, in the
end of the world, even to us, whose names are here under written, and to a
third person, in calling above all former callings whatsoever, (Christ Jesus
excepted) the Lord confound us two with vengeance from heaven, and carry us
(with all violence) into the bottomless pit.

If we have not taken the name of God in vain, it stands you upon to read
this letter with fear and trembling, with joy and gladness: with fear, that
the Lord should woo you to do him service: with joy, that he offers you
honor, if you accept it. We two are messengers from heaven, who have a good
Captain to guide us: who have received immediate callings from God, to call
the whole world to repentance, and amendment of life: otherwise they are to
fear, that Christ Jesus his second coming in glory, will be to them as a
thief in the night. If I Edmund Coppinger do not prefer you before any one
man in the land whatsoever, for your wise, holy, loving and religious course,
both in the general calling of a Christian, and in your particular calling,
the Lord confound me body and soul. The reason why I choose you first, is,
because in your house, in your presence, and (under God partly by your means)
I had my first extraordinary calling, though thereof (as of all other things)
the whole honor and glory be the Lords. And of the same mind is my brother
Arthington. In token of our extraordinary love to you, we deal as we neither
have, or will do, with any other: for we command in the name of the Lord, all
creatures upon the earth, and they must obey. But with you we will dispense
thus far, that it shall be your choice to come, and take a new calling (for
a time, wherein we would use you) or refuse it. So wishing you to commend us,
and your self to God, before you answer us, which we expect in word, and not
in writing, etc.

The messenger of mercy to the whole world, if they accept me. Edm. Coppinger.


I avouch whatsoever my brother has written, to be most true: and further I
protest, that you are a more holy man then any Preacher in London, or
throughout the whole land, or else the Lord confound me. If it please you to
come and see me joyful, you may hope this is true.

The Prophet of Gods judgments to the whole world, where mercy is rejected.
Hen. Arthington.


That the perfect and enlarged history of Hacket be briefly gathered into a
summarie, and here set down, it will not (I think) be amiss, for such as
shall be desirous to know, what mysteries may be therein contained, which drew
these two (amongs other matters) into such an extraordinary admiration, and
opinion of him.

First therefore, A sum of Hackets history.
there is declared whom Hacket served, then how he got the execution of the
Bailywike of Oundel, being void: how upon complaint of the wives there, that
their husbands spent their thrift in Alehouses on the Sabbath days, he (by a
Justice of Peace not far off) did cause all the playing tables that could be
come by, to be burnt. Also the light and entising behavior of some women
toward him, and his familiarity with them, whereby his wife became jealous of
him, so that he was forced (for her satisfaction) to clear himself by his
oath. The sundry baits laid by means of some of his fellows (that envied
him for the credit he had with those who^ he served) to entrap him with women.
His attempting them in dishonest manner, but with purpose only (as he there
pretends) to learn of them the practices against him. The like snares laid
for him by some of better place and credit, then the former: Of his affliction
in mind that he endured, because he so behaved himself toward women, and yet
could not learn out by them, the plot laid against him. Of his going into
Hampshire to have been placed there: How he was in a place there (for the most
part of 20. days) beat with a bastonado, and into what pitiful state of body
he was thereby brought: That this was done, partly for his auoutching that
Christ was head of the Church against the Pope, and for saying, that as
certain earthen pots were there by him broken, so should all Papists be
broken in hell, and confounded, so many as rose up against him in earth: how he
was forced to use the Deputie-Lieutenant of Hampshire his aid, to be safely
conveyed out of that Country, least he should be murdered by his enemies:
that he came thence to one M. Paul Wentworthes house, where he remained a
month, and was used most Christianly, and where he was most deeply exercised
in the spirit: How as he passed by the way out of Hampshire, he told a
Gentleman in company (that was privy to his enemies complots) of a great
practice intended against him, and to be done in a chamber, by certain
persons, whom he then named aforehand: insomuch as the said Gentleman (being
made privy to such purpose, and knowing that he said true) affirmed, surely
he could conjure, or else it had not been possible to tell such things as he
did: where in deed (he says) the Lord, in the midst of his former
afflictions, revealed it unto him, and further showed him a place which he had
appointed for him, and how he would bring all his enemies practices to
confusion: How in performance of that which was so revealed, he was afterward
in a certain place in Hartfordshire bound, first in a chamber, and then
chained in a sincke hole of a seller, and most grievously many ways afflicted
there, for 20. days together: That in the greatest extremity thereof (which
was greater then he could express) a Cross came upon his breast as he lay,
and always when his torments were at the greatest, the Lord unloosed his feet
and hands from his fetters, and bands: nevertheless he lay still til his
tormentors came, and bound him again: how the Lord then appeared to him, and
assured him, that he would establish the Gospel by him, and showed him all the
whoredom of Rome, in the person of a great personage (since deceased) as it
were in candle light, with a great Bell full of iniquity: That during that
time, the Lord showed him a terrible famine which he would bring upon a land,
but whether this land or not* was not declared: That Christ then showed him
his wisdom and providence, in governing the Seas, and all other waters in
their courses: and further showed him the man that should sit on Christ's
right hand, to judge both the quick and the dead, whose name he well knows:
That then he made his petition unto the Lord, who answered him by a voice,
thus, what he would, how he would, and when he would: How (by the extremity
of his torments) his eyes were fallen down, and his tongue thrust out of his
head, so as he could not pull it in again one Barley corns breadth: but the
Lord in that extremity showed him, that he would keep his body from
bursting, and that one hair of his head should not perish: That being loosed
(by his wives importunity) soon after, in a very raynie day, he, his wife,
one Richard Dickons, and one Palmer, rid altogether thence, toward Oundell,
thirty miles that day: and albeit it rayned all the day very sore (so that
great floods came upon it) yet never one of them had any drop thereof fall
upon their clothes: That being at Oundell, and foreseeing he should be
exercised again, he prayed his wife, that no man might come at him, for he
would keep his chamber: and then the Lord appeared unto him, and showed him,
in what danger the land was, by reason of foreign enemies at the Sea: and
commanded him to go round about the Town, and that should be a defense to
the land round about: That after this, he kept him self in his Barn about
eight days, reasoning with the Lord, touching Praedestination and
Reprobation, continually begging of him, that he would save all those, that
fought ignorantly against the truth, or otherwise sinned through want of
knowledge: How (after this,) betaking himself to his chamber again, the Lord
(he says) forced him to cry out against two great subjects and Counselors in
this land: That he was again bound and tormented there other twenty days,
in eight whereof, he neither did eat nor drink, and was continually watched,
for that they knew, the Lord would come and loose him, if they left him: That
during this time Witches used their forcerie stongly upon him: That the Lord
then told him that he would harden his own heart against Hackets torme^tors:
How then also 4. or 5. Angels night by night stood by him, and watched over
him, like unto doves, and one night spirits innumerable: and that a white hand
came from the Almighty, and took him by the hand, whereby all venom,
poison, uncleanness, and corruption departed from him for a time: whereupon, the
Lord showed him three heavens together, and all the dwelling places contrived
in one of them, but the highest heaven was showed to be without end, which
glory he was not able to behold, but was made able to look upon the blood of
the Saints, which was made round like a wax cake, in very great breadth, but
the glory which therewith appeared, he could not look upon, so that he was
forced to turn his face upon the pillowe: How the Lord also showed him the
murdering of the wicked, even like the slaying of swine, the father murdering
the son, and the mother the daughter, and every one another, all the day
long, and no man took pity upon them: That there was then revealed unto him,
a very strange fire from heaven, the length whereof he did see consuming all
things from the heaven to hell mouth, but he did not see the breadth thereof:
Also that he then did see the breadth of the tormenting place of the damned,
and what was therein, but neither the bottom, nor length of the place: That he
also supposed, he saw his liberty begged, by two honorable personages:
Notwithstanding which deliverance (that he dreamed of) he tells that he was
carried afterward to North-hampton jail, where he remained 17. weeks, as
before is remembered. Furthermore there is declared, that in his torments the
Lord showed him, how he would confound all his adversaries that were guilty
in any practice against him, and that one thing which they went about, they
should never bring to pass: for he let him see, that they were all as drunken
men and fools without wit: That in the end they should throw all their books
away, and be at a great confusion, one with another: That afterward (viz. about
the beginning of Easter term last) the Lord brought him to London, and how
he was made acquainted with Coppinger at that time, as has been before
declared: How after his departing out of the City from Coppinger, he could
not but remember him in his prayers: desiring the Lord to reveal himself
extraordinarily to him, so that he might be encouraged to go forward in the
action: whereupon (as the said Coppinger affirmed) he had two extraordinary
seals in very short space after Hackets departure, and was wonderfully
strengthened, to proceed in the cause. Then is told how the Lord commanded
him to go from one place to another in and about the City, for two days
space: and how he was commanded to rail against the said two great
Counselors, in diverse places where he came: How being (in that time)
commanded to see the Lions in the Tower, he took the fiercest of them by the
head, and had none harm: Then is told, what Preachers in the City he heard,
and that going to hear one, he saw a surplesse lie in the Church, whereupon
he would not stay there: That he went to certain Preachers in prison, to
command them to deal faithfully in the Lords business: And how he was
commanded by God to deface the Arms of England in Kaies house in Knight-Rider
street. Lastly, it is said, that God has appointed two others to deal for,
and with Hacket, whom it will stand upon to deal faithfully for the Lord,
for they know what Hacket is, and what shall follow, if their counsels and
directions be not followed.

Now if any shall marvel, how such an absurd and ridiculous lying legend,
should seduce men of any consideration, so earnest for a supposed Reformation,
and so exercised in praying and fasting: let him remember, not only the
effectual, but the efficacy it self of Illusion, and the spirit of slumber,
falling (by Gods secret, yet always just judgment) upon the children of
disobedience, such as be wise in their own conceits, and not wise with
sobriety: that they might believe lies, because they have not believed the
truth: and that they might ask and not obtain, because they ask not as they
ought.

After Arthington (on Thursday morning) had ended his aforesaid Treatise of
prophecy (being the very day before their rising) Coppinger told him, that
God (the night before) had enlightened him the said Coppinger, who they all
three were, saying, that Arthington had unawares prophesied truly: for he was
the greatest Prophet of Gods judgments against the whole world, that ever was,
but that they both were greater then he: for Coppinger himself was (he said)
the greatest that ever was, and last Prophet of mercy: and that he must
describe the new and holy Jerusalem, with the several places of joy, that
the elect should enjoy after this life, and that they the said Coppinger and
Arthington, were ordained to separate the Lambs from the Goats, before the
Lord Jesus at the last day. Whereat (it is said) they were both astonished,
considering their own vnwoorthines and unfitness, crying out against themselves
and their sins: yet submitting themselves to the direction of Gods spirit,
which they were assured, should sufficiently furnish them to do him that
service, which himself did command. Then Coppinger proceeded to tell further,
that Hacket was greater then either of them, and that they two must obey him,
in whatsoever he commanded, but told not then, what nor how great he was,
other then king of Europe: which title was (before this time) concluded of
amongs them. Hereupon (according to Coppingers commandment) Arthington offered
to honor Hacket with his title of the king of Europe, and to demean himself
toward him accordingly. But Hacket himself herein dispensed with him, until ye
time should come, that he was to honor him before others, bidding him withal
to be of good cheer: for (says he) I serve a good Captain, who makes so
dear account of me, that all the devils in hell, nor men in earth, cannot take
my life from me. Then Coppinger (for confirmation of the like unto them two
also) said, that Arthington and himself were possessed, not only with
prophetical, but also with Angelical spirits, which Arthington taking to be
true (by a great burning that he felt in himself after that time) did thereupon
fancy to himself, that no power in earth nor hell, could hurt either of them,
because they had the spirit of Angels, and they were subject to no power, but
to God alone: And that (God being the master of the whole work) all things
should prosper with them, they only seeking his glory, which (he says) he
vowed with himself, and to deal thoroughly in his office, to rebuke the world
of sin, and to denounce judgments against whomsoever the spirit should move
him, without fear or favor of men, or of devils in hell: which spirit (he
says) then moved him (according to his hatred before conceived against the^,
and his opinion that they were traitors against the Queens Majesty) to utter
and to declare his detestation he had against the aforesaid three worthy
Counselors, being by their places the greatest subjects in the land. But
herein may be said with the Poet: Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes?
Verrem de furto? who can with any patience endure such seditious companions as
these, to appeach others of treason? but especially, so loiall, honorable, and
worthy Counselors, as they three are known to the world to be.

By the way we may note the subtle managing and carriage of this action by
Hacket and Coppinger in this one principal point, which Arthington himself
also now observes: videlicet, in that they opened not at any time Hackets
chief pretended office unto Arthington: videlicet, to represent and to
participate with Jesus Christ's office (of seuering with his fan the good
from the bad) until the very time they were to go into the streets to do
the message that Hacket enjoined them. For hereby they prevented a doubt of
driving Arthington back, who seemed a man so serviceable for their purpose, as
that he was worthy to be still retained by them: and the rather, for that
he had not yet finished the writing up of Hackets history (that was to be
annexed to the Prophecy) until late that Thursday night which was before their
rising, for they might have feared (if leisure had served him to have
considered of it, and examined it at full how this could be) least it might
have made him at least to stagger, and be doubtful of it.

Besides Hacket kept (as Arthington now gathers) that honor wholly to
himself to proclaim it to them both together, as it were by a voice from
heaven, at that very instant when they should receive their charge of him: and
thereby have no time to reason against it, being straight way to go forward as
obedient persons to him in all things.

Thus that Thursday passed on. On Friday morning, Coppinger sent his man
Emerson (by five of the clock in the morning) unto Arthingtons lodging, but
his wife would not then awake him: so he sent for him again at six, and they
two then went together unto Coppinger. Then Coppinger and Arthington determined
(that Friday morning being the 16. day of Iulie last) betwixt six and seven of
the clock in the forenoone, to go unto a certain Gentleman's man's house about
the City, of good behavior, and they forsooth to honor him, to be chief
Governor under her Majesty, which they also did that Morning, and promised
unto him accordingly that he should so be. Leaving also with him both the said
Prophecy and Hackets history to peruse, but the good gentleman was unwilling
to deal either with them or their papers any way. They stayed not there above
half an hour. From thence they came betwixt 8. and 9. of the clock in the
morning unto Wiggintons chamber (being prisoner in the Counter in Woodstreete)
with whom having much speech and conference (part whereof is touched before)
among other things, they signified unto him, (as Arthington confesses) that
they were provoked to pronounce him the holiest minister of all others, for
dealing so plainly and resolutely in Gods causes above all ministers, which God
would manifest one day to his comfort.

Wigginton at his examination confesses such conference by him at that time to
have been had with them, and (as he was enjoined by those who examined him)
has reported it by writing somewhat largely. He therein also sets down a
conference had by him about the same matters with Hacket himself, coming to
him thither alone (as he says) the self same Friday morning, some while after
the other two were departed from him.

It may be gathered by his own narration, that betwixt the time of Coppinger
and Arthingtons talk with him, Wigginton had set down article-wise, and
distincted with number the several heads of their speeches had with him. And
after he also enquired and set down in writing Hackets opinion likewise, unto
every of the said articles severally. And albeit it need not be questioned,
but that both for circumstance and matter he would set it down, the least that
might be either to his own, or any his accomplices disadvantage, yet may it
serve for the fuller understanding of the whole action, and for necessary
observation besides, to touch some chief points of those conferences, though
it be but as himself tells the^.

The principal points of VViggintons own report touching conference and
speeches had by him to and fro with Coppinger and Arthington, and afterward
with Hacket, the 16. day of July in the morning, 1591.

He saieh, that Coppinger and Arthington came unto him about 8. or 9. of the
clock of the 16. day of July in the morning, full of courage and comfort,
saying unto him thus: We are come to you now to bring you certain news of
great comfort, which is this, viz. That we have seen Jesus William Hacket,
more then in any creature upon the earth.

When Hacket came not long after their departure that morning unto him,
Wigginton says, that he examined him about the whole speeches of Coppinger
and Arthington uttered before unto him: whereunto Hacket answered first
generally thus: That he approved them no further then he saw they had warrant
for their doings, but particularly to this first Article thus, viz.

Hackets answer thereof unto Wigginton.
To the first that he knew not of that their vision, but he accounted himself
to be a chief messenger of God, in such sort as follows.

Copping, and Arth. speeches to Wigginton.
That the said William Hacket is the very same angel forespoken of

Hackets answer.
To the second, that he was the only principal man sent of God to decide the
controversies of the Gospel of Christ in the world, or in England, or in
Europe: into which controversies some bad persons (being enemies to him and to
the Gospel in England, and some of them being great personages) had drawn him
to enter by their cruel, unjust, and extraordinary practices and trecheries,
or sorceries used against him: and that by him as by a principal angel of God
(with his fan in his hand) God would now separate the sheep from the goats:
and that God would establish the Gospel by him generally, either by his death,
or by his life: but (quoth he as it were correcting himself) by my life it
must be.

Coppinger and Arth speeches.
That Hacket is a man dearer or nearer unto God in some respects, because he
must (as it were) bring an acco^plishment unto their prophesies, and has a
more excellent spirit or work to do, then they in some respects.

Hackets answer.
To the third, that God would do a greater work by him the said William
Hacket, then ever he did by any of all the Prophets, for the establishment of
his gospel, to the confusion of Satan and Antichrist.

Copping. and Arth. speeches.
Hacket had laid two several charges in the name of Christ upon them two,
which they must needs perform or execute: the one upon Arthington of
prophecy, concerning the end of the world: the other upon Coppinger of
painting out the good and bad in the world, or in these parts of the world:
and one of them had in purpose or charge, to read over the whole Bible, for
proof of their office and business.

Hackets answer.
To the fourth, that God had sent Arthington to be the said Hacket his writer
or pen, and the said Coppinger to be the expounder of his mind, or deliverer of
his message to the old magistrates (which were almost gone) and to the new, and
to the world.

Coppinger and Arth. speeches.


M. Cartwright had done more against Antichrist, then any in the world before
him* since the Apostles time: and that Wigginton was comparable unto him,
Mutuum muliscabunt.
and M. Lancaster (meaning a schoolmaster in Shoe-lane) was above them both,
in the state of heavenly glory, because he had kept himself undefiled from the
common corruptions of these times, and had a most single heart to God.

Hackets answer.
To the fifth and sixth, that men should shortly turn their spears into
mattocks for the making of a true or better Reformation, or else a great
plague, as it were fire from heaven should fall upon them for their rebellion
against God: and that the Queen was undone, and all we Preachers should be
damned, if we fall not to Reformation speedily. And that he knew not of any
such comparisons or degrees to be in the seat of glory, but sure he was,
although every man should be rewarded according to his works, yet he that
would be highest should be lowest there, where all be as one in Christ.

Wigginton shapeth none answer in Hackets behalf, belike allowing it: and
therefore did not ask Hacket of it, because himself made no doubt of the
truth thereof, as it seems.

Coppingers and Arthingtons speeches.


Hackets answer.
To the eight: that it was true, so near as Wigginton could call to
remembrance.

Coppingers and Arthingtons speeches.
William Hacket, to be extraordinarily called and sent of God as aforesaid:
and they exhorted him to be constant in the truth. Arthington also pronounced
Wigginton to be highly in Gods favor, and assured him, that Gods Spirit
should be doubled upon him.

Hackets answer.
To the ninth be avouches the full effect thereof, and he also pronounced
Wigginton to be highly in Gods favor: and further told (after a bold and a
resolute manner) that he had appointed him and some few others, to be
assistants to Coppinger and Arthington in their foresaid offices, etc.

Besides the premises, Wigginton has set down (as pleased him best) a
dialogue had with Coppinger and Arthington at that time not worth the
insertinghere: yet this may be observed in it, that they then said they would
prove the things aforesaid, by Gods Spirit (which was above his word) and by
his word also. Secondly, by Wigginton his own report it appears, that they
answered unto his speeches, very temperately, directly, and pertinently.
Thirdly it appears also therein, that he did not contradict any of their
sayings, nor rebuke them, nor found fault with the absurdity and blasphemy
of their opinions, and vnduetifulnesse of their speeches, or danger of their
purposes, but only warned them to be wary etc. least they might be illuded of
the Devil: so leaving it at that time doubtful, whether he allowed them to
be such extraordinary men or no.

In his said Narration he further shows, that he asking Hacket, when he
saw the two Gentlemen? Hacket answered, they had been with him that Morning
whiles he lay in his bed, and had suddenly departed from him with one cry,
saying, Christ is come, Christ is come whereat he said he marueiled, not
knowing what was their meaning in the matter: adding further, that he had often
warned Coppinger to take heed of conceiving too much liking of his own
spiritual gifts, Scilicet.
whom he perceived to be ravished with an exceeding love, and extraordinary
care for the safety of his Mistress, meaning the Queens Majesty, who (quoth
Hacket) is undone (and here is put an etc.) For you and all other Preachers
shall be damned, unless she for her part, and you for your parts, do
speedily fall to Reformation. Wigginton also says further, that Hacket either
at that time, or not long before, did exhort him to deal faithfully in the
Lords business, and that he had heard Hacket pray sometimes before, in
strange terms, as these and such like, viz. Father, I know thou love me
as well as thou love thine own self. Thus when Hacket had answered
Wiggintons demands touching Coppingers and Arthingtons speeches (as is before
set down) he said he would depart home into tbe Country, yet he would
leave word behind, for his adversaries to know in what place they should
find him, if they were disposed to call for him. And withal made great show
(after his former wo^ted manner) as though he neither feared Magistrate, nor
cared for any punishment, nor doubted any danger to ensue upon him, for any
thing he had done or said, or should go about.

Now touching some things markable in this Narration of Wiggintons. First, if
Arthington say true in his confessions: that Hacket published not himself to
have that office of Christ or his principal spirit, till the very moment that
they were to go into the City to proclayme (as they did) and if they went not
unto Hacket that day till they had first been with Wigginton, which seems to
be true: then could it not be, that Wigginton heard that of them two at that
time, which he reports them to have spoken in the first, second, third, and
fourth article: and therefore he was made acquainted with it, before that time.
Secondly, that, which he makes Hacket to fumble about somewhat doubtfully in
answer to the fourth article (touching the old Magistrates that were gone,
and of new) does argue, that Wigginton was also made privy to the intent of
displacing all the old Counselors, and placing of new, as was plotted by the
conspirators. Thirdly, their lewd and malepart imputation of her Majesty's
Honor to be blemished, and affirming she was undone, though it had been no
more, were matters of that quality, that no duetifull or well advised subject
would have either concealed, or so lightly passed over as he did. Fourthly,
it is probable, that Hacket meant rather to have mattocks turned into spears
then contrariwise: for I see no peaceable means that was thought on by them.
Fifthly, we may observe that here is a Reformation moved, which upon pain of
damnation must be undertaken, and that with all speed, even Now, (they say)
wherein others beside the Queen have their parts to perform in erecting off
it: some whereof have also extraordinary gifts and callings to run in that
course of Reforming, and Wigginton (being yet a prisoner, but belike put in
hope of speedy deliverance by their means) is appointed a principal
assistant to them: yea, and is made privy unto some matter, for which Hacket
thought he was not unlike to be afterward sought for, and which he knew
might be dangerous unto him, had he been such a man, as any Magistrate,
punishment or danger might have dismayed, and yet not sought to be revealed by
Wigginton unto any Magistrate, till upon his examination it was found out.
Lastly, I observe the Coggerie of the Reporter, or else the lewd lying and
contradiction to himself of that wretched seducer Hacket. For in his answer
to the fifth and sixth articles he knows no degrees of glory in heaven, and
yet in his answer to the eight, he assigns more honor and higher places in
heaven unto some few that are the most forward, then he does unto others.

But let us go on with the Narration of the principal action interrupted by
occasion of the conferences had with Wigginton, and of his report of them.

From Wiggintons lodging the said Coppinger and Arthington came directly to
Hackets chamber in Walkers house at Broken Wharfe, and there found the beast in
bed after eight of the clock: where being enflamed (they say) with zeal out
of all measure, Coppinger began to pray at the beds feet, and Arthington
joined with him: wherein they stood much upon their own unworthiness etc.
but yet offered their obedience to do as the Lord should direct them by his
Spirit, having already done so much as was enjoined them. Whereupon Hacket came
out of his bed, and prayed with them in his shirt twice, that the spirit might
direct them, and they likewise obey the same in all things, to the glory of
God only. After Hackets latter prayer, Coppinger offered to go on in his
prayer, but the Deuilish spirit moved Arthington to interrupt him, and to
charge him in the Name of the Lord Jesus to arise and annoint the king, with
the holy Ghost. Whereupon Coppinger streightway rose up, and three times kissed
the boordes under his feet, rising up after every time, and making great
reverence with bowed knee: and after the third time he came toward Hacket as
he lay in his bed, who put out his hand, and took Coppinger by the hand,
Blasphemy.
and said, You shall not need to annoint me, for I have been already
anointed in heaven, by the holy Ghost himself. Then Coppinger asked him, what
his pleasure was to be done. Go your way both (said he as Arthington reports)
and tell them in the City, that Christ Jesus is come with his Fan in his
hand to judge the earth. And if any man ask you where he is, tell the^ he lies
at Walkers house by Broken Wharfe: and if they will not believe it, let them
come and kill me, if they can: for as truly as Christ Jesus is in Heaven, so
truly is he come to judge the world. Then Coppinger said it should be done
forthwith: and thereupon went forward, and Arthington followed so readily the
said Prophet of Mercy, that he had no leisure to take his gloves with him,
and yer Arthington could get down the stayres, Coppinger had begun (in the
house below) to proclaim news from heaven, of exceeding great mercy: that
Christ Jesus was come etc. as above is said, with whom Arthington also cried
the same words aloude, following him along the streets from thence by Watling
street and Old Change, toward Cheapeside, they both adding beyond their
Commission these words, Repent England, Repent. But surely either their
Commission was delivered them (at one time or other) more largely then the one
of them now reports: or else they went beyond and exceeded it in many other
material points besides this. For after they both had thus come (with mighty
concourse of the common multitude as to such a novelty of hearing two new
prophets in these days arisen was likely) with an uniform cry into Chepeside
near unto the cross: and there finding the throng and preasse of people to
increase about them, in such sort as that they could not well pass further,
nor be coueniently heard of them all, as they desired; therefore they got them
up into an empty cart which stood there, and out of that choice pulpit (for
such a purpose) made their lewd and traiterous preachment unto the people:
wherein they stood not only upon the words of their former cry, but (so
near as I could learn from so common an Auditorie, and in so confused an
action) they reading something out of a paper, went more particularly over the
office and calling of Hacket: how he represented Christ, by partaking a part of
his glorified body: by his principal spirit, and by the office of seuering the
good from the bad with his fan in his hand, and of establishing the Gospel
in Europe (which as it seems they took to be all the world, or else
supposed, that all Europe did profess Christianity) and of bringing in that
Discipline which they so often babble of, and which they mean by the term of
Reformation and the holy cause: that he was now come, and all these things were
presently to be performed by him, telling also the people, where they saw him,
where he lay and remained: that they were two Prophets, the one of Mercy, the
other of Judgment, sent and extraordinarily called by God to assist him in
this great work, and were witnesses of these things: confirming the same upon
their own salvation, and wishing themselves confounded and damned for ever, if
these things they spoke, were not true. And thereupon, the one of them
pronounced Mercy, great comfort, and unspeakable joys to all that should
repent presently, be obedient, and embrace this acceptable message and
opportunity offered: and the other denounced terrible Judgments, if they
repented not, which should even presently (also) fall upon them, and especially
upon that City of London: affirming that all that believed them not, were
condemned body and soul. This judgment against London (as Arthington the
pretended Prophet of Judgment, says he gathered out of Hackets history)
was, that men should (there) kill and massacre one another (as Butchers do
kill swyne) all the day long, and no man should take compassion of them. There
was then and there further delivered by them, or by the one of them, that
Hacket was King of Europe, and so ought to be obeyed and taken: and that all
Kings must hold of him, and that the Queens Majesty had forfaited her
Crown, and was worthy to be deprived. Which most traiterous point (amongs
others) Hacket enjoined them to publish, as in the one of his Inditements is
contained. Lastly, in very unmannerly and saucy terms they prayed to God, to
confound two great Lords of her Majesty's Counsel: for these two (together
with a certain Knight) they then and there openly and most lewdely accused in
general terms of treason. This outrage was done the sixeteenth day of July
aforesaid, about ten of the clock or something after, in the afore-noone.

By which their proclamation, being laid together with their former
conferences, Letters, and purposes against the Queen and Counsel, and for
aduauncing of Hacket, and for altering the State, with the very time (when so
many soldiers were about the City) it is evident to any, who has but half
an eye to see with, that they intended and hoped to move tumult and sedition:
that by many hands of the common multitude (which they brag of, saying, they
are already inflamed with zeal) they might have brought all their purposes at
length to a sure and speedy conclusion, which designement, for their pretended
Reformation, this sort of people do greatly lament, so long to have been
frustrated, after so many other several kind of means, in vain attempted by
them. But God (who stays the raging of the waters, and the madness of his
people) did frustrate them herein of their purpose and expectation: his Name be
always praised therefore.

And whereas they had purposed to have gone with the like cry and proclamation
through other the chief parts of the City, the preasse (not of Officers to
take them, but of common people to gaze and wonder at them) was so great, as
that they were forced to go into a Tavern in Cheapside, at the sign of the
Mermayde: the rather, because a Gentleman in a white doublet, being of his
acquaintance, plucked at Coppinger whiles he was in the Carte, and rebuked him
for his strange and lewd demeanor and speeches.

Whereupon (though Arthington were offended with the said Gentleman for
touching a Prophet of God in so rough a sort as he said) yet they were both
contented to step aside into the said Tavern with him: where when they had
remained a space, Coppinger was persuaded by one of the aforesaid Lawsons men,
that stayed there at that time (for avoiding the wondering and preasse of the
people) to step over into Woodstreete, and from thence by back Lanes to his
sisters house near unto Powles wharfe, where he lodged. But whiles they two
were going together, Coppinger was very careful to know, whether Arthington
followed them or not: insomuch as he would not be satisfied, till the said
apprentice went back again for him. At whose coming back, he found
Arthington still publishing his foresaid messages to the people, and telling
them of Hacket and of his Office, with whom Arthington was content also at
last to go by the same streets that Coppinger had gone, but yet crying (as
he did before) Repent England, Repent etc. When in this sort they two were
come together to Coppingers lodging, they found the gates shut against them:
whereupon the said apprentice would have had Arthington to have gone to his
own lodging, but he would needs go to Walkers house at Broken wharfe, where
not long before he left Hacket. All the way that Arthington went, he was
followed by a great multitude of lads and young persons of the meaner sort: But
at his coming to Walkers house, Hacket was not yet returned out of the city,
from Wigginton.

After that Arthington was entered the house, he was there stayed by one Edward
Jones an honest citizen: and when Hacket (not long after) came in, Arthington
said, There comes the king of the earth. But Hacket willed him to keep
silence, telling him he was too outrageous: whereupon he straightway (in very
duetifull manner) obeyed: for he called Hacket his Captain, and said, That
he would do whatsoever he commanded him to do.

When the said Jones (in searching about Arthington) found a writing in his
sleeue, Arthington said, That fell out as he would have it, for now it would
be seen: for he had made (he said) an Epistle to the Queen, and she would
not receive it, and therefore she was (he said) no longer Queen, but was
depryued of her Crown, Hacket saying nothing thereunto.

There was found also in Hackets Chamber, hidden at the beds feet, many
writings: and Walker (the owner of the house) brought also unto the said Jones
other writings of theirs, out of a stable.

And when Master Heiney parson of the Church of Saint Mary-Somersets an honest
and learned Preacher, looked on one of the said papers, Hacket reproving him
said, that it appertayned not unto him, but unto the Magistrates to look on
them.

Arthington (in speeches with the said Heyney) said amongs other things, that
the Judgments of God over that City were very great, and that the time was
now come, that God would reform his Church universally, and root out all
Idolatrous priests, and that the Ministers of that City were no better:
affirming him self to be a Prophet sent purposely from God, to denounce his
Judgments, and that Coppinger was a greater Prophet then he: that Cartwright
was a great learned man, and a Saint of God: but Wigginton was less learned
then he, yet far before him in dignity for his zeal, always concluding his
speeches with these words of imprecation against himself, viz. else God
confound me.

When the said Preacher demanded of Hacket why he had seduced Arthington to
bring him into such blasphemies, his answer was, that abundance of zeal did
cause him to exceed in that sort. Then he asked Hacket, how he liked that
Arthington ascribed unto him an Office peculiar to Christ? To which he would
not directly answer, but said, that God had a great work to bring to pass by
himself in this land, affirming that himself also was a Prophet, and had
endited that prophecy (which Arthington writ) to be sent to the Queen or
Counsel, and that he prayed to God to direct Arthingtons pen therein.

This strange accident being quickly blown through the city, all was in a
buzze, and in a kind of astonishment, what to think of the matter: and being
speedily brought to her Majesty's ears, (then lying but at Greenewich) two of
her honorable Counsel were presently dispatched unto London, to take further
notice of the whole matter. About one of the clock in the afternoon,
Coppinger was sent for, whiles Hacket and Arthington were brought before those
honorable Counselors and others at the L. Majors to be examined: but (as is
informed) they would not show any token of duty or reverence unto those
honorable persons, not so much as by putting off their hattes unto them. Then
their hattes were plucked off by others, and they were told their duties, and
were asked whether they did not know before whom they stood? To which they
answered, that they knew them right well: nevertheless they would yield them
no duty nor reverence, insomuch as themselves (they said) were greater
persons, then those before whom they were conuented, yet they seemed well
content to stand bareheaded, so their hattes were taken off by force, and not
put off by their own wills. This course of insolent behavior toward all
that examined them, both Hacket and Arthington held on, at sundry other their
examinations. Nevertheless, Arthington that was so scrupulous to yield any
reverence to the Queens Counsel, and Officers, at one time when he saw
Hacket, presently fell down groueling upon his face on the ground and honored
him, according to the Conuention among them mentioned before. And albeit both
these continued still resolute in their former fancies conceived of their
extraordinary callings and Offices, and sought most absurdly to defend it by
Scripture, (but chiefly by most terrible imprecations unto them selves,
praying to be confounded and damned if they said not true:) yet to all
questions that were asked of them, they answered (though most co^fidently) yet
pertinently, and directly to purpose, saying, that Hacket used the matter
somewhat more craftily, when any question of especial danger was propounded
unto him. For then would he by cunning euasions, by cauils, and by frustratorie
kinds of answers go about to put off such interrogatories, seeming when he
was pressed somewhat hard, to be weary of his part and person put on, if he
could have then told how to have shaken it off, and been rid of it again,
with any honesty.

Coppinger (soon after his first examination) finding the event of things not
to answer their expectations, seeing also the matter somewhat warmely taken
(as there was good cause) and thereby gathering the danger which he and his
accomplices stood in, and perceiving also (by the questions asked) the
intercepting of their writings and Letters, whereby their dealings were at full
discovered and brought to light; began, either by his own voluntary choice
(as some perhaps not improbably have imagined) or through anxietie (in deed)
of mind, growing forth of the badnesse of the cause, to behave himself as a
man distracted of his wits. Insomuch as coming at one time to be examined, and
finding Hacket there, at his sight he presently roared out, in a very strange
and horrible kind of voice: which Hacket willing to turn to the best,
straightway said, It was no marvel, though Coppinger did now so behave
himself, for that he had given him over already unto Satan.

By perusal of their writings and Letters, and by their examinations, all the
plots of treason and lewdness (before mentioned) fell out very evidently, and
more at full against them.

Touching the Queens arms defaced at Kayes house, Hacket did confess, at the
times of his examination, that he did it, none other being present, and that
he was moved thereunto inwardly by the spirit, to take away her whole power
of her authority, and that he would have done worse, had it not been for
disquieting his hostess where he lay, because when she found it, she was very
angry therewith: for he was not sorry, neither is sorry (as he then said)
for doing the act, because he was commanded by God to do it, and durst do
none otherwise. He confessed also, that he was likewise moved to put out the
Lions and the Dragons eyes in the arms: but being asked, why he did so? he
bitterly and maliciously answered, that he did know, that Lions and Dragons
did afflict Gods people. He did also raze out the cross, that was pictured on
the top of the Crown. He further confessed, that he meant also her
Majesty's Counsel should be removed, because they were (he said) wicked:
and that he himself (being moved by the spirit) would have placed certain
other new Counselors (whom he then named) to wait upon the Queen, and to
reform Religion. It is also confessed by him, that he told Arthington and
others, that he was the anointed King of Europe. By the depositions of the
said Kaye and his wife, it appears, that they finding (about a fortenight
before Hackets departure from them) the Queens Majesty's picture pricked with
some bodkin or iron instrument in the very place, representing her royal
heart, did in great anger charge Hacket with it. Whereunto he answered, that
he had done it, and must and would answer it; adding, he had greater matters
to answer then that, and therefore (said he) you need not make such ado
for it. But Hacket at all his examinations either denied this point flatly, or
said, he did not remember it. This Noble heart, which thereby he so
traitorously despited, God of his infinite mercy long bless and continue still
most happy and hearty in his love and fear, within her Majesty's sacred
breast, maugre all such execrable fiery spirits and hell hounds in earth, and
all the damned devils in hell. Amen.

Likewise he confessed, that he moved and sent forth Coppinger and
Arthington, to go whither God should send them, and to declare and publish,
that there lay a man (namely he the said Hacket) at Walkers house, which made
claim to the Crown of England, and that her Majesty had forfaited her
Crown, in that her Ministers have used extraordinary means to set up
religion. This he confessed on the one and twentieth, and three and twentieth
of July. But at his former examination on the nineteenth of July, being
demanded whether he would acknowledge that the Queens Majesty is lawful
Queen of England or not? he subtly then said, he would not answer to
that question, but said, she was Queen of England yet, if she had not
forfaited the same. And he further confessed (on the three and twentieth day
of July) that he first published in Hamp-shire (about three or four years
past) and afterward in Hartfordshire, and in Northhamptonshire, that her
Majesty was not Queen, and that she had forfaited her title to the Crown:
and that he told Arthington so much in Trinity term. All these aforesaid,
were confessed by him, without any torture: but being tortured, he then sang
another song, and confessed her Majesty to be his lawful Queen, and
affirmed, that he honored her, and was sorry for his offense: adding, that if
Coppinger, Wigginton, and one other (whom he named) were well sifted, and
straightly examined, they would utter and declare sundry matters of treason.

It fell out besides upon deposition of Kayes, that Coppinger (being told how
Hacket had used the Queens picture and the Arms) at the first seemed to
mislike with it, saying, that if he were such a fellow, he had done with him;
but (says he) you must bear with him: for some great men have also borne
with him, and he is with you, but as it were a prisoner.

Coppinger himself also at that his examination (which was taken the 19. of
July) confessed, that the Letter then showed to him, (and inserted before) was
the copy of a Letter which he sent to the said John Vdall about ten weeks
then past, and that the cause why he wrote to Vdall that he used not to
repair unto him and the rest who were in prison* so often as he was wont to
do, for doubt of more trouble and danger that might grown to them thereby,
was, in respect of this action, which he had to do: he also then affirmed,
that the Queens Majesty, Queen Elizabeth, is not Queen of England, neither
is he (as he said) now her servant, for Hacket is the only king of the
world, and that Hacket was commanded by God to deface her Majesty's Arms
which were in the house where he then lay, and that Hacket also pricked the
picture of the Queens Majesty at the heart. That himself, Wigginton, and one
other (the very week before Wigginton was committed) had a Fast together, where
they prayed, that if any of them should have any extraordinary calling, they
might have some extraordinary seal of it: about the which time, he the said
Coppinger was called in a Dream. And that he (together with Arthington, and
one other) had a former Fast at the aforesaid Lancasters house, about one week
before that time: and that her Majesty's Counsel (that now are) must be tried
by this King, whether they are to be removed from her Majesty or not: and
that she is to have to be about her to attend her person (for the time) such
as himself should assign, which shall be those, whom he has named in a Letter
of his, that is found with him: and some others also (he said) were meant to
have been assigned also for that purpose.

There fell out also upon some of Arthingtons examinations (whiles he remained
obstinate) certain other points not unworthy to be remembered. One was, that
whereas he, in writing of a treatise against the state of this Church as it now
stands, observed (as he says) therein his old wont to abstain from
bitter speeches and raylings, as a thing which he naturally abhorred: yet
within these few Months, and after he had entered into these actions, he had
altered his opinion, and was moved in spirit, to follow another sharp and
biting course of writing, as being more convenient in his judgment. Also,
when some that examined him, stood greatly upon this point, to persuade him,
that he was seduced in those things wherein he seemed so resolute: and reasoned
against such their pretended extraordinary callings, gifts, and offices: then
he (for better confirmation thereof) said: that it should very shortly appear
to the world, that they were no such seduced persons, as was imagined. For
whereas a godly Gentlewoman in London (so he termed her) had been by the space
of fourteen years, possessed with a devil, (as is before touched) that (for
a sure sign of their vocation) the said devil should be thrown out of her,
by all, or some of their three means, very shortly. He also persisted wilful
in his former fancies, until the very time that he knew Hacket was hanged, for
until that day, he very confidently affirmed, that he was most assured by the
spirit of God, and by the joys and comfort he inwardly felt, that Hacket did
participate with Christ in a part of his office, and was in deed king of all
Europe, on whom her Majesty and all other, must hold their crowns and
scepters, and must govern (if they would continue their government) by such
laws, as he should prescribe and set forth, that all they three should shortly
be dismissed, and should go over sea with Hacket, to take possession of all
those his other kingdoms abroad, and to perform their offices. But when the
vanity and danger of this strange fancy was opened unto him, his answer was
to this effect: You think (says he somewhat pleasantly, as it were pitying
their error and misconceit) that we have incurred the danger of laws herein:
and that we shall therefore be put to death: but as sure as God is in heaven,
the sword shall not come near to hurt us, neither shall any man be able to
touch the least hair of any of our heads.

Thus, the mean time (for the most part thereof) from Friday the 16. of July,
until Monday seuennight after, being spent in examinations, it was thought
good, that Hacket should then come to his trial: on which day (being the 26.
of July) he was brought from Bridewell to the Sessions house near Newgate,
before the Lord Mayor, the Lord Wentworth, Sir Gilbert Gerrard knight, Master
of the Rolls, Sir Wolstane Dixie, and Sir Richard Martin knight, M. Sergeant
Fleetwood Recorder of London, M. Daniel and others in that Commission: where
after the graund Jury was empannelled, the witnesses that should give
evidence sworn, and two several Indictments against him found, Hacket was
willed to hold up his hand, which he did: then the first Indictment was read
being of this tenor being turned into English, viz.

The Jury do present for the Queen, London ss.
that William Hacket late of Oundell in the County of Northampton yeoman, as a
false traitor against the most excellent and Christian Princess our Sovereign
Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God, of England, France, and Ireland, Queen,
defender of the faith, etc. his natural and Sovereign liege Lady, having not
the fear of God in his heart, nor weighing his due allegiance, but seduced by
the instigation of the Devil, maliciously and traitorously, compassing,
imagining, devising, and intending the deprivation and deposing of our said
Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, from her honor and royal name of the Imperial
Crown of this Realm of England, on the 21. day of July, in the 33. year of
the reign of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth now Queen of England, at London,
that is to say, in the parish of S. Brides in the ward of Farringdon extra
London, and diverse other days and times, betwixt the 12. of February last
past, and the 25. day of July, in the said 33. year of her Majesty's reign,
as well in the parish and ward aforesaid, as else where in London aforesaid, of
his own perverse, and traitorous mind, and imagination, maliciously, expressly,
advisedly, directly, and traitorously in the presence and hearing of sundry
faithful subjects of our said Sovereign Lady, these false, malicious, and
traitorous English words following, concerning our said Sovereign Lady the
Q. Majesty, falsely, maliciously, advisedly, expressly, directly, and
traitorously said, rehearsed, published, and spoke, viz. That the Q. Majesty's
(meaning thereby our said Sovereign Lady Q. Elizabeth) was not Queen of
England: and that the Queens Majesty (meaning thereby our said Sovereign Q.
Elizabeth did represent al hypocrisy, and had forfeited her Crown, and was
worthy to be deprived, and that he had been of that opinion these four
years: and that he defaced her Arms in Kayes house (thereby meaning the house
of one Ralph Kayes situate and being in Knight-rider street in the parish of
S. Gregory near Paul's in the ward of Baynards Castle London) to take away
her whole power of her authority, and was moved thereunto by the spirit, and
that he neither was, nor is sorry therefore, to the great scandal and
derogation of the person and Royalty of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen,
and to the subversion of the state of this Realm of England, and contrary to
the form of a statute in this case made and provided, and also against the
peace of our said Sovereign Lady, her Crown and dignities, etc.

Being asked whether he were guilty to this Indictment or not? he confessed
and pleaded guilty: adding this, All must be as you will. Whereupon M.
Attorney general desired for the Queen, his confession of the Indictment
might be entered. Then Hacket being again bidden to hold up his hand, he did
so accordingly: whereupon the second Indictment was read being in English as
follows, viz.

The Jury presents for the Queen: London ss.
That William Hacket late of Oundell in the County of North-hampton Yeoman, as
a false traitor against the most excellent and Christian Princess our
Sovereign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God of England, France and Ireland
Queen, defender of the faith, etc. Having not the fear of God in his heart,
nor weying his due allegiance, but seduced by the Instigation of the Devil,
and intending wholly to withdraw, put out, and extinguish the hearty love,
and the true and due obedience, which a true and faithful subject of the
Queens should bear, and by law is bound to bear, toward our said
Sovereign Lady the Queen. The first day of July in the three and thirtieth
year of the Reign of the said Queen, at London in the parish of Saint
Gregory's near Paul's in the ward of Castle-Baynard London, falsely,
maliciously, and traitorously intented, imagined, went about, and compassed,
the said Queen his Sovereign and natural liege Lady, not only from her
Royal state, title, power, and government of this Realm of England, utterly
to deprive, depose, cast down, and disherit, but also to bring and put the
said Queens Majesty to death, and final destruction, and sedition in the
said Realm of England to raise up, leauie and make: and also wholly to
subvert and destroy the state of this whole Common wealth, being in and
throughout every part thereof, well constituted and ordered. And to the intent
he might fulfill and bring to pass those his aforesaid traiterous purposes,
imaginations, compassings, and intents, the said William Hacket afterward,
that is to say, the said first day of July, in the three and thirtieth year
of the reign of the Queens Majesty that now is, did come to the mansion
house of one Ralph Kayes situate and being in Knight-rider street in the said
Parish of Saint Gregory in the ward aforesaid: and then and there,
maliciously, deuilishly, and traitorously, rased and defaced the Arms of the
Queens Majesty then and there in the said house being, with this intent,
traitorously to take away, put down, and overthrow the power of authority of
the said Queen. And that the said William Hacket for further accomplishing
and effecting of his said traitorous purposes, imaginations, compassings, and
intents, the said first day of July, in the said 33. year of her Majesty's
reign, in the house of the said Ralph Kayes situate in the parish and ward
aforesaid, did traitorously raze a certain picture of the Q. Majesty's, then
and there in the said house likewise being: and then and there did maliciously
and traitorously put in and thrust an iron Instrument into that part of the
said picture, that did represent the Breast and Heart of the Q. Majesty. And
afterward, that is to say, on the 16. day of July, in the 33. year of the
reign of the Q. Majesty that now is, the said W. Hacket, traitorously came
to the house of one John Walker situate and being in the parish of S. Marie
Sommersets in the ward of Queene-hithe in London aforesaid, with intent,
traitorously to confer and treat, with one Edmund Coppinger Gent. and Henry
Arthington Gent. concerning his traitorous purposes, imaginations, compassings,
and intents aforesaid, And that the said William Hacket afterward, that is to
say, on the 16. day of July in the 33. year of the reign of the Q. Majesty
that now is, at London aforesaid in the house of the said John Walker, in
the foresaid parish of S. Marie Sommerset in the said ward of Queenehithe in
London, of his own perverse and traitorous mind and imagination, maliciously,
advisedly, expressly, and traitorously, did treat and had conference with the
said Edmund Coppinger and Henry Arthington, by what ways, means, and manner,
the said traitorous purposes, imaginations, compassings, and intents, might be
accomplished and brought to pass. And thereupon on the said 16. day of July,
in the said 33. year, in the said house of John Walker aforesaid, situate and
being in the said parish of S. Marie Sommersets in the said ward of
Queene-hithe London, in the presence and hearing of the said Edmund Coppinger
and Henry Arthington (being then and there in the said house) the said Hacket
these false traitorous English words following, of our said Sovereign Q.
Elizabeth, falsely, maliciously, advisedly, expressly, directly and traitorously,
said, rehearsed, published and spoke, viz. That the Q. Majesty, (meaning our
said Sovereign Lady Q. Elizabeth) had forfaited her Crown, and was worthy
to be deprived. And that furthermore the said William Hacket thereupon the
said 16. day of July in the said 33. year, in the said house of John Walker
situate in the parish of S. Marie Sommersets in the said ward of Queene-hithe
London, maliciously, and traitorously moved and stirred up the said Edmund
Coppinger, and Henry Arthington, traiterouslie and openly to publish and
declare in London aforesaid, that the Queens Majesty that now is, had
forfaited her crown to the great offense and derogation of the person of the
Queens Majesty, and to the subversion of the state of this Realm of England,
and contray to the peace of our said sovereign Lady, her crown and dignities,
etc.

And being likewise asked whether he were guilty to this Indictment or not
(belike perceiving that he was already plunged in far enough) he began then
to answer more peruerslie, saying to the Bench, You have wit enough to judge
for me and your selves too: being asked the same again, he said, Few words
are best, it is good to know much and to say little: and being diverse times
asked, he still repeated these words. Then being told that if he should
persist in that sort, not to plead directly as by law he ought, it could not
serve his turn, for that alone was sufficient of it self, to condemn him of
the treason: and being asked again whether he were guilty or not, he said,
Ambo. But some further good aduertisements being given unto him, at last (after
much ado) he pleaded not guilty to that second Indictment. Thereupon being
asked, by whom he would be tried? he said by the country: but being told he
ought to say, By God and by the country, he said, that he would be tried by
the Jury. And there withal, burst out into such blasphemous and hellish
words against the Majesty of God (in truth not to be heard by Christian
ears, and therefore not to be vitered or repeated here) that they were to the
great astonishment and horror of all, and detestation of him with all the
hearers. It may be that he hoped thereby to induce the Judges to an opinion,
that he was mad and furious, albeit in his countinance, gesture, attentiveness
to that which was spoken, silence when he ought, holding up his hand when he
was commanded, perceiving the effect of all was spoken, pertinent (though
sometimes perverse) answers, through all that action, no tokens of any fury or
madness at all could be noted in him.

Some have imagined that the Illusion of the devil was so strong to persuade
him of an immunitie from all danger, according to his former conceived
opinions, that thereby he grew to such a devilish impatience against God, when
as now he saw himself to be brought to more apparent danger, the^ (happily)
he supposed there ever would be cause for him to fear. Which thing seems
more probable to have been the occasion thereof, for yt immediately after his
blasphemy, he also used these words: God almighty is above, and will he not
revenge? But seeing he could not be brought to any other plea, the Queens
Attorney general, desired in behalf of the Queen, that judgment thereupon
might be entered. And seeing he pleaded guilty to the one, and stood mute to
the second, in that he answered not as law would (whereupon he was to be
convicted of both the Inditements) so that none Evidence (which was there
ready) needed either to be used, or by the Queens Counsel learned to be
opened or enforced: Nevertheless, for better satisfaction of the world, it was
by them thought meet, somewhat to show, both how heinous, and how evident (for
proof) his treasons were. And albeit I am not able (in any tolerable sort) to
repeat the grave, wise, and pithie discourses that were made in this behalf,
by those two worthy gentlemen master Attorney general, and master Solicitor
to her Majesty: yet (I hope) they will pardon me, to set down only some few
heads of their speeches, as they were noted briefly from their mouths, and
afterward brought unto me. Master Attorney declared, that the original of
these plots and conspiracies came from, and were for the Sectaries of this
time: that Coppinger in a letter to Vdall prays him and the rest in prison
not to saint: that he and others had taken a course for their speedy
deliverance, and desired pardon for not coming to him, which he said might
be dangerous, for that they should be the sooner suspected, or to that
effect: that there were letters dispersed in the streets five or six days
before the action: that there were found in Wiggintons chamber printed
pamplets, which should be sent to a great number of women (whom I, quoth
master Attorney forbear to name) as is touched before: that in other letters
was contained, that the Queen should command her Counselors to their
chambers, because of the stir and danger which then should be: that Hacket
himself had before confessed (besides the other points of the Inditements) how
he sent Arthington and Coppinger to do and proclaim as they did.

Then master Solicitor very excellently also discoursed, how there was no
treason more dangerous then that, which is practiced under other colors, as it
were in the clouds, and none wounded so deep as those that were shadowed under
the cloak of religion and zeal: for of it commonly followed greatest
destruction and calamities. This he exemplified by the Anabaptists at Munster
in Westphalia, and some others: that in like sort (as they did) this Hacket
also affirms he was sent from God, was a principal Angel sent before the
Judgment, that he does participate (with horror I rehearse it, said master
Solicitor) of the humane nature of Jesus Christ, and the two other are
Prophets, one of Mercy, and the other of Judgment. That the Queen had
forfeited her crown: that the counsel was wicked, and must be ouer-ruled, and
by whom but by him? etc Then he showed what Hacket was, viz. a Bankrupt: that
he had married a widow, and had spent all.

Which done, master Recorder of London, gave judgment upon Hacket as in like
cases is accustomed. From thence Hacket was carried to Newgate, and there
remained till Wednesday next after (being the appointed day for his execution)
that in the mean while he might (by godly counsel) be brought to repentance,
and to provide for his souls health. Certain preachers so traveled with him
in the mean time, that albeit (for some while) he thought to advantage
himself, and to respite his execution, by giving (through dissimulation)
froward and lewd answers, yet at length they brought him (as it then seemed) to
a serious consideration of his own state, and of the grieuousnesse of his
treasons. In so much as master Richard Young of London coming also unto him
thither, on the Tuesday being the 27. of July, betwixt the hours of six and
seven in the after noone (sundry others also being in company) he found him (in
outward appearance) well affected. For when master Young wished him to submit
himself, and to confess his fault toward almighty God, he presently with
good words did it accordingly. Then master Young told him that God had
appointed death unto all men, but unto diverse in diverse sorts, and wished him
to take patiently that which God had laid upon him. This Hacket said he would
unfeignedly do, and withal asked the Queens Majesty for giuenesse, saying,
he was very sorry for the words he had spoken, and that it was a gracious and
happy turn, that their treasons were in time revealed: for otherwise it would
have cost a number of innocent men their bloods, and himself (he thought)
should nevertheless also, have been slain amongst them: but now he trusted in
God, that the others would confess also their treasons, and that her Majesty
was a gracious Prince, and would forgive them if they asked mercy. And if it
would also please her highness, to be so gracious unto him as to pardon him, he
would henceforth become a good subject. Furthermore (because he had no money)
he then desired M. Young either to give or to lend him some money: saying, he
would repay it again, if ever he were able, who thereupon did his devotion
toward him. Then Hacket thanked him, and desired master Young to pray for him.
Thus he continued in good temper that night, and the next morning, until
(looking out at one of the windows into the street leading toward Chepeside)
he saw all the street even filled (as it were) up with people, expecting his
execution. Thereupon he began to answer such as exhorted him very desperately,
and blasphemously: and when as coming down the stairs, one of the Shiriffs
wished him to be mindful of Christ's death, who suffered for him, he thereupon
uttered most execrable blasphemy against Christ's blessed passion.

He was brought from Newgate toward the place of execution, the eight and
twentieth day of Iulie (being Wednesday) after ten of the clock in the
morning, albeit by reason of the incredible multitude (then in the streets)
but especially in Chepeside from one end thereof unto another (the like whereof
at no assembly in memory has been seen) it was very long ere the Officers
(with all they could do) could get him to the very place. All the way that he
was dragged upon the hurdle, he continued his counterfeit vain that he had
then undertaken: one while crying out Jehovah Messiah, Jehovah Messiah: another
while crying out thus: Look, look, how the heavens open wide, and the son
of God comes down to deliver me. When he came under the gibbet (which was
reared hard by the cross in Chepeside, toward the right hand of the street
as you come from Paul's) and the noise being appeased, he was exhorted to ask
God, and the Queen forgiveness, and to fall to his prayers: but he
perseuering in his unprofitable course of dissimulation, in stead thereof, fell
to railing and cursing of the Queens Majesty, most villanouslie. But being
more vehemently urged to remember his present state, and to give over all hope
to do himself good by such dissembling, he began to pray this most
passionate, blasphemous, and execrable prayer, videlicet. O God of heaven,
mighty Jehovah, Alpha and Omega, Lord of Lords, King of Kings, and God
everlasting, that know me to be that true Jehovah, whom thou have sent:
send some miracle out of a cloud to convert these Infidels, and deliver me
from these mine enemies: If not, I will fire the heavens, and tear thee from
thy throne with my hands. With other words of most execrable blasphemy
against the divine Majesty of God (not to be rehearsed) by reason that he
found not that deliverance, which he fansied God to have promised. Then turning
toward the Executioner, he said unto him, Ah thou bastards child, will thou
hang William Hacket thy king? The Magistrates and people detesting this
subtle, seditious, and blasphemous humor, commanded and cried to the Officers
to dispatch with him, or to have his mouth stopped from blaspheming: but they
had much a do to get him up the ladder: And when he was up, he struggled with
his head to and fro, (as well as he could) that he might not have the fatal noose
put over his head. Then he asked them (very fearfully) O what do you, what do
you? but seeing by the circumstance, what they intended, he began to rave
again, and said, Have I this for my kingdom bestowed upon thee? I come to
revenge thee, and plague thee, and so was turned off. But the people unwilling
that so traitorous and blasphemous a wretch, should have any the least favor:
cried out mightily to have him cut down presently, to be quartered, and seemed
very angry with the Officers, that made no more haste therein: but as soon
almost as he was cut down, (even with a trice) his heart was taken forth, and
showed out openly to the people, for a most detestable, blasphemous traitors
heart.

Thus died the most dangerous firebrand of sedition, most detestable traitor,
most hypocritical seducer, and most execrable blasphemous helhound, that many
ages ever saw, or heard of, in this land.

The next day after this (being Thursday,) Coppinger having wilfully abstained
from meat (as is said) seven or eight days together, died in Bridewell: and
Arthington lives yet in the Counter in Woodstreete, reserved (I hope) unto
sincere and perfect repentance. For immediately upon Hackets execution, he
wrote a letter unto two great Counselors, (whom among others he had lewdly
slandered) of submission, and afterward (more at large) he wrote to the body
of the Council, the whole course (as he pretends) of this action, so far
as he was made acquainted therewith, humbly craving their Lordships mediation
unto the Queens most excellent Majesty for his pardon, and acknowledging his
dangerous error, and devilish seduction (by Hacket especially) into this
traitorous action.

This declaration is truly taken forth of their own letters, writings under
their hands, and their confessions upon examinations, subscribed by themselves,
and by sundry honorable and worshipful persons of great gravity, and
wisdom, before whom they were made: and therefore may suffice, to show unto
all reasonable and well affected, the lewdnes and danger of the hypocritical
plots, and sedicious conspiracies entered into by these persons.

But some there are so peruersely wedded to their own wills, and addicted to
their fancies once conceived, that they give out they were mad, and furious
persons, choosing therein, rather to accuse the honorable Justice of the
Realm, and all the administers thereof, then that any of their factious crewe
(professing desire of pretended Reformation, and to bring in The Discipline (as
they call it) should be noted with so deep disloialtie.

As it is not the part of any honest Christian, by calumniation to charge those
yt be innocent: so does it not become a loyal subject, to justify any
traitors, especially with slandering of the State. It therefore seems
requisite, that this point be not left vncleared: whether they or any of them,
in these practices, were in deed tra^sported with fury, besides themselves, so
as they needed not to have been regarded, nor (by law) ought to have suffered
death for them?

In wants of understanding and reason (after such time as men should naturally
have them) there are noted diverse degrees, that are also of several
consideration, that is to say: Furor sieve Rabies: Dementia sieve Amentia:
Insania sieve Phrenesis: Fatuitas, Stultitia, Lethargia, and Deliriu^. And
albeit the three first (by sundry writers) be sometimes confounded and taken
for one, like as also the fourth is with the fifth, and the sixth with the
last: yet when the diversity espied in the things themselves, do drive men
to a more exact consideration, and distinction of the words (by which those
passions are to be expressed) they are for the most part thus properly termed
and distinguished by the best writers.

Furor (as it is described by Tully) est mentis ad omnia caecitas: Tusc. qu.
li. 3.
an entire and full blindness or darkening of the understanding of the mind,
whereby a man knows not at all, what he does or says, and is englished
madness or woodnes. Bal. in I. sed and milites iam autem ff. de excus: tuto: and
passim alij.
He that is possessed herewith, is carried with fury of mind, into great
violences, and outrages, so that he neither spares himself, nor other men,
and is called in Greek (...). Such was the madness of Ajax (as is fained by the
Poets) who whipped and scourged droues of beasts and cattle, thinking they
were the Graecians that had displeased him, and afterward in that rage, killed
himself.

Dementia is described there, Ibidem.
by the same Author, to be affectio animi lumine mentis carens, A passion of
the mind, bereauing it of the light of understanding: Quintil. Declamat. 348.
Or as another grave and learned Author calls it, ablatus rerum omnium
intellectus, when a man's perceiuance and understanding of all things is taken
away, and may be englished distracted of wit, Festus.
or being beside himself. Such one is called also Mente captus, cum men's eye
potestate abijt, in Greek (...). I. 2. D de inoffic. testamento.
This infirmity of the mind is less then furious rage, and to be
distinguished from it. They differ in this, that the first is, as it were
carried with great outrage of mind, DD. in 1. Instit. de curat.
into violent courses: but he that is only mente captus, uses greater
quietness of body, and calmenes, and shows not such outward testimonies in his
actions, of alienation of his wits: yet neither of these have any ruled
memory, will, understanding, or feeling, of that they do or say. Tuscul. qu.
li. 3.


Insania is also described by Tully (upon the judgment of the Authors of the
12. Tables) to be inconstantia sanitate vacans, quae tamen possit tueri
officium vitae communis, and cultum vsitatum; A kind of Inconstancy void in
deed of perfect soundnes of mind, yet such, as that he which has it can
observe and do the common offices of this life amongs men, in some reasonable
and tolerable sort: such be all they, whom commonly we term either
frantic, braine-sicke, cracked-witted, cocke-braines, or hare-brained men,
being not altogether unapt for civil societies, or void of understanding, to
perceive what they say or do, or what is said unto them: albeit they have
many strange conceits, toying fancies, and perform sundry, rash, indiscreet,
mad, and foolish parts. Many examples of these three degrees, much differing
one from another, may be observed in our daily experience, and in histories of
all ages.

Fatuitas is the want of wit and understanding, wherewith natural fools are
possessed: But Stultitia is that folly which is seen in such, as albeit they
be but simple and gross witted, yet are not to be accounted very Idiotes, or
Naturals. Therefore one speaking modesty of himself, Afranius.
said thus: Ego stultum me existimo, fatuum esse non opinor. I take my self
to be but a simple man, yet (I hope) no stark idiote.

A Lethargy is a notable forgetfulness of all things almost, that heretofore a
man has known, or of their names: so that such one often times forgets
also his own name, calls any thing by a wrong name, and beginning to speak,
forgets what he had said before, and what he meant to say after. This
distemperature and weakness comes by some blow, sickness, or age.

Delirium is that weakness of conceit and consideration, which we call dotage:
when a man, through age or infirmity, falls to be a child again in
discretion: albeit he understand what is said, and can happily speak somewhat
pertinently unto sundry matters.

If a man, whiles he is troubled with either of the first two infirmities,
shall commit any thing, which in his own nature is criminal, all good laws
do rather pity his case, then punish him, albeit, in the rest, it be not
absolutely so observed: for volunt as non actus, affectus non effectus
distinguunt maleficia: we are not in punishing offenders, so much to respect
the event, and what is done, as with what purpose, mind, and affection the
thing is done. But such as be furious, and distracted of their wits, are
intended (whiles that passion lasts) to have no will, l. 17. filio. D. de
iniurijs L. 2.
to know or perceive nothing, and therefore not to give consent to any thing
they do, or say. In which respects they are compared in law, to men absent,
finali. D. de iure Codicillorum.
and utterly ignorant of any thing done by themselves, or in their presence.

Now then, to examine these three persons by that which has been said: It
may be yielded, that their imaginations, purposes, plots, and designements,
respecting the weightines of the end, and weakness of the means, were
fantastical, unadvised, and most fond and unlikely, yet none otherwise then
may be also truly said for the most part of all such fanatical fantastiques,
schismatiques, heretics, or maleco^tented treasonable conspirators
whatsoever. But cannot (truly or with any color of probability) be affirmed,
that any of them were mad, beside themselves, and out of their wits, as not
knowing and perceiving what they did or said, or what others said or did unto
them.

First concerning Arthington, I have not heard so much as any doubt at all of
madness to have been made by any man that conuersed, or had to deal with him,
either in, or after this action. But because Coppinger has been supposed by
many (after the time of his first examination) to have fallen into stark
madness, let us a little look back, and briefly recapitulate some points, that
have been before touched concerning him, to see, if any such distraction of mind
could also be noted in him, by the carriage of this action, before his
apprehension. Yet I do know, that it has been doubted (upon some good ground)
by wise men, whether he were in deed mad, even at any time after he was
apprehended, as he made show, or whether it were only fained by him. For a mad
man may, and often times does, for 2. or 3. days together, eat no meat, nor
happily drinks not at al. But when the humors of his stomach are fully
concocted and put over, so that for want of food, it begins naturally to
suck back the blood and nourishment, distributed before into the veins and
parts, which breeds hunger: then will a mad man (most commonly) very greedily
and rauenously, even by course of nature, fall to his meat, if it be showed
him, and cannot abstain, because he cannot dissemble this appetite, in the
time of his fury. But Coppinger is said to have forborne and abstained from
meat and drink (though they were offered unto him) by the space of 8. whole
days: whereby he grew so weak, as that it may seem, he died for want of
sustenance. Such resolution or obduration of mind, can hardly so long together
remain with him, that is mad in deed, and knows not what he does.
Howsoever it were after, it is sure, that before their pageant was played,
(wherein matters prospered not as they expected) the whole course of his
speeches, writings, and other dealings were such, as do argue no defect at all
of reason, memory, wit, or understanding, setting aside the absurdity and
folly of the fancy, wherewith he was led.

For when he first had taken apprehension of such extraordinary calling, he
yielded not straight way and unadvisedly unto it, but after long and deliberate
debating with himself: his care was great, and course (as in such a matter)
was considerate, in seeking to be resolved by such, as he both then, and before
held, to be best able to judge of his gifts and calling: the questions that he
framed were very pertinent to that purpose, and orderly penned: his letters and
speeches to T. C. to Eg. to Chapter to Vd. to Lan. to Wig. to P. W. to I. T. and
others, and to them of foreign Churches, were (for that matter) well and
advisedly indicted: his cunning was not small, to keep the very particular way
of effecting that which he desired, from those he dealt with, because himself
knew it a dangerous secret, and a course not justifiable, unless it came by
extraordinary motion, and special oeconomie from God, and therefore he
desired to have it allowed so to be: his pretense of entertaining intelligence
(touching some important service to the State of the Realm, whereof he
pretended to have an inckling, but no full and particular knowledge) was none
unadvised or simple reach of policy, in him. For if in platting of his
purposes, and dealing in the principal action, any thing of doubtful
acceptance, should happen to have been after discovered, then might he well and
with good color, have pretended, that he did it but in way of attaining to
intelligence of those dangers, whereof the generality (as it were in the
clouds) he had before delivered to a Counselor. For he might not seem a man
to be suspected of any disloyal purpose, who showed himself so careful for
his Sovereigns safety. Add to these, his cunning petition* to have prisoners
for treason, etc. to be examined by himself, and execution of condemned
persons to be stayed at his beck, whereby he might more easily have induced
them to appeach, whom he list to have overthrown, and whom he principally
aimed at. His subtlety also does notably appear in his petitions to her
Majesty: where he makes show of great secrets to be delivered only in her
presence, and prays to be pardoned, if in over much fear of her safety, he
had attempted to prove that, which he could not, which argues, that he had
(in deed) not so much as any colorable intelligence delivered unto him, of
treason intended, by such great men, as he pretended: but used this as a
means, to have access, for himself and the others, unto her Highness
presence, for some further intended mischief: then his allowance and
commendation of sound and good counsel given him, by Eg. a preacher, and by
others: his sparing to reveal the great and dangerous secret unto Hacket, upon
their first acquaintance: his rasing out of Hackets and the Towns name, out of
the letter sent by him to a Noble personage, to give inckling of treasons
intended against her Majesty, least the quality and unlikelihood of the man
being enquired after, that plat should be dashed: his not subscribing of his
name to sundry letters: his directing of Hacket, neither to subscribe nor
endorse (but in that sort as he prescribed) for fear of discovery: his
desire to have all the letters again, that he had written to Eg. about that
matter: his wary and diligent keeping of copies, of every letter that he writ
in that cause: and when leisure served not so to do, his great care to have
the very letters again: his offense with one Hoc. for keeping a letter from
him, which he had sent unto him: his cunning excuse of Hackets defacing of the
Queens Arms: his counterfeite revelation to bring Arthington further in: his
devise to make Arthington resolute, by saying it was revealed to him, that they
had Angelical spirits, not subject to hurt, by any mortal power: his willing
choice to withdraw himself into an house, when (after their proclamation)
things fell not out as was expected, and from thence afterward to go to his
place of abode, thorough by-lanes: his and Hackets putting of the matter from
knowledge of Arthington for a time, though afterward (happily) to be opened,
why the Queen might not be prayed for, in particular: their pretense of the
Lords commandment, to keep the means secret: how the Queens Majesty and
the Council were to be brought to repentance, and unto their pretended
Reformation: The sensible and coherent manner of report unto Wigginton,
touching Hackets and their own callings, and offices, by Coppinger and
Arthington: their temperate and pertinent answers unto Wiggintons speeches,
and all their consulting sundry times together, about their business, namely,
the night before, and the day of their proclamation, do plainly argue, that
Coppinger (albeit he were greatly misled by a false and spiteful zeal, and by
much hypocrisy) yet was he far enough, from any distracting of his wits, in
every part of this action.

And concerning Hacket (whose terrible blasphemies at the last, do argue
either a villainous dissimulation to have his execution respited, or a desperate
intemperancie against God, for frustrating his expectation) there can no fury
or madness be justly noted in him, by the whole managing of this action, but
rather, notable hypocrisy, craft, and dissembled holiness. First, in that he
seemed a man most zealous for the pretended Reformation of the Church, by
erecting the Discipline, and afterward also for reforming of the Commonwealth:
That he used (in outward appearance) a most fervent, and devout manner of
praying: that in his prayers, he did execrate himself most deeply, if he
sought not the glory of God only in this action, thereby the better to be
credited, and to cover his villainies: that he took a days deliberation, to
answer the great matter, after it was first propounded by Coppinger: that he
sought to get credit to himself, and to terrify her Matestie, by telling (in
generalities) of strange judgments of God, imminent over her, that were
revealed unto him: that foreseeing it not unlikely to rain (after a long time
of drought) he prayed in Coppingers presence for rain, whereby it might seem
to be sent by God, at his only prayer and mediation: that he bare them in hand
he could tell things to come, being merely contingent: that he could feign
such kind of Revelations, as if they were showed to him in the midst of his
torments, which (if they be marked) tended only to have himself magnified, as
a man placed most highly in Gods favor: that when the one of his followers
seemed offended, he craftily excused the mislike which he had showed, to hear
her Majesty prayed for: that the better to color his hatred and malice, he
afterward prayed for her himself: that he cunningly induced Coppinger, either
to feign or to fancy a Revelation, that he, and Arthington must obey him the
said Hacket in all things: that he pretended to dispense with Arthington, for
honoring him as king of Europe, until he should do it before others, where
it might stand him in better steed: that he craftily put off his intended
anointing by Coppinger, (as being already done in heaven) lest some (unlooked
for) accident happily falling forth, the whole pageant might have been marred:
that his pretended greatest office of seuering (in Christ's behalf) the good
from the bad, with his fan in his hand, was concealed from Arthington, until
the very time that the message was to be done by them, when as it was too late
to consider of it, and unlawful to be disobeied: that this office he proclaimed
unto them (after his two solemn prayers, for direction of them by Gods spirit,
to the glory of God only) as it were an oracle newly dropped down from
heaven: that he answered Wiggintons questions very cunningly* as touching the
old Magistrates that were gone, and the new come in place, meaning thereby (in
truth) the displacing of al her Majesty's Council: that he warily qualified
Coppingers and Arthingtons speeches, which seemed unto Wigginton, to attribute
a little too much unto him: that (coming through yt streets, and seeing their
proclamation had not made such stir, as was hoped) he then pretended unto
Wigg. that he had not set them on work, but maruailed what they meant thereby,
and thereupon signified, he would depart yt city, and be gone home: that fearing
what might happen in the event of the tumult, he sent them into the streets,
but tarried behind in the house himself: that he put the trial of his said
pretended great office (which he claimed in Christ's room) upon this issue and
trial, that none of yt people which should come to see him, had the power to
kill him: for he knew that no private subject might or would attempt to do it,
howsoever otherwise they took the matter: that after the matter fell not out to
his purpose, and being returned to Walkers house, he rebuked Arth. overmuch
forwardnes, for calling him there (openly before others) the king of the earth,
and excused this in him, by his great zeal: that he slily avoided the
questions which the minister of that parish did ask him touching those things
which Arthington attributed unto him: that he used at his examinations, many
crafty euasions, when any question of capital danger to him was asked: that
he constantly at all his examinations persisted in denying, and said he did not
remember that action which seemed most odiouslie traitorous touching the
piercing that part of the picture, which represented her Majesty's royal
heart: that he denied also to have sent them to publish as they did: that he
did answer so doggedly and (in truth) knauishly, to the question of defacing
the Lion and Dragon in her Majesty's arms: that to a question (of most
importance) whether her Majesty were lawful Queen of England? he refused to
answer: that he subtly answered (albeit not to the lawfulness of her being
Queen) yet she was (in fact) Queeene as yet if she had not forfeited it: that
when he was tortured, he revoked his treasons, and sorowfully submitted
himself, a course which by the extremity of pain (at the first assaying of
it) does drive a man (being in deed mad) into a far greater rage and impatience
then he was before: that till he was tortured, he would not appeach any other
his accomplices in the treasons: that being not willing to plead directly to his
second indictment, he drove of the time with cunning answers, in deed
importing nothing less then madness: that being in good temper, and (as
seemed) well disposed in mind both the night before, and the Wednesday morning,
until he saw no remedy, but that he was presently to be executed, he burst
not forth into his horrible blasphemies: and that at the very execution, in
his greatest impatience pretended, (albeit his speeches were most villainous
against the Queen, and blasphemous toward God) yet he understood what was
said and done, his words had sense, and his prayer was coherent together, one
part with another. None of all which things premissed, can happen or be found
in him, that is in deed furious and distracted of his wits, such as the laws
not only do pity, but also spare and protect from all punishment*

If any man now shall marvel how such vain and foolish conceits, could so
deeply possess men of any consideration, let him remember what Luther writ
against certain like fanaticall persons, the Anabaptists in Germany: who
pretended like purity, and intended also a dangerous Reformation: There is
(says he) none error so absurd, but (when Gods wrath is once kindled) the
devil is able to persuade it.

But if offense be taken by any against the Gospel it self, for that these
weeds have sprung up in the times, and amongst those persons that make outward
profession of it, let that be called to mind, which I said in the beginning of
this treatise, and the comparison and resemblance now ensuing be considered,
with these men's purposes, opinions, and actions, which there I promised to make
betwixt them and certain heresies and tumults stirred up in Germany, at the
very beginning of the renewing of the light of the Gospel, by the preaching of
Luther, Zuinglius, and others, the brief of which story is thus, viz.

About six or seven years after Luther began to preach the Gospel, Sleidan
lib. 4. and 6.
the devil (to disturb this work) stirred up certain hotebrained,
inconsiderate, and importune preachers, that misliked not only the doctrine of
the Pope, but the doctrine of Luther also, as not being so spiritual, nor
serving so fitly for planting of purity, as they thought requisite. By whose
continual clamor, and sharp Inuectiues against the enormities of the
Ecclesiastical state, the Nobility and Magistrates, such effect was wrought,
as that (in short time) there was kindled a most fearful war of above one
hundred thousand of the common and vplandish people, rising and taking up
arms, almost about one time, in several parts of Germany, where they sacked
towns, killed certain of the Nobility, and did many other outrages. For such
preachers having set them on fire, did so harden them also, as that they could
not be wholly vanquished, until (what in one place and in other of that
country) fifty thousand of them were killed, and cut in pieces by the united
forces of the most of the Princes of the Empire. The manner of these peasants
linking themselves together, was in secret conuenticles by night, and
assemblies in private houses, where they gave mutual faith and oath, each of
them to stick to other. Their purposes and counsels were how to overthrow the
state Ecclesiastical, the Magistrates and Counsels of Estate, in every
several Province. When they were up in arms, they made the pretenses of their
actions, to be the defending, erecting, and upholding of the preaching of the
Gospel through every place. Being once assembled in great troops, they then
set forth and published certain points, which they required the Princes and
Magistrates to perform and yield unto them, whereof these following were some,
amongst sundry other grieuances, which they pretended were offered unto them by
Princes, Noblemen, Magistrates and gentlemen, and whereof they urged a
Reformation, videlicet. One petition of those vplandish rebels was this: that
they and other the common people, themselves might every where have the free
choice of sincere ministers: another that Mortuaries might wholly be taken away:
a third, that they might be disburdened of paying any tithes to
Ecclesiastical persons, but only corn: and a fourth, that they might also
prescribe how these tithes should be better employed. Luther in an answer
that the made to that book of theirs, says, he conceived that this sedition
was a very stratageme of Satan: to the intent that the devil might destroy
and kill him, and other true and sound preachers of the Gospel, by men making
outward show and profession of the same religion, because he saw he could not
effect it, nor so far prevail by open adversaries, such as the Pope was and
his adherents. For these rebels called themselves a Christian congregation, and
bragged much, that they would (in all their actions) follow the precise rule of
Gods word. And whereas (under the pretense of detestation of sin, and of
their own great sincerity and good lives) these traitorous rebels noted many
faults in all other sorts and states of men, and protested also great loyalty
and fidelity to the persons of their Princes, so they might but have things
amiss reformed: he freely and truly puts them in mind, that whiles they
pried thus narowly into other men's faults, the devil had so blinded them
(through pride and hypocrisy) that they could not see their own derestable
treasons, with other their sins, and impieties: adding also, that such as
wrest away or abate Princes swords and Jurisdictions, will (upon any fit
opportunity offered) no doubt, take away their lives also: which is chiefly
maintained by their sovereign jurisdiction, and by power of the sword.

Amongst others, Carolastadius a preacher, professing the Gospel, but fallen
into discontentments and emulous oppositions against Luther: gave no small
advancement to this fearful commotion. This man attributed much to Cabinet
teachers in private conuenticles, and unto visions, and pretended conferences
with God. But of all other preachers that pretended enmity both to the Pope
and unto Luther, one Thomas Muncer was the hottest and chiefest bontifeu and
bellows of this sedition. At first he urged and exhorted men (in his teaching
by a good space together) and that with great vehemency, unto a singular,
strait, precise, and holy course of life: namely to fly all, even the least
show of actual sin, to fast much, to array themselves with mean and base
raiment, to retain a settled austeritie in countenance, to speak seldom, and
such like: which he called the bearing of the cross, mortification and
discipline. Now when as hereby he had procured unto himself, a great opinion
of holiness and reputation with the common people, he proceeded further unto
strange and very dangerous opinions: for then he began to teach men in their
prayers, to ask a sign of God, whether they held the truth in religion or
not? that if he gave not a sign, they might importune him, and expostulate
with him, that he dealt not well with them in not giving a sign to them, who
(in this sort) begged but true knowledge of him, saying, that to show such
anger in prayer, was acceptable unto God, for that hereby men did show their
feruencie in zeal. He taught also, that God (even in these days) did reveal
his will by dreams and visions: that all judgments civil, must be by the
Bible or revelation from God: that all in dignity must be equal. He rayled
against Princes, and imputed many faults unto them, and namely this, that they
suffered the Ecclesiastical state with great impiety. This opinion of
equality of authority and dignity, made the common people fall from their
work, and beginning to gad idly up and down, they took away (by violence)
such things as they had need of, from those that were more wealthy.

Muncer (in this sort) winning many unto him, they entered from time to time
into secret leagues together, upon mutual oaths given, to help to root out
and kill all wicked magistrates, to the intent new that were more godly might
be set in their places, for so (he said) God had given in commandment unto
him. According to which plots (by a tumult of the people) at Mulhusin, he
procured the old Officer to be deposed, and a new Magistrate to be set up in
his place, and himself to be chosen a Senator of that City, albeit he was
still a Preacher, and seemed to mislike this course in other men. Now when as
by these and other like means, great multitudes of men, to the number of
forty thousand had taken up arms, throughout Franconia, and Sucuia, then he
thought opportunity served him to set forward his purposes, by adjoining
himself unto them: and in this action one Phyfer, a near companion of his,
and like affected to him, did also join. But when the rebellious Rout wanted
victuals, and many other necessaries, whereby their courages began to fail:
then he comforted them in his Sermons, and assured them (as from God) that
their cause and quarrel was so good, that the frame of the whole world should
sooner be changed, then they should be forsaken, or left destitute of him. And
when the Princes army (gathered to subdue them, being greater and better
furnished then theirs were) was ready to join in battle, he still most
resolutely assured them, of some evident miraculous help, to be manifested
from Heaven, for the overthrow of their enemies: saying, that God would so
enfeeble all their enemies shot, that Muncer himself would receive them al
(without harm) into the lap of his coat, before they should light: for a
token hereof, it happened that they had taken the sign of a Raine-bowe for
their ensign, he showed them (as it fell out the self same time) a true
Rainebowe in Heaven, as an undoubted sign, that they should obtain the
victory. Whereupon they courageously at first set forward, singing a song for
aid by the holy Ghost: but being nevertheless all put in Rout and
discomfited, Muncer fled away, and disguised himself. Yet by means of
certain letters that were found with him, he was afterward in a house
discovered, and taken. Being brought before the Magistrates, he stoutly
defended his fact, affirming, that Princes, who refused to establish the
purity of the Gospel, were in that sort to be bridled. When he was brought to
the place of execution, and saw no hope of escape (which before he hoped for)
he grew to be very. much dejected, and perplexed in mind, in so much, as
without help of a godly Prince, which then stood by, he could not repeat so
much as the articles of his Christian faith.

I shall not need to dwell long in the application and resemblance of these
points, unto this late tragedy: the very reading of them over, giving
sufficient light unto the same. For the sharp and angry zeal of some
unadvised Preachers, which pretend neither to like of the Pope, nor of the
present state of the Church, for want of some purity, as they fancy, has it
not incensed, and made to boil over, not only the foul mouths of
Martinists, but also the traitorous actions of these Conspirators? And albeit
the common multitude (whom the Disciplinarians brag to be already inflamed
with zeal, ready to lend a hundred thousand hands for the advancement of
their cause, and by whom they hope and say such Reformation must at last be
brought in) did better keep themselves out of this action then was expected:
Yet the danger thereof was as great, and if it had once taken head, would
(happily) as hardly as the other have been subdued. Were not the treaties of
these men also in private houses at night-fasts, and the Consultations
concerning it, at Classical Conuenticles, and like assemblies? Did not these
likewise shoot at the overthrow of the whole state Ecclesiastical, and at
the displacing of her Majesty's most honorable Counsel, and that under pretense
of Reformation, and to advance the preaching of the Gospel in every
congregation throughout this land? Made not these the like complaints of wicked
Counselors, Noble men, and Magistrates, for keeping out the Discipline, for
persecuting sincere Preachers, and afflicting Gods people, like lions and
Dragons? And do they not pretend this to be a special grieuance of theirs,
that the common people of every Congregation may not elect their own
Ministers? that the people are brought under the yoke of the law Ceremonial,
by paying tithes, etc. and is not the hand and head of Satan, as plainly in
this action, to seek the overthrow of sound professors, by others of the same
profession, under pretense of greater sincerity? Do not these likewise almost
appropriate to themselves and their favorites, the tennes of Gods Church, of
Christian brethren, and of true and reformed Preachers? Is any speech more rife
in their mouths, then that they will only be tried and judged by Gods book,
and by his spirit? Do they not tax all other men (not so far gone as
themselves) of loose lives, of Antichristianisme, of Hypocrisy, and Idolatry:
in the mean time, never looking at their own treasons, disloyalties, and
other vices? Make they not great ostentation of love and fidelity to her
Majesty's Person, and of care of her safety, even when they secretly nourished
a fancy of forfeiture of her Crown, and sought to ouerrule her by Hacket
their imagined Sovereign King of Europe? Had they not their Cabinet Preachers,
their table-end teachers, their guides of Fasts, etc. that teach, pray for, and
attend extraordinary callings by visions, dreams, revelations, and
enlightnings? Was not Giles Wigginton and some others unto them, as Thomas
Muncer, and Phifer were to the Germans, men of supposed great austeritie of
life, holiness, favor with God, resolutenesse in his cause, singleness, and
uprightness of heart? Did not Wigginton resolve them, by examples he gathered,
touching extraordinary callings in these days, by reason of the great waste
of this Church of England? Had not he and they likewise learned of the same
Devil (in the prayers at fasts) to ask signs and seals of God, for their
extraordinary callings? Does not Arthington say, that he importuned God in his
prayers? and Coppinger, that he had leave given to talk more familiarly with
God then before? Did not Hacket in praying for the pretended possessed
Gentlewoman, sawcily expostulate with God, and charge him with his promise, as
if he dealt not well with him? Did he not at his Arraignement and Execution,
show such anger in his prayers against God, thinking belike, as those did, to
be excused by his feruencie of zeal? Did not both he and Coppinger pretend
conference with God by sundry revelations and dreams? Fenneri theol.
Do not they and the rest of the Disciplinarian humor, exact and seek to
square out, even in Hypothesi, all civil policies and judgments (in causes
Criminal especially) unto the Judicials of Moses, given for the people of the
Jews? Is there any thing they stand more upon, or condemn the contrary
deeper, then to have an equality amongs all persons Ecclesiastical? Do they
not inueigh sharply against Prince and Nobles, for upholding the state
Ecclesiastical, and in this respect intended to have them brought to
repentance, when their opinions grew to a ripeness? Was not this their
principal pretended purpose, to plant the Gospel and their Reformation by
rooting out wicked Magistrates, and Counselors (as they judged) and by setting
others in their places? Did Hackets fansied Fan in stead of Christ, to sever
the good from the bad, import any thing else, or should it have served any other
turn, then for the killing up of all that thought not well of their Discipline
and Reformation? Did they not pretend the will of the Lord so to be? And was it
not plainly meant, this to be effected by tumult of the common people? did not
these likewise bear one another in hand, that all things should succeed and
prosper with them? that no violence could harm them, nor any man had power to
hurt them, as having Angelical Spirits, and being in most high favor with
God? and Hacket accordingly (even in going to execution) did he not call for
and expect a miraculous deliverance from Heaven, out of the hands of those,
whom he called his enemies? Did he not likewise (for a certain sign of his
favor with God) make Coppinger believe, that he could and did obtain rain,
and could stay it at his pleasure? Was not the chiefest of their plots and
conspiracies detected by their letters found with them? Did not they likewise
when they were conuented before the Magistrate, stoutly and resolutely defend
their dealings, and maintain, that the Prince had forfaited her right, and was
now to be bridled and ouer-ruled by others? and lastly, was not that impious
wretch Hacket as irresolute, dejected, and base-minded toward his death, as
Muncer, or any man either could be, or as so bad a cause might procure?

Not long after those former rebellions in Germany, another strange and
memorable Commotion happened in Munster, the principal City of Westphalia, a
Province also of Germany: which is not unmeet to be (in some points) also
touched in this place, for the near resemblance that it has unto this late
action.

After the suppression of this former Rebellion, Sleydan. lib. 6.
and about the year of the Lord 1527. Anabaptistrie began mightily to spread
it self in sundry parts of Germany, even as Cockle and Darnell does (by the
sowing of the envious man the Devil) among good wheat. It happened that in
the year 1532. one Bernard Rotman first, Idem. lib. 10.
and afterward five others (sent to assist him from the Lantzgraue of Hesse)
began to preach the Gospel truly, in and about the said City of Munster. In
the year 1533. one John surnamed of Leyded a town in Holland (having none
other known surname, by reason of his ignobilitie, being but a Cobbler, or a
Currier by his occupation) came unto the City of Munster. This Cobbler was an
egregious Anabaptist under pretense of professing the Gospel, and of an hatred
he had of Popery, he insinuated himself into the acquaintance of the
Preachers of the City of Munster: but when it happened once that in answer to
a question of his (in that behalf made) they told him, that young infants ought
to be baptized, he laughed at them, as it were in scorn and of pity of their
ignorance. Not long after this, one Herman Staprede, a Preacher came also
thither: but he preached openly against the baptism of young children. By
these means (but especially by their secret assemblies and conuenticles by
night) this heresy of Anabaptisme spread it self largely throughout that
City, so that great speech was made in every place thereof: albeit no certain
knowledge was had, because they admitted none other to their close assemblies
but such, as stood alike persuaded. This their course being come to the
Magistrates ears, all that favored that opinion, and had assembled themselves
in any such dangerous conuenticles, were (by a general Edict) banished the
City: but as they went out at one gate, so (being confident upon their
multitudes) they returned in at another: pretending that they were commanded
by God to stay there, and to deal more earnestly and resolutely in their
business. It happened, that Rotman (who before had preached against them)
began at that time, to show himself to be a favorer of their opinions:
which thing gave also great encouragement unto them, insomuch as they then
challenged the sound Preachers (which stood against them) unto disputation. But
when this challenge was accepted, so that learned and grave Judges and
assistants might be chosen, and that whatsoever should be determined, might
firmly be stood unto, and observed of all without further contradiction: then
they shrunk back, and refused disputation upon any such conditions. Hereupon
they began to be less esteemed with the people, then they were before;
therefore to recover their former reputation with them, they devised another
more short and plausible course, which was this. About the end of December,
one of them pretending to Repent, Repent, and be again baptized, or else the
judgments and wrath of God will quickly and suddenly ouerwhelme you. By this
occasion, many of them which before did lurk secretly in corners, and kept
themselves close, came suddenly abroad, and in great routes and plumpes ran
together (with the former cry) into the chief street of the City being the
Market place, making great outcryes, that all which were not rebaptized in
token of repentance, should be slain as heathens, and as ungodly men. After
this, (with sundry great outrages done by them against many of the Citizens)
they invested themselves of the Guyld hall or Towne-house, and of all the
Artillery and Munition of the City: so that many persons, what upon credulous
simplicity, and what for saving their goods and lives, were content to be
rebaptized with them. Nevertheless, others (for sauegard of their goods and
themselves in this perilous uproar) betook themselves to a place in the
Town, very strong by natural situation, and apprehended many of the seditious
Anabaptists for prisoners. These skirmishes lasted betwixt both the parties,
until they grew to a parley and composition, giving hostages each to other,
for observance of it. And albeit the said Rotman, and one Bernarde
Cnipperdoling (being chief in the faction) had also allowed of such
composition: yet by their sundry Letters, privily and under hand sent unto
others of their faction and sect in places and Cities abroad, they
trecherously (from time to time) invited very many, (though it were with loss
of their goods abroad) to retire themselves to dwell at Munster: assuring them
of ten times as much, Anabaptists, and to the rest of the common sort. Thus
becoming masters of the place, they by and by put out all the old Senators or
Counselors of that estate, and the two Consuls (being the chief
Magistrates) and put others in their places, and namely they called
Cnipperdoling to be one of their Consulles. Then they fell to burn, ryflle
and deface the Churches, and in plumpes went through the streets, crying,
Repent, Repent: and immediately after, Avoid all ye wicked, upon peril of
your lives. Whereupon all the Anabaptists put themselves in Arms, and
(according to their proclamation) drove out of the City, all whom they
supposed not to be of their sect, without regard either of age or sex.
Insomuch as diverse women with child through the great throng and their
ouerhastie departing, pitifully miscarried. This banishing and proscription
happened the very day before the Bishop of the City being also temporal lord
thereof, planted his siege against the town, for reuolting from his obedience.
In the midst of all these outrages, sundry (calling themselves prophets) did
arise up amongst them; who pretended to have extraordinary callings, gifts,
functions, and revelations from God; the chief whereof was one John Matthewe,
next to him was the said John of Leyden, and then Cnipperdoling, Crecthing and
some others. This Matthew (their principal Prophet) charged every man (upon
pain of death) to bring all his gold, silver, and moveable goods into a great
common storehouse appointed for that purpose, to the end they might be used
and bestowed in common: for so he protested to them, it was the will of his
heavenly Father. The people were greatly grieved with this rigorous Edict;
nevertheless they obeyed, though sore against their wills. Neither was it
possible (without great danger) for any to conceal or hide any part from them,
because there were in ye City two gyrles, soothsayers, that did reveal
whatsoever was concealed, at least so it was believed. Then the said Matthewe
commanded every one to bring all his books whatsoever (saving the holy Bible)
to be publicly burned, which was accordingly performed. Thus taking great
confidence and boldness that his hestes and aduises were so readily obeyed,
and had so good success; he most insolently and cruelly thrust in with a
Pike, and after shot in with a Harquebuze one Hubert Trueteling, only for a
merry ieste that he made, touching one of their Prophets. Yet seeing that he
did not die thereof out of hand, the said Prophet told them, it was revealed
to him from heaven, that Trueteling should live, and continue, and that God had
forgiven him. Nevertheless, he dyed of his wounds within few days after.
Then Matthewe got into his hand a long pyke; and running hastily therewith
through the Town toward the gates, he proclaimed as he went, that God the
Father had commanded him to beat back all ye enemies (that besieged them)
from the town. But being met near the camp, by one only soldier, he was
by him thrust through, and so died. And albeit the falsehoode of his forged
prophesies was thus twice detected, yet the other prophets (his companions) did
so disguise the matter, and bewitch the people, that they could not perceive
his coggeries, but did rather much lament his death, as a matter ominating some
great mishap toward them, for that so excellent a man was taken away. Yet John
of Leyden comforted them, saying, that God had revealed unto him long before,
that Matthew should have such an end, and that he should marry his widow. Some
few days after, Cnipperdoling also prophesied, that high mountains should be
brought low, and the poor and mean should be exalted: and thereupon commanded
all which was left standing of the Churches to be demolished even with the
ground: assuring them (and that with a constant settled gravity and great
earnestness) that this commandment came from God himself: and in further
accomplishment (as may seem) of such his prophecy: John of Leyden gave to the
said Cuipperdoling the sword of execution, and so made him the common hangman
of the City, that immediately before was Consul and chief Officer. This office
of Executioner (belike upon compact between them) he willingly accepted, and
obeyed Leyden therein, as the messenger of God. Now after that some assaults
had been made against the City, by the Bishops Army besieging it, (albeit
with no success) John of Leyden laid him down to rest, and dreamed three
days together. Being awaked, he spoke not a word to any person, but calling
for paper, writ down the names of twelve men (whereof some were in deed
Gentlemen of blood) who should have the sovereign charge of all, and should
govern the City, as the heads of the tribes did in Israel: for so he said, it
was ye heavenly Fathers will. But hereby (in very truth) he laid the
foundation of a kingdom, whereunto he aspired. Then he propounded unto their
reformed Preachers, certain articles to be resolved in by the Scriptures
alone: by which if they could not confute them, then he would (as he said) put
them up unto the people, that by their authority they might be established.
The effect of them was, that a man was not bound unto one wife, but might marry
so many as him self lusted. When their Preachers made some difficulty and
sticking at it, he called them into the Counsel house, together with the
twelve new Governors or Elders. Then he put off his cote and laid it and the
new Testament down together before them, swearing by those two (as by assured
tokens) that the articles by him proposed, were reueiled unto him from heaven,
and that God would never be merciful unto them, if they did not yield unto
them. Hereupon they gave their assents, and after (for three days together)
they preached of nothing but of marriage. Then Leyden married three wives: one
whereof was the widow of their great Prophet Matthewe lately deceased, and
diverse other followed the like example, as if it had been a matter most
allowable and lawdable. But some of the Citizens (of better disposition)
finding this course to be most abominable, gave a watch word through the town
for all that truly favored the Gospel without fantastical novelties, to come
into the Market place: where being assembled, they apprehended Leyden,
Cuipperdoling, and all the rest of their Prophets. But when the common people
were advertised hereof, they straightway took Arms, and rescued the prisoners
from them. The people also laid hands on them, which had apprehended their
Prophets, putting them to death with most exquisite torments: namely, they
fastened fifty of them unto trees, and shot at them with harquebuzes, their
great Prophet (all the while) crying thus unto them, that he that would do God
good service, should first shoot at them; and others were put unto sundry
other several kinds of death.

In the Month of July that year, a new prophet (being a goldesmith by his
trade) did arise up amongs them: who having called the multitude together into
the Market steed, signified unto them, it was the will and commandment of
the heavenly Father, that John of Leyden should be Emperor of all the earth;
and that he marching forth with a puissant army, should destroy all Kings and
Princes, but should spare the common people that loved righteousness and
synceritie, to the intent he may hold the seat of David his father, until
the heavenly Father should receive again the kingdom: for (said he) godly men
must only rule in the world, after they have once dispatched all the wicked
out of the way. When the Prophet had ended these speeches, suddenly John of
Leyden kneeled down, and lifting up his hands to heaven, say de thus:
Brethren, it is a good while agone since I first knew this, and yet would not
hitherto publish it abroad: but now the Father has used another Minister to
bring it to pass and to proclayme it. So having (by this subtlety) compassed
to be King, he first deposed the twelve Governors, and after the manner of
other Kings, did choose and create sundry to be great Lords about him: he
also caused two Crowns of pure gold to be made for himself, and a Royal
robe, collar and scepter, with other complements of Majesty. He assigned also
certain days, wherein he would give audience to all complaynants and suitors.
Whenever he came abroad, he was attended with his Officers and gentlemen of
his Court, and with two young henchmen on horesebacke, the one on his righthand
carrying the Bible, and the other on his left, carrying a drawn sword. He had
also a magnifical Throne prepared and set on high for him, with a golden cloth
of Estate. At a certain time, when the King was thus set in his Majesty, and
the people thronged close together about him, Cuipperdoling one of the
prophets, got upon the peoples heads; and so creeping along on his hands and
feet, he breathed upon them in their mouths one after another, saying thus:
the Father has sanctified thee, receive the holy Ghost. Certain weeks after,
the new Prophet (before mentioned) caused (by sound of a Trumpet) to be
proclaimed, that all should retire themselves in arms unto the Churchyard of
the chief Church, for that the enemy must be repelled from the town. Coming
thither, they found a great supper ready prepared. Then there sat down to
supper (as they were commanded) four thousand: and after these had supped,
one thousand more (that had waited) sat down. The King also, and the chief
Queen, together with their courtiers did serve at table. The supper being
toward an end, the king gave bread unto every one of them, saying, Take,
eat, and show forth the Lords death. Then the Queen presented them with the
cup, saying, Drink, and show forth the Lords death. This being done, the said
prophet got him up into a pulpit, and asked them if they would obey the word of
the Lord? which when they had yielded unto that they would, he said it was the
Fathers commandment, that eight and twenty Doctors or Teachers should be sent
forth into all the corners of the world, to teach ye doctrine that was taught
and received in that City. Then he named them all, and the particular place
whitherech of them should go. So after all was done, they let the said eight
and twenty Preachers out of the town by night very closely, for fear of
those without, who besieged them: giving to every one (above that which should
defray his charges) one piece of gold, and commanding them to leave it at such
places where their doctrine should not be received, for a testimony of such
peoples damnation, and everlasting perdition, for refusing such message and
wholesome doctrine. When those Preachers were come to the places assigned unto
the^, they cried in the streets of the towns where they came, Repent, repent,
or else you shall all quickly perish. Then they spread their garments on the
ground before the Magistrates, and upon them they laid the pieces of gold which
were before delivered unto them, assuring them, and protesting that they were
sent from the heavenly father, to bring them peace and mercy: and if they would
receive it, then they must give up all their goods to be used in common: but if
they refused it, then that sign and token should be a witness against them of
ingratitude and rebellion against God. For (said they) now is the time come
that was spoken of before by ye Prophets, in which righteousness shall reign in
the earth universally; and when the King (meaning John a Leyden) has brought
to pass, that righteousness shall rule in every place, the^ Christ shall give up
his kingdom to his Father. But these preachers being hereupon apprehended, they
resolutely stood in it, and defended, that they only held the true doctrine,
which they would maintain upon peril of their lives. Being asked, with what
justice they could enter upon, and possess other men's wives, children and
goods as they did? they said, The time was come forespoken of by Christ, that
the meek should possess the earth, and that God gave these unto them, as he
did give the goods of the Egyptia^s unto the Israelites. They affirmed also, yt
king David and John a Leyden were two righteous prophets: but ye Pope and
Luther were both false prophets: whereof Luther was the worse. Thus still
persisting obstinate in their erroneous opinions (not withstanding ye tortures
which they endured) they were al beheaded, saving one of them, that escaped
away by flight. Whiles these things were thus in doing within and abroad, the
city of Munster was every day more and more straightly besieged, and pressed
with extreme famine, so that for fear lest many ye chief Burgers should
capitulate with the enemy, and yield the King up unto the Bishop, their King
therefore did choose twelve, whom he held most faithful unto him, and appointed
them to be captains of war over so many several parts of the town, into
which he did quarter it: entertayning the said twelve persons with mountains
of large promises, and telling them over what great Provinces and Dominions
under him he would after place them. Thus the famine still more and more
increasing in the City (so that sundry died thereof, albeit the King had
abundance for himself and his special favorites, not only for supply of
necessity, but also to riot and banquet) it happened, that one of his Queens
in commiseration of the distressed, said unto the rest, that she could not
believe it was the will of God, that me^ should in that sort be suffered to die
for want of food. Hereupon being accused, she was brought into ye market place,
and being commanded to kneel down, the king struck off her head; all the rest
of his Queens singing, dancing, and giving thanks therefore to the heavenly
Father. But when as the common sort had like to have mutined, by reason of the
extremity of famine, their King promised them assured deliverance from God
before Easter. When Easter was come, no sign or toke^ of their deliverance
appeared. Then the king fained himself to be sick for six days: afterward
(assembling the people into ye market steed) he told them, that all that while
he had ridden upon a blind Ass, and that the Father had laid upon him the
sins of the whole multitude, so that now they were cleansed and freed from
all vice: which was the deliverance which he promised unto them, and therewith
they were to hold themselves contented. When the Bishops strength, by common
supplies from the Princes of the Empire were much ree^forced, matters (in the
town) grew to that extremity, that by means of two persons (who conveyed
themselves secretly forth of the town) it was at last surprised by the
assaylants, though with much ado and bloodshed, even after they were entered.
Their King, with Cuipperdoling and Crecliting their two false prophets were
taken alive: but Rotman their Reformed preacher (seeing no hope to escape)
desperately ran in amongs the thickest of the armed companies, and by them he
was cut in pieces. The three persons aforenamed were carried about the country,
as a spectacle to sundry the Princes and others thereabouts, and after were
brought back again unto Munster. The Bishop of Munster demanded of the
King, by what authority he took upon him to rule in that City? who asked the
said Bishop again, by what authority he the said Bishop claymed any
power there? When he answered, that he had it by means of election of the
Chapter, and by consent of the people, the King replying, said, that himself
had his authority from God. After two days had been bestowed with them, to
reduce them (by godly persuasions) from their errors, Leyden their King
confessed his sin, and desired for giuenesse at Christ's hands. But
Cuipperdoling and Crecliting would confess no fault, but defended their course
and opinions with great obstinacy. So all three being tied unto posts, were
dismembered by piece meal, and pulled in small pieces with hot burning
pinsers and tongs, and afterward their carkases were hanged up there in iron
cages; but the King in the midst, and much higher then the other two, as his
place required.

Besides certain especial opinions which these Anabaptists held, namely, ye
young children were not to be baptized, and touching lawfulness, of Poligamie
or having many wives: Of community of goods, and that Christ took not flesh
of the virgin Mary etc. they also taught and defended many other strange,
erroneous and heretical positions: and yet they showed as much devotion,
outward holiness and purity, as might be. As for example, they held these
following: viz. that a perfect Christian might not exercise ye office of a
Magistrate, nor might take an oath before him: that God does now oftentimes show
his will by extraordinary revelations, dreams, and visions: That the common
people have an especial authority in determining and establishing of Chruch
causes: That before the day of judgment the kingdom of Christ shall be such, as
that the godly and elect, shall overthrow and subdue all the wicked, and then
they alone shall rule in the earth: That it is lawful for the people to depose
and put down the Prince or Magistrate: That Ministers and others godly
affected, ought to establish (though it were by force) a Reformation in all
Countries: That Princes and Magistrates ought not to pursue this kind of
persons, for that they are innocents and the beloved people of God: That the
seat of David which was fallen down must be reestablished, and that Christ
now in the latter end of the world shall reign externally upon the earth:
That the time of besiege (they then lived in) was that whereof Esaie
prophesied, wherein the just and godly were afflicted and persecuted: That the
time of their deliverance and enlargement was at hand: which should be like to
that deliverance of the Israelites from the thraldom under the Babylonians:
And that then the wicked and ungodly shall receive the guerdon and recompense
of all their impieties committed against the saints, all the ungodly being
rid out of the way, the seat of righteousness should be prepared and
advanced: That there is none efficacy or force in that baptism, wherewith
infants are baptized. All which they obstinately defended, and yet (whenever
they were charged) they pretended that they would acknowledge and confess
their errors, if they should be showed unto them by the Scriptures, to be
errors.

Now as I have done before, in the History of Thomas Muncer, I must crave
leave, that with the readers patience, I may also briefly compare and resemble
some of the dealings and errors of the Anabaptists of the City of Munster,
with the actions and opinions of these late conspirators, and of their
Disciplinarian schoolemasters, from whom they have sucked like poison.

For did not Hacket (the most ignorant of all the three, being but an
unlettered Maltster) in like sort take upon him to rule the other, and to
manage the whole action? and are not the most ignorant of such as be of this
humor, most presumptuous to direct all others, and to discuss deepest doubts?
Have not their mutual cohortations, and seditious instructions, with their
conceived prayers, and hypocritical Fasts, (that they practiced in privy
conuenticles, and assemblies) given greatest strength to his faction, to the
seduction of numbers? Have not the Magistrates now as great cause to look into
these proceedings, before they make head, upon confidence of their multitudes?
Have not all the stayed and sound Preachers of this land, by sundry
Maleperts, and now again by Arthington, been (most insolently) challenged
unto disputation? Has not the cause of this pretented Discipline, been
neuethelesse quashed (oftentimes) in Pulpits, in public disputations in the
universities, and by learned treatises written: whereby the weakness, and
meagernesse of their childish collections, have been fully displayed? Will
they make any haste, or dare they to offer disputation, if such conditions,
assistants, and indifferent and learned Judges as are fit, shall be set down
and appointed? and (being beaten from their ordinary means) have not these
Conspirators, and such as have animated them, betaken themselves unto pretended
extraordinary callings, rauishings in spirit, caryings into Heaven,
revelations, dreams and visions? Have they not seditiously filled our streets
with their like hypocritical outcries of Repent, Repent, etc. and by gathering
of Routes, tending to vproare and popular tumult? If their purposes had
succeeded, and their prophecies of killing and massacring men (like swine) in
London streets, had come to pass; would the outrages, in haynousnesse, have
come any whit behind those of Munster?

If this sort of persons have been gratified with any indifferent toleration,
could their restless busy heads (though they have promised otherwise) cease
to hammer, by long hand, and secretly, the bringing to full effect of their
designements, viz. That they might govern in the Church with Christ's scepter,
and administer his kingdom? for so they (blasphemously) term the Discipline,
which they have forged? Was not the displacing of her Majesty's Counsel
plotted by the Confederates, and had they not assigned other Counselors in
their rooms? Should those, whom themselves had thus chosen and assigned, have
remained long in place, if their King Hacket, had been once invested, as fully
and royally as John a Leiden was in Munster? Would they not quickly have
brought them down, as Cnipperdoling was, from being Consul to the basest
room of account, that might be? would these (if they had prevailed) have
spared (think ye) either place, age, or sex, or should banishment only
have served? No: Viscera impiorum crudelia. And did not Hacket take upon him to
be as great a Prophet, as John Matthewe, or John a Leiden his successor? and
Coppinger the Prophet of Gods mercy, as high as Cnipperdoling? and Arthington
the Prophet of Judgment, and pen of a ready writer, as refined and
excellent, as Crechting the goldsmith? had not these also appointed out
Wigginton and Lancaster, to be their assistants for a time, as it were their
petie Prophets? Did they not pretend the will of the Heavenly Father, for
every most ungodly, and absurd motion, speech, or action, as namely for the
defacing of her Majesty's Arms: and that she should not be prayed for? Did
not these pretend and feign, to be in high favor with God, and that they
could tell secrets, and things to come, merely contingent, and to be able to
cast out Devils, and to obtain rain at pleasure? matters of as great
difficulty and vnlikelyhoode, as soothsaying and bewraying of things
concealed? Did they not inueigh against the humane wisdom (of diverse of their
own judgment) whom they supposed not to be forward enough? and do not
many of the Disciplinarian vein, despise and condemn all helps of good Arts
and learning, as little less then impious, but specially in Sermons? Was not
Matthewe the chief Prophet of Munster his fancy stronger, and his resolution
greater, then these Conspirators showed in any part of their action: when he
thought himself alone able to repel an whole host? and yet he was not
therefore accounted furious, mad, or distracted of his wits? Was not
Coppinger likewise, as deeply bewitched as the people of Munster, when he
could not perceive, that Hacket did but dally with him, about particular
intelligence of some treasons, supposed to be plotted by some great persons?
had not these three, and this sort of Humorists, as great envy at old and
Cathedral Churches and others: when as they seek to procure their overthrow?
Did not Coppinger fancy, to have had his extraordinary callings, and
enlightnings, by dreams in his sleep? Had they not likewise appointed their
governors for matters of Counsel, and for other civil administration? Do
not this kind of persons also make show of desire, to have all questions
decided alonely by Scriptures? Does not the Discipline give the chief and
sovereign allowance or disallowance of all Ecclesiastical determinations,
unto the whole congregation? Did not these Conspirators use (as means to be
trusted that God had revealed such things unto them) oaths and execrations of
damnation and confusion to themselves, as deeply as John a Leiden did, when he
did swear by his coat, and by the new Testament, touching the like
revelation? Did not Hacket their great Prophet, thirst after, and threaten
revenge against some great persons, who he though did stand in his way? Did
not Coppinger and Arthington proclaim in the Market place of Chepe, and
afterward defend, that Hacket was King and Emperor of all Europe, and that
God had so appointed it? Did they not hold, that he together with themselves,
should go forth, and take possession of all his kingdoms here and abroad,
and subdue all kings, that would not hold their scepters of him, and be
governed by such laws and orders, as he should appoint: and that he should
sever with his Fan, the good from the bad, so that they should not trouble
and afflict the godly any more? Had not Hacket also, his said Prophets to
proclaim him publicly King of Europe, as John of Leiden had the goldsmith?
Did not Coppinger (upon Arthingtons advertisement) with three most lowly
obeysances, and with great gravity, take upon him, and was ready to annoint,
and sanctify Hacket with the holy Ghost, but that (by a shift) he was put off?
and as they of Munster had their profane and impious celebration of the
Communion, before they sent forth their 28. Preachers; In like manner, had not
these, their hypocritical fasts and prayers, promulgated and made known, unto
sundry of their own disposition, that they might join (either in body or
spirit) with them, before they enterprised any matter, or entered consultation of
weight, or would assume their supposed extraordinary callings? Do not these,
and all like affected to them, by their teachers in every corner, seek to
win or persuade, as many to the liking of their opinions, as possibly they
can any way compass, and hemme in? Have they not also their set, empty,
thundering words, and solemn obtestations, to allure men to believe that,
which they teach? Did not the said two English Prophets, offer by their
Proclamation, great mercy and joys to them that should believe or follow
them, and infinite woes and damnation, to those that should reject them? did
they not signify, that the time was come for the establishing the Gospel and
Reformation, by their K. Hacket: and therefore willed all true Christians to be
of good comfort, because the wicked should be overthrown? did they not engage
their lives, yea and souls, upon the verity of the messages, that they
published? and were they not a good while (after their apprehension) very
obstinate and resolute in their fancies conceived? was not Coppingers promises
of speedy deliverance unto Vdall, as confident and resolute as John a Leidens
was unto the people of that City? though the event showed, that at last all
did but come, to the riding of a blind ass? did not Hacket likewise
blasphemously affirm, that by the whipping which Pigge bestowed on him, he did
suffer for the sins of all hypocrite preachers, such as favored the
discipline, but were not so forward, as he thought they ought to be? Was not
the resolution of one of these, as lewd as Rotmans (who after all hope was
past, ran amongst the armed companies) if he also did (as was said) with
like wilfulness, refuse to take any sustenance? was not the desperateness of
Hacket also most horrible and fearful, when as (seeing no remedy but death)
he opened his mouth blasphemously against heaven, and against the Majesty of
the Eternal God?

And concerning certain opinions of the Anabaptists, do not many of the
Disciplinarian humor, come far nearer unto them then were to be wished? for
though they deny not the civil magistrates superiority altogether: yet in
causes Ecclesiastical, though they admit it (in words) they allow unto him
nothing else but execution of their orders without attributing any superior
pre-eminence of commandment in church causes, for retaining of good order,
and of soundness of doctrine in the Church. Likewise, though they take not the
sovereignty from the chief magistrate in causes of the common wealth, do
they not so abridge and pound his authority in causes Ecclesiastical, that
the very Papists do attribute as much in this behalf unto him, as they do?
And albeit they will not absolutely in judgment deny the lawfulness of an
oath before a magistrate, yet if their sundry and variable positions in this
point be marked, they do (in effect wholly) repeal the use of it. For do not
some of them plainly refuse to take an oath, whereby they may be urged to
discover any thing which may either be penal to themselves, or to their
Christian brother, and so in effect deny it altogether? Do not others of them
refuse to tell any thing that is criminal concerning any other person, though
perhaps they will do it against themselves, especially when they think it is
before discovered and known? Do not some of them refuse an oath simply, yea,
and to answer (without oath) either affirmatively or negatiuely, but do will
their accusers to stand forth? Do not others deny to take an oath, except
every particular question be before made known unto them: a matter impossible,
because sundry questions that shall be asked, do arise forth of the matter of
the answer? And do not sundry of them (albeit they yield to detect by oath
both their own and others offenses) yet deny to reveal any thing whereof they
are asked, if themselves be persuaded the matter demanded of, be none offense?
And so they do hang obedience to laws, allegiance and duty of subjects, upon
every particular man's conceit, eue^ as he by circumstances, or his own fond
persuasion, shall list to measure matters, Do they not resolutely hold, that
summapotestas, the chief and Sovereign power in all church-causes, belongs to
a Presbytery, who though they may consult, yet may not determine matter of any
moment, without the allowance of the people? Had not these conspirators a like
opinion to those of Munster, that the principal spirit of Christ (being in
Hacket) he was come with his fan to sever and dispatch out of the way, all
the wicked and ungodly, from the good and godly? Has it not been set down by
an English subject, and twice printed with singular allowance of the English
Arch-prophet of discipline, for found and holy divinity, that it is Gods
ordinance, to have in every kingdom certain chief officers (like Ephori in
Lacedamon) who should have authority to depose kings, though they come unto it
by lawful succession, if they shall judge them to be tyrants? Did not
Wigginton deliver for sound doctrine, that if the Magistrates did not govern
well, the people might draw themselves together, and to see a Reformation? Do
not these kind of persons like wise slander the Prince and state, with
persecution of the saints, and of innocent men, because they are a little
restrained from running on in their seditious courses? Did not these
conspirators also hold, that now in these later times, Christ by his principal
spirit (imparted unto Hacket) should rain and erect an external kingdom on
earth, and in the world? And did they not fancy, that even at that time the
Gospel with their discipline, should be universally established, and all the
ungodly abolished? Do not all of the Disciplinarian sect hold, that to the
very being of baptism (and without which, it is of no more force in any case,
then the nurses washing) it is required, that it be administered by a lawful
Minister? thereby derogating, not only from the true baptism of thousands,
but also of all whomesoeuer, that were baptized by Popish sacrificing Priests
themselves, and from all that have received baptism of such, as were baptized
by them? whereupon must needs follow necessity of rebaptization, or else
that it were lawful to neglect and contemn that Sacrament, and high mystery
of our salvation. Lastly, do they not make great shows, and many pretenses,
for all their unsound and absurd opinions, that they are taken from the holy
and sacred written word of God? which by this means they make to be of private
interpretation, and do not reduce their senses unto it, when they read,
Scripturas ad suum non suum sensum ad Scripturas adducunt.
but do wickedly captiuate the Scripture unto their own senses and meanings?
even as (in this behalf) Coppinger or Arthington did first take upon them an
extraordinary calling, and were afterward charged by Hacket, to read over the
whole Bible, there to find an approbation of it.

God of his infinite mercy forgive, and turn the hearts of all that trouble
his Church, from running well, or that impugn his ordinance, and such as are
set over them: and restrain, or root out all fantastical errors, and
fanatical spirits, which the envious man (from time to time) does sow amongs
the good wheat: that holding the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace,
we may all meet together (in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son
of God) unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fulness of
Christ, and so speedily and joyfully meet him our bridegroom in the clouds,
with our heads lifted up, and full of comfort, and so reign with him for
ever, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom with the Father and the
Holy Ghost, one eternal, immortal, invisible, and only wise God, be all
honor, praise, glory and dominion, now and for ever. Amen. *


