THE TRIPLE CORD OR A TREATISE PROVING THE Truth of the Roman Religion, By
Sacred Scriptures Taken in the Literal Sense. Expounded by Ancient Fathers.
Interpreted by Protestant Writers.


WITH A Discovery of sundry subtle Sleights used by Protestants, for euading
the force of strongest Arguments, taken from cleerest Texts of the foresaid
Scriptures.

Si quispiam praeualuerit contra vnum, duo resistunt el: Funiculus triplex
difficile rumpitur. Eccles. 4. 12.

If a man prevail against one, two resist him: A triple Cord is hardly broken.

Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XXXIIII.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY, TO THE PROTESTANT NOBILITY OF GREAT BRITAIN.
RIGHT HONORABLE LORDS,
The Conceits of Men are so various, and the Gifts of Nature so unlike, with
the qualities of Climats so different, as that we may by our Understandings
observe, as great Variety in Wits and Manners, as with our Eyes we see in
Faces, and Favors. For some, as I may say, are so unfortunately borne, as
having no reguard to true Honor and Nobility, which is ever founded upon true
Virtue; they wholy dedicate themselves and their daily endeauours, to the
only gayning and enjoying of such pleasures and profits, as may best please the
Corporal Senses, or otherwise comply with the advantage of Temporal
Fortunes: nothing fearing any blemishes of Honor, vvhilest they may obtain
the foresaid Ends.

Yet others rising under a more prosperous planet, are so greatly taken with
the desire and love of true Honor and Renown, as that for the gayning or
increase thereof, all corporal Contents and temporal Commodities with
greatest scorn they trample and contemn; and their dearest Lives they
joyfully expose to greatest hazards.

It is true Honor, and celebrity of Name which these men seek to purchase;
Honor by Wisdom, Learning Fortitude, Magnanimity, Magnificence, and other
such like Heroical Virtues, which as so many Potent Princes, create men truly
noble. These are They, that gave splendor to your right Honorable
Progenitors, from whom by direct line you dravv your Nobility: and these are
they who give to your Selves a plentiful increase of all Honor, through your
own most worthy, and memorable deserts.

It were true Rusticity to say, that Children are not honorable in the Honor
of their Parents. Do not the Mat. 3.1. Luc. 3.23. Luc. 1.5.
Evangelists describe at large the Genealogy of Christ our Lord and his B.
Virgin Mother, as also of S. John Baptist, thereby to prove that these greatest
Heroes, were truly noble in their Progenitors? Does not from the same root S.
Hierome derive the praises of noble Paula, affirming that she was noble in
birth, as being the issue of the Gracchi, the offspring of Scipions, and the
heir of Paul? Does not S. Gregory Orat. de S. Cypr. and orat. de S. Basil.
Nazianzen for splendor of their Stemmes, highly extol S. Cyprian and S.
Basil, though otherwise most renowned for their learning and sanctity? Yea
those Salust.
famous Heathen Nobles P. Scipio and Qu. Fabius, when they heard, or read the
glorious gests of their Ancestors, or beheld their Statues, they were greatly
inflamed with the love of their Virtues.

Julius Caesar, but looking upon the Image of Alexander the Great, was thereby
excited to the undertaking and performance of things truly great. And Alexander
himself, remembering the Triumphs of his Father, they served to him as the
sharpest spurrs to prick him forvvard to the gayning an Immortality of his
own Name? Wherefore my Honorable Lords, make right account that saying of
Plato to be most true, and truly Yours, The virtues of Fathers are the
Treasures of Children, in which you may truly glory, and desire to imitate.

Yet must I humby make bold, to intimate this further unto your Honors, that
when your Fathers vvorthes are increased and enriched with your own Merits,
then your Nobility is more complet, and more truly free from all maleuolous
Exceptions. The Jo. 8.39.
Jews gloryed that their Father was Abraham, but Christ bad them if they be
the Children of Abraham, to do the works of Abraham. Yea they raised their
Pedigree so high, as that they avouched they had, but one Io. 8.41.
Father God himself; But Jesus therefore said to them, If God were your
Father, verily you would love me, for from God I proceeded and came. So that
to make your Nobility, Firm and Immortal, you must adioyne your own
virtues: for no more can it subsist without These, then Man without Reason.

What did it avail profane and sensual Esau, that his Father was holy Isaac?
or rebellious Absalom, that he was Son to the most valourous King David? Or
foolish Roboam, that he had vvysest Solomon for his Father? nothing did this
profit, but to augment their shameful Infamy in this world, and their
Eternal misery and punishment in the next, by so foully degenerating from so
Noble Progenitors.

But so powerful is Virtue, for the Creation of Nobility, as that many borne
in a gross air, of obscure parentage, through the Glory of their merits and
worthiest Acts have shined to the whole world, as so many stars, leaving
Honor to their Posterity, which their Fathers vvanted. Tin is extracted
from Silver, yet is not Silver; and Gold proceeds from the base matter of
Earth, and yet is not Earth, but precious Gold. It is much better, of an
ignoble Race, through virtuous Actions to become Noble, then of a Noble Stock,
by base vices, to become contemptible.

Their, Abraham's Father was an Idolater, and yet the Son for his admirable
vvorth had the Honor to be styled, Romans 4.11.
The Father of the Faithful, and him, in whose Seed, all Nations should be
blessed, the Messiah of the world being to rise from thence. Ex. 3.1.
Moses and 1. Reg. 9. psalm. 77.71.
David, were by condition Shepherds, but through their noble Acts became
renowned Princes. Profane Histories are plentiful in these Examples, but I
hasten to that which gives life and luster, yea the last perfection to all
Nobility.

This is Christian Nobility (worthy Peers) which will make you to be men
truly borne of God, to have him for your Noblest Father; and through the
Influences of his Grace, to imitate, and in some, though imperfect, sort, to
express in your Selves, his Purity, Sanctity, Innocence, Wisdom, Justice,
Mercy, and the like; by these no less representing his Divine Image, then
Sons do the faces and conditions of their carnal Parents. These are those
true Nobles, which the Princely Eagle S. John Jo. 1.13
describes to be borne of God; not of Blood. These are they whom the Sacred
Io. 1.12 Romans 8.14.17. 2. Pet. 1.4. 1. Pet. 2.9. Io. 10.34
Scriptures do honor, with those glorious titles of being the Sons of God,
the friends of God, Heirs of God, and Coheires of Christ, partakers of his
divine Nature, Kings, Gods.

Now to be linked with this kindred, and so to be exalted to the highest
Nobility, our heavenly Father requires in his Children that by sacred virtues
they seek to glorify, and magnify his holy Name, for so himself promised,
when he said, 1. Reg. 2.30.
Whosoever shall glorify me, I will glorify him: and they that contemn me,
shallbe ignoble. The Virtues vvherby God is chiefly glorified, and whereby Men
upon Earth do derive their Nobility from the King of heaven, are according to
the beloved Apostle, divine Faith: for 1. John 5.1.4.
Whosoever belieueth that Jesus is Christ, is borne of God. And, All that is
borne of God, overcomes the world, and this is the victory which
overcomes the world, our Faith.

But besides Faith, is likewise required Charity, for 1. John 4.7.
Every one that loves is borne of God. As also Justice, for 1. John 2.29.
Every one which does Justice is borne of him. And lastly, filial Obedience,
and conformity to the will of our heavenly father, whose eldest Son
assures us all, that, Mat. 12 50.
whosoever shall do the will of my Father that is in heaven, he is my
Brother, Sister, and Mother. O admirable Honor! O incredible power of virtue!
How many good Mothers, Brothers, and Sisters, would have thought themselves
most highly honored, if they might have been linked with Christ in these
degrees of carnal propinquity. And yet, as S. Chrysostom truly teaches, Hom.
45. in Mat.
They are nearer of kin to God, who do his will, then those who are joined
with greatest alliance of Blood.

So that for a man to contract affinity with God, and thereby to be made of
the Blood Royal, and to attain to the highest degree of Nobility, he must of
necessity have his Soul adorned with those heavenly Graces of Faith, Charity,
Justice, Obedience, and the like. His Country must be the supernall Jerusalem;
his highest Honor the preservation of Gods Image, and conformity to his
Pattern, which by Reason, and Virtue are only caused, and whereof at Gods
Tribunal he must give account. If he shall vitiously defyle that sacred Image
of greatest Nobility, cut by the hand of God himself, and thereby introduce
another form, to wit, of the Serpent; then, must he rank himself to his
everlasting dishonor, amongst the spurious and ignoble.

Christian Nobility does not accept Persons, and Conditions of men, but looks
into their Minds: From the manners she judges a man to be servile or noble.
The only freedom with God, is not to serve Sin: and the greatest Nobility
with him, is to be eminent in virtues. Who amongst men in the sight of God
was more noble then Peter, a poor Fisherman? And who amongst women more
illustious then blessed Mary the wife of a Carpenter? And yet to that
Fisherman the keys of the kingdom of heaven were given: and to that poor
wife it was granted to be the Mother of him, who gave the keys. Wherefore
Christian virtues are they that must raise a man to the height of Honor.

Now, if he that is borne of a Regal Stock, may justly glory in Princely
Nobility; much more he who truly deriueth himself from the King of Kings and
Creator of all things. With this dignity all the Just upon Earth are honored,
being borne of God by a new Nativity; and the Saints in heaven do thereby
reign, as puissant Princes in Eternal glory.

It is not unworthy your remembrance, Noble Lords, that Hier. in Quaest.
Hebraic. in Genesis ad Cap. 22. and in ep. 27. ad Eustoch. Genebrard. in psalm. 68.
Mount Sion having two topps or Heads, upon one was built a Temple for the
Service of God, and upon the other a Palace for the service of the King:
thereby to show, that these two Honors must ever cohabitate, and not be
separated, each one giving a peculiar Grace, and Splendor to the other.

The Romans also, as S. De ciu. Dei l. 5. c. 12.
Austine records, erected two Temples near adjoining together; the one
they dedicated to Honor, the other to Virtue: thereby signifying that in what
place there is splendor of Honor, in the same must be the exercise of Virtue.
Wherefore whosoever desires to shine with Christian Nobility, and to derive
his Pedigree from the King of Heaven and Earth, a Father Almighty, he must
ground his Honor upon divine faith, and raise it to the Height, by the
exercise of Charity, and true Religion.

But when I mention Religion, it puts me in mind, that this King your
Father espoused himself to Ephesians. 5.27.
a glorious Queen, one so beautiful, that she had neither spot, or vvrincle,
or any such thing, but was Holy, and Unspotted: and this was his Beloved Ephesians.
5.25.
Church, whom he affected so dearly, that he delivered himself for it, and
Act. 20.28.
purchased it with his own Blood. This then being the Spouse of God, the
Children of God, must needs be the Children of the Church, and she their Holy,
and Unspotted Mother. A truth so certain, that the glorious Martyr and Bishop
S. Cyprian, doubted not to avouch, that De Ecl. vnitate c. 5. August. tom. de
Symb. l. 4. cap. 10.
He cannot have God for his Father, that has not the Church for his Mother.

Now, that this Mother Church, is only the Catholic Roman Church, I shall
prove at large in this subsequent Treatise: only be pleased in the mean to
remember, what a good old Bishop and Martyr said of this point: Lucius Ep. 1.
ad Episc. Hisp. and Call.
The Roman Church is Apostolical, and the Mother of all Churches, which is
never proved to have Erred from the path of Apostolical Tradition, nor
depraved with Heretical Novelties to have failed, according to the promise of
our Lord himself saying: I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.

This Mother Church it was, and only this, that had all your Forfathers for
her loving and dutiful Children. It was She, that brought them forth
Christians by the Lauer of Baptism, and afterward gave them grouth, strength
and increase by her other Sacraments. In her bosom they sucked Sanctity
during this life, and by her they were advanced to the Court of Heaven,
raygning there, truly Noble in immortal Glory.

Peruse your Genealogies, look into the Chestes of your Evidences, view the
Records of all Courts, behold the ancient Monuments in your Churches, read all
Chronicles and Histories, they will all depose unto You, that your Noble
Ancestors, all of them before King Henry the eight his Reign, and infamous
Relapse, were all of them Catholics truly Roman: The Sect of Protestancy, or
the very Name thereof as then not being in Rerum Natura, and so never heard, or
dreamed of by any of your Ancient Blood.

And not only this, but many most noble Lords and Ladies, your glorious
Predecessors, duly considering the vanity of things transitory, the
uncertainty of this present Life, the innumerable dangers that therein occur,
the dreadful Judgment they were to undergo, and the final Sentence of Joy,
or Misery Eternal, which they were to receive: these importa^t points, I
say, they seriously and prudently pondering, with brauest Resolutions
abandoned the present pleasures, profits, or Honors this world could affoard
them, and betook themselves to the safest Port of Monastical, and Religious
life, therein to give themselves to the Exercise of Penance for expiation of
sins, to the Contemplation of their Heavenly Fathers infinite and
unspeakable Perfections, for their imitation of his virtues, and to the
needful Preparation, and due Disposition for the gayning, and enjoying
Nobility and Honor, ever permanent and immortal.

But if it were not to abuse your Honors greatest Patience with longer
Discourse, in a matter so evident, I should easily present unto your worthy
vievves, many Kings and Queens of our own Country, for their singular
virtues admired and honored by all posterity, upon the former Considerations,
to have cast by their Crowns, to have dethroned themselves of all civil
Government and Command, to have resigned their Scepters into the hands of
others, and to have given the farevvell to all Earthly contents, and all this
to retire themselves the better in Religious life for the exercise of Virtue
and the gayning of the Kingdom of Heaven.

These, Noble Lords, are the bright Stars you must delight to behold; these
are the choice patterns you must endeavor to imitate: Your worthy Spirits
may, with much honor, emulate, their rarest Virtues, and thereby propagate to
your own Posterity the name and Honor, which Kings and Kindred have
bequeathed unto you. In these glory as your most Noble Progenitors; in your
Selves rejoice, when as lively Images, you represent their Goodness.

To degenerate from these would be greatest dishonor. His fall is fouler who
has happily stood, and the same more dangerous from the greater height it
happens. What does it avail a covvardly Son, that his Father was valiant?
Or a vicious Child that his Parents were virtuous? Certainly no other, but more
clearly, to blaze his greater shame, and most hateful Ignominy. Your Noble
Hearts would not brook the least aspersion to be laid upon the Honor of your
most renowned Predecessors, by any man whatsoever, but with your vvisedoms
you would clear, and with Valor you would punish all offenders in that
kind, as justly thinking the Dishonor would rebound upon your own persons,
if you should suffer such Indignity to pass without Controvvle. Much more
will your Lordships be truly careful and precise, that the least stayne, or
blemish do not fall from your Selves, whereby your Ancients splendor should
by any ways, be obscured.

O what insufferable disgrace is it, for men ignoble and illiterate, not only
to appeach your Noble Progenitors of ignorance, blindness, and stupidity; but
further to brand them with those black marks of being men Superstitious,
Idolatrous, Antichristian; and so undoubtedly for ever damned. And yet these are
the ordinary detractio^s which come from the foul mouths, and pens of
ignorant, and impudent Ministers.

But who, not a vvretched Atheist, can possibly endure to have his Heavenly
Father most blasphemously censured, as a cruel Tyrant, imposing Laws upon
his Children, and Subjects, which are impossible to be observed, and yet the
keeping of them to be necessary to their Salvation? To destiny and reprobate
men from all Eternity, before their Creation, without all respect of their
free works, to certain Damnation? To make the fountain of all Goodness (all
ears do abhor to hear it) the Author, Cause, Counsailour, Commander, and
Compeller to all Sin. To make the Son of God, Christ our Savior, to have
been borne with ignorance, to have dyed with despair, and to have suffered
the very pains of the damned. And yet these are Tenets, holden for good by
your learned Protestant Doctors.

And what Child legitimate can with Patience brook, that his Mother most
Honorable, Chaste, and Faithful to her Spouse, should be accused and judged
for an Infamous Adultresse? No very Minister so ignorant, but will
acknovvledge, that the Roman Church was the most chaste and faithful Spouse
of Christ, when S. Paul proclaimed that Romans 1.8.
her Faith was renowned in the whole world: And Romans 16.19.
her obedience published into every place: and the Romans highly commended,
for that they had Romans 6.17.
obeyed from the heart, unto that form of doctrine which had been delivered
unto them. And yet now our viperous brood of Ministers, vvil needs have her to
be the very whore of Babylon; Apoc. 17
a harlot etc. with whom the Kings of the Earth have fornicated: An Apostata
from Christ her Spouse; a profaner of Gods word and Sacraments and in brief,
wholy Antichristian.

And I must not forbear to put your Honors in mind, of the dishonorable
disgraces that these nevv-borne Sectaries, would put upon your Selves, not
only as you are Nobles, but as you are Men, endovved with reasonable Souls,
whose principal Powers are Understanding, and Free Will, the most Essential
differences betvveene men and Beasts. Do not your New Masters generally
teach, that God has given to man only free will to sin, but not to do good?
When they do good, they are necessitated thereunto, for as without Gods grace
they cannot do it, so the same being offered, they cannot resist.

O how dangerously does this Ecclypse the shyning splendor of your own, and
your Ancestors most commendable Acts! what can be praisvvorthy, that
includes necessity? Or on the contrary blamable, that cannot be avoided? If it
was not in the power and will of your Selves, and your Forefathers to do, or
not to do those Heroical Deeds, but what you did, you were necessitated to
do through the enforcing hand and Ordination of God; what cause or color can
be imagined for the raising of your Selves, without all desert, to such
highest Honors, and to grace even your Successors with such titles of
Dignity?

Be pleased to hear what Malleus Haereticorum, the learned S. Austine
thinks of this brutish Paradoxe: L. de duabus Animabus c. 11.
Neither here (says he, speaking of Frevvill) am I to search obscure books,
from whence to learn, that no man deserves Dispraise, or Punishment, who
either wills that which Justice does not prohibit, or does not that which
he cannot do. Do not the Sheepheards sing these things in the Mountains, the
Poets upon the Stages, the unlearned at their meetings, the learned in their
Studies, Masters in the Schools, Bishops in Churches, and Mankind all over
the world? So that Shepherds, Poets, Rustickes etc. do exhibit that Honor
unto you, whereof your own Chaplaynes would willingly deprive you.

Neither is Envy thus satisfied but with greatest malignity pursues even your
most laudable virtues, affirming that your best Deeds done for the Honor of
God, his Church, your Country, or your Selves, are of all them, in themselves,
and in the sight of God, Sins abominable, mortal or deadly, which deprive
a man of Gods grace, and thereby of all Spiritual life, which degrade him of
that chiefest Nobility to be the adopted Son of God, and heir of Eternal
Kingdom, and finally make him the very slave of the Devil, and a most
vvretched Caytiffe, condemned to eternal Misery.

To what end should you expose your dearest lives in the service of your King
and Country to imminent dangers? To what end should you make your daily
prayers, and use other Exercises of Devotion, to the Honor of your supreme
King, and your own Souls good? Or give your Charitable Alms to the Relief
of the needy, if these deeds, payers, and Alms be all of them stained with
Sin, offensive to the Majesty of God, and exceeding prejudicial, being all
of them sinful to your own Souls? And yet these, and sundry other such
nasty principles, the pretended reformed Protestancy does project unto you.

Awake then, Noble Lords, and let your eyes of Truth send forth their cleerest
Rays, vvherby to dispell those darkest Clouds of Error, which so dangerously
obscure the brightness of your Names and Nobilities. If these unfortunate times
do threaten, or object any danger of loosing some temporal Honor, your Lops.
may rest assured, that as the loosing of your lives for Loialty and Fidelity to
your King and Country, does nothing diminish, but greatly augment your former
Renovvnes: So the loss of all tra^sitory Glory for your Loyalty to God, for
Obedience to his Church, for profession of the Catholic Faith, for the gayning
of a Heaven, is not to loose the least title of Honor, but with plentiful
increase to enrich the same. To loose lands or goods in the same honorable
quarrel, is a pious Usury, only lending them for a time upon securest Bands, of
not receiving ten for the hundred, but a hundred for ten. And I cannot think
so vnvvorthily of so worthy Spirits, that voluptuousnes, and freedom in
sensual delights, which your new Divines do so loudly teach, and liberally
allow, that these, I say, can any thing deter you from the chaste
Embracements of pure Virtue, and Religion, these being the base baits,
vvhervvith the vulgar and ignoble are only taken.

Wherefore to conclude this my humble Suite unto your Lops. be pleased sometimes
to reflect, that as you are truly careful, and therein most commendable, to
continue in your selves, and to propagate in your Children, the Ancient
Nobility which your fathers have left you, lively representing their vvisdome,
Fortitude, Magnanimity, and other such most bright beams of true Nobility: so
no less careful that you be, in expressing their Noble Christianity, which
they, before many hundreds of years past, vvorthily purchased by profession of
Catholic faith, by obedience to Christ's Church, by Communion with Gods
Saints, by participation of holy Sacraments, and by their other exercises of
Religion and Charity. Whereas this last Century has given the first, and
ancientest Blood which Protestancy can challenge, or expect.

And seeing that wherein your chiefest cares must ever be incumbent, is the
laboring the Eternal Weal of your own Souls, which men deuoyd of divine
faith, and floting out of the Arc of the Catholic Church, amongst the
uncertain waves of Error and Heresy, can never attain; therefore it will
most nearly concern you diligently to learn, vvherin that divine Faith
consists; how it is to be gained; what profession thereof necessary; which
is that Church which is the Arc of safety, the Spouse of Christ, the Mother
of the Faithful, the Pillar of Truth, and so infallible a Judge of all
Controversies in Religion, as whosoever shall refuse to obey her Sentence, is
to be reputed by all men, as a Heathen, and Publican.

This is the business that imports; the neglect vvherof is not loss of
temporal liberty, and imprisonement for life, or of large Renevves, and mines
of Gold, or the favor and grace of Princes, and esteem in Court, or of
Strength, Health, Beauty, and other such guiftes of Nature; but it is the loss
Eternal of all Heavenly joys, and the Soul and Bodies burning in
unquenchable fire for all Eternity.

O discuss with your Selves at leisure, that deep question proposed by a
Prince, Luc. 18.18. Mar. 10.17.
What shall I do, that I may receive life everlasting? or in the words of
another Act. 16.31.
What must I do, that I may be saved? Seek, Search, Study, Meditate,
Confer, Read, never rest until you find a true Resolution of this
vveightiest Question.

If you will take it from Christ our Savior, he gives it in these plain
words Mat. 19.17.
If thou vvilt enter into life, keep the Commandments. If you will have it
from your own Doctor, the Doctor of the Gentiles S. Paul, his answer is,
Act. 16.31.
Believe in our Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved. If you will have then the
full Resolution, given by those two greatest Doctors, it is Faith, and
Keeping of the Commandments, that will save you. Whereupon the third and most
renowned Doctor S. Austine gives the whole decision in these words, De
fide and operibus c. 15.
I see not why Christ should say, If thou vvilt have life everlasting, keep
the Commandments; if without observing of them, by only faith, one might be
saved. Join then these two for your obtaining of Eternal happiness: and have
ever fresh in your memories that sacred sentence of the Son of God, Mar. 8.36.
What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and suffer damage
of his Soul? And with this, I humbly kiss all your Lops. hands, and ever
desire to remain,

Your Honors faithful, though unworthy Servant, N. N.

THE PREFACE TO THE Protestant Reader.
SEEING it was ever houlden as a thing most worthy of greatest praise, for a
man to excel in all, or any of the liberal Sciences, the knowledge thereof
being not only to himself, but also to others most useful and commodious;
much more then is he to be honored, who shall wholly, or chiefly employ his
pains and studies in the attaining of the Science of Sciences, sacred
Divinity, true Wisdom, whose Object is God, and whose supreme end is the
Omnipotent glory, and man's Beatitude. This Science it is, for the teaching
whereof the best Master, Christ our Lord, came into this world, according to
those his blessed words, Io. 18.37.
For this was I borne, and for this I came into the world, that I should give
testimony to the truth: Which truth he Io. 18.20.
taught in the Synagogue, and the T^mple: And Mat. 9.35.
went about all the Cities and Towns teaching in their Synagogues, and
preaching the Gospel of the kingdom etc. And not content that this preaching
of the Gospel should only be used by his own person, and for his own time,
he gave also in chiefest charge to his Apostles, and their Successors, that
they should Mat. 28.19.20.
Teach all Nations etc. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever he had
commanded them. Now, for their encouragement, the better to perform this
Charge imposed, he assures them by his Apostle, that 1. Tim. 4.16.
Thus doing, they shall save both themselves, and them that hear them. By
which last words it also appears, that the knowledge of this Truth, this
Gospel, this Divinity is requisite and necessary for man's Salvation.

This truth and Gospel we only learn aright by the virtue of Faith, through
which we firmly assent to all such Doctrines as the prime Verity, God himself,
does reveal, and his holy Church does propose unto us. A blessing so great, as
that without it, Heb. 11.6.1.
It is impossible to please God, and attain Salvation, in being the foundation
of all such things, as are to be hoped, or expected.

This faith as it is only gained by the free Gift of God, so is it only lost
by Infidelity and Heresy, these being the opposites which destroy faith, and
with which possibly she cannot subsist. And if it be most true that every
Heresy is a certain Infidelity, and a true denial of all faith; what shall we
think of the Heresy of this unfortunate Age, by which the integrity of faith
is not only violated in one or other Article, or those of less moment and
necessity (which yet by no means were to be tolerated, but by all Christian
hearts to be detested and accursed) but generally in all as it were by an
universal deluge of Apostasy, even in the points of greatest weight
concerning God, Christ, the Church, her Sacrifice and Sacraments, Man's
Justification, Grace, Freewill, the Commandments, and many other such like; All
which with singular impiety are so depraved and impugned by the Sectaries of
these days, as that their Endeauours may seem to aim, and to be wholly
employed, instead of an Heresy, to introduce with g eatest boldness, Madness, and
Malice, a general Apostasy or Atheism from the faith of Christ.

The serious Consideration, and feeling Commiseration of this so great a
mischief, I must confess (worthy Reader) was the main Motive for my
undertaking and compyling this Treatise following: for whilst I remembered,
that without entyre divine Faith, and true worship and Religion toward God, no
Salvation was to be expected: and withal saw such innumerable Souls (so
dearly bought by the precious Blood and death of Christ our Lord, Souls also
most dear to me in sundry other most just respects) so continually to perish
through the Infection of Heresy; I could not forbear, but after my humble
Prayers, add also my poor and unworthy labors, which if through Gods
blessing, they may prove so effectual, as to reduce any seduced Soul to the
state of Salvation, I shall think them all most happily undertaken, and
joyfully sustained, and my self plentifully rewarded at the holy Hand of God.

Now, that my writings might prove more pleasing, and powerful with the Prot.
Reader, whose Salvation I thirst* I have purposely restrained my self to that
sole kind of Argument, which himself does affect, and ever urge, which is the
sacred Scriptures, or Written Word of God, to which he professes in all
Disputes to appeal, and in all Doctrines to subscribe; esteeming, and making
it his sole Rule, and Square, whereby to be directed in all points of faith and
Religion necessary to Sa^uation. To this also for the present I likewise
appeal, making this the subject of my whole Discourse nothing doubting, but to
make it appear, and that most clearly, that the Written Word, is our
Catholic Word, speaking and teaching our Romans 1.8.
Roman faith, so anciently renowned in the whole world.

And that it may be rightly observed how different are the proceedings of
Catholics and Protestants, in the religious and sincere handling and using
of this sacred Word, I desire briefly to give a just account, of the Method,
and order which I have prescribed to my self, and is generally observed,
throughout this whole Treatise.

First then, seeing the true staring of the Matter in dispute, does of it self
often discover the weakness and falsehood of a bad Cause, and therefore all
Heretics do fraudulently set down the state of the Question, changing and
perverting the true meaning thereof, thereby the better to hyde their own
Errors, and to traduce their Adversaries; I have therefore in prevention hereof,
in the first place ever stated the Controversy aright, showing what the
Catholic Church does teach and believe as matter of faith, and this from her
sacred Councels and approved Doctors: and what she permits her Schoolmen to
dispute as points indifferent, not defyned by her Decrees: for with these I
find our modern Sectaries D. Morton, White, Featley.
greatly to delude their Vulgar Readers, urging these School differences, as
though they were Differences in Articles, and Conclusions of faith, which to
affirm, is a Grand Imposture, much frequented by D. Morton, who for want of
better matter, storeth and stuffeth his writings with toys in this kind

But not content with this, it is ordinary with Protestants in their Sermons
and Writings, most fowly to belly our Catholic Cause, ascribing unto us
infinite gross, and most absurd opinions, which we utterly detest and deryde:
they intending by malicious untruths to disgrace that, which with sound
Arguments they are not able to confute. I give plentiful Examples of this bad
dealing throughout this whole Book.

Having thus cleared our Catholic Doctrine, I next set down what Prot. teach
concerning the point in Controversy. In which I find them often at deadly wars
amongst themselves, and that not for Points disputable and indifferent, but for
the Chiefest Articles, and Conclusions of Faith, the true belief whereof is
necessary to Salvation. In these their differences, I ordinarily set down for
Prot. Doctrine, that which is most commonly taught by the English Prot. Church;
or by such others, as are most renowned amongst their Brethren, for their
supposed Wisdom, and Learning.

But in thus searching what their opinions are, I still observe, and
accordingly prove, that wherein they disagree from the Catholic faith, therein
they do agree with some Ancient Heretic, formerly confuted, and condemned by
Councels and Fathers.

And not only this, but I find further, that they run themselves upon fundry
gross Errors, which were not even dreamed on by any former Heretics, and
which once admitted, would ineuitably infer a general Apostasy from the
Christian faith. This is the Course which I generally use for the true
expression of the point in Controversy; which point thus cleared, I address my
self in the next place to such proofs for the Catholic cause, as the
sacred Scriptures do plentifully affoard: from whence yet I only produce such
textes, as being taken in their native, simple, and literal signification, do
speak most plainly for the Catholic Truth. But because nothing can be spoken
in terms so plain, but what the wit and malice of the Devil and his
Ministers will in some sort deprave, inuenting for that end some Evasion or
other, thereby to weaken the force of the words being taken in their proper
signification; I do therefore also take notice of these poor shifts, and do
further show, that they are mere fancyes, feigned and taught without all ground
or color of truth, wholly impertinent, often ridiculous, and ever such, as
with the like liberty, any Heresy though never so forlorn may easily be
defended, and any Article of our Christian faith, though never so necessary, be
dangerously impugned.

But neither is this detorting of the words of Scripture from their proper
meaning, the greatest injury now adays offered to the word of God: For
Sectaries further proceed, when all other means fail them, most accursedly to
corrupt the sacred words and sentences of Gods divine word, adding words of
their own stamping to the holy textes, omitting, or taking away some of the
sacred-words themselves, mistranslating words, making them to speak things
most different, and repugnant from their own proper signification. And if all
this will not serve their turn, through the evidence and fulness of Scripture
condemning their Errors, then they betake themselves to that last most
desperate and damnable Refuge, of that Atheistical denying, or making
Apocryphal whole entyre Books of holy Writ: which impious freedom, if it
might be admitted, would shortly discharge the whole Canon of Scripture from
any Scripture at all.

But because it is another usual shifte used by Protestants, to fly from the
words to the sense, that neither they, nor we, as partial Judges, should give
sentence thereof; I do therefore appeal for the fynding out of the true sense of
the Scriptures to the Interpretations, and Expositions made by the Ancient
Fathers, who living in the purest times of the Church, neighboring upon the
Apostles, flourishing in learning, shining in sanctity, and ignorant of our
present Contentions, may in all reason be thought, and accepted for Judges most
competent, vncorrupt, and impartial. Neither do I produce these as barely
affirming what themselves thought or practiced, or spoke in heat of disputation
against their Adversaries, but what they dogmatically taught in their
Commentaries, Expositions, and Interpretations of the sacred Scriptures: or
what is acknowledged, confessed, and disliked in them by Prot. as making
unanswerably for our Catholic faith, and strongly confuting, and condemning
the Prot. Errors.

Neither do I wholly rest in this manner of proof, though superabundant for my
Cause: But I likewise in greatest surplussage adioyne herunto, the abundant
Interpretations of Scriptures made by Prot. writers, most agreeable to the
former made by Fathers, and wholly confirming our Catholic faith, and therein
impugning their other Brethren who oppose against it. Now, if the Textes of
sacred Scriptures, taken in their proper and literal sense, and the answerable
Expositions made by the holy Fathers, and sundry of the learned Prot.
writers, do all of them conspire in making that sense of Scripture, which
wholly agrees with the doctrine and practice of the Catholic Roman Church; I
do not see what more can be required by any indifferent, and understanding man,
for the making it to appear clear, as the sun at Noone day, that the
Written Word of God is that which teaches us our Catholic faith, and
confuteth and condemns such Errors and heresies as arise against it.

Lastly seeing, all this notwithstanding, Prot. do not desiste to object some
darker passages of Scripture against others most plain, and for such confessed
by Fathers and Prot; I do therefore not forbear to take notice of them, but
withal do plainly show, that the said textes taken in their literal sense, do
nothing make against us, and so most impertinently urged; and being explayned
by other plainer places, do strongly make against themselves who urge them. And
if not the words but the sense, must be regarded, then I frequently allege
both Fathers and Prot. so expounding the same, as that their Expositions are
full answers to what is objected by other Prot. So weakly, and not at all, is
Heresy truly grounded upon the word of God.

This, Christian Reader, is the course observed by me through this whole work,
which whether I be judged duly to perform or no, I most willingly leave to the
dispassionate Censure of the Judicious: who will easily herby perceive, that
Prot. pretending to fly to the Scriptures, as their only refuge, do therein make
flight to their mortal Enemy, who cutteth their throats. That which for my
poor pains at the hands of the good Reader I shall only request, is, that
all former preiudicate opinion against Catholic Religion set apart, and all
base and unworthy fear of temporal losses in Honors, Estates, or Liberties
courageously shaken off, that he firmly believe, and constantly profess that
only Faith, and Religion which Gods divine Word does teach, the holy Fathers do
confirm, and sundry of the learned Prot do acknowledge for true: which
doing, he shall gain that faith, without which, according to the Apostle,
Hebr. 11.6.
It is impossible to please God. Which according to S. Ambrose, In Ps. 40.
Is the firm foundation of all virtues. According to S. Chrysostom, Ser. de
fide, spe, and charit.
The origin of Justice, the head of Sanctity, the beginning of Devotion, the
groundwork of Religion. And according to S. Austine, Ser. de Temp. 38.
The beginning of man's salvation, without which no man can come to the
fellowship of the Sons of God: because without it, neither in this world can
any man obtain the Grace of Justification, nor in the world to come shall
possess life Eternal A fearful Sentence, and much to be pondered by
Infidels, and Heretics, who are certainly deuoyd of this divine Faith.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of the Chapters, and Sections contained in this Book.
The Preparatiue to the Triple Cord.
Wherein is proved the dignity and infallibility of the written word of God, or
sacred Scriptures: as also the necessity of fynding out the true Sense intended
by the Holy Ghost: with certain infallible Rules for the fynding out of the
said sense.

Section 1. The true state of the Question concerning the verity of the sacred
Scriptures. Whether the Scriptures contained in the Bible be the word of God
himself, truly divine and infallible, in every least parcel, or Text thereof?
And therefore for such are by all the faithful to be received, believed, and
obeyed. page 1. Section 2. That the sacred Scriptures are the true Word,
divine, and infallible, the Scriptures themselves do testify. p. 3. Section 3.
That the Ancient Fathers do teach and believe the sacred Scriptures to be the
true word of God, of divine and infallible authority. p. 5. Section 4. That
sundry Prot. do acknowledge the sacred Scriptures to be the word of God, of
divine and infallible Authority. p. 6. Section 5. That it is impious to
corrupt, or reject any part of Canonical Scripture. p. 7. Section 6. The
necessity of fynding out the true sense of the Scriptures. p. 9. Section 7.
That the sacred Scriptures do admit several, true, and different Senses but
not contrary; as well Literal as Mystical: and of the force of such
Arguments as are taken from any of the forsaid senses. p. 12. Section 8.
Certain Rules prescribed for the discerning of the simple literal sense from
the figurative: and for the fynding out of the true sense intended by the Holy
Ghost. p. 15. Section 9. An Examination of such Rules as Prot. ordinarily
prescribe and observe for the fynding out the true sense of the sacred
Scriptures. p. 19. Section 10. That the Certain and Infallible Rule, for the
fynding out of the true sense of the Scriptures, is the Church of Christ. p.
21. Section 11. An Explanation of what we mean by the Church, when we say,
that the true understanding of the Scriptures, and the final Decision of all
Controversies in Religion, is to be taken from the Church. p. 23.
CHAP. I.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question in Controversy between Catholics
and Protestants concerning the Judge of Controversies in Matter of Religion
consists is this:

Whether besides the sacred Scriptures, any other infallible Authority and
Judge is to be acknowledged, by which the divine faith, and the true sense of
Scriptures may be proposed to the faithful, as revealed by God, and to be
believed:

And whether the said Authority and power of Judging, be to be ascribed to the
Church, to General Councels, and to the Fathers of the Primitive Church? Or
only to the sacred Scriptures themselves, or the Spirit of every particular
Man. p. 33.

Section 2. The sacred Scriptures clearly teach, that we are to repair to the
Church of Christ, for the fynall decyding of Controversies in Religion. p. 40.
Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers expound the sacred Scriptures agreably with
Catholics, in proof of the Church being the Judge of Controversies. p. 50.
Section 4. That Prot. expound the sacred Scriptures agreably with Catholics
in proof of the Church being the judge of Controversies; And that sundry
Protestants do teach, and defend the same Doctrine. p. 53.
CHAP. II.
Section 1. THe true State of the Question concerning the Churches
Infallibility, or not Erring.

Whether the universal Church of Christ can err in defyning matters of Faith,
and Manners: Or rather, that such her Decrees are always most true and
infallible, and for such are to be believed and observed by the faithful. p.
62.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that the universal Church of Christ,
cannot err in matters of Faith and Manners. p. 65. Section 3. That the Fathers
do expound the Scriptures in proof, that the Church of Christ cannot err. p.
73. Section 4. Protestant Writers teach, that the Church of Christ cannot err
in matters of faith. p. 75. Section 5. Objections from Scripture in proof,
that the Church may err in matters of faith, answered. p. 77.
CHAP. III.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the difficulty in
understanding the sacred Scriptures.

Whether the sacred Scriptures be so easy and plain to be understood, as that
without the Explication of the Church, they are sufficient to decyde and end
all Controversies of Faith: or rather in many places are very obscure, and
difficult, even to the learned. p. 82.

Section 2. That the Scriptures are obscure, and hard to be understood, it is
proved by the Scriptures themselves. p. 83. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers
expound the sacred Scriptures agreably with Catholics, in proof of the
Scriptures obscurity, and difficulty. p. 87. Section 4. That Protestants
expound the sacred Scriptures agreably with Catholics in proof of the
Scriptures obscurity: And that sundry Prot. de teach and defend the same
Doctrine. p. 89. Section 5. That the Scriptures are obscure, it is further
proved by sundry Reasons. p. 92. Section 6. That the conference of one place of
Scripture with another, does neither make the Scriptures to be our Judge of all
Controversies, nor always easy to be understood. p. 94. Section 7. An
Examination of such Objections as are usually urged by Prot. against the
Scriptures Obscurity. p. 101.
CHAP. IV.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the Interpretation of
Scriptures and deciding Controversy by the Private spirit of every particular
Man. p. 105. Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that the said Scriptures
are not made easy to be understood, or our Judge of all Controversies, by the
spirit revealing to every Private Man, the true sense, and determination
thereof. p. 107. Section 3. It is proved by the Ancient Fathers that the Private
spirit is not a Judge sufficient for the deciding of Controversies, and
interpreting the Scriptures. p. 111. Section 4. It is proved by Prot. that the
Private Spirit is not our Judge of Controversies. p. 112. Section 5. It is
proved by Reason, that the Private spirit is not our Judge of Controversies. p.
113. Section 6. Objections from Scripture for the Private spirit, answered. p.
115.
CHAP. V.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the Books of Scripture
Canonical or Apocryphal.

Whether the Books of Toby, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the first and
second of Machabees, be Scriptures truly Canonical, or Apocryphal. p. 121.

Section 2. It is proved by sundry Reasons and Authorities, that the forsaid
Books are truly Canonical. p. 126. Section 3. That the Primitive Church of
Christ, and the Counsels therein celebrated, have admitted, and approved for
Canonical, the forsaid Books of Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, Toby, Judith,
Machabees etc. p. 131. Section 4. That Protestants themselves do defend the
forsaid Books. p. 134. Section 5. Sundry Octiections produced against the
forsaid Books, answered. p. 135.
CHAP. VI.
Section 1: THe true state of the Question, concerning the Translations of the
Bible.

Whether the Translation of the sacred Scriptures, ordinarily called the Old
Vulgar Latin Translation, be to be used and preferred before all Translations
made by Protestants. p. 141.

Section 2. It is proved by sundry Arguments, that the Vulgar Latin
Translation of the Bible, is to be preferred before all Translations made by
Protestants. p. 144. Section 3. Objections against the Vulgar Translation,
answered. p. 150.
CHAP. VII.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Traditions.

Whether, besides the sacred Scriptures, or written word of God, there be not
another word of God, not written, which is called Traditions: And whether their
Authority be certain and infallible, in deciding matters of Faith. p. 152.

Section 2. It is proved by the sacred Scriptures, that besides themselves, or
the written word, there are certain Traditions of the Church, or word of God,
not written, which we are bound likewise to believe, and observe. p. 156.
Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the sacred Scriptures in proof
of unwritten Traditions. p. 169. Section 4. That the learned Protestants are
enforced to acknowledge and believe our Catholic Doctrine of Traditions. p.
170. Section 5. Objections against Traditions taken from Scriptures, answered.
p. 176.
CHAP. VIII.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning S. Peter's Primacy.

Whether Christ our Savior ordained S. Peter supreme Head or Pastor, not only
of the Apostles, but of the universal Church. p. 181.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that S. Peter was appointed by Christ
the Supreme head, not only of the Apostles, but of the universal Church. p.
184. Section 3. That the Fathers expound the sacred Scriptures agreably with
Catholics, in proof of S. Peter's Primacy. p. 198. Section 4. That Prot. also
do agree with Catholics in the Doctrine of S. Peter's Primacy. p. 204. Section
5. Objections from Scripture against S. Peter's Primacy, answered. p. 207
CHAP. IX.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the Bishop of Rome his
Primacy in matters Ecclesiastical.

Whether the Primacy given by Christ to S. Peter, was given also to his
successors: And whether the Bishops of Rome be the said successors. p. 210.

Section 2. It is proved from Scriptures and Reason, that the Primacy given to
S. Peter was given also to his Successors: and that the Bishops of Rome are the
said successors. p. 215. Section 3. That the Fathers expound the Scriptures in
proof of the Bishop of Rome his succeeding S. Peter in the Primacy of the
whole Church. p. 218. Section 4. That sundry of the learned Prot. do
acknowledge, and teach the Primacy of the Roman Bishop. p. 220. Section 5.
Objections taken from Scripture against the Popes Primacy, answered. p. 223.
CHAP. X.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Antichrist.

Whether Antichrist be yet come; and whether the Bishop of Rome, can be said to
be Antichrist. p. 225.

Section 2. It is proved by the Scriptures that Antichrist is not yet come: and
that the Bishop of Rome, cannot be said to be Antichrist. p. 228. Section 3.
That the Fathers expound the Scriptures agreably with Catholics, in proof
that the Pope cannot be Antichrist. p. 236. Section 4. That Prot. agree with
Catholics in the Doctrine of the Pope not being Antichrist. p. 239. Section
5. Objections from Scripture, that the Pope is Antichrist, answered. p. 241.
CHAP. XI.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Euangelical Counsels,
and the state of Perfection.

Whether there be Evangelical Counsels, or works of supererogation, which
if they be observed or done, they are good and commendable; if omitted, not
sinful: or whether all things that are good be commanded by God, and the
omission of them be sinful. p. 244.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures that there are Evangelical Counsels,
or works of supererogation, which if they be observed or done, they are
commendable and meritorious, if omitted, not sinful. p. 247. Section 3. That
the Fathers do expound the sacred Scriptures answerably with Catholics in
proof of Evangelical Counsatles, and works of Supererogation, and
Perfection. p. 253. Section 4. That Prot. do agree with Catholics in the
Doctrine of Evangelical Counsels, and works of Supererogation. p. 257.
Section 5. Objections from Scripture, against Evangelical Counsels, are
answered. p. 260.
CHAP. XII.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Vows proposed.

Whether the Vows of works of Perfection, as Poverty, Chastity, and
Obedience, be lawful, and commendable now in the law of Grace. p. 263.

Section 2. It is proved from the Scriptures, that the forsaid vows of
Perfection are lawful and commendable. p. 266. Section 3. That the Fathers do
expound the forsaid Scriptures in proof of the vows of Poverty, Chastity and
the like. p. 271. Section 4. That Prot. defend with Catholics the vows of
Poverty Chastity, and the like: And that they confirm the same from the sacred
Scriptures. p. 275. Section 5. Objections from Scripture against the vows of
Poverty, Chastity, and the like, answered. p. 277.
CHAP. XIII.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the Marriage of Priests.

Whether the vow of Chastity be so annexed to holy Orders, that after
Ordination they who are Consecrated, can neither marry, nor use their wives
formerly married. p. 286.

Section 2. It is gathered from the Scriptures, that the vow of Chastity is
rightly annexed to holy Orders. p. 289. Section 3. The Fathers do gather from
the Scriptures, that the vow of Chastity is rightly annexed to holy Orders. p.
290. Section 4. That Prot. teach the vow of Chastity to be rightly annexed to
holy Orders. p. 292. Section 5. Objections from Scriptures against the vow of
Chastity in Priests, answered. p. 293.
CHAP. XIV.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Christ his descending
into Hell

Whether Christ our Savior truly descended in Soul into Hell, and there
redeemed those who were in Abraham's bosom, or Limbus: Or that by hell should
only be understood his Grave, or his suffering the pains of Hell. p. 299.

Section 2. It is proved by Scripture, that Christ our Savior truly descended
is soul into hell: And there redeemed those who were in Abraham's Bosom, or
Limous. p. 303. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers do agreably expound the
Scriptures in proof of Christ's descending into hell, and his delivering of
the Just in Captivity. p. 306. Section 4. That Prot. Writers do teach the
descending of Christ into Hell, and the delivery from thence of the Just that
were in Captivity. p. 309. Section 5. Objections from Scripture against
Christ's descending into Hell. answered. p. 311.
CHAP. XV.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Purgatory, and Prayer
for the dead.

Whether besides heaven and hell after this life there be a place of Purgatory
wherein the souls of the faithful are temporally punished for their sins
committed in their life time: and whether they may be relieved by the
Sacrifices, prayers, and alms of their living friends: Or otherwise that
instantly after death, every soul either immediately ascends into heaven, or
descends into hell. p. 313.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that after this life there is a place
of Purgatory: and that therein the souls of the faithful may be relieved by
the Sacrifices, Prayers, and other spiritual helps of their living friends.
p. 317. Section 3. The ancient Fathers expound the forsaid Scriptures agreably
with Catholics, in proof of Purgatory, and Prayer for the read. p. 327.
Section 4. Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead taught, and believed by Prot.
themselves. p. 331. Section 5. Objections from Scripture, against Purgatory,
and Prayer for the dead, answered. p. 333.
CHAP. XVI.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the Intercession, and
Invocation of Angels and Saints.

Whether the Angels and Saints in Heaven, do pray for men upon Earth. And
whether we may lawfully pray to them as Intercissors to God for us: or whether
the said Angels, and Saints do hear our Prayers or know things done upon
Earth, and their Intercession be not a deroga^ion from Christ's Mediation. p.
338.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that the Angels and Saints in heaven,
do know our Prayers upon Earth, and that they pray for us, and we may lawfully
pray unto them, as Intercessors for us. p. 343. Section 3. Scriptures expounded
by most Ancient Fathers, in proof of the Intercession of Angels and Saints,
and that we may lawfully invoke them. p. 355. Section 4. That Prot. do
agreably teach with Catholics, that the Angels and Saints in heaven do hear
our prayers, do pray for us in particular: and that we may lawfully pray to
them. p. 359. Section 5. Objections from Scripture, against Invocation of
Angels and Saints, answered. p. 364.
CHAP. XVII.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the use and reverence to
be ex^ited ^o Images of Christ and his Saints.

Whether it be lawful to make the Images of Christ and his Saints, to place
them in Churches and to exh^te any honor or reverence unto them: or that all
^his is Superstition and Idolatry, contraty to the Commandment of God. p. 372.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that it is lawful to make the Images
of Christ and his Saints, to place them in Churches, and to exhibit honor,
or reverence unto them. p. 375. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers expound the
Scriptures for the lawful use of Images, and Religious Reverence done unto
them, agreably with Catholics, p. 387. Section 4. That Protestant writers do
acknowledge and allow the use of Images in Churches: and that due honor may be
exhibited unto them. p. 390. Section 5. Objections from Scripture urged by
Protestants against the lawful use of Images, answered. p. 393.
CHAP. XVIII.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the Sacraments of the
New law conferring grace.

Whether the Sacraments of the New law do truly confer Grace to the worthy
receiver, as Gods Isntrumental Causes: or that they are only signs and
remembrances of Grace received by faith. p. 396.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that the Sacraments of the New law do
truly confer grace to the worthy receiver. p. 403. Section 3. Reasons in
proof that the Sacraments do confer Grace. p. 405. Section 4. That the
Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures agreably with Catholics, in proof
of the Sacraments conferring Grace. p. 408. Section 5. That the learned
Prot. do agreably with Catholics teach, that the Sacraments of the New Law
do confer Grace to the worthy receiver. p. 413. Section 6. Objections from
Scripture, in proof that the Sacraments do not confer Grace, answered. p.
416.
CHAP. XIX.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the number of the
Sacraments.

Whether there be seven Sacraments Instituted by Christ our Savior: to wit,
Baptism, Confirmation, Euchariste, Penance, Extreme Unction, Order, and
Matrimony: or only two, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. p. 418.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures that there are seven Sacraments
instituted by Christ our Savior. p. 424. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers
agreably with Catholics believed and taught that there were seven
Sacraments of the New law. p. 428. Section 4. Prot. Writers do teach, and
confess the number of seven Sacraments agreably with Catholics. p. 432.
Section 5. Containing certain Reasons, or congruences establishing the number
of seven Sacraments. p. 435. Section 6. Containing certain Objections had
from Scriptures against the number of seven Sacraments, with Answers thereto.
p. 440.
CHAP. XX.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the necessity of Baptism.

Whether the Sacrament of Baptism, or the desire thereof, be not absolutely
necessary to Salvation, not only because it is commanded by Christ, but because
it is a means necessary thereto: so that Children dying without Baptism,
cannot be saved. p. 442.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that Baptism is necessary to
Salvation. p. 447. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the sacred
Scriptures in proof of the necessity of Baptism. p. 452. Section 4. That
Protestant Writers do teach and defend the Catholic Doctrine of the Necessity
of Baptism. p. 455. Section 5. Objections from Scripture, against the
necessity of Baptism, answered. p. 457.
CHAP. XXI.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the B. Sacrament of
Christ's Body and Blood.

Whether in the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, under the forms of Bread
and wine, there be truly and really, and not only in sign, figure, or
representation, contained the very Body and Blood of Christ our Savior, which
was borne of the B. Virgin Mary, and afterward crucified. p. 462.

Section 2. Wherein is inquired what Prot. understand by receiving spiritually,
or by faith? p. 473. Section 3. The Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood
in the Sacrament, is proved by testimonies of Scripture taken from the Old
Testament. p. 479 Section 4. That the Scriptures of the New Testament convince
our forsaid Catholic Real Presence of Christ's Body, and Blood in the
Eucharist. p. 482. Section 5. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the
Scriptures in proof of our Catholic Doctrine of the Real Presence, and
Transubstantiation. p. 498. Section 6. That Prot. Writers do teach and believe
from Scriptures, the real Presence of Christ's Body, and Blood in the
Eucharist. p. 511. Section 7. Objections taken from the Scriptures, in
disproofe of the real Presence, answered. p. 515. Section 8. Objections
against the possibility of the Real Presence, answered. p. 521. Section 9.
Objections against the real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the
Eucharist, in regard of certain pretended indignities thereupon ensuing,
answered. p. 532. Section 10. The forsaid truth of the real Presence of
Christ's Body, and Blood in the B. Sacrament, is further proved by clear and
confessed miracles, wrought by God in testimony thereof. p. 534.
CHAP. XXII.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the Communion of the
Laity, under one, or both kinds.

Whether under either kind of the Eucharist, the Body and Blood of Christ our
Savior are truly contained, and the true Essence of the Sacrament preserved;
and consequently whether it be lawful to administer the Sacrament only under
one kind to the Laity: or that Christ has commanded both kinds to be
administered unto them. p. 537.

Section 2. That under either kind is contained whole Christ, to wit, Body,
Blood, Soul and Divinity: As also the true essence of the Sacrament. p. 542.
Section 3. That Christ our Savior gave no commend of receiving under both
kinds, it is proved by the sacred Scriptures, and by his own, and his blessed
Apostles examples. p. 544. Section 4. That Communion under one, or both kinds
being a thing indifferent the Church might lawfully determine the same: And of
the reasons that moved the Church in limitation thereof. p. 547. Section 5. That
the Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures in confirmation of the lawfulnes
of the Administration of the B. Sacrament under one kind. p. 552. Section 6.
That Prot. Writers do believe and teach the lawful use of Administering the
Eucharist under one kind to the Laity. p. 553. Section 7. Objections from
Scripture, against Communion of the Eucharist under one kind by the Laity,
answered. p. 554.
CHAP. XXIII.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the Sacrifice of the
Mass.

Whether Christ our Savior did institute a true, proper, and external
Sacrifice of his Body and Blood, to be offered up in his Church, in
Commemoration of his death and Passion. p. 562.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures that our Savior instituted a true,
proper, and external Sacrifice of his Body and Blood, to be offered up in his
Church to God in Commemoration of his death and Passion. p. 567. Section 3.
That the Ancient Fathers expound the Scriptures agreably with Catholics, in
confirmation of the Sacrifice of the Mass. p. 579. Section 4. That sundry
Prot. do teach and allow a true and external Sacrifice in the time of the New
Testament, even the Sacrifice of the Mass. page 587. Section 5. Objections from
Scripture against the Sacrifice of the Mass, answered. p. 590.
CHAP. XXIV.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the Power given by
Christ to Priests for the forgiveness of sins: and the necessity of Confession.

Whether Christ our Savior gave to his Apostles, and in them to Bishops, and
Priests, true authority to forgive and retain Sins in the Sacrament of
Penance: or only to declare Sins to be forgiven to those that do believe:
and whether Confession of Sins in the said Sacrament, be necessary. p. 595.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures that Christ gave to his Apostles and in
them to Bishops and Priests, true authority to forgive, and retain Sins in
the Sacrament of Penance: And that Confession of sins is necessary. p. 601.
Section 3. That the ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures for the authority
of Priests to forgive sins; and the necessity of Confession. And that
Penance is truly a Sacrament. p. 606. S^ction 4. That Protestant writers do
teach, that Priests have authority to retain or to forgive Sins: and that
Confession of Sins in particular, is to be made to Priests: And that Penance
is truly a Sacrament. p. 610. Section 5. Objections from Sripture against the
Power given by Christ to Priest, for the remitting of sins, answered. p. 614.
CHAP. XXV.
Section 1. THe true State of the Question, concerning punishment to be
suffered after Remission of the fault.

Whether the fault of Sin being pardoned by the Sacrament of Penance, the
Punishment due to Sin is also always pardoned therewith: or whether the said
punishment is not afterward to be paid, or satisfied by Prayer, fasting, and
Alms, and the pains in Purgatory. p. 616.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that temporal punishment often
remains to be paid after the fault is remitted: and that the said punishment
may be taken away by the good works of prayer, fasting, Alms, and the like.
p. 620. Section 3. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proof of
Punishment remaining after the fault pardoned: And that the said Punishment is
paid by works of Pennace. p. 624. Section 4. That Protestants do agree with
Catholics in teaching that Punishment after remains to be paid for Sin,
the fault being remitted: and that the same Punishment may be satisfied by good
works. p. 626. Section 5. Objections from Scripture to prove that the
punishment is always remitted with the fault, answered. p. 628.
CHAP. XXVI.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning Indulgences.

Whether the Church of Christ has authority to grant Indulgences, or Pardons
for the temporal punishment due to sin, the fault being formerly pardoned by
the Sacrament of Penance. p. 630.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that the Church has authority to grant
Indulgences, or Pardons for the temporal Punishment due to sin, after the
fault is forgiven. p. 635. Section 3. That the ancient Fathers do agree with
Catholics in the Doctrine of Indulgences. p. 640. Section 4. Protestant
writers teaching Indulgences. p. 641. Section 5. Objections against
Indulgences, answered. p. 642.
CHAP. XXVII.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning prescribed days for
fasting and Abstinence from certain meats.

Whether certain days prescribed by the Church for Fasting: As also
Abstinence at some times from certain meats, be things lawful, and to be
obse^ued under sin: or rather that they are to be left free according to
every man's Devotion, and liking. p. 645.

Section 2. It is proved by the Scriptures, that days prescribed by the Church
for fasting: As also Abstinence at some times from certain meats be things
lawful, and to be observed. p. 648. Section 3. That the Fathers do expound the
Scriptures in proof of the lawful Abstinence from certain meats, and the
appointed days for Fasting. p. 650. Section 4. That sundry Prot. writers do
teach our Catholic Doctrine of Abstinence from certain meats upon
prescribed days. p. 652. Section 5. Objections from Scripture against
Abstinence from certain meats, and Prescript fasting days, answered. p. 635.
CHAP. XXVIII.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Concupiscence.

Whether Concupiscence, remaining after Baptism, is truly and properly sin,
though not imputed to the faithful: or only that it is an Effect of Original
sin: and corruption of nature inclyning men to sin. p. 657.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that Concupiscence remaining after
Baptism, is not truly and properly sin. p. 659. Section 3. That the Fathers
do expound the Scriptures in proof that Concupiscence remaining after Baptism
is not properly sin. p. 661. Section 4. That Prot. writers do teach that
Concupiscence without consent is not properly sin. p. 663. Section 5.
Objections taken from Scripture in proof that Concupiscence it properly sin,
answered. p. 663.
CHAP. XXIX.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the distinction of sin
into Mortal and Venial.

Whether all sins be of their own nature mortal and damnable; and only
venial in the Elect by Gods not imputation: or rather that there be some
Mortal others Venial, which of their own nature do not deserve Eternal
Punishment, even in the wicked, and Reprobate. p. 666.

Section 2. It is proved by Scripture, that all sins are not of their own
nature Mortal, but some Mortal, some Venial. p. 669. Section 3. That the
Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proof of the difference between Mortal
and Venial sins, p. 672. Section 4. That Protestants teach the true
difference of Mortal, and Venial sins. p. 674. Section 5. Objections from
Scripture against the difference of Mortal and Venial sin, are answered. p.
676.
CHAP. XXX.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the Author and Cause of
sin.

Whether God does, will decree, predestinate counsel, or compel men to
sin, and to be damned, or only permits the same; and that man himself is
Cause of his own sin and damnation: and whether Christ dyed for all men, or
only for the Predestinate. p. 678.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that God does not Predestinate, will,
decree, counsel, or compel men to sin or to be damned, but only permits
the same: And that Christ dyed not only for the Predestinate, but for all men
whatsoever. p. 683. Section 3. That the Fathers expound the Scriptures in
proof, that God does not will, or command sin: And that Christ dyed for all.
p. 687. Section 4. That Prot. writers do teach the same doctrine with
Catholics, against God being the Author of sin, or damnation. p. 689.
Section 5. Reasons to prove that God does not will, command, or enforce men to
sin, or to be damned but that he only permits the same. p. 692. Section 6.
Objections from Scripture in proof that God is the Author of sin, and
decrees the sin or damnation of man, answered. p. 696.
CHAP. XXXI.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Freewill.

Whether man after Adams fall has Freewill with Gods Grace, to do such things
as belong to Salvation, and not to do them: or whether the will concurreth only
as a natural Instrument of God, and not as a free Cause. p. 705.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that man after Adams fall, has
freewill with Gods Grace, to do good, and eschew evil. p. 709. Section 3. That
the Fathers do expound the Scriptures agreably with Catholics, in proof of
Freewill. p. 714. Section 4. That sundry Prot. Writers do teach, and defend our
Catholic doctrine of Freewill. p 717. Section 5. Objections from Scripture
against Freewill, answered. p. 718.
CHAP. XXXII.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the possibility of
keeping Gods Commandments.

Whether the Commandments of God, through his holy Grace, though not by the
only power of freewill, are possible to be kept by just men in this life: or
rather that they are so impossible, that in every work that men do, they
transgr^sse them. p. 721.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures that the Commandments of God through
his holy Grace are possible to be kept by man in this life. p. 726. Section 3.
The Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proof that the Commandments are
possible to be kept. p. 729. Section 4. Protestants teach, that the
Commandementes of God are possible to be kept. p. 731. Section 5. Objections
from Scripture in proof, that it is impossible to keep Gods Commandments,
answered. p. 732.
CHAP. XXXIII.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the best works of the
Just being Sin.

Whether all the works of the Just, even the best, are in themselves and of
their own nature truly sins, and deserving damnation: Or rather, that they
are truly and properly just and good. p. 733.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures that all the works of the Just are not
sin, nor deserving damnation. p. 735. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers do
expound the Scriptures in proof that the works of the just are truly good, and
not sin. p. 737. Section 4. That Prot. Writers do teach that the works of
the just are truly good, and not sin. p. 738. Section 5. Objections from
Scripture, in proof that the works of the just are truly sin, answered. p.
739.
CHAP. XXXIV.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the infallible knowledge
of our Predestination and Salvation.

Whether man in this world without special Revelation from God, can have
Infallible knowledge of his present Justification, Predestination, and Eternal
Salvation: In so much, that every one is bound as firmly to believe his own
Salvation as he does the Articles of his Creed: Or only that in this world a
moral certainty can be had thereof: And whether true Faith and Justice once
had, may be lost. p. 741.

Section 2. It is proved by Scripture, that man in this world without special
Revelation from God cannot have infallible knowledge of his present
Justification, Predestination, and eternal Salvation: And that true faith and
justice once had, may be lost. p. 745. Section 3. The sacred Scriptures
expounded by the Fathers agreably with Catholick^s in proof of our uncertainty
of our Predestination and Salvation: as also in proof that faith and justice
once had, may be lost. p. 751. Section 4. That sundry Prot. do teach from the
sacred Scriptures the uncertainty of our Predestination and Salvation: and that
faith and justice once had, may be lost. p. 753. Section 5. Objections from
Scripture in proof of our certainty of Predestination, and Salvation, and that
faith and Justice cannot be lost, answered. p. 755.
CHAP. XXXV.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the formal Cause of
Justification.

Whether the formal cause of Man's Justification is any virtue or grace infused
by God, and inherent in the soul. Or that it consists only in Christ's not
imputation of sin; or in the only remission of sin, without any infusion of
grace. p. 762.

Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures that the formal cause of man's
Justification is true virtue and Grace inherent: and that it does not consist
only in Christ's not imputation of sin, or in the only remission of sin. p.
766. Section 3. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proof of
inherent Justice. p. 768. Section 4. That Prot. Writers do teach the doctrine
of inherent Justice. p. 769. Section 5. Objections from Scripture against
inherent Justice, answered. p. 770.
CHAP. XXXVI.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Justification by Faith
and Works.

Whether man is truly justified by faith only, or that Hope, Charity, and good
works, are likewise causes of Justification. p. 772.

Section 2. It is proved by the sacred Scriptures, that not only faith, but
likewise Hope, Charity, and other good Works do truly justify, and cause
remission of sin. p. 775. Section 3. The Fathers expound the sacred
Scriptures in proof of Justification not only by faith, but likewise by
works: As also that true faith may be without works. p. 781. Section 4. That
sundry Prot. do teach our doctrine of Justification by works, and not only by
faith. p. 783. Section 5. Objections taken from Scripture in proof of
Justification by only faith, and not by works, answered. p. 784.
CHAP. XXXVII.
Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Merit of Works. Whether
Works proceeding from Faith and Charity, do truly merit increase of Grace and
Glory. p. 788. Section 2. It is proved by Scriptures, that works proceeding
from Faith and Charity, do truly merit increase of Grace and Glory. p. 792.
Section 3. The Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proof of merit of works.
p. 793. Section 4. That Protestant writers teach our Catholic Doctrine of
merit of works. p. 797. Section 5. Objections from Scriptures against merit of
Works, answered, p. 798.
A PREPARATIVE TO THE TRIPLE CORD. WHEREIN Is proved the Dignity and
Infallibility of the written Word of God, or Sacred Scriptures: As also the
necessity of finding out their true sense intended by the Holy Ghost: With
certain infallible Rules for the finding out of the said Sense.
SECT. I. The true State of the Question, concerning the verity of the Sacred
Scriptures. Whether the Scriptures contained in the Bible be the word of God
himself truly Divine and Infallible in every least parcel or text thereof? And
therefore for such are by all the faithful to be received, believed, and
obeyed.
Catholic Doctrine.
SACRED Scripture being a principal ground of Christian faith and Religion,
the dignity and infallible truth thereof must necessarily be acknowledged; and
therefore the Catholic Church Conc Trid sess. 4. Decret. de Canonicis
Scripturis.
Receaueth and honors with like affect o^ of Piety and reverence all the
books as well of the Old as New Testament, seeing one God is Author of both
etc. The Council Senonense decrees, that Decret. 4.
Great has been and ever is to be the Authority of sacred Scripture, in which
nothing can be false, nothing idle. Our Catholic Doctors teach, that Rhem.
Test. in Gal. 6.
The Scriptures which are indeed wholly of the holy Ghosts indyting, being put
to the Churches trial, are found proved, and testified unto the world to be
such, and not made true, altered, and amended by the same. Without which
attestation of the Church, the holy Scriptures in themselves, were always true
before, but not so known to be to all Christians, nor they so bound to take
them. Cardinal Bellarmine proves several ways, that the De verbo Dei l. 1.
c. 2.
Canonical Books of Scripture are the word of God. So that according to
Catholics, there is not any one Sentence or text of Scripture which we are not
bound to believe for most true and divine.

Protestant Doctrine.
Some Prot. Harm. of Confess. p. 1.
believe and confess the Canonical Scriptures of the holy Prophets, and
Apostles of both Testaments, to be the very true word of God etc. And they
Ibid. page 3
detest all the heresies of Artemon, the Manichees, Valentinians, of Cerdon,
and the Marcionistes, who denied that the Scriptures proceeded from the holy
Ghost, or else received not, or etc. corrupted some of them.

Others of more sublimated spirits do so little esteem of the written Word,
that they affirm the Sea hereafter Chap. 1. Sect. 1. fig 53.
Old Testament and the New to be contrary and to fight altogether. Others
utterly reject Luth. tom. 3. VVittemb. in Psalm. 45. f. 423. 422. and tom. 3.
Ger. f. 40. 41.
Moses and his writings, as being (as they conceit) in the sight of God either
Idolatry, or Hipocriticall wisdom. Others Swingl. tom. 2. cont. Anabap. f. 10.
charge the Anabaptists with ignorance, for that they think the Commentaries
of the Evangelists, and the Epistles of the Apostles, to have been then in
Authority, when Paul did write these things, as though Paul did attribute so
much to his Epistles, that whatsoever was contained in them was sacred etc.
Which thing (says Swinglius) were to attribute immoderate arrogance to the
Apostle. Whitaker. de Eccl. cont. Bell. Controu. 2. q 4. page 213. Fulke ag. the
Rhem. Test. in Gal. 2. f. 322.
Others condemn S. Peter to have erred in matters of faith, even after the
Holy Ghostes descending upon the Apostles. But these things once admitted, how
then can we be secure that the Evangelists and Apo^tles were the Scribes of
the holy Ghost, and erred not also in their writings?

And if it be true which D. Fulke says, In Confut. of Purgat. p. 214.
Whosoever denies the authority of the holy Scriptures, thereby bewraieth
himself to be an heretic; what is then to be thought of Luther, Whitaker,
Swinglius, Fulke himself, and sundry other Protestants, who thus impudently
detract from the authority of Moses, the Evangelists, the Apostles, and their
writings.

SECT. II. That the sacred Scriptures are the true word of God, divine and
infallible, the Scriptures themselves do testify.
I Do not intend these proofs from Scriptures with any expectation that they
should be approved by such as reject their authority, relying only upon their
private Spirits, but only in this regard, that the world may know, that we
Catholics do so highly esteem them for divine and infallible, as whatsoever
is spoken, taught, or to be read therein, we in all Disputes and Controversies
of Religion, do humbly submit our selves to the doctrine thereof.

First then we believe that the Author of the Scriptures, is only God himself,
dictating them to his Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles, as his Scribes; of
whom S. Peter affirms that, 2. Pet. 1.21.
The holy men of God spoke, inspired with the Holy Ghost. And S. Paul affirms
that, 2. Tim. 3.16.
All Scripture inspired by God is profitable to teach etc. Agreably to which
the Prophets were said to be the mouth of our Lord: Isa. 1.20.
The mouth of our Lord has Spoken. Luc. 1.70.
As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, that are from the beginning.
Heb. 1.1.
In times past God speaking to the Fathers in the Prophets, last of all in
these days has spoken to us in his Son. This speech whether uttered by the
Prophets, or by Christ himself, is here said to proceed from God, as the first
Author. And so God is said to speak by the mouth of man, and the Prophets and
other sacred writers by the mouth of God. And whereas Moises writes that Exodus
9.16.
God said to Pharao, S. Paul ^elating the same thing writes that, The Romans
9.17.
Scripture says to ^harao: so m^king Gods speaking and the Scriptures spea^ing
all one. And to the same purpose speaks S. Paul of himself, 2. Cor. 13.3.
Seek you an experiment of him, that speaks in me, Christ? Yea the self
same vvritings are said to be written by God, and by Moises. So God said to
Moises. Exodus 34.1. Deuteronomy. 10.1.2.4.
Cut thee two tables of stone like unto the former, and I will write upon them
the words which the tables had, which thou have broken. Deuteronomy 10.4.
And he wrote in the tables according as he had written before, the 10. words.
And yet Exodus 34.27.28.
our Lord said to Moises, write thou these words etc. And he wrote in the
Tables the words of the Covenant, ten. Now how could the Tables of the law be
said to be written by God and by Moises, but that Moises as a scholar did
hold the pen, and God as master did direct, that so all that writing might be
ascribed to Moises as the Instrument, and to God as the chief author.

A further proof here of may be taken from the frequent practice of the holy
men of God, who usually confirmed their callings, as also the Doctrine which
they wrote or preached by testimonies of the Scripture. So S. John Baptiste
alleged the Prophet I say as a witness of his Embassage, for being asked who
he was, he answered, Io. 1.23. Esa. 40.3.
I am the voice of one crying in the desert, make straight the way of our Lord,
as I say the Prophet said. The Apostles Peter, Paul, John, James, Jude, in all
their Epistles do frequently allege the testimonies of the law and Prophets.
Yea Christ himself first of all confirmed his own Embassage by testimony of
the Prophet Esaias saying, Luc. 4.18. Esa. 61.1.
The spirit of the Lord upon me, for which he anointed me etc. He confuteth
the Saduces out of the Scriptures, when he said, Mar. 12.24.26.
Do you not therefore err, not knowing the Scriptures? And a little after, As
concerning the dead that they do rise again, have you not read in the book of
Moises etc? Finally he Mat. 22.43. Psalm 109.1.
confuteth the Pharisees by the testimony of David, and directs them thus,
Io. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures for you think in them to have life Everlasting, and the
same are they that give testimony of me. This alleging of the Scriptures by
the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself in proof of their Callings and
Doctrine, does clearly suppose their divine infallibility.

SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers do teach and believe the S^cred Scriptures
to be the true word of God, of divine, and infallible Authority.
THE Ancient Fathers teach, that the sacred Scriptures are Letters, or Epistles
sent from God to man. So S. Chrysostom, Him. 2. in Genesis
God from the beginning spoke with man by himself for so he came to Adam so he
blamed Cain, so he spoke with Noe, so he lodged with Abraham. But after all
mankind had degenerated into great malice, neither then did the maker of all
withdraw himself wholly from mankind but willing to renew his friendship with
them, he sent letters as to men absent, to reconcile unto him all men, and
these Letters God gave, but Moises brought them. S. Austine affirms that, In
Ps. 90.
Letters came to us from that City (to wit Heaven) where we are Strangers:
they are the Scriptures, which do exhort us to live well. And again, Ser. 16.
ad frat. in Eremo.
The divine Scriptures, are as Letters sent to us from our Country. Because our
King more pious and merciful then can be thought or spoken, has vouchsafed to
send unto us by Patriarchs and Prophets the divine inuiting Scriptures by
which he would inuit us to our eternal Country. L 4. Epist. Ep. 84.
What is sacred Scripture (says S. Gregory) but a certain Epistle of Almighty
God to his Creature?

S. Austine teaches, that Christ God and man De ciuit. Dei. l. 11. c 3.
Spoke first by the Prophets, then by himself, after by the Apostles as much
as he judged sufficient: yea he made a writing (or Scripture) which is called
Canonical, of most eminent Authority which we believe of these things, which
it is not expedient to be ignorant of, nor are able of our selves to know. And
writing to S. Hierome, Ep. 19.
I acknowledge (says he) to thy Charity that I have learned to give that fear
and honor to those books only of the Scriptures, which are now called
Canonical, that I most firmly believe no Author of them to have erred any
thing in writing. And if I shall find any thing in those writings, which
seems contrary to truth, I will nothing doubt, but that either the Book^ is
corrupted, or that the Interpreter has not conceived what is spoken, or that
my self does not understand it. So Religious a respect did S. Austine bear to
the Scriptures. Yea he constantly avouches that, De doct. Christ. l. 1. c. 37.
faith it self will stragger, if the authority of divine Scriptures do not
stand sure. In which respect prefering it before all the writings of men, he
further says: De Bapt. Cont. Don. l. 2. c. 3.
Who knows not, that the holy Canonical Scripture as well of the old as new
Testament is contained in its own certain Bounds, and that the same is so to
be preferred before all the later writings of Bishopes, that no doubt or
disputation may be had thereof, whether it be true or right whatsoever shall
appear to be written therein. Thus S. Austine, and thus all Catholics at this
day.

SECT. IV. That Sundry Protestants do acknowledge the sacred Scriptures to be
the word of God, of divine and infallible authority.
MAny Protestants seem to give so much credit unto the sacred Scriptures, as
that they pretend to believe nothing for certain, but the holy Scriptures
only. So M. Willet teaches that, Synop. p. 38
The Scripture is not one of the means, but the sole, whole, and only means
to work faith. And agreably our English Church has decred that the Art. 6,
Holy scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation: So that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required
of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the faith, or be
thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. The Heluetian reformed Church
ordains that, In the Harm of Confess p. 4.
In controversies of Religion or matters of faith, we cannot admit any other
Judge then God himself, pronouncing by the holy Scriptures what is true, what
is false, what is to be followed, or what to be avoided. And again, Ibid. p. 5.
The Canonical Scripture being she word of God, and delivered by the holy
Ghost, and published to the world by the Prophets and Apostles, being of all
other the most perfect and ancient Philosophy, does alone perfectly contain
all Piety etc. In the Harm. pa. 6.
The Bohemia^ Ministers reach with one consent, concerning the holy Scriptures
of the new and old Testament, which is commonly called the Bible etc. that it
is true, certain, and worthy to be believed etc It is inspired and taught of
the holy Ghost, and uttered by the mouth of holy men, written by them, and
confirmed by heavenly and divine testimonies etc. Ib. p. 7.
Wherefore every one ought very highly to esteem of the divine writings of the
holy Prophets and Apostles resolutely to believe them, and religiously to yield
unto them in all things. The French Protest. avouch, Harm. pa. 8. 9.
That God reueiled himself etc. far more plainly in his word: which word in
the beginning he reueiled to the fathers by certain visions and Oracles, and
then caused it to be written in these Books we call holy Scripture. All this
holy Scripture is contained in the Canonical Books of the old and new
Testament. And then making the Catalogue thereof, they say, we acknowledge these
Books to be Canonical, that is, we account them as the Rule and square of our
faith etc. and we believe that the Word contained in these books, came from
one God etc. The Prot. of Belgia Harm pa. 10.
confess that, this word of God was not brought or delivered by any will of
man but that holy men of God inspired by Gods spirit spoke it as S. Peter
witnesses etc. And they Ib p. 11.
without any doubt believe also those things, which are contained in them etc.
As also that this holy Scripture does most perfectly contain the will of God,
and that in it all things are abundantly taught, whatsoever is necessary to be
believed of man to attain salvation. The Prot. of Wittemberge say, Ib. p. 13.
This Scripture we believe and confess to be the Oracle of the Holy Ghost, so
confirmed by heavenly Testimonies, that if an Angel from heaven preach any
other thing, let him be accursed. The Prot. of Scotland decree thus: Harm. p.
19.
As we believe and confess the Scriptures of God sufficient to instruct, and
make the man of God prefect; so do we affirm and auow the authority of the
same to be of God, and neither to depend on men or Angels. In regard of these
premises and sundry other such like acknowledgments, D Fulke infers and
concludes as before, that Against Purgat. page 214.
whosoever denies the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, thereby bewraieth
himself to be an heretic. And in this truth all Catholics do accord with D.
Fulke.

SECT. V. That it is impious to corrupt, or reject any part of Canonical
Scripture.
ALL sides agree, that it is most impious to corrupt the words, or true sense
of Scripture, by adding, or subtracting, mistranslating, or false interpreting;
this being, as S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 4 2.
to adulterate the word of God: and these Corrupters according to Origin, are,
In Romans 2.
Thieves and adulterers of the Scriptures. And S. Cyprian calls them, De
unit. Eccl. nu. 7.
false Interpreters, art^ficers. and craftsmaisters in corrupting the truth.
The anc^e^t Heretics were observed by the Iren. l 1. c. 1.
Fathers, to be often guilty of this heinous crime, but none more frequently
and palpably then our modern Prot. have offended herin, as will clearly
appear upon sundry occasions in this Treatise following. But this they have
learned from their first Father Martin Luther, to whom Swinglius said, Swingl.
tom 2. ad Luth l. de Sacram. p. 412. 413.
Thou do corrupt the word of God, thou art seen to be a manifest and common
corrupter and peruerter of the holy Seriptures: how much are we ashamed of
thee, who have hitherto esteemed thee beyond all measure, and now prove thee to
be such a man. Whereas on the other side, for special reverence and sincerity
of dealing in those matters, the Fathers and Catholic expositors are those
whom S. Paul styleth 2. Tim. 2.15.
Right handlers of the word of truth: These making Conscience and esteeming it
most sacrilegious to corrupt, alter, add, or subtract the least word or
syllable indicted by the holy Ghost, and written in the book of God.

It is no less criminal to deny or reject the sacred Scriptures when they
seem to make against them: which S. Hierome observes to be the custom of
ancient heretics, who, In Proaem, Comment. in ep ad Tit.
whatsoever they saw contrary to their opinion, they either scraped out, or
rejected the whole. Or, as S. Austine says of them. L. 18 cont. Faust. Man. c
7.
That which does not hinder their heresy, that they receive: but tha^ which
hinders, that they reeeiue not. So the Manichees denied all the old Testament,
and many parts of the new, as S. Austine Haer. 46. and cont. Faust. l. 3. and
81.
witnesses; the Nicolaires and Gnostikes discarded cut of the Canon the
Psalter, as Philastrius L. de haeres c. 117.
testifies. The Ebionites plainly rejected the Gospel of S. Matthew, as S.
Epiphanius Haer. 30.
records: And L. 3. c. 21.
according to Eusebius, they made small account of the rest of the Ghospels.
Marcion received only the Gospel of S. Luke, as Tertullian L de Praescrip.
Iren. l 1. c. 29.
and Irenaeus avouch: And the same maimed in above 20. places, Haer. 42.
as S. Epiphanius proves, and confuteth. The Alogians contemned the Gospel
of S. John, and the Apocalypse, witness Epiphanius. Haer 51.
The Seuerians admitted not the Acts of the Apostles, as Eusebius L. 4. c. 27.
declares, and the same affirms S. Austine L. de vtilit. cred c. 2.
of the Manichees. The Ebionites rejected all the Epistles of S. Paul, as
witness S. Irenaeus L. 1. c. 26. Epiph. haer. 30.
and S. Epiphanius. Now that our modern Prot. do no little offend in this
kind of rejecting the Scriptures, when they seem to make against them, I shall
sundry ways make clear, in this See hereafter.
subsequent Treatise.

SECT. VI. The necessity of finding out the true Sense of the sacred Scriptures.
SEeing all things naturally desire that which is good, and the mind cannot
incline to any evil, which may withdraw the understanding or the will from
that which is right, unless it be under the pretext and color of that which is
true and good; even as the Devil to deceive men, 2. Cor. 11.
does transfigure himself into an Angel of light: So in matter of faith,
nothing being more true the^ the sacred Scriptures, all heretics under the
specious title of the Scriptures, do deceive others and are deceived
themselves. Now because falsehood cannot receive proof from truth, and
Scripture rightly understood can produce or nourish no error; therefore from
Scriptures falsely understood do all Heretics defend themselves and their
cause. But against this fraud Christ himself forwarneth us, Mat. 7.15.
to take great heed of false Prophets, which come in the clothing of sheep,
but inwardly are ravening wolves. This clothing of sheep are the words of the
Prophets and Apostles, pretended by heretics, but inwardly, that is, in the
Sense of the words, they are reuening wolves and robbers of Souls. To which
purpose says most excellently the eloquent Vincent, L. Cont. proph. haer.
Nouitates. c. 36.
what is the clothing of sheep, but the sentences of Prophets and Apostles?
Who are the ravening wolves, but the wild and ravenous senses of heretics, who
always trouble the foulds of the Church, and tear in peaces the flock of
Christ by what means they can? But that they may more deceiptfully steal upon
the unwary sheep, the cruelty of wolves remaining, they cast of the shape of
wolves, and wrappe themselves within the sentences of Gods law, as within
certain fleeces of sheep. In like sort whereas our Savior bids us not to
believe false Prophets who will cry, Mat. 24.23.
Lo here is Christ, or there, old Origin expounds this of heretics detorting
the Scriptures: In Mat. hom. 29
He that would deceive us says, Behold here is Christ, showing for example
this place of the Gospel: but the Author of another error will say, Behold
Christ is here, offering for example another text. So that the text of
Scripture is made to serve the turn of all heretics, though never so opposite
one to another: Every one, as S. Peter says, 2. Pet. 3.16.
deprauing the Scriptures to their own perdition.

Tract. 18. in Joan.
In this respect it is, that the sacred Scriptures are said to be the books of
Heretics. Heresies (says S. Austine) and certain opinions insnaring the
souls of the perverse, and plunging them into the depth (of Error) have no
other root but when Scriptures are not well understood, and what is not well
understood in them, is also rashly and audaciously defended. Yea, De Genesis and
lit. l. 7. c. 9.
They are Heretics for no other cause, but because not rightly understanding
the Scriptures, they obstinatly maintain their false opinions, against the
truth of them. And according to S. Hilary, L. 2. de Trinit. and l. de Synodis
extremo.
Heresy is (or aryseth) of the understanding not of the Scripture (it self,)
the fault is in the sense, not in the words. And then naming diverse
Heretics, he says, they all speak Scriptures without sense, they all
pretend faith, without faith: for the Scriptures are not in the reading, but in
the understanding. Agreably to which, Christ our Lord reproved the Sadduces in
these words: Mat. 22.29.
You do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. The Sadduces
did read the text of Scriptu^e, but therefore they are said to err, because
they did not know, that is, they did not understand the Scripture: teaching
thereby that the cause of Error, is the not right understanding, although we
have the words upon our fingers ends.

S. Irenaeus L. 1. c. 1.
disputing against heretics avouches that their monstrous Doctrines and
fantasies of opinion, are wholly framed of Scriptures not well joined
together; As If a man should break asunder the Kings Image made of precious
stones, and changing the figure, should make thereof Foxes and Lions, and by
reason of the identity of the matter, should endeavor to persuade the simple,
that this is the true Image of the king: such like monsters make Heretics of
the word of God it self. This is so certain a truth, that D. Luther himself
avouches that, In Postil. Wit. in 2. con. 8. Dom. post Trinit. fol. 118.
It is true that the sacred Scripture is the book of Heretics, because
Heretics are accustomed to provoke to that book: neither did there arise at
any time any Heresy so pestiferous, and so foolish, which did not endeavor to
hyde it self under the veil of Scripture.

That then, which imports for the final and Infallible deciding of
Controversies arysing from the Scripture, is to find out the true sense thereof
intended by the holy Ghost: to which all parties will profess without any
tergiuersation to yield and subscribe. And so prescribed S. Hierome, In
Comment. ad Gal. 1.
Let us not think (says he) that the Ghospel is in the words of Scripture
but in the sense, not in the superficies, but in the marrow, not in the leaves
of words, but in the root of reason. Again, In c 1. ad Gal. Ep. ad Nepot. and
in l. 3. reg. c. 1.
Then the Scripture is profitable to the hearers, when it is not expounded
without Christ (that is to say, not contrary to the Rule of faith delivered by
Christ to his Church etc.) otherwise the Devil which alleges Scriptures, and
all heretics (according to Ezechiel) of Scriptures make Cushions which they
may put under the elbow of men of all ages. Wherefore S. Austine advises well,
Ep. 221.
Love exceedingly the understanding, because the Scriptures themselves, except
they be rightly understood, cannot be profitable unto thee. Tertullian tells
us, De Eraescript. c. 17.
That the sense of holy Scripture adulterated, does impugn the truth, as much
as the style corrupted. And answerably herunto Prot. themselves teach, that
Rainolds in his Confer. p. 68.
It is not the show, but the sense of words (of Scripture) that must decyde
controversies. Now how this true sense is to be found without all Error and
deceit, these few Sections next following will clearly discover.

SECT. VII. That the sacred Scriptures do admit several true and different
senses, but not contrary, as well Literal as Mystical: and of the force of
such Arguments as are taken from any of the forsaid senses.
SAint Gregory L. 21. mor. c. 1.
teaches that, It is a thing proper to the sacred Scriptures, having God for
their Author, to be of that fecundity, as to affoard several true senses, in
one and the same sentence, as the literal or historical, and the spiritual or
mystical. The literal is that which the words of themselves do immediately
bear: the spiritual relates to some thing else, then that which the words do
immediately signify. The literal again is twofold, the one simple or plain,
which consists in the propriety of words: the other figurative, whereby the
words are transferred from their native signification to another: and of this
there be so many kinds, as there are several kinds of figures. The spiritual
sense also is divided into Allegorical, Tropologicall, and Anagogical. Now of
these senses, the literal is found to be in every Text both of the Old and New
Testament: And though the Spiritual be often to be had in both Testaments, yet
not in every sentence of both. So those words, Thou shall love thy Lord thy
God with all thy heart, have but one sense, and that is Literal. These things
supposed, that which may seem somewhat questionable, is, whether one Text of
Scripture may admit several true and different Senses, either literal or
spiritual? In which though I find Fulk ag. Purg. pa. 151. Will. in Synop. p. 26.
D. Fulke and M. Willet to hold the Negative; yet S. Austine L. 12. Confess. c.
20. and 23. 27. 31. l. 3. de doct. Christ. c. 27. l. 11. de Ciu. Dei. c. 19.
proves by many examples, that in one sentence may often be found several true
literal senses. And further says, L. 12. Confess. c. 31.
When one shall say, Moses meant that which I do, and another, nay that which I
do; I think I speak more religiously, why not rather both, if both be true?
Or if any third or fourth, or any other truth any man shall see in these
words; why may not he be thought to have seen all those truths, by whom God,
to those that see true and diverse things, has tempered the Scriptures with
many senses? In another place he affirms, that such is the Scriptures
obscurity, that De Ciu. Det. l. 11. c. 19.
It brings forth diverse senses of truth etc. whiles one understands it
after this manner, another after that. L. 12. Conf. 1. and de G^n. ad lit. l.
1. c 21. de doct. Chr. l. 1. c. 36. de Ciu. Dei. l. 15 c. 16, de vtil. cred. c.
3.
Yea one text of Scripture may well have so many understandings, as may stand
with truth, and be not repugnant to life and good ma^ners. And the like he
teaches in sundry other places. And indeed it is the general Doctrine of the
Ancient Fathers.

A truth so evident that sundry Prot. writers do teach the same. Zanchius
avouches that, De Sacra Script. fol. 421. 424. 425.
Besides the literal Sense, the Allegorical sense is often needful: to which
are reduced the Anagogical, and Tropological, or Moral sense; and that these
are delivered from the Holy Ghost: Orig. in Genesis ho 11. Greg. Mo^. l. 20. c. 1.
Chrisost. ho 21 in Genesis Fulg. l. 2. C^ad Monim. c. 14. Lyra. in Daniel. c 8.
and are sometimes collected as pertaining to faith or to manners, and
according to the mind of the Holy Ghost. The Translatour of the Bible into
English published Anno 1576. speaking of the diversity of Translations, says,
Ep. to the Brethren of Engl. Scot. and Irel. etc.
Seeing some Translations read after one sort, and some after another, whereas
all may serve to good purpose and edification, we have in the Margent noted
that diversity of speech or reading, which may also seem agreeable to the mind
of the Holy Ghost. Aretius thinks, Loc. com. loc. 59. fol. 187.
As concerning the variable Exposition of Scripture, it is light which they
(the Anabaptists) do object: for they ought to consider that the Guiftes in
the Church be diverse, namly in Interpretation, wherein whiles the Rule of faith
and sincerity be observed, there is no cause why the diversity of opinions
should hurt. And somewhat before he says, Ibid. fol. 177.
Concerning the variable interpretation (of the Scriptures) I affirm every one
to enjoy their several Gift, and do somtymes profitably vary: And that so long
as it is not erred from the scope of faith, we ought not to be offended with
the diversity of Interpretation. But to allege many witnesses in one, the
Prot. of Geneua in their Principles of divinity propounded and disputed by
certain Students there, under M. Theodore Beza, and M. Anthony Faius, and by
them published, affirm and reach that, L. 52. fol. 149.
The Scripture is so plentiful, that one and the selfsame place can admit d
uers Interpretations, and yet all agreeable with the Doctrine of faith. So that
both Scriptures, Fathers, and Prot. do all teach this Catholic Doctrine, that
the words and sentences of Scripture do contain in them several different
Expositions and understandings, and yet all true, and intended by the Holy
Ghost.

The next thing to be examined, is, which of these Senses do affoard a forcible
Argument for the establishing any truth in matter of faith and Religion. And
first it cannot be denied, that a firm Argument may be taken from any sense,
litterall or mystical, so long as it appears that Sense to be true and
intended by the holy Ghost: But because it is most difficult to know and
discern when these mystical and spiritual senses are true, and so intended
by the holy Ghost, therefore ordinarily speaking, arguments drawn from this
Sense are weak, uncertain, and not sufficient absolutely to determine a Point
of faith. And so it is generally taught by Divines, that, Theologia Symbolica
non est argumentatiua, symbolicall or mystical Divinity does not yield a
strong Argument: which truth they have learned from S. Denis in his Epistle to
Titus. And S. Austine demands Ep. 43.
who but mest impudently will endeavor to interpret by himself any thing
that is Allegorical, unless he have most manifest testimonies by whose light
obscure things may be illustrated. And with him agrees S. Hierome teaching In.
c. 1^. Mat.
That never can Parables and doubtful understandings of riddles (or hard
questions) profit to the Authority of Decrees. And the reason of this is,
because the mystical and spiritual Senses are many; and although they may
edify, when they are not against faith or good manners, yet it does not always
appear, that they were intended by the holy Ghost: wherefore Ep. 48. ad
Vincent.
S. Austine deservedly derideth the Donatistes, who from these words mystically
interpreted, Show me where thou feedest, where thou lie in the noone day? did
gather that the Church of Christ did only remain in Afric.

Seeing then a good Argument cannot ordinarily be framed from the mystical or
spiritual Sense; Let us now see what authority bears the Litterall: In
which, it is our general doctrine, that seeing it is certain, that Sense
which is immediately gathered from the words to be Sense of the holy Ghost,
that therefore from the literal sense are we to take Arguments that will be
efficacious: And so accordingly Chemnitius concludes, from several sayings of
S. Irenaeus L. 2. c. 47.
that Exam. part. 1. fol. 74. 48.
That is the sound sense, and which is without danger, which plainly and
without ambiguity is set down in the Scripture in the same words. That then
which is necessary to be known, is, how infailibly to find out the true
Literal Sense from whence Arguments of force may be taken, and truly to
discern when and wherein it differs from the figurative.

SECT. VIII. Certain Rules prescribed for the discerning of the simple
Literal Sense from the figurative. And for the finding out of the true sense
intended by the Holy Ghost.
WE find by daily experience that often doubts do arise concerning the very
literal sense of Scripture: And this sometimes through the ambiguity of words,
as where it is said, Drink ye all of this; heeresome think it uncertain
whether the word, All, signifies all men without exception, or only all the
faithful, or only all the Apostles. Sometimes the doubts arise through the
propriety of words: for seeing the literal sense (as has been said) is
sometimes simple, and sometimes figurative, it is doubtful in many places
whether the true sense be proper and simple, or figurative. All Catholics
understand these words, This is my Body, simply and plainly, according to
propriety of the words: Protestants expound them figuratively. Through this
difficulty some have fallen into grievous errors, as Origin, taking Hier. ep.
ad Pama^h.
the words of Scripture figuratively, when they should have been taken simply.
And on the contrary, Papias, Hier. Praefat. l 18. in Isa. and. in c. 36. Ezech.
Aug. l 20. de Ciu Dei. c. 7.
Tertullian, and others, by taking the words properly, when they should have
been taken figuratively.

For the avoiding therefore of these extremes, S. Austine gives us this good
Rule. L. 3 de Doct. Christ. c. 10.
Whatsoever can neither be referred to the honesty of manners, nor the truth of
faith, that is to be taken figuratively and Metaphorically. Again, ^b. c. 6.
If any speech of Scripture be commanding as forbidding sin, or commanding
Beneficence, then it is to be taken properly: But if it should seem to command
sin, or forbid Beneficence, it is a figurative speech.

The 2. Rule given by S. Austine is, De unit. Eccl c. 16. and cont. lit Pet. c.
5. etc. 16.
that obscure and doubfull places may not be urged against those which are more
plain, but are to be understood and expounded by them. This is so reasonable,
that Chemnitius accepts of it for good, saying; Exam. part. 1. fol. 48. 74.
et. part. 3. fol. 49.
We affirm that obscure places of Scripture are not to be expounded against
that opinion which is expressed in plain and evident places of Scripture. And
he alleges S. Hierome to teach, that Exam. part. 3. fol. 127.
doctrine may not be gathered out of obscure, doubtful, aenigmaticall, and
allegorical places of Scriptures. In regard whereof, that figurative layings
afford no certain proof or Argument in matters of faith, it is taught by most
Protestants, as Chem. Ex. part. 3. page 127. Aret. loc com loc. 51. p 162. and
loc. 81. p. 261. Will. in Syn. p. 27. Oecol. l. ep. Oecol. and Swingl. l. 1 p.
223. Lub. de Princip. p. 409. Down. of Antich. p. 169.
Chemnitius, Aretius, M. Willet, Oecolampadius, Lubbertus, and M. Downham, who
affirms it to be a Rule in Divinity, that, Theologia Symbolica non est
argumentatiua.

A third Rule is, that the words of Scripture are ever to be taken in their
plain, proper, and litterall sense, and not to be changed into figures, unless
that Sense be contrary to other plainer places of Scripture, or make against
some known Article of faith, or be opposite to the common Explication of the
whole Church, or infer some absurdity. This is also acknowledged by
Protestants: for D. Bilson affirms it to In his true Differ. fol. 568.
Be rightly said, that, in the Scriptures so long as the letter may possibly be
true, and not against faith and good manners, we may not fly to figures.
Chemnitius thinks that, Era. part. 2. fol. 71.
when the Holy Ghost would have any sentence in the Scriptures to be understood
otherwise then as the words do simply and properly signify, he plainly
expresses and shows so much, either in the same or some other place. M.
Hooker Eccl. Pol l. 5. Ser. 59. p. 130.
holds it for a most infallible Rule in Exposition of Scripture, that where a
Litterall construction will stand, the furthest from the Letter is commonly the
worst. And the very same is taught by Against the Plea of the Innocent. pa 194.
D. Couell. And this with great reason, for if those textes of Scripture which
being literally taken, are not directly against any other playner Scripture or
Article of faith, may be perverted and turned into Tropes and figures, then as
Melancthon well observes, L. Ep. Oe col. and Swingl. ep. ad Prider. Micon p.
645.
All things may be perverted: Yea faith it self will perish, and all divine
Mysteries depend only upon opinion, and so the way laid open to infinite
errors.

A fourth Rule approved by Catholics and Protestants is this: that, when the
Scripture does specially instruct us in the Doctrine of the Holy Sacraments, in
the institution or publishing of Gods peculiar Commandments, or in any
principal Article of faith, then that sense is to be holden good, for proof
of which the words are most plain and literal. But for the right
understanding of this, it is to be observed, that although our Savior in his
ordinary Exhortation or preaching to the people, which did imply a
Commandment, did sometimes to stir them up to greater atte^tion, remember
them in figurative words of some general duty or Commandment, not then first
prescribed, but formerly known and commanded; yet the first promulgation of
every peculiar Commandment is ever delivered in words plain, not figurative
or obscure. And as touching doctrines, it is not meant hereby, that every
sentence or opinion concerning God is ever to be understood according to the
literal words, but only that such as comprehend in them a special difficulty
or necessity for us to believe, or practice; such as are the Articles of our
faith, which are set down and delivered in plain words, and so to be
understood. Wherefore such examples of God being a Consuming fire, of Christ
being a stone, a lion, a vine, a door, and the like, are of another nature,
not importing any principle or Article of faith or doctrine.

Again, in the secluding of Tropes and figures, it is not intended that every
figurative locution should be secluded, but only such as is obscure and dark,
for there be some which are in themselves no less easy and manifest then the
other: As for example to say, The Cup is shed, Every one knows (as Beza In
Mat. 26.28.
confesses) that thereby is mea^t not the Cup it self, but the thing
contained in the Cup. And this, and such like are sometimes usual, but yet
their sense is known and manifest.

This Rule thus understood, is acknowledged by Protestants to be good: so
Vrsinus prescribes that, Comment. Catech. fol. 416.
Articles of faith ought to be understood properly, unless some Article so taken
properly, do disagree with other places of Scripture. Whitaker teaches that,
De Sacra Script. fol. 391 395.
Although in the words (of Scriptures) many things be obscure, and in many
places, yet all Articles of faith are manifest. Che^nitius affirms that, Ex.
part. 1. fol. 48.
The Scripture when it delivers doctrine or Commandments, to be certain,
and nothing obscure. Melancton discoursing of this matter confesses that, L.
de verit. Corp. and sing Domini, and see L. Epist. Oecol. and Swingl. fol. 132.
140. And Confess. Aug. tract. de Euchar.
Although the phrase of Scripture be full of figures in narratio^ of things
done, yet says he, If in the Commandments or Doctrines which contain the
nature or will of God, we go about to do the like, what shall f, ollow,
learned men may easily judge. Whereupon he concludes that in Doctrines of
faith, the Scriptures ought to be taken properly, as the words do usually
signify, unless thereby, An absurdity do light upon other plainer places of
Scripture: Which if it do, then, says he, It is to be redressed by the
benefit of figures: But if the Absurdity light only upon reason, and not upon
the Scripture, then, as he teaches, must the word of God be preferred before
the Judgment of reason. And he further avouches that It is needful that the
meaning of those places be certain, from whence Doctrine, or Articles (of
faith) be taken: otherwise says he, when the rite of Circumcision was
instituted, it had been lawful for Abraham to have imagined some other thing
then that which the words signify: And, a subtle man might have disputed, a
thing (seeming) so ridiculous, to be in no sort commanded of God: But (thereby
only) to be signified, that lusts were to be restrained and bridled. Thus fully
Philip Melancthon. Lastly Carrion thinks it needful, Chron. p. 237.
that in the Articles of faith, in themorall law, and in the Promise of Grace,
that we be restrained with the native signification of the words.

And as this Rule stands good for the understanding of such Scriptures as
instruct us in the Institution of Sacraments and Commandementes, and in the
necessary Article of faith: So also may it serve for the fynding out of the
true sense of any other Text, in which the usual and Literal sense is ever
true; if so the said sense make not against some other plainer places of
Scripture, or be contrary to some Article of faith, or opposite to the general
understanding of the Church, or therewith it infer some gross and plain
absurdity. These Rules prescribed and approved both by Catholics and Prot. if
they likewise be observed in the Exposition of the Scriptures, they will
certainly discover the literal sense from the figurative, and thereby prevent
Prot. of their frequent flying to figures, when they are convinced by the
Letter.

SECT. IX. An Examination of such Rules as Prot. ordinarily prescribe, and
observe for fynding out of the true Sense of the sacred Scriptures.
THe first Rule that I find to be used and taught by Modern Sectaries, for the
fynding out of the true Sense and meaning of the Scriptures, is the Scripture
it self. Harm. of Conf p. 5.
The Interpretation whereof (say they) is to be taken only from herself, that
herself may be the Interpreter of herself etc. And, Ib. p. 3.
We acknowledge that Interpretation of Scriptures for authentical and proper,
which being taken from the Scriptures themselves etc. accords with the Rule
of faith and Charity. Yea Ib. p. 14.
the true meaning of the Scripture is to be sought in the Scripture it self,
and among those, that being raised up by the Spirit of God, expound Scripture
by Scriture.

This Rule to be most imperfect and false, I prove at large See hereafter.
hereafter; for the present, M. Hooker shall confute it, auouching that, Eccl.
Pol, l. 2. pa. 116.
The Scripture could not teach us the things that are of God, unless we did
credit me^, who have taught us, that the words of Scripture do signify these
things. And seeing, as D. Whitakers confesses De sacra Script. page 521.
the Scripture has no lively voice which we may hear, but is a thing without
all life: It is impossible to imagine that her self alone can make known to
her Readers, the true understanding of so many and so difficult passages as are
contained in her.

Others perceiving the insufficiency of this, do give for their Rule, not the
Scripture it self sole, and alone, but as Whitak. de Eccles. Contr. 2 q. 4. p.
221. and de script. page 521.
it is diligently read, conferred one place with another, the Circumstances
weighed, and much prayer used. But these studies and Conferences are but humane
endeauours, and such wherein every man, without extraordinary Privilege from
God, is subject to error, oversight, and man's infirmity, all his prayer and
possible diligence notwithstanding: and therefore cannot make and infallible
Rule, as shall be further sundry ways euicted, in this See hereafter.
Treatise following. Only I will now observe what D. Whitakers, who prescrybed
the foresaid Rule, as the best means of Interpretation, thinks of it
himself. De Eccl. Controu. 2. q. 4 p. 221.
Such as the means are (says he) such of necessity must be the
Interpretation: but the means of interpreting dark places, are uncertain,
doubtful, and ambiguous, therefore it cannot be but that the Interpretation
also must be uncertain, but if uncertain, then it may be false etc. So
confessedly false is the foresaid Rule.

The last Rule then, which indeed they chiefly rely upon, is the interpretation
made by the Holy Ghost, and given as they imagine, to every Private man. So D.
Whitaker affirms even of such as are ignorant in tongues, that, De sacra
Script. p. 127.
They acknowledge and allow the Doctrine, being instructed by the Holy Ghost.
But Lubbertus says more plainly that, De Principijs etc. p. 573.
God has given to every faithful person, not only the Spirit of
understanding, but also of discerning false Dostrine from true. Yea say
Brentius and D. White, Brent. Prolog. Cont. Petr. Sot. Whit. in the way to the
Church. pa. 6. 27.
As the private man has private Authority of Judging and decyding Doctrine of
Religion, so the Prince has Public. But though it be most true, that the
Scriptures are to be understood by the same spirit by which they were written,
and given unto us, to wit, the Holy Ghost, and that by the Holy Ghost the Gift
of Interpretation is sometimes given to particular men: yet that neither the
said gift is given to every one of the faithful, nor they to whom it is
given, without special Revelation, can infallibly be assured thereof; and much
less can it give any assurance to others of the right expounding of Scripture
or decyding any Controversy, as I shall at large declare herafter See hereafter.
. In the mean time, it is not unworthy of observation, that Protestants
appointing these Rules for the finding out of the true sense of Scripture, do
thereby intend no other, but to make themselves, even every Private man, to be
absolute Judge and Interpreter of the sense of the Scripture: and so to exempt
themselves from all other Interpretations, though made by Ancient Fathers,
General Councels, and the universal Church.

SECT. X. That the certain and Infallible Rule, for the fynding out of the
true Sense of the Scriptures, is the Church of Christ.
ALthough Prot. ordinarily profess that they Harm. of Confess. p. 3.
Do not acknowledge that, which they call the meaning of the Church of Rome,
for the true and natural Interpretation of the Scriptures: Yet the Church of
Christ in General Council has Decreed that, Conc. Trid. Sess. 4.
No man dare to Interpret the sacred Scripture contrary to that Sense, which
the Holy Mother the Church has and does hold, to whom it belongs to Judge of
the true Sense and Interpretation of holy Scriptures. And this with greatest
reason, for if the Church has power from Christ to discern the word of God
from the words of men as shall be clearly proved See hereafter.
hereafter, doubtless she has the like power of discerning in the words the
sense and meaning of God, from the sense and understanding of men, both these
being committed to the Church, that the may faithfully preserve them, and give
them to others, to wit, the true Scriptures and true understanding thereof. This
God promised to his Church by the Prophet Esaias in these words, Isa. 59.21.
My spirit that is in thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the
mouth of thy seeds seed, says our Lord, from this present and for ever. Which
is also confirmed by Christ our Savior promising Io. 14.16.17.
The spirit of truth, which should abide for ever, and should Io. 16.13.
teach all truth And indeed seeing the true Ghospel of God, does not consist in
the writings or words, but in the sense; if the Church had only the written
word, and not the true sense thereof, she had not the true Ghospel of God, and
so neither faith in Christ which is had by the true Ghospel; Faith having
relation not to the words but to the sense. Wherefore H^retickes and Devils
though they can allege Scriptures, yet not having the true sense, they have
not a true, but a false and Diabolical Ghospel.

Besides Christ opened Luc. 14.45.
(the Apostles) understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures, which
certainly he did not for them alone, but much more for his Church: and so
accordingly the Apostles delivered to the Church the true sense of them: for if
they had delivered the words and not the sense, they had not preached the
Ghospel, nor taught all Nations to keep all things that were commanded to them
by Christ. What preaching or doctrine would that be, which were delivered
without the meaning? certainly no other then of Children, or Parrots who can
give the sound of words without the sense.

Lastly, seeing the Church is the Pillar and ground of truth; and truth
properly and truly is in the understanding of the Scriptures, not in the
writings or words, but improperly and as in a sign; it evidently follows,
that she has a certain knowledge of the truths which are contained in the
Scriptures.

This truth is so certain, that S. Austine for the true understanding of the
Scriptures, directs all men to the Church, saying, L. 1. Cont. Crescon. c. 33.
The truth of Scriptures is holden by us, when we do that which now has
pleased the universal Church, which the authority of the same Scriptures does
commend, that seeing the holy Scripture cannot deceive, whosoever fears to be
deceived by the obscurity of this question, let him take Counsel thereof from
the Church, which without any ambiguity the holy Scripture does demo^strate.
But to omit sundry other Fathers very clear for thh purpose, many of the
learned Protestants teach the same Doctrine, as I shall See hereafter.
show hereafter: only for the present, hear what D. Whitaker says to Dureus
his Catholic Adversary, Cont. Dur. l. 2. fol. 134.
Thou do affirm that to be the sense of the word, which the Catholic Church
has received from the Holy Ghost; I confess so much for the Church is taught
the true sense of Scripture from the Holy Ghost: she is the keeper of faith,
the ground and Pillar of truth. So confessed and clear it is that the true and
undoubted sense and Interpretation of Scriptures, is to be learned from the
Catholic Church. Wherefore all Catholics in their Disputes, Sermons, and
Comments upon the Scripture, do ever place this as a sure ground and
undeniable Principle, that the true and sincere sense of the Scriptures, is to
be taken from the Interpretation of the Catholic Church.

SECT. XI. An explication of what we mean by the Church, when we say, that the
true understanding of the Scripture, and the final Decision of all
Controversies in Religion, is to be taken from the Church.
FIrst then Canus loc. com. l. 12. c. 6. et. l. 5. c. 4. Bellar de Council. l 2.
c. 2. Et de verb. Dei. l. 3. c. 3. Rhem. Test. in Mat. 18.
Catholics do here understand by the Church, the supreme Pastor thereof with
a Council of other Bishops, Pastors and Doctors. In so much that whatsoever
by these in matters of faith and manners is decreed, and proposed to the whole
Church to be believed, that we all firmly believe to be most true and
infallible, and wholly agreeing with the true sense of Gods word intended by the
Holy Ghost.

Secondly, we Val. T. 3. Disp. 1. q. 1. Punct. 7.. 44. Bellar. de verb. Dei l.
4. c. 3. etc. Canus loc. com. l. 12. ca. 6.
understand by the Doctrine of the Church, such Points of Faith also, as not
being written in the Scriptures, have been delivered by the Apostles by word of
mouth, the Holy Ghost inspiring them, or Christ being the Author of them: And
these we believe to have as infallible authority of truth, as if they had been
written in the Scriptures.

Thirdly Staplet. de Princip. l. 11. c. 4.
we likewise teach, that the universal and General practice of the Catholic
Church, is a sure and Infallible Interpreter of the Scriptures. In so much that
if any Question shall arise concerning any difficult place of Scripture, the
general observation and Practice of the Church concerning the matter treated in
that place is to be inquired, and to be held and followed, as the best
Interpretation, and a truth Infallible.

Fourthly, Protestants Jewel in his Sermon at Paul's Cross. Fulk in his
Answer to a Counterfaite Catho. p. 27. 33. 36. Whitak. cont. Camp. Rat.
themselves confess, that the Church during the first 600. years after
Christ, was pure, sincere, and truly Catholic; to the holy Fathers then of
those times we appeal, firmly believing Staplet. de Princip l. 7. c. 12.
that what they with unanimous consent did teach, or the greatest part of the^,
without contradiction of others, concerning points of faith, or what unanimous
Interpretation of Scripture they made concerning Articles of faith, that the
same is by us received and believed, as the true meaning of the holy Ghost, and
matter of faith.

Lastly, the Church of Christ has flourished and shyned in all Ages, with true
and undoubted Miracles, which being Truth, cannot give Testimony to a falsehood;
these also are sure and infallible proofs of all such Doctrine, in
Confirmation whereof they are done.

These are the Principles and firm grounds upon which the Catholic Church
does build her faith and Religion: which I do not hear go about to confirm,
with many such Arguments as might be easily produced in proof of them, because
the same will be done at large upon several occasions in this Treatise
following, to which therefore in this respect I refer the Reader.

THE TRVE STATE OF THE QVESTION IN CONTROVERSY, Between Catholics and
Protestants, concerning the Judge of Controversies in matters of Religion,
consists in this: Whether, besides the sacred Scriptures, any other
infallible Authority and Judge is to be acknowledged, by which the Doctrine of
Faith, and the true sense of Scriptures may be proposed to the faithful, as
revealed by God, and to be believed. And whether the said Authority and power
of Judging, be to be ascribed to the Church, to General Counsels, and to the
Fathers of the Primitive Church? Or only to the sacred Scriptures themselves,
or the Private Spirit of every particular Man?
CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
THIS Controversy being the greatest, and that whereupon al others do depend,
for the full and cleerest Decision thereof, the Council of Trent Council. Trid.
Ses. 4. decret. de Edi. and vsu sacrorum libroru^.
decrees for the repressing of proud wits, that no man relying upon his own
wisdom in matters of Faith and manners etc. wresting the sacred Scriptures to
his own sense, presume to interpret the holy Scriptures contrary to that
sense which our holy Mother the Church has, and does hold; to whom it
belongs to Judge of the true sense and interpretation of Holy Scriptures.

Before this it was taught in the Counsel of Sens, that Decret. 4.
Contentions being risen concerning Faith, the Scripture often is in vain
consulted, unless the certain and infallible Authority of the Church do end
the strife, which discerns the Canonical Book from he Apocryphal, the
Catholic sense from the heretical, the true from the adulterate. These
Councels avouch the Church to be Judge of the true sense of the Scriptures.
Concerning the authority of Councels, in the said Council of Sens, it was
ordained, that, Con il. Sen nense Decret. 3.
It might seem absurd, if God with so great care was present to the old
Synagogue, that if any thing occurred in the Law, difficult or doubtful, which
could not be ended without Controversy by the Judges and Lawiers, yet they
should not want a designed assembly, by whose sentence all the matter should be
ended; yet he should leave his Church, much to be preferred before the
Synagogue, without necessary helps, that she should not have whereupon safely
to rely, when Question of Faith aryseth. Wherefore seeing she Rule of the
Church is certain and infallible etc. that authority cannot be denied to
General Councels, which most nearly do represent the universal Church. In
the eight General Council it was thus decreed, Action 10. cap. 1. to. 3.
We profess to observe and keep the Decrees of the Catholic and Apostolic
Church, received by Tradition, both from the Holy Apostles etc. as also from
Orthodoxall, General, and Provincial Councels. So undoubted are the Decrees
of Councels in matters of faith. The authority of ancient Fathers in
expounding the Scriptures, is such, as that in the Council of Trent it is
decreed, that Conc. Trid. Sess. 4. Decret. de Edit. and vsu Sacrorum librorum.
no man presume to interpret the sacred Scriptures etc. against the unanimous
consent of Fathers. And it was enacted by the Council in Trullo, that, Synod.
6. Constantin. 8. in Trullo can. 19.
If any Controversy concerning Scripture shall be raised, let them not otherwise
interpret it, then as the Lights and Doctors of the Church have expounded in
their writings. In the eight General Council it was determined, that, Synod.
Constantinop. 8. generalis Act. 8.
If any man according to the custom of wicked heretics, by any means, either
by word, time, or place, shall attempt to remove the bounds, which the holy
Fathers of the Church, or the S. Sacred and General Councels have placed; or
do rashly innent novelties, and other expositions of faith etc. let him be
condemned for ever. In the first Lateran Council it is thus decreed, We Cont.
Later. sub Martino 1. Consul. 5.
follow in all things the Fathers and Doctors of the Church, Athanasius,
Hilarious, Basil, Gregory etc. and we receive all things which are expounded by
them, for the right Faith, and in condemnation of Heretics. And we receive also
other holy and orthodoxall Fathers who have ever preached in Gods holy Church,
the true Faith without blame. The Bishops and Doctors in the Council of
Valence said, Conc. Valent. sub Leone p. 4. cap. 1.
We do reverently submit our hearing, and understanding etc. to the clearest
expositors of sacred Scripture, that is, to Cyprian, Hilary, Ambrose, Hierome,
Augustine, and the rest etc. And to our power we embrace what they have written
for our salvation. So that by the several Decrees of so many Councels it
appears, that the true sense and interpretation of Scriptures, and thereby
the deciding of all diffrences in Religion, are to be known and taken from the
Catholic Church, from general Councels, and the unanimous consent of ancient
Fathers. This is our Catholic doctrine.

Protestants untruths.
The Authority of the Church not being to be infringed by any true and solid
argument, Protestants endeavor to weaken the same by falsehoods and untruths:
for whereas Bellar. de Con^il. authorit. l. 2. cap. 12.
all Catholics teach, that the Scriptures are in sundry respects to be
preferred before Councels; Calvin falsely accuses us in these words: To Instit.
l. 4. c. 9. 14.
subject thus the Oracles of God to the Censure of men, that therefore they
should be allowed because they pleased men, is a Blasphemy unworthy to be
remembered. Again, Initio libr^, seu Instructionis cont. Anabap. and in Luc. c.
4.16.
we do not after the manner of Papists say, that the sacred Scriptures ought to
be cast away, that we may rest upon the authority of men, for this evasion we
judge to be execrable blasphemy. If you will believe John White, Way to the
Church. Ep. Dedic. n. 2.
All their speech is of the Church, no mention of the Scriptures, or God their
Father, but their Mother Church. And, Ibid. p. 12.
They know and confess the most and greatest points of their Religion, even
welnigh all wherein they dissent from us, have no foundation on the Scriptures.
Luther speaking of Counsels, affirms, there In Act. Apo. c. 15.
was never any one pure, but either added something to faith, or subtracted.
And he avouches, that the Pope De council. and Eccl. prope extremo.
has buried the sacred Scripture in dirt and dust, and has almost blotted out
the whole Christian Doctrine. Master Sparks affirms that Answer to John de
Albines. page 82 83.
we prefer the authority of the Church the wife, before Christ the husband;
that we make the written word of God inferior in the Authority to the Church,
and to have his Canonical credit from thence. But these and such like
untruths sayned by Protestants, the Catholic Church disclaymeth, as mere
impostures, invented by men malignant, and barely affirmed without proof or
probability. The greatest esteem we have of sacred Scriptures, as believing
them to be Gods word, all inspired by him, all Catholic Bellar de verbo Dei. l
1. c. 2.
Authors do fully testify, and I have Preparatiue. sect. 1. 2.
formerly proved.

Protestant Doctrine.
You must ever know that the body of Protestancy, is a Cerberus with many
heads; for in this present Controversy, some Protestants teach, that our only
Judge upon earth in matters of faith and Religion, are the sacred Scriptures,
or written word of God; so our English Church has decreed, that the Article 6.
Scripture comprehended in the Canonical books of the old and new Testament,
is the Rule of faith so far, that whatsoever is not read therein, or cannot be
proved thereby, is not to be accepted as any point of faith, or needful to be
followed. This article is defended by D. Way to the Church. page 12.
White. And D. Morton acknowledges, Apolog. part. 2. l. 1. c. 1.
Protestants will have all matters of faith squared and tried according to the
written Rule, that is the sacred Scripture, even as by the Touchstone. Page 4.
In the Harmony of Confessions it is determined, that in Controversies of
Religion, or matters of faith, we cannot admit any other Judge then God
himself pronouncing by the holy Scriptures, what is true, what is false, what
is to be followed, or what is to be avoided. Ibid. p. 5.
Yea the interpretation thereof is to be taken from herself, that her self
may be the Interpreter of her self. And so English Confession. ibid page 10.
be the sure and infallible Rule etc. whereunto all Ecclesiastical doctrine
ought to be called to account. Other Protestants make every faithful man,
endowed with the spirit, to be Judge of all Controversies in Religion. So D.
Bilson styleth True difference etc. part. 2. page 353.
The people discerners and Judges of that which is taught. Doctor Whitaker
confesses of such as are ignorant in tongues, that De sacra script p. 127.
they acknowledge, and allow the Doctrine being instructed by the holy Ghost
Lubbertus avouches, that De principijs etc. page 573.
God has given to every faithful person, not only the spirit of
understanding, but also of discerning false Doctrine from true: And this in so
full manner, that according to Brentius and Doctor White, Prolegom. cont. Petr
Soto. White in the way to the Church. p. 6. 27.
Between the Prince and the private man is this difference; that as the private
man has Private authority of judging and deciding Doctrine of Religion, so the
Prince has Public. Master Rogers teaches that, Def. of the Articles Art.
20. page 103.
Authority is given to the Church, and to every member of sound judgment in
the same, to judge in Controversies of faith etc. And this is not the private
opinion of our Church, but etc. also the judgment of our godly brethren in
foreign nations: so that every private spiritual man is a supreme head of the
Church, able to judge all Controversies. Thus according to Protestants, the
Judge in matters of faith are either the sacred Scriptures, or every faithful
man endowed with the Spirit.

Protestants agree with ancient Heretics.
Protestants by their forsaid opinions do show themselves of what race they are
come. So whereas D. Whitaker affirms, Cont. Duraeum l. 7. pa. 478.
it is sufficient for us (Protestants) by comparing the Popish doctrine and
Scriptures together, to know their difference and disagreeing: we leave it
free for Historiographers (says he) to write what they l^st. And whereas Beza
says, In Barcrofts Survey. page 219.
If any shall oppose against my exposition the Authority of certain of the
ancient Fathers, I do appeal to the word of God. This appealing from Fathers
Historiographers and Church, only to the written word, is condemned in
Maximinus the Arian by S. Austine, who produces him saying, L. 1 cont.
Maximin. and cont. Faust. l. 32. c. 19. and ep. 222.
If thou shall bring any thing from the sacred Scripture which is common to
all, it is needful we hear you: But these words which are out of the
Scripture, in no case are to be received of us. But not only Arians, but L. 1
de Trinit. c. 3.
all Heretics (says S. Augustine) endeavor to defend their false and
deceiptfull opinions out of the Scriptures. L 1. cont. Haer. c. 35.
If one shall ask (says Vincentius) any Heretic etc. from whence do you
prove, from whence do you teach, that I ought to forsake the Universal and
Ancient Faith of the Catholic Church? Presently he answers, For it is
written: and forthwith he prepares a thousand testimonies, a thousand
examples, a thousand authorities, from the Law, from the Apostles, from the
Prophets. In brief, this appealing to only Scripture is condemned in the
Nestorians, as L. 7. c. 2.
Socrates testifies: In the Macedonians and Eunomians by De spiritu sanc c 15.
and l. 1. cont. Eunom.
S. Basil; and in several other heretics by sundry Hilar. orat. cont.
Constant. Tertul. l. de praescript. c. 15. Hieron. ep. ad Paulin. and tom 3.
cont. Lucif. Ambros. in c. vlt. ad Tit. Orig. hom 7. in Ezech.
ancient Fathers.

To come nearer home amongst our neighbors, it is condemned in the Puritanes
by D. Bancrofte Survey of pretended discip. c. ^7.
. In the Anabaptists by Calvin Tract. Theo. pa. 57. and instruct. cont. Anabap
p. 478.
and Hooker Eccl. Pol. praef. pa. 38.
. In the Protestant Arians by De aeterno Dei filio l 1. c. 2.
Simlerus; and the same is the doctrine and practice of the Brownists In their
apolog^. pa. 103 4 93. 99. 100. and see Ainsworth in his counterpoyson, p 15
154.
. And yet that all Protestants when they are urged by Catholics, do use the
same shamfull flight to only Scripture, their own Brethren shall accuse them.
The Anti-trinitarians say to the Tigurine Protestants Simlerus de fill. Dei. in
Bullingers praef. thereto. fol. 4 and in Simlerus his preface. fol. 1.
. You have taught us that nothing is to be received besides the Scriptures;
therefore we demand where it is written in the Scriptures? etc. Except you show
this according to your Rule, we reject and condemn those things: therefore we
have learned of you to contemn the Fathers. In like sort says Socinus the
Arian to Volanus the Protestant: ^i^. de Christi not. p. 21.
To what purpose should I answer that which thou borrowest from the Papists
etc. You are no less deceived in urging against us the Churches perpetual
consent, then are the Papists in urging thereof both against you and us etc.
Ibid. pa. 222.
Even Volanus himself disputing against the Jesuits, is enforced to reject the
examples, sayings, and deeds of Athanasius, Hierome, Austine, Theodoret, and
other Fathers, whose authority he now opposes against us, as sacred. Thus
etc. Volanus may receive answer from himself, when he so often inforceth
against us the authority of learned men, and consent of the Church. Luther
himself avouches that, In postil. wit. in. 2. c^n. 8. Dom. post Trinit. fol.
118.
It is true that the sacred Scripture is the book of Heretics, because
Heretics are accustomed to provoke to that Book: neither did there arise at
any time any Heresy so pestiferous and so foolish which did not endeavor to
hyde it self under the veil of Scripture. So clear it is, that all sorts of
Sectaries, whether Protestants or Puritanes, do agree with the ancient
heretics in rejecting the authority of the Fathers and of the Church, and in
appealing only to the sacred Scriptures, or the Private Spirit. Of which
appealing by old heretics to the Private Spirit, I shall See neerafter chap. 4.
show hereafter.

Protestant Errors.
It is worthy observation to see the gross errors and absurdities into which
Heresy does plunge a man. Calvin acknowledges of the Protestant Libertines,
that they Instruc. aduers Libert. c. 9.
were accustomed to laugh, if any man alleged the Scriptures: neither to have
dissembled, but that they hold them for fables etc. If any place was objected
unto them, they answered we are not subject to the letter, but ought to follow
the spirit that quickneth. Svvenckfeldius See Staphylus l. de concord. discip.
Lutheri.
also rejected the written word, as the letter that killed, contending himself
only with the internal spirit. Luther teaches, that Conc. de Sacram. Alt.
tom. 1. Ger. Wit. in Gal. 3. page 147
the right of interpreting Scripture is equally granted to the Laity, as the
learned. Yea he trembles not to say, Although the Papists do bring a great
heap of Scriptures in which good works are commanded: Yet I nothing care for
all the words of Scripture, although more then those were yet produced. Thou
Papist do greatly contemn, and with the Scripture make thy self
corragious, which yet is inferior to Christ as Lord. Therefore I am nothing
moved therewith. Go too then, rely upon the servant as much as thou will, but I
do rely upon Christ the true Ma ster, Lord, and Emperor of Scripture. To him I
do assent, and know that he will lie to me in nothing, nor will lead me into
error. I do rather make choice to honor and believe him then that with all
the sayings of Scripture, I will suffer my self to be removed from my Opinion
a nails breadth. And in sundry places he auerreth, that Colloq. Isleb. de
Christo fol. 96. Tom. 1. Ger. Wit. part. 1. fol. 190. Tom. 5. len. fol. 500.
in Colloq de spir. Sanct. fo. 125. de tentation. fid. fol. 218. Tom 6. Ger. len
fol. 86. Tom. 7. Ger. Wit. f. 482.
the Apostles might err and teach false doctrine; And that themselves daily
doubted of the truth of their Doctrine. See how an Enemy of the Church, becomes
also a contemner of Scripture it self, when it speaks against him.

Reynolds avouches that Conclus. annex. to his Confer. page 686.
S. John's Gospel alone is sufficient to Salvation. But if I should tell him
that according to his Doctrine, all Controversies are to be decided by
Scripture, and nothing is to be believed but what is taught in Scripture; he
would never be able to show that all this is performed only by S. John's
Gospel.

Some Protestants affirm, that the Old and New Testament, or the Law and the
Gospel, are contrary one to another: Illyricus teaches that In Clauo script.
part. 2 tract. 1. Col 10.
there are two kinds of doctrine, the Law* and the Gospel, and those of
themselves, and their own nature truly contrary. Ibid. Col. 11.
This truly is the key of the whole Scripture and Divinity, to know that therein
is contained a double kind of doctrine, and a double way of Salvation, which of
themselves are plainly contrary one to another. The Ibid. Col. 39.
Law and the Gospel of themselves do fight altogether. These doctrines do
fight but the inferior Law does yield to the superior Gospel, and so one
Contradictory failing, the other remains true. Calvin likewise affirms,
that Instit. l. 2. c. 9.. 4.
Paul makes the justice of the Law and the Gospel contrary amongst
themselves. This error is so wicked, that the Protestant Pareus avouches, In
Gal. 3. loc. 40.
If the doctrine of the Law, and the doctrine of the Gospel be contrary, God
in his word should be contrary to himself, which God forbid. Such gross and
execrable errors do Protestants teach and defend, against the truth and
authority of holy Scriptures, though at other times when they are pressed with
the authority of the Church, of General Councils, and ancient Fathers, they
seem wholly to appeal to them.

SECT. II. The sacred Scriptures clearly teach that we are to repair to the
Church of Christ, for the final deciding of Controversies in Religion.
I Must once for all, most earnestly entreat the Christian Reader, of what
Profession soever he be; that he diligently observe, whether the Texts of
Scripture alleged, being taken in their native signification, and according to
the literal sense which the words of themselves do import, do not clearly
make for that Catholic point of doctrine, for which they are produced: for
that being granted, I gain the intent which is here desired.

In the book of Exodus we read that, Moses said to Iethro, C. 18. 15. 16. 19.
20. 21. 22. 23 24. 25. 26.
The people comes to me seeking the sentence of God. And when any
Controversy chances amongst them, they come unto me to Judge between them,
and to show the Precepts of God, and his Laws. But Iethro said etc. Hear my
words and counsels etc. Be thou to the people in those things that pertayne
to God etc. And to show to the people the Ceremonies and rytes of worshipping,
and the way wherein they ought to walk, and the works that they ought to do.
And provide out of all the People, men that are wise, and do fear God etc.
which may judge the people at all times: and what greater matter soever shall
fall out, let them refer it to thee, and let them judge the less matters only
etc. If thou do this, thou shall fulfill the Commandme^t of God etc. which
things when Moses heard, he did all things that he had suggested unto him. And
choosing substantial men etc. he appointed them Princes of the people etc. who
judged the people at all times; and whatsoever was of greater difficulty they
referred to him, themselves judging the easier causes only. Now that these
might rightly perform their charge, it is further said by God to Moses, Number.
11.17.
I will take of thy spirit, and will deliver to the^ etc. Many words in this
Text plainly prove, that Moses was the Supreme Judge over the Israelits eue^
in matters of Religion. Let us now examine those poorest euasio^s, which
Protestants have for the avoiding of this plainest Text. M. Bridges Defense
etc. l. 2. fol. 237.
answers heerunto, that the charge given heerto Moses, was only in regard of
civil causes, but this is clearly contrary to the former words of Scripture,
Moises being to show to the people, The precepts of God and his Laws, the
things that pertayne to God, and the very Ceremonies and rytes of worshipping.
Other Protestants yet further reply, that Moses was not a Priest, but only a
temporal Prince. But this is likewise most untrue, for the same Scriptures
affirm, that Moses exercised all functions of Priesthood, as teaching the
Exodus 18.15
People all Precepts of God and his Laws, Exodus 21.1.
consecrating Aaron, and other Priests, and Ib. ver. 7.21.
anointing them, and their garments; yea which is most proper unto a Priest;
Ibid. verse. 36.37.
he offered sacrifice every day continually. A truth so manifest, that the
Prophet David said, Ps. 98.6.
Moses and Aaron in his Priests. And whereas Hunnius avouches that Colloq.
Ratisb. Sess. 1.
Moses sacrificed as a Prophet of the Lord, not as a Priest, this is barely
affirmed without all ground or proof, and is clearly convinced of falsehood, by
what has been said next before.

As Moses being a Priest, was thus ordained by God the supreme Judge even in
causes Ecclesiastical: so were the people of Israel commanded to go to the
high Priest for the final decyding of their doubts and dissentions. Deutr.
17.8.9.1^.11. And see cap. 1.5.
If thou perceive (says Moses) that the judgment with thee be hard and
doubtful between blood and blood, cause and cause etc and thou see that the
words of the Judges within thy gates do vary; arise and go up to the place
which our Lord thy God shall choose. And thou shall come to the Priests of the
Leuiticall Stock, and to the Judge that shall be at that time; and thou shall
ask of them, who shall show thee the truth of the Judgment. And thou shall do
whatsoever they that are Presidents of the place, which our Lord shall choose,
shall say and teach thee, according to his Law, and shou shall follow their
sentence: neither shall thou decline to the right hand, nor to the left hand.
But he that shall be proud, refusing to obey the Commandment of the Priest,
which at that time ministers to our Lord thy God, and the decree of the Judge,
that man shall dye. Here the people are commanded under pain of death, to
submit themselves and their causes to the decicision of the high Priest. But D.
Whitaker here De sacra Script. controu. 1. q. 5. p. 463.
replieth, that the people were but commanded to obey the Priest, if he taught
them according to the Law; in which sense Protestants profess to obey the
Church or Councels, if they decree according to the Scriptures: Yet this does
nothing avail; for first D. Whitaker and other Protestants, appealing ever to
the Original, as to the fountain, and text most authentical, and rejecting
our vulgar translation as corrupt, these words, And teach thee according to his
law, are only to be found in our vulgar, and not in the Hebrew. Secondly the
forsaid words are not conditional, but words of promise or assurance, that he
shall teach the truth according to the Law, which appears as well, in that
the people are commanded under pain of death, to abide the Priests absolute
sentence, as also in that, if the people were to judge whether the Priest gave
sentence according to the Law, or no, then not the Priest, but the People were
Judges: And so whereas this Law was made for the Satisfaction of the People in
their doubts, and final ending of their controversies, all things would be
left no less doubtful and disagreeing then before.

Wherefore In Prolegom. cont. Petrum a Soto.
Brentius further replieth, that the people are here referred not only to the
Priest; but also to the civil Judge, who therefore may hear and determine
causes Ecclesiastical. But the answer is easy, for first by the word, Judge,
we may well understand the chief or high Priest, for according to the Hebrew it
is said; Ascend to the Priests, and to the Judge, as if it had been said,
Ascend to the Council of Priests, and their Prince the high Priest. Secondly
though we understand by the Judge the civil Magistrate, yet this only argues
their Offices to be distinct, as the Priests Office to concern matters
Ecclesiastical; the Magistrates, matters civil; the Priests, to give
definitive sentence; the Magistrates to execute the same.

This answer then not satisfying, other Protestants seek to euade by
affirming barely that the foresaid Law of Deutronomy concerned only matters
civil, not spiritual or directly tending to God. But besides that the law was
general, concerning all doubts arysing from the law, and the text says in
general, between cause and cause; seeing here it is evident that the people
are referred by God to the high Priest, for the determining of their
difficulties; how absurd and distasting would it be to our politic State, if
our English Clergy should affirm, that the decision of temporal and Civil
suits were to be referred to the Priest or the Church? Yea how severely would
Bishops and Ministers be punished, if they should but endeavor to assume any
such pretended authority?

Others observing that none of the foresaid euasions do satisfy so plain texts
of Scripture, as not being able to deny the words to be most evident, do
therefore, as acknowledging the same, yet further answer; that many things
established in the old Law, are now abrogated by the new, and therefore, an
argument drawn from the decrees and practice thereof, to be now inualide, in
regard of our time of grace. But this also is as insufficient as the former
answers; for although many things used in the old Law, being Ceremonial, be now
abrogated; yet that makes no more against the Ecclesiastical Judge now, then
it does against the Judge in Civil causes, or the temporal Magistrates, which
were appointed by God, and exercised their authority during the old Law: and
therefore most things then prescribed, not being Ceremonial, are still with us
Christians, though not in every circum^tance, yet in substane observed. And the
rather ought this to be, seeing the occasions to have Controversies ended, and
the dangers of erring are now no less then they were during the time of the
old Law.

But all this is yet more fully explained and confirmed by holy King Iosaphat,
who having appointed Priests in Jerusalem, said thus unto them; 2. Paralip. c.
19. 10. 11.
Every cause that shall come to you of your brethren etc. Whersoeuer there is
question of the Law, of the Commandment, of Ceremonies, of iustifications;
show it them, that they sin not against our Lord etc. And Amarias the Priest,
and your Bishop shall be Chief in these things, which pertain to God: moreover
Zabadias etc. who is the Prince in the house of Judah, shall be over those works,
which pertain to the Kings Office. So dinstinctly does King Iosaphat allot to
the Bishop the decision of questions of the Law, of the Commandment, and of
all things which pertain to God, leaving the care of such things as pertain
to the Kings Office, to Zabadias a temporal Prince.

Now it will not suffice to a^^were, that Iosaphat made this distinction and
Decree by his own authority, and therefore that the power which the Priest had
for judgment, was but given him by the King, and depended of his pleasure; for
we have seen before to the contrary, that the Ordinance was by God himself,
who gave the same authority to Moses, and afterward enacted a Law thereof in
Deuteronomy, chap. 17. So that Iosaphat did only command the execution of that
which God had formerly prescribed.

By the Prophet Ezechiell God says of Priests, C. 44. 23. 24.
They shall teach my people what is between a holy thing and polluted, and
between clean and unclean they shall show to the^; And when there shall be a
Controversy, they shall stand in my Judgments, and shall Judge etc. By the
Prophet Aggeus God directs his people to ask C. 2. 12.
the Priests the Law. And by Malachy he promises that C. 2, 7.
The lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and the Law they shall require of
his mouth, because he is the Angel of the Lord of Hosts; that is, his
messe^ger sent and appointed to declare the truth. These texts are clear for
the Priest being Judge, and the peoples requiring the knowledge of the Law from
him.

This place of Malachy is so forcible, that Protestants for want of better
answer, instead of, shall keep knowledge, do most corruptly Engl. Bibl. of
1578.
translate, should preserve knowledge, contrary to all Originals.

Lastly of the practice of the old Testament, it is said, expressly, and this
according to the Protestants translation Engl. Bibl. of Anno 1578.
, that Esd. 2.8.7.8.12.13.
the Levites caused the people to understand the Law etc. and they read in the
book of the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to
understand the reading etc. Then all the people etc. made great joy because
they had understood the words that they had taught them. And on the second day,
the chief Fathers of all the people, the Priests, and the Leuits, were
gathered unto Esdras the Scribe, that he also might instruct them in the words
of the Law. So plain it is, that the people of the old Law, were instructed in
their understanding of the Law, and the Scriptures, not by their own reading
and conferring of Scriptures, or by any imagined and invisible Ghost, but by
the Priests and Leuits, who were then the Pastors of their Church. And agreably
to this we shall see shortly, that the Apostle Ephesians. 4.11.
affirms, that now in the Church Christ has placed not only Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists, but also next after them Pastors and Doctors: The
divine Providence disposing, that we should have not only the sacred writings
of the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, but also the Commentaries,
Interptetations, and Preachings of Pastors and Doctors, in explanation thereof.
Which Pastors and Doctors (as Calvin Instit. c. 5. de fide.
gathers upon this place) have an ordinary Charge in the Church, and the
Church can never want them, but evermore, as he says, Doctores praesunt
Scripturae interpretationi etc. Doctors have authority to interpret the
Scriptures, that sincere and wholesome doctrine may be retained among the
faithful. So false it is, that the external Judgment granted in the old Law,
is now abrogated by the New.

Now this course of deciding Controversies by the Priests or the Church, being
so generally prescribed and practiced in the old Law, was in it self so good
and profitable, that Christ at his coming approved and confirmed the same,
saying, Mat. 23.2.3.
Upon the Chair of Moses have sitten the Scribes, and the Pharisees. All
things therefore whatsoever they shall say to you, observe ye, and do ye; but
according to their works do you not, for they say, and do not. Here our
Savior commands the people to observe and do, whatsoever the Scribes and
Pharisees shall say, or prescribe unto them; and that for this reason, because
upon the Chair of Moses have sitten the Scribes and the Pharisees: signifying
thereby, the Supreme and infallible authority, which I have proved before, was
given to Moses by God, for the decyding of Ecclesiastical Controversies: as
also that his Successors in that Chair, were to have the same, though in
their lives and conuersations they proved offensive and scandalous. Where I
cannot but note the special providence and care of God over his Church, who
though he sometime permit the Superiors and Prelates thereof, to be of
sinful and scandalous life, yet he ever so preserved them from teaching
false doctrine to the people, as that he commands these still to follow their
teaching, though their works be bad: which in his goodness and wisdom he would
not do, if in like sort he permitted them to err in faith and doctrine, as in
lewdnes of life; but rather to the contrary would give them Counsel, to take
good heed both of their doctrine and life. To conclude then, from the ordinance
and pactise of the old Law; If the cause to have Controversies ended be as
urgent now, as during the Old Testament, and the danger of error as grievous;
then if the People were not referred to the written word, or the Private
Spirit, for the decyding of their doubts, but even to a visible and known
Judge, to wit, the Priests; may Christians, Heb. 8 6.
Whose Testament is established in better promises, expect less plain and
certain means for ending of their Controversies? To affirm the contrary were
indeed to prefer in this behalf, Moses before Jesus Christ, and the
Ecclesiastical government and policy of the old Law, before ours, which were
no less absurd in it self, then otherwise impious. And so I will pass to the
Law of Grace.

It is prescribed by Christ himself, that Mat. 18.15.16.17.18.
If thy Brother shall offend against thee, go and rebuke him beeweene thee and
him alone. If he shall hear thee, thou shall gain thy brother. And if he will
not hear thee, join with thee besides, one or two etc. And if he will not
hear them tell the Church. And if he will not hear the Church, let him be to
thee as the Heathen and Publican. Amen I say to you, whatsoever you shall bynd
upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven, and whatsoever you shall loose upon
earth, shall be loosed also in heaven. Our Savior here refers the final
deciding of dissentions amongst Neighbors unto the Church; therefore much more
does he the same in matters of Religion. If he command an Adulterer to be
brought to the judgment of the Church, much more an Heretic. And if the Church
have authority to loose whatsoever (not only whomsoever) upon earth, then no
question she has authority to loose all difficulties arysing in Religion. And
if they who disobey the Churches sentence are to be accounted as Heathens and
Publicans, that is, damnable sinners, then it follows evidently not only the
said sentence of the Church to be final, not admitting any further appeal
either to Scriptures, or the Private spirit, but also that the not hearing or
disobeying the Churches Judgment, is sinful and punishable. D. Whitaker would
avoid this two ways, first by expounding it of Controu. 2. q 4. c. 2. 3.
Ecclesiastical Censures, not of doctrine. Secondly by affirming that the
Church is to be heard, but in those things only, in which she hears and
obeys Christ. But if she be to be heard and obeyed in her Ecclesiastical
Censures of Excommunication and the like, much more in condemnation of
Heresies; if she be confessedly the supreme Judge in correcting and punishing
us, much more in directing and preserving us from error. Neither does Christ
(as Whitaker pretends) restrain this Precept of obeying the Church to any
particular matter, but indeed enlarges it to all, saying, Mat. 18.18.
Whatsoever you shall bind upon earth etc. whatsoever you shall loose upon
earth etc. Ibid. v. 19.
Concerning every thing whatsoever they shall ask it shall be done them. Luc.
10, 16.
And he that hears you hears me. All (30) things whatsoever they shall say
to you, observe and do ye. So clear it is, that the forsaid place is not to
be understood only of Ce^sures. In like sort to say the Church is to be heard,
Mat. 23.3.
but in those things only in which she hears and obeys Christ, or teaches
according to the Law, or Scriptures, is most idle, for so is any Child, and the
Devil himself to be heard. And so instead of ending Controversies, it
begets new ones, calling the Church it self into question, when it is to be
heard, and when not, and thereby making the sense only to be this; Hear the
truth wheresoever the truth is taught according to the Law, which to say, is
not infallible, and finally to direct us, but rather to leave us in our first
and other new perplexities. This place is so conuincing for the authority of
the Church, as that our English Protestants in their Bible of 1562. do
translate the foresaid words thus: If he hear not them, tell the Congregation.
So fearful they are of the word Church, and the power thereto given. This
direction of Christ, his Blessed Apostles and our first Christians observed
most diligently, for when some had Act. 15.1.2.4.6.7.8.9.10.11.13.19.22.28.29.
taught that, unless you be circumcised according to the manner of Moses, you
cannot be saved: No little sedition therefore being risen to Paul and Barnabas
against them, the Church of Antioch appointed, that Paul and Barnabas should go
up, and certain others of the rest, to the Apostles and Priests unto
Jerusalem upon this question. Which they accordingly doing, the Apostles and
Ancients assembled to consider of this word. And when there was made a great
diputation, Peter rising up decided the matter, whose speech James confirmed,
and the whole Church of Jerusalem so assented thereunto, as that they agreed
the forsaid decree to be sent to Antioch, saying, It has seemed good to the
Holy Ghost and to us, to lay no further burden upon you, then these necessary
things etc. Now when this decree was read at Antioch, they rejoiced upon the
consolation. And when Paul and Timothy passed through the cities, they
delivered unto them to keep the Decrees that were decreed of the Apostles ^and
Ancients which were at Jerusalem; yea it is expressly said, that Paul walked
through Syria and Cilicia confirming the Churches: Commanding them to keep the
Precepts of the Apostles and the Ancients. Here the deciding of the forsaid
Controversy, was not referred to the conference of Scripture, or the Private
spirit, but to the Judgment and determination of the Apostles, Priests, and
Church of Jerusalem: which after consult had thereof, they determined, and
their Decree without al further apeale was received with joy, and was holden as
a Precept, and the observation thereof was commanded by S. Paul. The Scrip^ures
further teach us, that we are bound to hear and obey our spiritual Pastors:
Christ said unto his Apostles, Luc. 10.16.
He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me. S.
Paul likewise, Heb. 13.17.
Obey your Prelates, and be subject to them: for they watch, as being to render
account for your souls. Now if we be commanded to hear and obey them, as our
Prelates, Ephesians. 4.11.
Pastors, and Mat. 28.19.20.
Doctors, then may we safely rely upon their Judgment and determination: for if
they could err, and so we, in following and obeying them, then might we lay
the fault upon Christ and his Apostles, who commanded us to obey them. And
whereas some reply, that Pastors, Prelates, and Doctors, being men, and
according to Scripture, Psalm. 115.11.
Every man is a liar, that therefore we cannot be infallibly a certained that
their teaching is not erroneous: This does not suffice, for though by nature
they be men and subject to lies and deceyptes, yet by Pastoral authority they
are true Governors of the Church, and instruments of the holy Ghost, by whose
assistance in their General assemblies, and public decrees, they cannot err
in matters of faith. S. Paul speaking of the Gospel which himself preached,
and which he had from the holy Ghost, says, Gal. 2.1.2.
I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas etc. And I went up according to
Revelation, and conferred with them the Gospel, which I preach among the
Gentiles, but apart with them that seemed to be something, least perhaps in
vain I should run, or had run. By this it is clear, that though S. Paul
was taught his Gospel of God, and not of men, and had an Extraordinary
calling by Christ himself; yet by Revelation he was sent to Jerusalem, to
confer the said Gospel with his Elders, the Ordinary Apostles, which
afterward he names to Ver. 9.
be Peter, James, and John: not that himself was doubtful of the truth of his
G^ospell, but because other men could not, nor would acknowledge so much, till
he were allowed by such as were without all exception known to be Apostles,
and to have the spirit of truth, to discern whether the vocation, Spirit, and
Gospel of Paul, were of God: he knowing that otherwise without conference
with them, he should loose his labor, both for the time past, and to come.

These texts of Scripture do plainly direct us to the Church and Pastors
thereof, for the clearing of all doubts, and the determining of all
controversies and questions, which shall arise in matters Ecclesiastical.

SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers expound the sacred Scriptures agreably
with Catholics in proof of the Church being the Judge of Controversies.
FOr the right understanding of the true sense of the foresaid Scriptures, let
us now see in what manner they were expounded by the ancient Fathers and
Doctors. Whereas I proved before that Moses was appointed by God the Supreme
Judge in matters Ecclesiastical; and Protestants answered thereto, that Moses
was no Priest, and therefore could not be a competent Judge in those causes: S.
Austin expounding these words of the Psalm, Moses and Aaron in his Priests,
says, In Psalm. 98.
Aaron was brother to Moses, whom he ordained Priest etc. But if Moses was
not a Priest, what was he? Could he be greater then a Priest? This Psalm
expresses that he was a Priest, Moses and Aaron in his Priests. Therefore they
were priests of our Lord. Yea else where he affirms, that Quaest, 23. in
Leuiticum.
This Psalm makes it undoubted, that Moses was a Priest. S. Hierome
intending to prove that Samuel was not Priest or Bishop, (though some hold
that he was Extraordinary, L. 1. cont. Iouin.
writes thus. In the psalms he is not named among Priests, but amongst those
who invoke the name of our Lord: Moses and Aaron in his Priests, and Samuel
amongst them who invoke the name of our Lord. And S. Gregory Orat. ad Greg.
Nyssenum.
Nazianzen in proof heerof, having produced the same psalm, calls Moses
the Prince of Princes, and the Priest of Priests: so clearly do the Fathers
prove from Scriptures that Moses was a Priest. Now that Moses was not only a
Priest, but that his Chair or authority was to be reverenced and obeyed, S.
Austine confirms from the words of Christ himself; for having numbered in
order of succession all the Bishops of Rome, from S. Peter to Anastasius, who
then was Pope, he avouches, that, Ep. 165.
If any traitor in those times had stolen into that Order of Bishops etc. it
would have nothing prejudiced the Church and innocent Christians: for whom our
Lord providing, said of evil Prelates: whatsoever they say, do ye, but what
they do, do you not, for they say, and do not. And again, Cont. literas Petil.
l. 2. c. 51.
why do thou call the Apostolic Chair, the Chair of Pestilence? If for the
men, why? did our Lord Jesus Christ for the Pharisees any wrong to the Chair
wherein they sat? Did he not commend that Chair of Moses, and preserving the
honor of the Chair, reprove them? for he says they sit upon the Chair of
Moses, that which they say do ye. As also Ibid. c. ^1. And see Aug. ep. 166.
neither for the Pharisees etc. did our Lord command the Chair of Moses to be
forsaken, in which Chair verily he figured his own. For he warned the people
to do that which they say, and not to do that which they do, and that the
holiness of the Chair be in no case forsaken, nor the unity of the flock
divided, for naughty Pastors. So fully does S. Austine confirm the authority
of Moses and his Chair, as also of the Church of Christ from the words of
Christ. But S. Austine is so full herein, as that he refers our certain
knowledge of the Scriptures themselves, to the authority and determination of
the Church, saying of himself, Cont ep. Fundamenti, c. 5.
I would not believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the Catholic Church
moved me thereto. Neither did he speak this of the time past when he was a
Manichee, as some See Whitak. Duplicat. aduersus Stapletonum. l. ^. c. 8. p.
387.
pretend, for all the words and circumstances of the place contest the
contrary, and accordingly are understood of the Protestant C^nturiae tres Cent.
2. q. 3. p. 267.
Brachmanus. Yea Swinglius so much disliketh them, as that he says; Tom 2.
fol. 135.
Here I entreat your indifferent judgments, that you freely speak, whether
this saying of Austine may not be thought more audacious then meet, or to have
been uttered imprude^tly. But here without entreaty, every man may see, how
imprudent and impudent Swinglius is, in this his unworthy censure of S.
Austine. Josephus witnesses that L. 2. cont. Apion.
the Priests were appointed by Moses to be overseers of all things, and Judges
of Controversies.

Concerning S. Paul's conferring his Gospel with S. Peter, James, and John,
Tertullian argues thus: L. 4. cont. Marc. 10. c. 2.
If he from whom S. Luke received his light, desired to have his faith and
preaching authorized by his Predecessors, how much more reason have I to
desire the like for the Gospel of S. Luke, seeing the same was so necessary
for the Gospel of his master. S. Austine also says hereof, Tom. 6. cont F
a^t. M^nich. l. 28. c 4.
The Apostle S. Paul called from heaven, if he had not found the Apostles with
whom by conferring his Gospel, he might appear to be of the same Society,
the Churcb would not believe him at all. S. Hierome auouche^h that Ep. 89. c. 2
he had not had security of preaching the Gholpell, if it had not been approved
by Peter's Sentence, and the rest that were with him. In Mat. 28.
S. Chrysostom upon these words, Tell the Church, understands by the Church,
the Prelates of the Church. Now as the ancient Fathers have thus expounded the
former Scriptures in behalf of the Church, being the Judge of Controversies in
causes Ecclesiastical; so was their own practice answerable in all succeeding
ages: for never did there heresy arise in any age, but it was still condemned
and extinguished by the supreme Pastor and other Bishops assembled who lived
in the same age. Now to censure that for error, which the universal Church
teaches, S. Austin Ep. 118.
terms most insolent madness. This is proved particularly throughout all ages
by Cardinal Bellarmine, De verbo Dei. l. 3. c. 6.
who recites the heresies, and the Popes and Councels that condemned them;
showing withal, that they were ever reputed heretics who did not obey them.
Agreably to which, D. Bilson confesses, that the Fathers Perpet. govern. page
374.
In all ages, as well before as since the great Council of Niece, have
approved and practiced this (of Councels) as the surest means to decide
doubts. By this it appears, that according to the Exposition made by the
ancient Fathers, the Scriptures do teach us, that not the Scriptures alone, but
the Church of Christ expounding the same, is to be acknowledged and received
for our Guide and Judge in matters of Faith.

SECT. IIII. That Protestants expound the Scriptures agreably with Catholics
in proof of the Church being the Judge of Controversies; and that sundry
Protestants do teach and defend the same Doctrine.
THe Text of Scripture is so clear and conuincing for this our Catholic
doctrine, as that sundry of our chiefest Protest^nt D^ctours, not only
interpret the same accordingly, but withal do teach and defend the same
truth. The very Puritanes acknowledge, concerning the Ecclesiastical Primacy
in time of the old Law, that, English Puritanisme p. 16 And see Hook. Eccl.
pol. l. 5. page 235.
The high Priest of the Jews, was Typically and in a figure the supreme head
of the whole Catholic Church; which though (say they) it were visible only in
the Province and N^tion of Iewry, yet those of other Nations and Countries (as
appears by the history of the Acts, even though they were Aethiopians) were
under this high Priest and acknowledged homage unto him. So that he was not a
Provincial Metropolitan, but in very deed an oecumenicall and universal
Bishop of the whole world. And thersore the Pope of Rome, who alone makes
claim unto, and is in possession of the like universal Supremacy, has more
warrant in the word of God to the same, then any Metropolitan or Diocesan, not
dependant upon him, has or can have. So that by the word of God, either there
must be no Metropolitans, or Diocesans, or else there must be a Pope.

In like sort teaches M. Cartwright, In VVhiteg. Def. page 428.
The high Priest was the head Priest over all the whole Church, which was
during his time to our Savior Christ. So clear it is that not only Moses,
but even during the whole time of the old Law, there was one supreme head
Ecclesiastical, unto whom all others were bound to obey. Now concerning the
law of Deutronomy, whereby, as I have formerly proved, the authority and Primacy
of the Church was established; Protestants in so evident a matter affirm, that
the people were bound Marg. notes of the Engl Bib. of Anno 1585. in Deuteronomy. 17.11.
to obey their sentence, that the controversy might have an end. D. Rainolds
confesses that, (4) The law of Deutronomy was made to establish a highest
Court of Judgment, in which all harder causes Ecclesiastical and Civil, should
be determined. And the self same is taught by De sacra scrip. pa 466. Bilson
perpet. Govern. c. 4. p. 20. And see his true Diff. etc. part. 3 p. 36. 37.
D. Whitaker, D. Bilson, and M. Hooker. Now that the sentence grounded upon
this Law was definitive and final, it is acknowledged by D. Bilson saying,
Perpet. Govern. p. 20.
Their sentence by Gods Law no man might refuse without punishment of death.
Yea says D. Whitaker, in this Case De sacra scrip. pa. 466.
of defyning Ecclesiastical controversies by the Minister, it was not lawful
to appeal, for otherwise there would have been no end of Contention. With whom
accords Doctor Reinolds affirming, Conference, pa. 251.
that in this highest Court of Judgment, all harder causes Ecclesiastical were
to be determined without appeal further. And the like is taught by M. Hooker,
Preface before Eccl. Pol. page 26. 27. 28.
who further alleging this Law of Deutronomy, and the former example of the
Apostles out of the Acts, tells the Puritanes, that what success God may
give to any Conference or Disputation, we cannot tell, but we are sure that
nature, Scripture, and Experience, have all taught the world to seek for the
ending of Contentions by submitting it self unto some judicial and definitive
sentence, whereunto neither part that contendeth may under any Pretense refuse
to stand. Yea it is a truth so certain, that the Church of Christ is the Judge
of interpretation of Scripture, and of all other Controversies, that Martin
Luther confesses, that, Lutherus l. de potestate Papae.
we are not certain of any private man, whether he have the Revelation of the
Father or no, but the Church it is, of whom it is not lawful to doubt. And
thereupon he says, In Disput. Lipsiaca.
I submit my self to the Judgment and determination of the holy Church. And in
another place; Ep. ad marchionem Brandeburg. quae est tom. 2. Germ. fol. 243.
It is a dangerous and horrible thing to hear or believe, any thing which is
contrary to the unanimous testimony of faith, and the doctrine of the holy and
Catholic Church, which she has agreably kept from the beginning, for above a
thousand and five hundred years. Were it possible to think that any man
should say thus much for the authority of the Church, and do the quite contrary
if he were not a Luther. Calvin expressly teaches, that, Inst. l. 4. c. 1 sec.
5.
as (God) in times past was not content only with the Law, or only with the
Scripture, but added Priests for interpreters, from Mal. 2.7.
whose lips the people should se^k the true sense thereof: So at this day he
would not have us only to attend to reading, but he also ordained masters, by
whose labor we may be helped. And in his Commentary, upon these words, It has
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and us, he says, In comment in Act. 15.
by this is confuted the obstinacy of those who with full mouths boasting of
faith, do no less impiously, then proudly contemn the ministry of the
Church. For as it were a Sacrilegious division, if faith but in one Article
should depend of man a part; So they openly mock God, who passing by (or
neglect^ng) his ministers by whom he speaks, pretend to receiuo him their
master. Now who are these true Ministers, himself tells us to his own
shame, saying, Comment. in Ezechiel. 13.
we see at this day how the Papists do take unto themselves the name of the
Church, because perpetual succession is pretended by them. And truly we are
compelled to confess, that they have the Ordinary Ministry. So Catholikly
Calvin. Chemnitius teaches, that in respect of Exam. part. 1. fol. 63.
many hard questions, God would have to remain in his Church (to avoid all
occasion of error) the gift of Interpretation, which is not common to all, no
more then is the gift of healing and miracles. And this gift God would not
have to be contemned or rejected, but reverently used, as an Instrument and
help to find out the true and sound sense of Scripture. According to the
Confession of Wittemberg, Cap. de Eccles.
the Church has right to Judge of all doctrines: Cap. de Council.
She has an assured promise of Christ's perpetual presence, and is governed by
the Holy Ghost. Yea says D. Whitaker, Controu. 1 q. 3. c 6 pa. 323.
She has the spirit of God, by whom being taught, she hears the voice of her
spouse, and acknowledges his doctrine. And in answer to Duraeus, Cont.
Duraeum. l. 2. f. 134.
Thou do affirm that to be the sense of the word, which the Catholic
Church has received from the Holy Ghost: I confess so much for the Church is
taught the true Sense of Scripture from the Holy Ghost, she is the keeper of
faith, the ground and Pillar of truth. And again, Ibid. fol. 142. 143.
It seems to thee as though I should esteem that for a great offense, that
when any hard question aryseth the Judgment of the Church should be required;
which thing I confess never came into my mind, for the Judgment of the Church
is greatly to be accounted of, and is ever greatly of force to interpret the
Scriptures rightly, and to determine Controversies.

D. Reynolds after his long debating this point, does in the end acknowledge,
that not only, Confer. p. 99.
Christ our Savior is to be our Judge, but also they, which under him have it
committed to them, even the Church of Christ.

D. Bancroft preached publicly, Sermon preached the 8. of February, Anno 1588.
page 42. 43.
God has bound himself unto his Church of purpose, that men by her good
direction might in matters of doubt be relieved; to whose godly determination
in matters of question, her dutiful children ought to submit themselves,
without any curious or wilful contradiction. A saying so Catholic, that a
Puritan writer repeating the same A Treatile entitled a Brief discourse of
untruths etc. contained in a Sermon preached by D Bancroft. p. 34.
says, If this be not to join hands with the Papists, let the Reader be
Judge. Def. of the Art. art. 20. Prop. 3. p. 103.
Rogers defends, that the Church has authority to Judge and determine in
Controversies of faith. And Ib. Art. 20. p. 104.
that to interpret the word of God is a peculiar blessing, given by God only to
the Church, and company of the faithful, though not to all and every one of
them.

And whereas General Councels do truly represent the Church, the authority of
them for the final decyding of Controversies, Protestants do confirm from the
sacred Scriptures; in so much that Melancthons advice is, that Council. Theol.
part. 2. p. 1. 2. And see l. 1. epist. 211.
They assemble general or national Councels etc. because it is written, Tell
the Church. This was the custom of the Church from the very beginning etc. And
Counsels are the proper Judgments of the Church: yea it is expedient, that
there be Judgments in the Church, for other Nations cannot but be scandalized,
if they shall hear that we will not undergo the sentence of any Council. D.
Whitgift, D. Rainolds, D. Bilson and others do gather from the former example
of the Apostles in the Acts, the necessity of Whit. Def. p. 661. And see
Carthwright, ib. and p 678. Rain. Confer. p 254. 255. Bills. in his Perpet.
Govern. c. 16. p. 373.
Councels for the deciding of Controversies.

In regard heerof Calvin says, Inst. l. 4. c. 9.. 8.
We willingly embrace and reverence as sacred, for as much as concerns
decrees of faith, those ancient Synods, as that of Niece, Constantinople,
Ephesus the first, Chalcedon, and the like, which were assembled for the
confuting of heresies; for they contain nothing but pure and native
Interpretation of Scripture, which holy Fathers applied with spiritual
wisdom, to the ouercoming of the enemies of Religion, who then appea^^d. And
in another place, L. 4. c. 9.. 13.
We truly do willingly grant, that if Disputation happen concerning any
opinion, that there is no remedy either better or more certain, then if a
Synod of true Bishops do assemble, where the doctrine controuerted may be
discussed: for much more weight will such Definition have to which the Pastors
of Churches having inuocated the spirit of Christ, shall generally consent,
then if any one alone at home, what he has conceived, shall deliver to the
people, or some few men privately should make it. Sir Edwin Sands confesses
that Relation etc. fol.. 82.
The Papists have the Pope as a common Father, aduiser, and conductour, to
reconcile their iarres, to decyde their differences, to draw their Religion by
consent of Counsels unto unity etc. whereas on the contrary side, Protestants
are as severed, or rather scattered troops, each drawing adverse way, without
any to pacify their quarrels, no Patriarch one or more, to have a common
superintendance or care of their Churches for correspondency and unity: no
ordinary way to assemble a General Council of their part, the only hope
remaining ever to assuage their contentions. Now that these Counsels cannot
err, D. Bilson acknowledges with them the presence and assistance Perpet.
Govern. page 372. 373. 374.
of the holy Ghost. Ib. p. 371.
And (43) that they are strengthened with the promise of our Savior. M. Ridley
affirms Act. Mon. page 1288.
that, Counsels do indeed represent the whole Church, and being so gathered
together in the name of Christ, they have a promise of the gift and guyding
of his Spirit into all truth. From which ground of their freedom from error,
D. Bilson observing truly, that, Perpet. Govern. page 372.
To have no Judge for the ending of Ecclesiastical contentions, were the utter
subuersio^ of all peace, does thereupon infer Ibid. p. 370.
Synods to be an external judicial means to discern error. And further he
affirms, that the Fathers in Ibid. p. 374.
all ages, as well before as since the great Council of Nice, have approved and
practiced this, as the surest means to decyde doubts. Luther was opinion that,
Lib. cont. Swing. de veritate Corp. Christi in Euch.
If the world shall continue longer, it will be necessary by reason of the
different interpetations of Scriptures, which now are, for the preserving of
unity of faith, that we receive again the Decrees of Counsels, and fly unto
them. To whom D. Couell adds that, Modest Examination. p. 110.
If Synods want, the Church neither at any time was, nor indeed can safty be
without tempests. Yea such is the force of a General Council, that Sir Edwin
Sands (as before) thinks it Relation. f. 8. 2.
The only hope remaining ever to assuage (Protestants) dissentions. And M.
Hooker avouches that, Pref to Eccl. Pol. p. 28.
The will of God is to have us do whatsoever the sentence of Judicial and
final decision shall determine, yea though it seem in our Private opinion to
swerve utterly from that which is right. Which sentence says he, Ibidem.
Is ground sufficient for any reasonable man's Conscience to build upon,
whatsoever his opinion were as touching the matter before in question. And
that, Ibid. p. 26.
As for other means without this, they seeldome prevail: because that, Ibid.
p. 28.
without this, it is almost impossible that we should avoid confusion, or ever
hope to attain peace. Of all which we may conclude, that seeing Protestants
expounding the sacred Scriptures, are enforced from thence to confess, that
Councels do truly represent the Church, that they are guided by the holy Ghost
into all truth, that the Fathers of all ages have used them for the ending of
Controversies, that without them the Church can never be without tempests, and
that, they are the surest means to decyde doubts, that therefore for the ending
of Ecclesiastical co^tentions, we are to appeal unto them, as a most certain
and Supreme Judge.

And that our Protestants at home, do not rely only upon Scripture, but upon an
external Judgment or definitive sentence appointed for the ending of
Controversies, appears by their answerable practice thereof, in the high
Court of Parliament, Anno 1. Eliz. cap. 1. Where having reserved the Judgment
of Heresy to a General Council, but yet with limitatio^ that the matter be
declared Heresy by the Scripture: it next afterward determines that to be
Heresy absolutely, and without any such or other limitation, whatsoever shall be
hereafter judged to be Heresy by the high Court of Parliament of this Realm.
And so accordingly, the Puritanes in their treatise entitled, Page 3.
A Petition directed to her most excellent Majesty etc. do refer their
matters in question to the Parliament to judge thereof. But this flying of
Protestants in causes Ecclesiastical to Parlaments, consisting for the
greatest part, of the Laity, strongly conuinceth their desperation to decyde
their daily and deadly arysing dissentions, only by the Scriptures.

But now, because the Council of Trent Sess. 4.
has further decreed, that, none presume to interpret the sacred Scriptures
contrary to the unanimous consent of Fathers; let us see how far sundry of
the learned Protestants, do agree with us in the same Rule of interpretation
by Fathers. D. Morton professes, that, Protestants Appeal. page 354.
It has been the common and constant profession of Protestants to stand unto
the Judgment of Antiquity, for the continuance of the first four hundred
years and more, in all things. Yea Ibid. p. 512.
Protestants in the disquisition of truth, do not absolutely bound the name of
Antiquity, within the compass of the first Century of years, but are content
to allow it a longer extent, and therefore in all doctrines which are truly
Catholic, etc. they refuse not to be tried by the testimonies of the Ancient
Fathers in the first five hundred years after Christ. This doctor makes here
a fair flourish, as though all Protestants did stand, as in all reason they
ought, to the Judgment of the Fathers of the Primitive Church: but how false
this is, every Section through this whole Treatise, which treats of the
Fathers interpreting Scriptures, will clearly demonstrate. Exam. part. 1. p. 74.
Chemnitius conceiueth this trial by the Primitive Church, to be so good and
just, as that he thinks, that no man doubts, but that the Primitive Church
received from the Apostles and Apostolic men, not only the text of Scripture,
but also the right and native sense thereof. Whereupon says he, Ibid. page 64.
we are greatly confirmed in the true and sound sense of Scripture, by
testimony of the Ancient Church. And accordingly other Protestants confess,
that the Harmony of Confess. p. 400.
Primitive Church is the true and best Mistress of Posterity, and going before
leads us the way. D. Sarauia confirms the authority of the Primitive
Church, from her special assistance by the holy Ghost, saying, De diuersis
Ministrorum gradibus p. 8.
The holy Ghost who governs the Church is the best Interpreter of Scriptures,
from him therefore is the true interpretation to be sought, and seeing he cannot
be contrary to himself who ruled the Primitive Church, and governed it by
Bishops, it is not agreeable to truth now to cast them of.

D. Whitaker renewing the most audacious challenge made by D. Jewel, writes
thus to the glorious Martyr Campian, Resp. ad Rat. Camp. p. 90. 9.
Attend Campian, The speech of Jewel was most true and constant, when provoking
you to the Antiquity of the (first) Six hundred years, he offered, that if you
could show but any one clear and plain saying, out of any one Father or
Council, he would grant you the victory: It is the offer of us all, the same
do we all promise, and we will all perform it. And the like is proclaimed by
Of the Church l 5. in his Appendix thereto. Part. 1. p. 33. Mort. Protestants
Appeal p. 573. 574.
D. Field, and D. Morton. So that if we may believe these great Doctors, all
Protestants do appeal to the Councels and Fathers of the Primitive Church for
the deciding of Controversies, and for the fynding out of the true sense and
Interpretation of Scripture. Neither may we in reason think that this gift of
interpretation of the sacred Scriptures, ceased with the Pastors of the
Primitive Church; but as Pastors and Doctors are to continue, to Ephesians. 4.11
12.13.14.
the consummation of the Saints etc. until we meet all into the unity of faith,
which is, according to Protestants, Whitak. ag. Reinol. f. 76. Melanct. loc.
com de Ecclesia.
for ever, to the end that we be not Children wavering, and carried about with
every wynd of doctrine. And who therefore not by any humane authority, but by
Act. 20.28.
the holy Ghost are placed etc. to rule the Church of God: that so likewise
their infallible power and authority of interpeting Scripture, and declaring
the true sense thereof, is also to continue in the Church. In proof whereof,
Calvin gathers from these words of the Apostle Ephesians. 4.11.12.
And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and
other some Pastors and Doctors etc. that, Instit. impress. Geneuae. 1550. c.
de fide f 234.
these Pastors and Doctors have an ordinary charge in the Church, and the
Church can never want them, but evermore Doctors have authority to interpret
the Scriptures, that sincere and wholesome doctrine may be retained among the
faithful. D. Fulke confesses that, Answer to a Counterf. Cath. art. 14. f.
81.
the Church never wants the gift of understanding. And both he, and D.
Whitaker teach that, Against Rhem. Test. f. 445. 6. Whitak. de sacra Scrip.
contro. 1. q. 4. f. 406.
The people are not sufficient to read the Scriptures without their Pastors to
guide them in all matters and doubts. The translatour of the Bible into English
published Anno 1556. in his Epistle thereto prescribes, that every one as he is
placed in this body which is the Church, ought to enquire of the Ministers
concerning the will of the Lord, which is revealed in his word; for they are,
says Hieremie, the mouth of the Lord, yea he promises to be with their mouth,
and that their lips shall keep knowledge, and that the truth and the law
shall be in their mouth, for it is their Office chiefly to understand the
Scriptures, and teach them. So clearly do Protestants attribute to the Pastors
and Doctors of the Church in all ages the gift of interpretation, the true
understanding of Scriptures, and the Peoples duty in learning of them the will
of God, and the decision of their doubts. And thus we see by the several texts
of the holy Scriptures, either taken in that literal and native sense which
the words do afford, or according to their Exposition made by the Ancient
Fathers, and Protestant writers, that our Judge of Controversies is not only
the written word, but the Church of Christ in all ages, General approved
Councels, and the unanimous consent of Ancient Fathers.

Such objections from Scriptures as are usually urged against the Judicature of
the Church, are either taken from such texts, as give great praises to the
Scripture, or seem to assure every man of the assistance of the spirit, or
which may be thought to detract from the Infallibility of the Church: of all
which being to speak in the Chapters following, I reserve the answers for
their more proper places.

CHAP. II. The true State of the Question concerning the Churches
Infallibility, or not erring.
Whether the Universal Church of Christ can err in defyning matters of faith,
and manners: or rather, that such her Decrees are always most true and
infallible, and for such are to be believed, and observed by the faithful.
SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
THE Church being thus proved to be the Judge of all Controversies in Religion,
it must needs follow that she is free from error, and therefore as a truth most
certain in the Council of Basil it was decreed, that Respons. Synod. de
Authorit. Council. Gener.
the Catholic Church is enriched with so great Privilege by Christ our
Savior, who founded it with his blood, that we firmly believe she cannot err
etc. in those things which are necessary to Salvation. The holy Ghost who
cannot lie, has promised that he will stay with her to the end of the world,
and that she is to be taught by the Holy Ghost in all truth. And the same is
taught by the Council of Sens, saying, Decret. General.
The universal Church cannot err, because she is governed with the Spirit of
truth, abiding with her for ever, and with whom Christ abides until the end
of the world. And Decret. 1.
He that shall not follow (her) authority in faith and manners, as if he had
denied God etc. let him be holden worse then an Infidel. And so accordingly it
is now Bellar. de Eccl. l. 3. cap. 14. Rhem. Test. in Luc. 18.8.
generally taught, that the Catholic Church of Christ cannot err in matters
of faith and manners.

Points not defyned.
Some teach See Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c, 4.
that the particular Roman Church cannot err in matters of faith, in such sort
that no true belieuers should be found in the Roman Church. But others limit
this, in case the Apostolical Sea should be removed from Rome, which whether
it can be translated or no, is also disputable. But none of these are defyned
by the Church as matters of Faith, or otherwise condemned as doctrines
heretical.

Protestants untruths.
Luther blusheth not to say, that Lib. de Concilijs.
those Sycophants who flatter the Pope (meaning Catholics) are so besotted,
that they defend most audaciously this Paradoxe, The Councels have power to
make new articles of faith, and to change the old. But this is an audaciouslye
made by Luther. White affirms that, Way to the Chur. Pref. to the Reader. n.
12.
For the Church, the Fathers, the Councels, the Pope, which is all they can
pretend, are yielded by themselves to be subject to Error. But John white in
lying follows in this his Father Luther. Rogers avouches that, Def. of the
Articles Art. 21. p. 113.
Never yet had there been a Council, either General or National, or
whatsoever etc. either begun or ended to the glory of God, but it has been, I
say, not called only, but confirmed also by some Godly Emperor, King, or
Queen. This in effect is granted by all reformed Churches. And, Ib. Art. 11.
p. 116.
by Councels, the Traditions and books of foolish men, have been made of
equal authority with the word of God; as by the Council of Trent. This is
only loud lying, and therefore needs no other Answer.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Protestant Church has decreed that, Article 19.
the Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living and manner of
Ceremonies, but also in matters of faith. Article 21. See Calu. Inst. l. 4. c 9.
General Councels etc. when they be gathered together, for as much as they be
an assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the spirit and word of God,
they may err, and sometime have erred, even in things pertaining unto God.
Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to Salvation, have neither
strength nor authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of
holy Scripture. Whitaker affirms that, Controu. 2. q. 4. c. 3. pa. 489.
God has not promised this to the Church that it should not err etc. The
universal Church may err. The Church militant may err. All the Pastors and
Bishops of Churches may err. It is Ibid. pa. 490.
evident that the true Church even in things necessary may err for a time. Yea
Ibid. page 491.
it is evident that the whole Church erred concerning the vocation of the
Gentiles. And the Church Ib. q. 5. c. 17. p. 541.
also for a time may err in some fundamental points. The like is taught by De
notis Ecclesiae. vol. 3. p. 139. Danaeus Controu. 4. l. 3. c. 17. p. 733.
Beza and others. So that according to Protestants the universal Church, the
true Church, General Councels, all Pastors and Bishops may err in matters of
faith, in things necessary, and in points fundamental.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
The Alph. de Castro. ver. Concilium.
Arians taught all Counsels to be subject to error, and particularly they
rejected the Nicene Council. The Donatists Aug. passim Cont. Donatistas.
condemned the whole Church of error. And so did also Sermon. 45.
Wicliffe. And the same as you have seen do our modern Protestants defend, as
true heirs of such unworthy Progenitors.

Protestant Errors.
We De vera Eccles. refor. pa. 322.
do not urge without cause (says Calvin) the Church of God, for some ages to
have been so torn and broken in pieces, that it has been destitute of true
Pastors. Danaeus affirms that, Contro. 3. p. 426.
the Church often has no man for Pastor. And Controu. 4. p. 757.
the true Church has often wanted Prelates. And the same is taught by Beza de
notis Eccles. vol 3. p. 147. Sadeel, resp. ad art. abiurat. p. 573. Lub l. 5.
de Eccl. c. 5.
other Protestants. Whitaker not fearing to charge the Apostles themselves with
errors, says Controu. 2. q. 5. c. 17. p. 541.
, These were great errors, and yet we see these to have been in the Apostles,
even after the holy Ghost had descended upon them. Brentius affirms that, In
Apo. Confess. c. de Council. p. 90^.
S. Peter chief of the Apostles, and also Barnabas after the holy Ghost
received, together with the Church of Jerusalem, erred. But if the Church can
be without true Pastors, if the Apostles who have delivered unto us the new
Testament of Gods sacred word; if S. Peter the head of the Church, be all of
them subject to error, upon what firm ground can any Christian build his
faith or certainty of Religion?

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures that the Universal Church of Christ,
cannot err in matters of faith and manners.
I Must suppose what I have formerly proved, See before c. 1.. 1. See 3. Reg.
8. 14. Mat. 18.17. Fulk. ag. Rhem. Test. in Act 15. sect. 5 Ridley Act. Mon. p.
1288.
and which is acknowledged for true by sundry Protestants which is, that by the
Church in this question is understood, not only the whole company of the
faithful, comprehending therein both the Clergy and the Laity, but chiefly that
which does truly represent the whole Church, to wit, the head thereof, and the
Bishops lawfully assembled together in General Council: Even as the
Parliament represents the whole Common wealth, and has the Authority thereof.
And so S. Austin L. 1. de Bap. c. 18. and. l 7. c. 53.
calls the sentence of a General Council, the consent of the whole Church.
Now that the Church taken in this sense cannot err, may first be proved by all
such arguments, as we See before c. 1.
used before in proof that the Church of Christ, is the lawful and final
Judge of Controversies in Religion, for it does evidently follow thereof, that
she is not subject to error. Or else it must be granted, that Christ has made
for us in matters of Salvation, an erroneous Judge, which were absurd and
blasphemous. The same is confirmed by such places as speak expressly of the
Church it self, Mat. 16.18.
Upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it. Mat. 18.17.
If he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen and Publican.
Now if the Sentence or decree of the Church may be false and erroneous, it were
most injurious to bynd every one under so great punishment to assent thereunto.

Those textes literally taken being most plain in our behalf, let us see how
Protestants would euade them. To this place Whitaker answers: De script. l.
1. c. 12. sect. 1. pa 143.
The son of God has commended the voice of the Church to be heard, but not
unless she show the Scriptures. Or as Herbrandus says, In Compend. loc. de
Ecclesia. page 492.
As long as she sounds heavenly and vncorrupt doctrine, but so long a Child
may be believed. Field Of the Church. l. 4 c 4 Hunnius in Colloq Ratisbon.
sess. 6. Molineus in Scuto. p. 84.
and others do limit this to contentions between particular persons, not to
Controversies of Religion: but if the Church be to be heard in matters Civil,
much more in Ecclesiastical.

Herbrandus also limiteth this to the Church of Christ's time, saying, The In
Compend. loc. de Eccles. page 494.
Commandment is not universal of the Church of all times, but Christ speaks
of his little Church, according to the Condition of those times, which then
wanted a pious politic Magistrate, and who should be a member of the Church.
But this derogateth from Christ's perpetual Providence over his Church: neither
are those times less needful of an Infallible teacher and Judge, then the
former. Christ also is called Ephesians. 1.22.23.
The head of the Church, and the Church his body; and Ephesians. 4.4.
one body, one spirit; Therefore if the Church should err, the error thereof
would be ascribed to Christ, he being the head thereof, and to the holy Ghost,
as the Soul or life. And whereas Calvin answers, that Christ and the holy
Ghost do teach the Church all truth absolutely necessary, (which is contrary to
his former brethren) but yet do always leave some blemishes or smaller
errors; which no more are to be ascribed to Christ, or the holy Ghost, then
Ignorance, whereof doubtless there is some in the Church: I answer, as the
husband who is head of the wife, is not bound to remove all Ignorance from her,
and yet is bound to remove all error, whereof great hurt may arise, although
she may be excused by Ignorance: So Christ is bound to preserve the Church from
all error, whereof great Evil may ensue, of which kind is all error concerning
faith: seeing it is a most pernicious evil, that the Church should worship God
with false faith, Gods true worship chiefly consisting in faith, hope, and
charity. Again, if the Church only cannot err in matters necessary to
salvation, then the most points of faith may be called in question, for many
things are to be believed, which are not absolutely necessary to salvation, as
that there are Divine Scriptures, without the faith whereof, many have been
saved, as well before the Scriptures were written, as since the Irenaeus l. 3.
c. 4.
time of the new Testament, in remote Nations. Now I presume that Calvin will
not allow that doubt to be made of the Scriptures.

Again those smaller errors are either such as do not prejudice the integrity
of faith and man's salvation; and then without just cause did Luther and all
Protestants revolt from the Catholic Church, with so much combustion and
effusion of Christian blood: Or if they do prejudice faith and salvation, then
they are not small, but weighty errors, and such, as therewith the Church
cannot stand. For Whitaker confesses, that Controu. 2. q. 5. c. 17.
If any fundamental point of doctrine be removed, the Church presently
falls; but no man will deny that such things as prejudice faith and
salvation, are fundamental, unless he will speak so absurdly and
contradictory as Whitaker does in the same place, affirming that, The Church
may err for a time in some foundations, and yet be sound. So that you must
imagine a Church to be sound, and yet fail in the foundation.

Yea directly contrary to Whitaker, S. Paul calls the Church, 1. Tim. 3.15.
The pillar and ground of truth. This text is so plain in our behalf, that
Protestants labor extremely to avoid the same. Calu. in Tim. Whitaker. cont.
Staplet. fol. 289. Vrfinus Comment. Catech. fol. 17. Rein. Confer. pa. 639.
Calvin and others answer, that she is only so called, because she is a
faithful keeper of the truth, preserving the Scriptures. But this makes for
me, for if she be a faithful keeper of the truth, how then does she err? for
in erring she does not keep the truth, but depart from it. And if it be only
understood that she kept the written word from perishing; then in that sense,
Libraries, Sationers shops, and Arkes, may be called Pillars and grounds of
truth: neither is here any mention made of Scriptures, but absolutely the
Church is called the Pillar and ground of truth: Besides the Church was a
Pillar of Truth, when there were not any Scriptures to be preserved.

Whitaker further answers, that Controu. 2. q. 4. c. 2. p. 485.
not simply every truth, but only necessary is understood in this place,
Answerably to which says Vorstius, In Antibel. p. 143.
The Apostle treats not of every truth in any respect belonging to Religion,
but only of saving truth, or necessary to Salvation to be known; and this
conditionally, to wit, so long as she perseuereth the true Church of Christ. Or
(as Peter Martyr says) In loc. Clas. 4. c. 4.. 21.
I confess she is truly the Pillar of Truth, but not always, but when she
relyeth upon the word of God. Or as others say, Confess Heluet. c. 17.
She erreth not as long as she relyeth upon Christ the Rock, and the
foundation of Prophets and Apostles. Or as Bullinger writes, Decad. 4. sermon.
5. fol. 229.
the Church erreth not when she hears the voice of her spouse and Pastor. But
all this is so impertinent, that with the same limitations, I may truly
affirm any Cobbler or Tinker, any Heretic or Devil, to be the Pillar of
truth: for none of these err so long as they rely upon Christ, and the word of
God. And indeed it is all one as to say, She is the Pillar of truth, whilst
she is the Pillar of truth. So idle is all this.

Again, Protestants must understand here, either all Truth, or but some Truth:
if they mean that some truth is ever in the Church only, and she in that
respect the Pillar of Truth, that cannot be so, for some truth is ever also
among heretics, and yet is not their Congregation the pillar of Truth. And if
they mean that all Truth is ever in the Church only, then we have our intent,
that the Church cannot err, seeing every error is a denial of some truth.
Lastly, Chemnitius Exam. part. 1. p. 10. Rein. Confer. p. 652. c. 9.
and Reinolds answer, that the Apostle calling the Church the Pillar of Truth,
meant only, that she ought to be the Pillar of Truth, and so though not always
indeed, yet always in office and duty, she is the Pillar of Truth, even when
she erreth: Even as in like manner the Priest is called Mal. 2.7.
The Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, not for that he did always the Lords
message truly, but for that he always had authority so to do. I answer this
shift is no better then any of the former, the Comparison being most unlike,
for though it were granted, that the Priest did not Gods message always truly,
yet was he always truly and indeed Gods Messenger, receiving that name and
office, not from the message done, but from the authority and charge, given him
to do the same: for the word Messenger, is a word of Office, respecting only an
authority and charge of a thing not already done, or presently in doing, but
herafter to be done, namely of the message to be executed, and so even before
the message done, the party is actually invested in that office, in respect
only of the authority and charge, which actually he enjoys? As in like, Kings
Ambassadors are actually for the time Ambassadors, before they do their
Embassy, or although they do it untruly. But these words which the Apostle
refers ^o the Church, are of another nature, being titles not of Office
only, but of Privilege, respecting an action still present. And so the Church,
is in this place also called the House of God, for that God still dwells in
her; and in the next words, she is termed The Pillar of Truth. Because (even as
Confer. p, 639.
Reynolds himself says) it bears up the Truth and confirms it: for no man
ca^ say of the Church, that she is the House of God, when God dwells not in
her; or that she is actually the Pillar of Truth when she erreth, as on the
other part it may be said in the example objected of the Priest, that he is
actually Gods Messenger, and may so be called even before his message done, or
though he err therein: As also in like manner he is truly his Priest, though
he should err in the function thereof. Instit. impress. Argentor. c. 4. defide.
p. 147.
Calvin himself confesses thus much, speaking of the Jews Church when it had
revolted, in which notwithstanding he then acknowledges peculiar prerogatives
of the Church, and yet in respect of the Revolt and defection of those times,
he says thereof, If those be Churches, then is the Church not the Pillar of
Truth etc. not the Tabernacle of the living God: whereas if the foresaid
answer were good, the Church revolted, which he speaks of, was even the
Pillar of Truth, because as then she ought to have been such. To conclude, as
the Church is ever actually, and indeed The house of God: So is she ever
actually and indeed the Pillar of Truth: and unto her, as Gods house the
faithful ought to resort to be taught, as the Prophet foretells of Christ's
Church, saying, Isa. 2.3. Mich. 4.2.
Come let us ascend to the House of the God of Jacob, and he shall teach us his
ways. The same is proved by such places as argue that lawful Councels cannot
err. If the first Council said confidently, Act. 15.28.
It has seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us, so auouching the decrees
thereof to be the decrees of the holy Ghost, then the like may say other
Councels, the holy Ghost no less assisting them for the good of the Church.
Christ himself also Mat. 18.20.
promises his own perpetual and present assistance, saying, Where two or
three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. But
for the better understanding hereof, observe, that our Savior speaking before
of the incorrigible man, said, Tell the Church, and if he will not hear the
Church etc. Now least any should think that the Church might be contemned or
disobeyed, he annexeth immediately, Whatsoever ye shall bynd upon Earth etc.
And least any should doubt of Gods assistance, when the Pastors of the Church
assembled do condemn or absolve any man, therefore it follows, Where two or
three are gathered in my name, there am I in the midst of them. And
concerning euerything whatsoever they shall ask it shall be done to them of my
Father etc. Now what request more just and necessary, then to be able
infallibly to discern truth from falsehood?

Christ speaking of the coming of the holy Ghost, says, Io. 16.23 and 14.26.
when he is come which is the spirit of Truth, we will lead you into all truth:
Whitaker would euade this, saying, Controu. 2. quaest. 4. c. 2. p. 486. 488.
I answer, Christ and the holy Ghost do teach the Church all truth, simply
necessary, but often do leave some error: And the same answer is given by
Reinolds These. 2. Bucanus loc. 41.
and others. But this is contrary to the text which says, that the holy Ghost
will lead into all truth. Neither would this be sufficient direction for
Christians, who are not able to discern, what truth is simply necessary, and
what not. Daneus therefore restrayneth this only to the Apostles, saying
Controu. 4. p. 632.
This promise of Christ belongs properly and truly to those twelve whom he
then spoke unto: Therefore it is a personal benefit, which cannot be extended
to others then those twelve Apostles. And the same answer is made by Molineus.
In Scuto. p. 51.
But S. Cyprian Cypr. l. 4. Epist. Basil. Constit. Monast. c. 23.
and S. Basil apply this to their Successors. And Fulke confesses, that,
Fulk. Rhem. Test. in Luc. 10.16.
It is all one to despise the Minister of Christ's Catholic Church, and to
despise Christ. And that this is not spoken only to the Apostles, but also to
their Successors, is manifest, in that the said Spirit is promised to abide
with the Apostles Io. 14.16.
for ever, that is, with them and their Successors. And so Christ himself
says, Io. 14.16.
I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Co^forter, that he may
abide with you for ever, the Spirit of truth, which Io. 16.13.
shall teach you all truth. And accordingly he prays after to his Father, not
only for the Church of that age, but also for the Church in all ages following,
in these words: Io. 17.20.
And not for them only do I pray, but for those also that by their word shall
believe in me. So expressly is Christ's Church sanctified for ever in the truth
of this word.

Now, the holy Ghost does not teach all truth to every particular man, or
Bishops being apart, therefore when they are assembled together. Fulke further
replyeth, that every true Christian may err, and yet is no true Christian void
of Christ's Spirit; for as the Apostle teaches, Romans 8.9.
He that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his. But this is but a
deceipful euasio^, for the gift of Christ's spirit is not alwais one; it is one
in the whole Church, and another in every true Christian, we speak here of
that particular spirit which is the Io. 16.3.
Spirit of truth, which does teach al truth; the gifts of this Spirit (I say)
be not always one, but it distributeth as the Apostle affirms Rom 12.6.
Different guiftes, and therefore though every true Christian has Christ's
Spirit to Satisfaction, yet has he not thereby, his special gift of the
Spirit of Truth, whereof we now speak, no more then he has the gift of
prophesying, and of miracles.

Of Bishops and chief Pastors it is said, Luc. 10.10.
He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me: Heb.
13.17.
Obey your Prelates and be subject to them: they are called Pastors, Ephesians. 4.11.
or Shepherds, and Mat. 28.19.
teachers. Ephesians. 4.11.
And he gave some Apostles* and some Prophets, and othersome Evangelists, and
othersome Pastors and Doctors, to the consu^mation of the Saints, unto the
work of the ministry unto the edifiing of the body of Christ, until we meet
all into the unity of faith etc. And now follows the reason why Christ
provides these Pastors in his Church; That now we be not Children wavering and
carried about with every wynd of doctrine, in the wickedness of men, in
craftines to the Circu^uention of Error. So prouidently does God preserve his
Church against every wynd of false doctrine, and Circumuention of Error.
Accordingly as the Prophet foretold, calling the Church of Christ Isa. 35.8
a direct way, so that fools cannot err in it. Now, if we be commanded by God
to follow and hear them as our Prelates, Pastors, and Doctors; then either
they cannot err, or erring, and we following them therein, we may lay the fault
upon God, who commanded us to follow them: And then seeing every Bishop apart,
or several from the rest may err, it follows, that many lawfully assembled
in Council together cannot err.

The same is proved by all such texts as convince, that the Head, or Chief
Bishop of the Church cannot err in defyning matters of faith, Luc. 22.31.
Simon, Simon, Satan has desired you, that he might winnow you as wheat, but
I have prayed for thee, that thy faith may not fail. Here Christ prays not
for all the Church, but in particular for Peter, as all the words show, Simon,
for thee, thy faith, thy brethren: Also whereas our Savior began to speak in
the Plural number, Satan has desired that he might winnow you (vos)
forthwith he changes his manner of speaking, and says, but I have prayed for
thee: further he prays for him to whom he says, and thou sometimes
converted, which cannot agree to the whole Church, except we will say the whole
Church to have been first perverted, which is many ways untrue. But now that
which Christ prayed for, is expressly, that his faith should not fail, and then
seeing this prayer for Peter, was for the good of the Church, the Devil still
desiring to winnow the faithful, it thereof follows, that she never wants
one, whose faith may not fail, by whom she may be confirmed. Again, Peter is
called Mat. 16.18.
a Rock, and foundation, both which argue firmenes; for a Rock is not broken
with wynd or tempest, and if the foundation fall, all the whole house falls
withal.

Again, if the Church could err, then there were no means left to decyde
controversies, and preserve unity: yea all former decrees of the Church, and
many condemned heresies thereby would be called in question. And we should ever
remain uncertain of sundry parts of Scripture it self, the authority whereof
was holden doubtful, until they were approved as Canonical by the Church and
her Councels. And if the church can err, how can Protestants be assured that
their Church does not err, in condemning the Roman Church of superstition? Or
how can the vulgar be sure they are taught the truth, when their Teachers
themselves confess, that their Church, and all their Pastors may lie?

And lastly, if the Church can err, one of these absurdities must ensue, that
either Christ may sometimes be without a Church, an Espouse in Earth, (as he
was all the while there were no Protestants, if their Church be the Spouse of
Christ) or else, if the Catholic Church only is, and has been his wife and
spouse, and the same have such Errors as Heretics falsely pretend; then his
wife so dear Ephesians. 5.26.
and so praised, is notwithstanding a very whore: this so gross absurdity
conuinceth, both that the Catholic Church always is, and that it teaches
truth always.

In brief, Io. 14.16. Mat. 16. mar. 28. Ephesians. 4. Io 17. Luc. 22. Ps. ^. Ephesians. 5.
if the Church be the Pillar of Truth, if it has the spirit of God to lead it
into all truth till the worlds end; If it be builded upon a Rock, and hell
gates shall not prevail against it; If Christ has placed in it Apostles,
Dostors, Pastors, and Rulers, to the Consummation, and full perfection of the
whole body, that in the mean time we be not carried away with every blast of
doctrine: If Christ have prayed for it that the faith of the chief Governor
thereof do not fail: If it be his house, his Spouse, his body, his lot,
kingdom and Inheritance given him in this worlld: If he loves it as his own
flesh, and it cannot be divorced or separated from him: Lastly if the new
Testament, Scriptures, Sacraments, and Sacrifice cannot be changed, being the
everlasting dowry of the Church, continued ever in this our Catholic Church;
then certainty it cannot err. So plain then are so many textes of Scripture
in proof that the Church cannot err.

SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures, in proof that the
Church of Christ cannot err.
SAint Cyprian (or rather as some think Ruffinus) speaking of the Church
says, De symbolo Apost.
This is the holy Church not having blot or wrinkle etc. The Churches of
Heretics are not without blot or wrinkle of untruth, Ephesians 5. v. 27.
and therefore the Prophet said of them, Ps. 25.5.
I have hated the Church of the malignant, but of this Church which keeps the
faith of Christ whole, the holy Ghost says, Cant. 6.8.
my Dove is one.

S. Austine directs us to the Church for the fynding out of all truth,
saying, L. 1. Cont. Cres^o. c. 33.
The truth of Scriptures is houlden by v^ when we do that, which now has
pleased the universal Church, which the authority of the same Scriptures does
commend, that seeing the holy Scripture cannot deceive, whosoever fears to be
deceived by the obscurity of this question, let him take Counsel thereof from
the Church, which without any ambiguity the holy Scripture does demonstrate. S.
Lucius Pope and martyr Ep. 1. ad Episcopos Hisp. and Galliae.
affirms that, The Roman Church is Apostolical, and the Mother of all
Churches, which is never proved to have erred from the path of Apostolical
tradition; nor depraved with Heretical Novelties, to have failed according to
the promise of our Lord himself saying, I have prayed for thee that thy faith
fail not.

That the Fathers taught from Scripture, that Counsels could not err,
appears by S. Cyril, who speaking of the Bi^hops of the Council of Nice, who
made the Creed, says, Cyr. Alex. in Expos. Symb. Ni^eni.
Truly with them sat Christ himself, who said, where two or three shall be
gathered in my name, there I am in the midst of them: for how can it be
doubted, that he did inuisibly rule that holy and great Synod? As also in that
the said words of Christ are cyted and urged in proof that General Counsels
cannot err, by the Council of Epi ad Leon. quae est post tertiam Act. eiusdem
cont. Syn 6. Act. 17. Tol. 3. prope init. Innoc. disp. 20. can. de quibus.
Celest. ep. ad Conc. Ephesians. primum.
Chalcedon, by the sixth Synod, by the third Toletan Council, by Innocentius
and Celestinus. S. Austin in another place says, In Ps. cont part. Donat.
Number the Priests even from the sea of Peter, observe who in that rank of
fathers succeeds one another, that is the Rock which the Proud gates of Hell
do not overcome. In proof of the supreme Pastors freedom from erring, I may
allege that, Theodoret writes to Pope Leo in these words, If Ad Leonem Papans.
Paul the preacher of truth, the trumpet of the Holy Ghost ran to great
Peter, that from him he might bring the answer (or resolution) to them who
contended at Antiochia concerning the legal ordinances; much more we, who are
abject and little, do run to your Apostolical Sea, that we may receive from
you, remedy for the wounds of the Churches. S. Bernard writes thus to Pope
Innocentius, Ep. 190. ad Innocen.
It is meet that all dangers and scandals of the kingdom of God (or Church)
be brought to your Apostleship, those especially which concern faith. For I
think it convenient, that there chiefly the domages of Faith should be
repaired, where faith cannot feel defect; for to what other Sea was it ever
said, I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. So eleerly do the
Fathers and Councels expound the Scriptures, in proof that the Church, General
Councels, or the Supreme Pastor of the Church cannot err in matters of faith.

SECT. IV. Protestant writers teach, that the Church of Christ cannot err in
matters of faith.
THe place before cited out of the Prophet Isay, is so clear for the Churches
not erring, as that the Glossers upon the English Protestant translation,
confess the truth thereof in the marginall notes upon that place: Calvin
commenting upon the same place says, In Isa. c. 50.
God promises that his Church shall never be spoiled of this inestimable good,
but that it shall be governed by the holy Ghost, and underpropped with heavenly
doctrine etc. And a little after, such is the promise that our Lord will so
assist his Church, and will have that protection and care of it, as he will
never permit it to be deprived of his doctrine: what more clear could be
spoken by a Catholic?

But no man delivers his mind more freely in this point then Luther, The De
december praeceptis.
Church (says he) cannot err, but every man may err in his devotion etc. The
Church is governed by the holy Ghost. Again To 7. Ger. Wit. de vet. Eccl fol.
561.
they are enforced to confess the Church to be the Rock against which the
gates of hell cannot prevail. Matt. 16. or as Paul expounds, the Pillar and
groundworke of truth etc. Therefore the Church neither will nor can suffer a lie
and false doctrine. Yea, Tom. 7. de Antiqua Ecclesia f. 562. Germ.
The Church neither ought nor can lie, nor teach errors, not in the least
things* seeing God is the mouth of the Church: and as God cannot lie, so also
neither the Church. And Resp. ad Dialog Siluestri Priorat.
the universal Church cannot err, as the Cardinal Cameracensis proves most
learnedly, upon the first of the Sentences. Yea says he Epist. ad Marchion.
Brandebur. Tom 2. Germ. fol. 324.
It is dangerous and fearful to hear or believe any thing which is contrary
to the unanimous testimony of faith, and the doctrine of the holy Catholic
Church, which from the beginning she has kept with one consent for 1500.
years. And, In Protestatione.
I protest (says Luther) first, that I will neither speak or hold any thing,
but first that which is had, and may be had, in and from the sacred Scriptures;
then from Ecclesiastical Fathers received by the Roman Church, hitherto
observed; and from the Cannons and Decretals of the Pope. But if any thing
cannot be proved or disproued from these, that will I only hold for
disputation sake. If Luther had performed this his just protestation, he had
never bin condemned by the Church for an Heretic.

Would any man think it credible that Fox and many of his canonized Saints,
who so obstinately opposed and disobeyed the Church, should expressly teach,
that the Church cannot err; and yet I find that Fox himself says, Act. mon,
p 999
The true Church Christ never suffers to err in the whole. Ib. page 493.
Ridley Ibid. 1362.
I do acknowledge an unspotted Church of Christ, in which no man can err,
without which no man can be saved. And, Ib. page 1186.
the Catholic Church is the Spouse of Christ, the Pillar and stay of truth,
this Church I believe according to the Creed. Philpot. Ibid. page 1401.
I do not think that the Catholic Church can err in doctrine. Bradford
calls the Church, Ib p. 1211.
Christ's wise, the Chair and seat of verity. James Bainhams opinion was, that,
There be two Churches, the Church of Christ, and the Church of Antichrist; the
Church of Antichrist does and may err, and the Church of Christ not. Bilney
avouches that Ib. p. 464.
the Catholic Church can by no means err in faith. And the same truth of
the Church not erring, is taught by In his Sermon. preached 8. Feb. 1588. Hun.
Act Colloq. Ratisb. fol. 105. Keker. in System. Theol. Pow. of things
indifferent. c. 2 p 7.
D. Bancroft, Hunnius, Kekermanus, and Powell. Bertrand de Loque says of this
very question, Discourse of the Church. c. 11. p. 198.
The Controversy in my Judgment is not of the Catholic (or universal)
Church, for we all agree heerin, that she cannot err touching faith etc.
Wherefore this question is, touching (only) a particular Church: but that a
particular Church may err Catholics do not deny. In this sense also is S.
Paul expounded by Zanchius, saying, De Relig Christ. c. 24. 20. p. 139.
We believe and acknowledge this Catholic Church, which we have above
described, so to be governed by the spirit of Christ, that he will never suffer
all the same at once to err etc. Whereto we doubt not to pertayne that which
Paul said, The Church to be the Pillar and foundation of truth, because out of
the Church there is no truth, but in it, it is perpetually kept, seeing
allalwayes some company great or little may be found, in which the word of truth
sounds. But of every particular Church we have learned the reason to be
unlike. In like sort says Rhegius, Discuss. Theol. p. 213. See Hunnius in Acta
Colloq. Ratisb. f. 105.
We grant that although particular Churches may err, yet the whole Church
cannot err altogether, for the promises of God do withstand it.

Husse also in this is very liberal saying, Sermon de fidei suae elucidatione.
I admit all the doctrines of holy Doctors, declaring faithfully the law it
self: I reverence also all general and particular Counsels, Decrees, and
Decretals, and all laws, Cannons, and Constitutions. And concerning Counsels
which do represent the Church, Luthers opinion was that, Cont. Swinglium and
Ocolamp.
If the world shall longer continue, it will be again for the different
interpretations of Scripture, which now are, to preserve unity of faith, that
we receive the Decrees of Councels, and fly to them. Again, In Declaratione
Eucharistiae.
I have not said nor counseled, neither is it my Intention, that one or some
Bishops by proper authority begin to give to any one both kinds, unless it
should be so ordained and commanded in a General Council. So respective in
this humor was Luther to a General Council. D. Bilson acknowledges with
Councels, the presence and assistance Perpet. Govern. page 372.
of the holy Ghost. And, that they are strengthened with the promise of our
Savior. Ridley affirms that Act. mon. p. 1288.
Councels do indeed represent the whole Church, and being so gathered together
in the name of Christ, they have a promise of the gift, and guiding of his
spirit into all truth. Thus do many of the chiefest Protestants expound the
Scriptures in behalf of the Church not erring, and believe and teach the same
doctrine themselves.

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture, in proof that the Church may err in
matters of faith, answered.
SOme object that Aaron, and the whole multitude adored the golden calfe. But
the Answer is easy, for Aaron was not then invested with the authority of high
Priest, but that office was imparted long after unto him, as appears in
Exodus c. 40. Neither did the Leuits consent to that Idolatry, or Moses in
whom the supreme Priestly dignity still remained; so many ways impertinent is
this Objection. Such places are also objected, as seem to argue all Pastors,
Priests and Prophets, not only of evil life, but even of ignorance or error.
His Isa. 56.10. Ierem. 6.13.
watchmen all blind have been ignorant etc. The Pastors themselves have been
ignorant of understanding. Answer. It is frequent in Scriptures Mat. 2.3. Luc
10 25.
for the faults of some, all to be reprehended in general, that so the
reprehension may seem more vehement: and this is observed by S. Austine. De
Ciu. Dei. l c. 12.
Yea Jewel himself does acknowledge that, In Defense. p. 442.
the holy Scriptures, this word, All, is often used instead of many. Again,
these reprehensions concern Priests as they are several, not as they are
assembled in any lawful Council together. Neither is it necessary that these
things which are spoken against the Priests of the old Testament, should be
applied also to these of the new, especially assembled in Council, the Church
having greater promises from God, then the Synagogue had, of which it was never
said; Upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it, with sundry such like.

Some urge those words of Christ, Luc. 18.8.
But yet the son of man coming shall he find, trow you, faith in the earth?
as though at Christ's coming all faith should be ceased, and so the Church to
have erred and perished. Answer. The Ancient heretics Luciferians, and
Donatists, as Protestants now do, used this place to excuse their fall from the
Church; saying it was decayed in faith, when they forsook it: to whom S.
Hierome Hier. cont. Lucif. c. 6. Aug. de unit. Ecclesiae. c. 15. and de verb.
Dom. Sermon. 36.
and S. Augustine answered; that Christ says not, that there should be no
faith left in earth, but by this manner of speech insinuates, that at the
latter day in the great persecution of Antichrist, faith should be more rare,
especially that perfect faith, containing devotion and affection toward God.
Rogers obiecteth Def of the Art. art. 11. p. 116.
that at the death of Christ, the chief Priest, with the rest of the Priests
and the people erred in faith, condemning our Savior as guilty of death, and
denying him to be the Messiah, accordingly as was foretold by the Prophet,
Ezech. 7.26.
The law shall perish from the Priests and Counsel from the Elders: As also
that at the same time the apostles lost their faith. Answer. 1. The Chief
Priest and the rest were not assembled to expound the Law, or teach the people,
but to pronounce sentence in a matter of fact; in which no man doubts but
that they might err. 2. The Privilege of not erring was granted to those
Priests, but until the time of Christ's coming; and of it the Prophet said,
The law shall perish from the Priests: but the New Testament is to continue
unto the worlds end, and to it the promise was made for Ps 88.29. Isa. 54. Ier.
31.31.
ever, and that the Mat. 17.18.
gates of hell should not prevail against it. 3. As for the rest or the people,
to many of them these injuries to Christ were most displeasing, as to
Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathia, and others. And to many others in Judea, and
sundry other parts of the world they were altogether unknown, who therefore
remained at the same time faithful. And so accordingly Protestants tell us of
Harm. of Confess. page 326.
Zachary, Symeon, Joseph, Elizabeth, Marie, Anne, the teachers, and many
others, who agreed in pure doctrine and did not hear the Pharisees and
Saducees; many of whom being then living. never consented to Christ's
condemnation. Yea Caiphas himself did not err in faith, when he Io. 11.49.
said, that it was expedient that one man dye for the people, and the whole
nation perish not. And this he said not of himself, but being the high Priest
of that year, he prophesied, that Jesus should die for the Nation etc. And as
for the Apostles they were not as then Bishops, but only designed. Neither is
it probable, that they as then did err in faith; for though it be said that,
Mar. 16.14.
He reproved their incredulity, yet this does not signify that they lost their
faith which they had, but only that they were slow to believe that which they
had not formerly believed, to wit, our Saviors resurrection, whereof when
himself had said, Luc. 18.33.34.
They will kill him but the third day he shall rise again; it is imediatly
said, but they understood none of these things. And S. John gives the reason
hereof: Io. 20.^.
For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he should rise again from the
dead. Besides the B. Virgin Mary, and S. Mary Magdalen and others, continued as
then with great Charity, which necessarily presupposes faith. Again, the
state of Christ's Church with obligation to enter therinto, did but begin at
Pentecost, when the Apostles preached publicly the faith of Christ. Lastly
Protestants acknowledge, that the Church cannot err in matters necessary to
salvation, wherefore if they charge the whole Church with this damnable error,
they therein impugn themselves no less then us. For so says Willet, Willet.
Synop. p. 51.
The Church of God may err in some points not necessary to Salvation, but
(she) cannot fall into any damnable error, Against Rhem. Test. p 122. 168. 169
336. 373. 372. Call. Instit. Argent. pa. 369.
and the like is taught by (37) Fulk and Calvin, so many ways does appear the
weakness of this Objection. Fulke Ans. to a Counterf. Cath. p. 89.
urged from S. Paul, 1. Cor. 13.9.
That our knowledge is imperfect, our prophesying imperfect; therefore the
doctrine of the Church may also be imperfect or erroneous. Answer. Fulke may as
well conclude that therefore S. Paul's doctrine and writings may be erroneous,
for this his saying concerns himself, as much as the Church; we must
therefore understand, that S. Paul in this place (as is affirmed by S. Austine
Cited by Bid upon this place.
and is otherwise manifest by the 1. Cor. 13.10.12.
Circumstance of the text) only insinuates our knowledge in this life not to
be so clear and manifest, as it shall be in the next life, saying to this end in
the place cyted; we see now by a glass in a dark sort, but then face to face:
now I know in part, (for which Fulke translateth falsely, imperfectly) but then
I shall know, as also I am known. Which knowledge of the Church, although in
this sense and respect, it be, and ever was but in part, yet it has been, and
still is so certain in it self, that she may be bold to say in her
determinations, Act. 15.28.
It has seemed good to the holy Ghost and us. Rogers obiecteth that Def. of
the Art. art. 21. p. 115. Fulk. Ans. were to a Counterfeit Cath. p. 86.
General Counsels consisting of men, who may err, and who are all liars, God
only being true, that therefore they are subject to error. Answer. Though men
of themselves be all subject to error, yet God being true, who has promised
in that case to be in the midst of them, the danger of error is taken away.
2. Though every man be of himself a liar, yet may some men notwithstanding by
Gods special grace, be true and no liars, as the Evangelists and Apostles of
Christ's, against whose doctrine and writing this argument makes as much, as
against the Church, unto which the direction of the holy Ghost is no less
promised, then to the Apostles and Evangelists. Whitaker and Reynolds argue
thus Contro. 2 q 4. c 3. Rem. in his 2. Concl.
That which befalls to one, may befall to the whole: but every one in
particular may err, therefore the whole may err. This is a poor sophisme,
for in the like sort might I argue, Whitaker cannot remove a millstone, nor
Reynolds, nor any other Minister; therefore all the Ministers in the world
together, cannot remove a Millstone. So though particular Pastors of the
Church may err, yet not the whole Church, especially it being guarded by Gods
promise, and the assistance of the holy Ghost. But Whitaker and Fulke reply,
Contr. 2. q. 4. c. 2. Fulk. in c. 16. Io, sec. 5.
(23) That the holy Ghost is promised to every one in particular, Christ prayed
to sanctify every one, and confirm him in verity, as he did for the whole, for
the laity, as well as for the Clergy. Answer. It is true that he promised to
every particular, and prayed for them, but in a different manner, to every one
according to their several state and degree: he prayed for S. Peter, and the
rest of the Apostles, and Bishops their successors, and assured them the holy
Ghost; as to parents, masters, and sheepheards of his fold; to the Laity and
every particular man, as to Children, scholars, and sheep to be directed by
them: they have the holy Ghost to teach, preach, and govern; these to obey,
learn, and believe. Wherefore as the Pastors cannot err in teaching,
defyning, and condemning heresies; so neither any particular man in believing,
obeying, and submitting himself unto them.

Thus have Prot. like unshamefast Children, sought (though with small success)
to discover the nakedness of their spiritual mother, Christ's Spouse.

CHAP. III. The true State of the Question, concerning the difficulty in
understanding the sacred Scriptures.
Whether the Sacred Scriptures be so easy and plain to be understood, as that
without the explication of the Church, they are sufficient to decyde, and end
all controversies of faith, or rather in many places are very obscure and
difficult, even to the learned. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
AMONGST other reasons that convince the sole Scripture, not to be our Judge of
Controversies, is the extreme difficulty in fynding out the true Sense thereof.
And therefore in the Council of Basil we are taught, that, Council. Basil.
Orat. Joan. de Ragusio.
Seeing the sacred Scriptures in many places are hard to be understood, in the
resolving of such doubts as arise concerning faith, there does often happen
amongst learned men variety and multiplicity of Opinions, and as it were an
endless difficulty. Wherefore in this difficulty of Scriptures, and variety of
Opinions, it is necessary to have recourse to some measure or square, by
application whereof, truth is discerned from falsehood, which truly can be
nothing else in humane things, then the holy Catholic Church, which we suppose
cannot err. Bellar. de verbo Dei. l. 3. c. 1. Rh. Test. p. 232. 672. Val to.
3. d. 1 q. 1. de obiecto fidei p. 112.
All Catholics agreably teach, that the Scriptures in many places are so
obscure, that they need the interpretation of the Church. In which, their
meaning is that this obscurity does not arise through any default of the
doctrine therein by God delivered, but by reason of the Majesty and depth of
the wisdom and knowledge of God taught thereby, and through the weakness of
man's understanding.

Protestant Doctrine.
In this question Luthers absolute decree is this: L. de seru^ Arb. fol. 440.
I say of the whole Scripture, I will have no part thereof to be said to be
obscure. Praef. Aspert. Artic a Leone 10. damnatorum.
The sacred Scripture is of it self most certain, most easy, most plain,
(and) the expounder of it self. D. Fulke is of opinion that, Against Rhem.
Test in 2. Pet. c. 3.
Whatsoever is necessary to be known, is plainly set forth, and easy to be
understood of them that will read diligently, mark attentively, pray heartily,
and Judge humbly. Apol. part. 2. l. 1. c. 19.
That which is questioned (says D. Morton) is, whether all such things as are
necessary to salvation, are so very plain, that the most unlearned belieuers,
by the reading thereof, may be instructed to Piety; and Heretics, though most
learned, may clearly enough be confuted by them. And herein M. Morton holds
the affirmative part. The same is taught by Controu. 1. q 4. c. 3. pa. 341.
etc. 1. p. 135. Et Controu. 2. q. 5. c. 7. p. 513. Perkins Tom. ^. Col. 128.
Whitaker, and sundry other Protestants. So that according to these men, the
Mysteries of the B. Trinity, of the Incarnation of Christ, of the holy
Sacraments, of our Justification etc. are so very plain in the Scriptures,
that the most unlearned belieuers by the reading thereof may be instructed to
Piety, and Heretics though most learned, may clearly enough be confuted by
them. But how false all this is, daily and doleful experiences do most clearly
convince.

SECT. II. That the Scriptures are obscure and hard to be understood, it is
proved by the Scriptures themselves.
THe Prophet David, who was a man most conversant in such Scriptures as were
written in his time, was skillful in the Hebrew, and otherwise humble, not
proud or unbelieving; yet he prays for the true understanding of the Law, or
Scriptures, as for a special gift from God, saying, Ps. 118.18.
Reueile my eyes, and I shall consider the marvelous things of thy Law. Ib.
ver. 26.
Teach me thy Iustifications. Ib ver. 34.
Give me understanding, and I will search thy law, and sundry such like.
Praefat. Assert. Artic a Leone 10. damnatorum.
Protestants ordinarily answering, that the Scripture of it self clear, is
made obscure to the proud and incredulous, through their own blindness and
wicked affections, will nothing help them in this case; for David was a man
humble, and a true belieuer, and yet he prays for the true understanding of
the Law, or Scriptures. Neither will it suffice to answer with Prolog. Cont.
Petr. a Soto.
Brentius, that the Scriptures obscurity is somtymes by reason of the Hebrew
and Greek Phrases, yet the Sense is ever most clear: for besides that this
seems to be spoken contrary to it self, as the words to be obscure, but the
Sense most clear; David doubtless well understood the Hebrew Phrases, and
therefore that could cause no difficulty to him.

The Apostles likewise who had heard so many heavenly lessons, given from the
mouth of Christ, were yet so troubled with this difficulty of Scriptures, as
that our Savior accompanying the two disciples going to Emaus, Luc. 24.27.32.
Beginning from Moses and all the Prophets, he did interpret to them in all
the Scriptures the things that were concerning him etc. And they said one to
the other, Was not our heart burning in us, whiles he spoke in the way, and
opened unto us the Scriptures? Yea immediately before his Ascension, all his
Apostles being assembled together, he said to them Luc. 24.44.45.
These are the words which I spoke to you when I was yet with you, that all
things must needs be fulfilled which are written in the Law of Moses, and the
Prophets, and the Psalms of me. Then he opened their understanding, that they
might understand the Scriptures. Signifying thereby that the Apostles
themselves, could not rightly understand the Scriptures, had not Christ
specially opened or enlightened their understandings, that they might understand
the Scriptures. Here I hope it will not be replied, that the Apostles did not
know the Hebrew Phrases, themselves being Hebrews borne: nor that they were
proud and misbelieuers, being the chosen Apostles of Christ our Savior.

In respect of the Scriptures difficulty, as also of the weakness of us to
conceive; the Apostle Heb. 5.13.14.
makes difference not only of persons, but of doctrine, affirming some to be
unskillful of the word of Justice, and such as are to be fed with milk, or
easy doctrine: others who by custom have their senses exercised to the
discerning of good and evil; and of these the Apostle says, strong meat is
for the perfect. And so elsewhere he says, 1. Cor. 2. v. 7.
we speak wisdom among the perfect, discoursing oftentimes of doctrine hard
to be understood, such as the Apostle terms Heb 9.1^.
inexplicable. So clear it is that some mysteries and doctrines of faith, are
so far from being easy, that they are so hard that they are inexplicable.

S. Philip hearing the Ethyopian Eunuch Act. 8.30.31.
reading Esaias the Prophet, said, Trowest thou that thou understand the
things which thou read? who said, And how can I unless some man show me?
And he desired Philip that he would come up, and sit with him. And the place of
the Scripture which he did read was this; As a sheep to slaughter was he led
etc. And the Eunuch etc. said, I beseech thee of whom does the Prophet speak
this? of himself or of some other? And Philip opening his mouth, and beginning
from this Scripture, Euangelized unto him Jesus. Here the Eunuch acknowledging
his ignorance in the understanding of the Scriptures, entreats the Apostle to
expound the same, which he accordingly performed, not referring him back
again to the Scriprures, or any conference thereof. Now whereas some reply that
this Eunuch, as also the Apostle at those times were carnal, and therefore no
marvel if the Scripture were to them as then obscure: I answer, that all
heretics and Infidels, to whom the Protestants prescribe the sacred Scriptures
for their only certain Rule, direction, and Judge in matters of faith, are
doubtless no less carnal; yea all ignorant persons are in like manner carnal,
at least before their Conversion, and yet in the mean time the foresaid
Scriptures must be their only stay; yea after their Conversion, they are still,
in regard of their capacity and understanding, weak, and carnal, though
otherwise spiritual in respect of their faith, humility, and obedience.

But none more clearly testifyeth the obscurity of Scriptures then Saint Peter,
who expressly writes thus: 2 Pet. 3.15.16.
As also our most dear Brother Paul acccording to the wisdom given him has
written to you. As also in all Epistles speaking in them of these things, in
the which are certain things hard to be understood, which the unlearned, and
unstable deprave, as also the rest of the Scriptures, to their own perdition.
This text is to conuincing, that D. Fulke in his translation thereof, most
directly contrary to the Greek and Latin, does thus fowly corrupt and falsify
the same, Against the Rhem. Test. 2. Pet. 3.16.
Yea almost in every Epistle speaking of such things, among which are many
things to be understood, which they that are hard, unlearned, and unstable,
pervert, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction.
This making of Hardness to agree to the Readers, not to the Scriptures, is so
gross a corruption, as that other Protestant See Bible of Anno 159^.
Translatours rejecting the same, do agree with our vulgar translation heerin.
And though S. Peter does not say, that S. Paul's Epistles are hard, but only
that in them are certain things hard to be understood, which some pretend for
an answer; yet all is one to say, such an Author is hard to be understood, or
he writes of matters hard to be understood: And the rather here, in that S.
Peter alleges this hardness, as a reason why S. Paul's Epistles are depraved by
the unlearned and unstable. And it may justly be further observed, that seeing
S. Peter affirms, those things of S. Paul, as also the other Scriptures to be
depraved by unlearned, and unstable men, thereby he shows the other Scriptures
for the most part to be likewise obscure: for by reason of the difficulty, the
other Scriptures also are depraved, even as those things of Paul's Epistles. All
this notwithstanding, Whitaker blusheth not to affirm, that Peter does not
say, Controu. 1. q. 4. c. 3. pa. 341.
Paul's Epistles to be obscure, no nor that in Paul's Epistles there are certain
things obscure: but this the very sense of Seeing will easily confute, by but
reading the words themselves.

SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers expound the sacred Scriptures agreably
with Catholics, in proof of the Scriptures obscurity, and difficulty.
SAint Ambrose writing upon the former words of King David, Give me
understanding, and I will search thy Law, says, Sermon 10. in Psalm. 11^.
The Prophet who had received the Holy Ghost, after he was anointed King,
anointed a Prophet, writing the hundred and eighteen Psalm, desires
understanding to be given to him, that he may understand the Commandments of
God; and knows, that unless he receive grace from our Lord, he is not able to
understand his Commandments. S. Hierome alleging the self same words
infers thus, Ep. 13 ad Paulin. c. 4.
If so great a Prophet confesses the darkness of his Ignorance, with what a
night of Ignorance do thou think us little ones and almost sucking babes to
be compassed? But this veyle was not only put upon the face of Moses, but also
upon the Evangelists and the Apostles. S. Chrysostom expounding those words of
Christ our Savior, Search Io. 5.39.
the Scriptures, says, Hom. 40. in Joan.
Christ referred the Jews not to the simple and naked reading of the
Scriptures, but to a very diligent search; he said not, Read the Scriptures,
but Search, for divine things do need greatest diligence. In a shadow to those
Ancestors not without cause he spoke, he commanded therefore to dig more deep,
that so we may find those things that lie bid in the bottom. For we do not dig
for any thing that lies in the Superficies, and is apparent, but for that which
as a treasure is hid in the bottom; for he that seeks for such things as
these, unless he use greatest diligence and labor, he shall never find the
things sought for. S. Hierome instanceth this obscurity in diverse books of the
Bible, Ep. 103. ad Paulinum. ca 7.
Who is able (says he) to understand or expound Esaias, Hieremy, Ezechiel, and
Daniel. Ezechiel has a beginning and ending inwrapped in so great obscurities,
as that these parcels with the beginning of Genesis, were not read by the
Hebrews before they were thirty years old etc. James, Peter, John, Judas set
forth seven Epistles, as mystical as succinct, and both short and long: short
in words, but long in Sentences: so that he is a rare man, who is not half
blind in the reading thereof. The Apocalypse of John has as many mysteries as
words. Again, Praef. in Oseam.
If in the expositions of all the Prophets we need the coming of the holy
Ghost, that by his revelation they may be opened, by whose instinct they were
written; And we read in Esaias, that the book was sealed, which the Scribes and
Pharisees, who boasted they knew the letters of the Law, could not read,
because it was sealed, and none could be found but the lion of the Trybe of
Judah, whom God the Father signed, who was able to open the mysteries thereof:
How much more in the explanation of the Prophet Osee is our Lord to be prayed
unto, and with Peter we are to say, Mat. 13.
Expound us this Parable; especially since he testifies the obscurity of this
volume in the end thereof who writ it, Ose 14.10.
Who is wise and shall understand these things? Understanding, and shall know
those things? which we are to understand, not as impossible, but as difficult.
In like sort concerning the Epistle to the Romans, he avouches, that Ep 150.
ad Hedibiam q. 10.
All the Epistle to the Romans needs interpretation, and is wrapped in so
great obscurities, as that to understand the same, we need the help of the holy
Ghost, who by the Apostle did speak these things.

S. Hierome also alleging the former example of the Eunuch mentioned in the
Acts, writes thus, Ep. 103. ad Paulinum.
That in the mean time I may speak of my self, I am neither more holy, nor
more studious then this Eunuch, who came from AEthtopia, that is, from the
uttermost Coasts of the world, to the Temple, left the Court, and became so
great a lover of the Law and divine knowledge, that even in his Chariot he read
the Scriptures: And yet having the Bible, thinking of the words of our Lord,
with tongue and lips speaking thereof, yet he knew not him, whom unknown he
worshipped in the Book: Philip came and showed to him Jesus, who shut up lay
hid in the letter. O wonderful virtue of the Teacher! The same hour the
Eunuch belieueth, is baptized, and is made faithful and holy, and of a
scholar becomes a Master etc. these things I have briefly touched etc. that
thou should understand, that in the sacred Scriptures, thou art not able to
enter the narrow path without a guide and a teacher. And then showing that
neither Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Philosophers, Geometricians, Logicians,
Musicians, Astronomers, Astrologers, Physicians, no nor Husband men,
Carpenters, Smithes etc. can come to be that which they desire, without a
teacher etc. he adds, as also our times do plainly confirm, that it is only
the Art of Scriptures, which all do challenge to themselves etc. This the
chatling old wife, this the foolish old man, this the prattling Sophister, this
all presume, tear, and teach, before they learn.

S. Austine endeavoring to expound these words of S. Paul, Cor. 3 12.
If any man build upon this foundation, gould, silver, precious stones etc.
promises that De fide and operibus. c. 15.
it is meet diligently to attend how that sentence of Paul the Apostle is to be
taken, being plainly difficult to be understood. Yea he further teaches, that
this Sentence is to be accounted amongst those whereof Peter affirms, that in
the writings (of Paul) there are certain things hard to be understood. And
coming to set down his own opinion he says Ib. c. 16.
Here peradventure it will be expected of me, what I think of this Sentence of
Paul the Apostle, and how I think it is to be understood? Here I confess I
had rather hear others more understanding, and more learned etc. So clearly
does S. Austine acknowledge the difficulty of Scriptures, exemplifying the same
particularly in S. Paul's writings, which he takes to be of those which S.
Peter meant, when he affirmed, that there were certain things hard to be
understood in the Epistles of Paul. And thus we see that the ancient Fathers
do clearly expound the Scriptures agreably with Catholics, in proof of their
obscurity and difficulty.

SECT. IV. That Protestants expound the Sacred Scriptures agreably with
Catholics in proof of the Scriptures obscurity: And that sundry Protestants
do teach and defend the same Doctrine.
CHemnitius producing the former example of the Eunuch, teaches that in
respect Exam. part. 1 f. 63.
of many hard questions, God would have to remain in his Church, to avoid all
occasion of error, the gift of interpretatation, which is not common to all,
no more then is the gift of healing* and miracles. And this gift God would
not have contemned or rejected, but reverently used as an Instrument and help,
to find out the true and sound sense of Scriptures, even as the Eunuch said,
How can I understand without a Guide?

The Translatours of the English Bible of Anno 1578. in their marginall notes,
of the place before alleged from S. Peter (2. Pet. 3.16.) do affirm that; As
no man condemns the brightness of the sun, because his eye is not able to
sustain the cleernes thereof; So the hardness which we cannot sometime compass,
or perfectly understand in the Scriptures, ought not to take from us the use of
the Scriptures.

Aretius affirms that Loc. com. loc. 53 f. 164.
Many things remain obscure even to the Godly etc. Who did ever sufficiently
express the matter of the Trinity, of the Incarnation of the son of God etc.
I pass over in silence the different understandings of the places of the
Gospel, wherein thou may find among the Interpreters, almost so many
opinions, as there be Interpreters. And immediately after, he alleges the
foresaid saying of S. Peter, to prove the obscurity of S. Paul's Epistles;
affirming generally of the Scriptures, that they contain Ibid. fol. 106.
obscurity, as well in the matter as in the phrase. And that the veyle (or
darkness) of the letter, is taken away by fit Interpreters. And that those being
wanting, the Church is brought into darkness. The like whereof is also taught by
De sacra. Script. p. 46.
D. Whitaker. D. Fulke not only produces several of the forealledged textes
agreably to this purpose, but also declares his own opinion to be the same,
saying: Against Rhem. Test. in 2. Pet. 3. p. 821.
As concerning the Argument and matter of the Scriptures, we confess that for
the most and chiefest matters, it is not only hard, but impossible to be
understood of the natural man etc. Again, Hierome to Paulinus notes certain
difficult places in the Prophets; and who will mislike him that he desired to
learn of Didimus? etc. And David prayed for understanding. The Eunuch required
an Interpreter. And we also affirm that prayer is necessary for all men, and
an Interpreter requisite for the unlearned, that will come to the right
understanding of the Scripture etc. Yea we deny not but the Scriptures are in
some places very hard. And Ib. p. 810.
we plainly protest, that whosoever despises the ordinary Ministry of the
word, which God has established in his Church, for the direction of us in
truth and love, shall never attain to true knowledge, no, though he were
otherwise never so well learned, much less if he be ignorant and unlearned.

Cartwright the Puritan avouches, that In Whiteg. Def. p. 784.
Unless the Lord work miraculously and extraordinarily, the bare reading of the
Scriptures without the preaching cannot deliver so much as one poor sheep from
destruction. But would any man think it credible, that so learned a man as D.
Martin Luther, should so ingenuously confess his own ignorance in the
understanding of any one Book of Scripture? observe but his words: I would
Pref in Psalmos.
not have that to be presumed by any of me, which none yet of the most holy and
most learned could perform, to wit, to understand and teach the true sense of
the Psalter, in all things. It is enough to have understood some, and those in
part, the holy Ghost has reserved many things to himself, that he might
always have us his scholars. And I know it to be a point of most impudent
rashness of him that dare profess, that he understands anyone book of
Scripture, in all parts. De Conci^ij^. p. 12.
Above twenty years ago I was compelled to contemn the Commentaries of the
Fathers, when I was to read the Scriptures in the schools, and with great
sweat (or pains) to seek the true and proper meaning.

The Translatour of the English Bible of Anno 1600. avouches, that it is,
Preface.
A very hard thing to understand the holy Scriptures, and that diverse errors,
sects, and heresies grow daily, for lack of the true knowledge thereof. The
Centurists doubt not to affirm that, Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. col. 52.
The very Apostles thought that the Scriptures cannot be understood, without
the holy Ghost, and an Interpreter. Calvin speaking of the Scripture says,
Instit. l 3. c. 2. 4. See l 4. c. 17.. 10.
Daily reading, we fall into many obscure places, which do argue us of
Ignorance. But with this bridle God keeps us in humility, assigning to every
one a measure of faith, that even the best Doctor may be ready to learn. So
clearly do the learned Protestants expound the sacred Scriptures, in proof
of the Scriptures obscurity, and consequently agreably with Catholics defend
the same Doctrine.

SECT. V. That the Scriptures are obscure, it is further proved by sundry
reasons.
IN Scriptures we may consider, either the things there spoken of, or the
manner wherewith they are spoken, both which are obscure: for the matter therein
contained, it is concerning the blessed Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ, the
Sacraments, the hidden working of God in the soul of man, sundry Prophecyes
not to be accomplished so many hundred years after their first prediction, and
other the like. All which being high Mysteries, must of necessity be difficult.

Now the manner wherewith they are set down is no less obscure, for first many
things seem to be contrary, Exodus 20.5.
as, I am the Lord thy God etc. visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the
Children. And the Ezech. 18.20.
Soul that shall sin, the same shall dye: the son shall not bear the
Iniquity of the Father. S. Matthew and S. Luke report, Mat. 10.10. Luc. 9.3.
that our Savior sending his Apostles to preach, forbad them to take a Rod.
But S. Mark records that, Mark. 6.8.
he commanded them that they should take nothing for the way, but a Rod only.
S. Paul affirms that, Heb. 9.4.
In the Arc of the Testament, there was a goulden pot having Manna, and the
Rod of Aaron that had blossomed, and the Tables of the Testament. And yet in
the third Book of kings, and elsewhere it is said, C. 8 9.2. Paralip. 5.10.
In the Arc there was nothing but two Tables of stone. Again in the Acts of
the Apostles it is said, C. 9 7.
The men that went in company with (Paul) stood amazed, hearing the voice, but
seeing no man. And yet in the same Acts, S. Paul says, C. 22.10.
They that went with me, saw the light indeed, but the voice they heard not of
him that spoke with me. So likewise in S. Luke, Christ said to Peter, C. 22.34.
The Cock shall not crow to day till thou deny thrice that thou know me.
And yet S. Mark relates that, C. 14.68.72.
After the first denial the Cock crew, and that after another denial,
immediately the Cock crew again, all which, with many See Mar. 15.25. and Io.
19.44. Also Luc. 3.35.36. and Genesis 11 12. See also Hook. l. 5. sec. 19. p. 30.
other such like, are seeming Contrarieties. Which must needs argue greatest
difficulty for their right understanding, seeing, that we are bound to believe,
that they are not truly contrary, but all true in themselves.

In like sort there are many speeches so obscure and doubtful, as that the
learned Interpreters do vary and are troubled therewith. When the Jews said,
Io. 8.25.
Who art thou? Jesus said to them: The beginning who also speak to you: here
Beginning in Latin (Principium) is of the newter gender, and the Relative which
(qui) of the Masculine: And which is more, in Greek (...), Beginning, is the
Accusative case, both which according to our ordinary conceit, would seem a
most manifest incongruity.

There are also in the sacred Scriptures obscure figures and parables almost
innumerable. And if we be to examine and determine Controversies by the
Originalls, we shall find the Ambiguity, of the Hebrew especially, most
intricate, one and the same word or Phrase being oftentimes indifferent to
receive diverse significations, whereof great incertainty grows among the
learned, and to the ignorant in tongues, a difficulty invincible.

And if (as Luther affirms) Praef. assert. Artic. a Leone damnatorum.
the Scriptures be more clear then the Commentaries of all the Fathers, and as
other Prot. make so easy, that the vulgar people may understand them by their
own reading, to what end then the Fathers not only heertofore, but even
Protestants now continually do write so many Commentaries in explanation
thereof? But chiefly seeing Prot. decyde all Controversies only by Scripture,
how arise so daily and deadly dissentions among themselves, concerning things
taught and set down in the Scriptures, if the Scriptures be so easy as is
pretended?

To these demands two things are usually answered; first, that though the
Scripture be most clear, yet it is dark to the proud and unbelieving, by
reason of their blindness, and wicked affection. Secondly, that though in some
places it be obscure, yet the selfsame thing is clearly set down in other
places. But by the first it follows, that Luther himself (who gives these
reasons) is a Proud man and Infidel, it being evident, and for such even by
Prot. acknowledged, that he taught and maintained sundry gross errors, and in
all for his defense pretending Scriptures. And by the like reason the same
crimes of Pride and Infidelity incur all Lutherans, by the judgment of
Caluinists, and all Caluinists by the judgment of Lutherans; and so the like
may be affirmed of our Protestants and Puri^ans, every one of these conde^ning
the other of false doctrine in sundry points, and yet all building their
opinions upon the Scriptures.

And against the second I urge first, that sundry obscure places, have not
coherence with any other place; as the greatest part of the Apocalypse, and the
beginning and end of the Prophet Ezechiel. Secondly though it were true, yet a
true conference of places amongst themselves, is a thing of it self very
difficult; for that place which a Caluinist would think to be clear, and
therefore other places concerning the same matter to be expounded thereby; a
Lutheran will avouch to be obscure, and other places to be more plain. Besides
this, it is also very difficult always truly to discern whether the places so
conferred do speak of one and the same thing, seeing the same word, and almost
the same phraze is used in Scriptures to signify diverse things, as the
Scripture Baptism is sometimes used for the Sacrament of Baptism, othertimes
for Penance or Martyrdom. See Mar. 1.4.1. Cor. 15.29. and Mar. 10.38. Luc.
12.50.
it self testifyeth, and S. Austine L. 2. de Doctr. Christi. c. 24 25. 26.
observes. But because this conference of Scripture is accounted by
Protestants so auaylable for the making of Scriptures easy to be understood,
and to be our Judge of Controversies; I will therefore treat thereof more largely
in this Section following.

SECT. VI. That the Conference of one place of Scripture with another, does
neither make the Scriptures to be our Judge of all Controversies, nor always
easy to be understood.
SEeing Protestants generally teach, that Reinolds in his Conference. pa. 68.
It is not the show, but the sense of the words that must decyde Controversies:
And seeing as D. Whitaker avouches, De sacra Script. p. 521.
The Scripture has no lively voice which we may hear we must use certain
means whereby we may search out what is the true sense and meaning of the
Scriptures. And these means, as they Rein in his Conf. p. 83 84. 9^. 99
Whitak. de sacra Scrip. p. 511. 522 523.
prescribe, are our reading of the Scriptures, our Conference of places, our
waighing of the Circumstances of the text, our skill in the tongues, our
diligence, our Prayer and such like. Of which means D. Reynolds doubted not to
auerre, that, Conference. pa 99.
They are still effectual, if men pray as they should, and search as they
ought in the spirit of faith and modesty. And D. Fulke avouches that, Against
Purgat. p. 434.
Who so observes this search shall come to the knowledge of the truth most
certainly.

I will now make manifest the vanity and insufficiency of this pretended course
of trial, and that for sundry respects: for first if in the observation of the
foresaid means, they require such a conference and diligence as is but
imaginary, and cannot be performed; then they prescribe vainly and to no
purpose: And if they intend but such a diligent observation as is possible and
within our power; then I allege them the example (to omit others) of D. Martin
Luther, whom Prot. acknowledge to be a man Apolog. Anglic part. 4. c. 4. q. 2.
sent of God to lighten the world, Act. Mon. p. 416.
the Elias, Conductour, and Chariot of Israel, whose calling they think Aret.
loc. com. loc. 63 p. 198. Daneus Isagog. part. 4 l. 2. p. 36. Lascius de Rus.
Religione p. 93.
extraordinary, and his coming and speaking specially Anti-Christus p. 12. 13.
80. Co^radus Schlusselb. in Catol. haeret, p. 314. 316.
foreshewed in the Scriptures, and since foretold by Act. Mon. p. 399. and see
Fox in Apoe. p. 324.
sundry Prophecyes (of later times) which went upon the time of Martin Luther:
yea they account him a Sleidan. l 16. and after the Eng. Transl. fol. 222.
Prophet, and that sundry of his Prophecies proved true: And himself
undertook that he was so assured and certain of the truth of his doctrine, as
he feared not to say; Aduersus falso non^matum Ecclesiasticum statum.
I would have you know, that hereafter I will not honor you so much, that I
will either suffer you, or the Angels from heaven to judge of my doctrine etc.
Neither will I have my doctrine judged by any, and therefore not of the very
Angels: for seeing I am certain thereof, I will thereby be Judge both of you
and the Angels. This is the pure spirit of a new Ghospeller.

Now this so rare a man, being skillfull Act. Mon p. 403.
in the Gerecke and Hebrew did not only confer the Scriptures most
diligently, even with a desire (as himself confesses) to alter his Judgment
against the Real Presence, Ep. ad Argentinens. And in the Treatise against the
Defense of the Censure p. 99. 100.
Because (says he) I did well perceive that I might very greatly hurt thereby
the Papacy (so direct and holy was his intention:) and, If Carolostadius or any
man else could have persuaded (him) that there had been nothing in the Sacrament
but Bread and Wine, he should have bound him to him by a great good turn. But
also he had personal Coopers Chronicle fol. 290. Sleydan l. 6. f. 83.
Communication therein with Oecolampadius and Swinglius, Act. Mon p. 403.
he heard and observed their conference and Collections from the Scriptures:
and yet all this notwithstanding still persisted in his former opinion See
Bridges in his defense of the Govern. page 559. Perkins in his 4. Treatises
Tract. How to apply Gods word. number. 10.
of the Real Presence: Ep. ad Argentinens. And in the Treatise against the
Defense of the Censure p. 99. 100.
the which he thought to be so clear a truth, that mentioning his former
desire to change his Judgment therein; he yet concludes and says, Ep. ad
Argentinens. and the Treatise against the Defense of the Censure. p. 100.
But I do see my self captive, no way being left to escape; for the Text of
the Gospel is too plain etc. And not content with this, he proceeds so
far, as to Sleydan. l. 16. f. 215. after the Eng. Translat.
set forth a book against Swinglius, wherein he recites and Defens. verborum
Coerae in the 7. Tome of Luthers works.
rejects the arguments and conferences of Scripture framed by Swinglius and
Oecolampadius against the Real Presence.

Now upon these premises I do infer, that for so much as Luther observed the
foresaid prescribed means of conferring the Scriptures, and that with all
diligence he could, and yet the same notwithstanding, still believed and taught
(in other Protestants Judgments) a doctrine most erroneous, as also the like
did his followers Exam. part. 2. 92 94. 100.
Chemnitius, Iacobus In Confut. Disput. Grinaei de ^oena Domini.
Andreas, and Act. disp. de 8 ^oena pub^ice in Academia Heidelberg. Anno 1584.
and see Haffenreff loc. Theol. l. 3. loc. 7. de Sacram. p. 371.
others of the learned Protestants; that therefore the Conference of
Scriptures, though observed and used with all diligence we can, is yet
nevertheless uncertain, and unavoidable to resolve us privately, much more to
end and determine our public Controversies.

Secondly, I argue from the nature of the thing it self, that seeing our
foresaid skill in tongues, our conference of places, and other prescribed
means, are but actions on our behalf humane, and such wherein, as in our
other humane endeauours, every man without extraordinary Privilege from God,
is (all his prayer, learning, and possible diligence not withstanding) subject
to error, oversight, and man's infirmity, as both reason and Experience teach,
that therefore the same can be no certain and infallible Course of Judgment,
whereby to determine Controversies. A truth so certain, that Lubbertus speaking
of their own learned ministers and Interpreters says, De principijs
Christian. dogm. p. 563.
As we have showed that all these may err in expounding, so also do we
affirm, that they may err in Judging. Yea says Zanchius, De sacra Script.
page 411. 412.
with Judgment let us hear them, knowing that they are men, and that they
could, and may err. And as it were despairing to prescribe any Rule for
means, he iumpeth from them to the point of Elections, so restrayning the
understanding of Scriptures, as an immediate and special gift peculiar only
to the Elect, Ib. page 375.
chiefly by reason of this obscurity (says he) we can give no rule for the
understanding of Scriptures, because it is in no man's power, that he be Elect.
And, It is only granted to the Elect, that they may understand the sacred
Scriptures truly, clearly, properly, and soundly.

D. Whitaker, who prescribed the foresaid means, is enforced yet to give
sentence against them, and therein against himself, saying, De Ecclesia
Controu. 2. q. 4. p. 221.
Such as the means are, such of necessity must the Interpretation be: but the
means of Interpreting are obscure, uncertain, doubtful, and ambiguous,
therefore it cannot be, but that the Interpretation also must be uncertain; If
uncertain, then may it also be false etc. So that all diligence in Conferring
is insufficient to assure us infallibly of the true sense of the Scriptures.

Thirdly such as are Ignorant in the tongues, wherein Scripture was first
written, as also such as cannot read at all, cannot have the foresaid.
Conference for their Infallible Judge, seeing whether the Translatours have
erred, either upon Ignorance or malice, or both, they are not able to discern;
and consequently whether that which they read or hear, be altogether true
Scripture, or rather replenished with manifold errors, and so no certain
Judge, they remain most uncertain. According to which D. Whitaker is enforced
to confess, that, De sacra Script. page 523.
The Ignorance of the Hebrew and Greek tongues, has brought forth many
Errors: truly those that know them not, do err often and unavoidably. And
therefore for the instruction of these he is enforced to fly to their immediate
knowledge from the holy Ghost, saying, Ib. page 127.
The Ignorant in tongues, although they cannot Judge of all places whether they
be truly translated, yet they acknowledge and allow the Doctrine being
instructed by the holy Ghost. And as for those others, Ib. p. 588.
Who know not letters, and cannot read, he grants that, They retain wholesome
says by the preaching of their Pastors. So that to all such as do not
understand the Hebrew, and the Greek, or that cannot read at all, the foresaid
Conference of Scripture can be no immediate and certain course of Judgment.

Fourthly, this foresaid Conference is only a Colorable refuge of words,
whereby to make, not the Scripture our Judge, but ourselves Judge of the
Scripture: for to Confer and apply the Scriptures, and thereby to determine
the right sense, is in us an act of our understanding, even as it is the like
to confer our temporal laws: wherefore if the Scripture only without our
conference thereof, do not determine to us the true meaning of it self, then is
it no more our Judge in Matters of faith, then the law is in temporal causes:
And then further, if every one of us be to undertake this Conference for
himself, without relying upon the Conference* and Judgment of any Interpreter,
further then we our selves can discern the same to be true by our Conference,
(as many Protestants Zanchius de sacra Script. p. 412. Whitak. de sacra Script.
page 529 Carthwr. in Whiteg. def. page 511. and Whitguift 16. Bilson in his
difference etc. part 2. p. 353. Willet Synops. Controu. 1. q 2 p. 127.
teach) it thereof necessarily follows, that every man must judge and
determine the sense of the Scriptures for himself, which is all one as to make
himself his own judge. A clear Example hereof Protestants have in their
Lutheran and Puritan Brethren, of whom they must needs confess, that
concerning such Errors as they lay to their charge, they make themselves Judges
of the Scripture, and not the Scripture their Judge.

Neither does it suffice to answer, that they defend not an erroneous, but a
sincere Conference: for the rightful conference makes the Scripture no more
Judge, then does the right conference of the laws, make the Law to be our
Judge. And as for the different kinds of erroneous and rightful Conference,
they do equally and alike admit our Judgment and act of conferring, only the
nature of this conference is severally altered, according to the sincerity or
error thereof. So that as Protestants must needs confess of their foresaid
Brethren, that they in their said Erroneous conference make not the Scripture
their Judge, but themselves Judges, though erroneous Judges of the Scriptures
meaning: In like manner in their own Conference, they make themselves (though
in their opinion rightly Judges, yet) Judges and determiners thereof. Whereupon
it follows, that Protestants whether learned or unlearned, conferring the
Scriptures either sincerely or erroneously, do nevertheless in the said
Conferences make themselves Judges of the Scripture, and not the Scripture
their Judge.

This sequel is so clear, that sundry Prot. do in plain terms acknowledge
the same. Lubbertus teaches, De Princip. Christian. dogm. l. 23. p. 563.
All the faithful are Judges of interpretations and doctrines. And Ibid. p.
573.
that God has given to every faithful person, not only the Spirit of
understanding but also of discerning false doctrine from true. D. Bilson
expressly defends, that, True difference etc. part. 2. p. 353.
The people must be discerners and Judges of that which is taught. Brentius
avouches most fully that, In Prologom. Cont. Sotum and in Confess Wittemberg
c. de sacra Script.
It appertains to every private man to judge of doctrine concerning Religion,
and to discern true doctrine from false. So that now any Cobbler may be a
competent Judge of the true sense of the Scriptures, or of any doctrine
preached by his Pastor.

But what seriously does ensue of all this, but that every heretic and
ignorant fellow, may at his pleasure, exe^pt himself from all authority of
Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, Pastors, and the Church it self, making his
own fancy and conceypt, the supremest Judge of all. Whereby amongst other
absurdities, it ever happens, that as yet could never be established any
agreement in Religion amongst the Protestant faction: but rather to the
contrary, the schism and division so long continued between Lutherans,
Swinglians, Caluinists, Anabaptists, Brownists, Puritanes etc. heerby to be
most strongly vphoulden and maintained, and that which is most dangerous,
without all hope and probability of any future unity and consent. Wherefore I
may conclude, that our Modern Protestants creating for their Judge their our
Conference of Scripture, do thereby only endeavor, as S. Austine affirms of
all heretics, that L 32. conc. Faust c. 19.
Every man's mind may be his own guide, and, that he be not subject to the
authority of Scriptures, but that, he may make subject the authority of
Scriptures to himself.

Add only heerunto what M. Hooker thinks of this cyting and co^ferring of
Scriptures: Eccl pol. l. 2. Sect. 7. fol. 113.
Such are readiest (says he) to cite for one thing five hundred sentences of
holy Scripture what warrant have they, that any one of them does mean the
thing, for which it is alleged? Is not their surest ground most commonly,
either some probable conjecture of their own, or the Judgment of others,
taking those Scriptures as they do? which notwithstanding to mean otherwise
then they take them, it is not still altogether impossible. So that now and
then they ground themselves on humane authority, even when they most pretend
divine. So fallible still is this Conference of Scriptures.

But I will conclude with D. Fields Judgment in this Case. L. 4. c. 19.
We confess (says he) that neither conference of places, nor consideration of
things precedent and subsequent, nor looking into the original; are of any
force, unless we find the thing which we conceive to be understood and meant, in
the places interpreted, to be consonant to the Rule of faith. And this Rule of
faith (he teaches) must be tried, Ibid.
either by the general practice of the Church, the renowned of all ages, or
the Pastors of an apostolical Church. So unable is this pretended Conference
to make a competent Judge.

I must needs yet observe how aduenturous Protestants are for the maintaining
the honor of their supreme Judge the Conference of Scriptures. For whereas it
is said, that S. Paul Act. 9.20.21.22.
Entering into the Synagogue, he preached Jesus etc. and all that heard, were
astonyed etc. But Saul waxed mighty much more, and confounded the Jews that
dwelt at Damascus, affirming that this is Christ, Protestants translate those
last words thus; See the English Church Bible of Anno 1^77.
Saul confounded them, proving (by conferring one Scripture with another) that
this is very Christ. Here for affirming, they say, proving, but this not
satisfying enough, they add to the text it self these words, By conferring one
Scripture with another, which words are not to be found in any Original. And
though some other Bibles have left out this impious addition in the Text, yet
in their marginall The Engl. great Bible of 1578.
notes they are pleased to say, Proving by the conference of the Scriptures:
whereas in the place cited, there is not the least mention or intimation of any
Scriptures; but directly otherwise it is said, that he preached in the
Synagogues, and confounded the Jews. If a Catholic should add but one word
to the text, presently all the woes threatened in Scripture against such Adders,
would be thundered against him.

SECT. VII. An Examination of such Objections as are usually urged by
Protestants against the Scriptures obscurity.
MOst Brentius in Prolegom. Cont. Petr. Sotum.
Protestant writers object those words in Deutronomy, C. 30.11.12.14.
This Commandment that I command thee this day, is not above thee, nor so far
of, situated in heaven, that thou may say, which of us is able to ascend
unto heaven to bring it to us, that we may hear and fulfill it in the work?
etc. But the word is very near thee in thy mouth and in thy heart to do it.
Answer. 1. Whereas the question is, whether the Scriptures be easy to be
understood, here is not any mention made of the Scriptures at all. 2. The words
objected do only prove, and that directly against Protestants, who teach that
the Commandments are impossible to be kept, that indeed the Commandments may
be easily performed. And in this sense, is this place understood by Ancient
Tertul. l. 4. cont. Marcion. Orig. Ambros. and Chrysostom. in. c. 10. ad R^m.
Aug. l. de Perfectione Iustitiae Resp. penult.
Fathers. 3. It may be understood with Abulensis in hunc locum.
others of the facility in knowing, not the Scriptures, which as then
peradventure were none, but the Precepts only of the Decalogue, which being
natural, are easily understood, and especially by those Jews, who had heard
Moses explicate the same: so that according to either sense, the Objection is
impertinent.

Secondly are objected these words of K. David; Ps. 118.105.
Thy word is a lamp to my feet; and a light to my paths. And those of S.
Peter, 2. Pet. 1.19.
And we have the prophetical word more sure: which you do well attending unto,
as to a candle shyning in a darkeplace etc. Answer. 1. Neither of these places
do speak of all the Scriptures, and therefore they cannot conclude that all
the Scriptures are easy. Secondly though they were spoken of all the
Scriptures, yet the Scriptures may be well called a lamp, light, or Candle,
not that they be all easy to be understood, but because being once rightly
understood, they do illustrate the understanding, and direct it in the working
of good. And so K. David in the place objected, intended to show, that greater
was the knowledge which was gotten by the word of God reueiled, then by his
Creatures, and therefore he compares the word of God to a lamp, which more
avails us for expelling the darkness of the night, then the light of all the
stars. Thirdly though the Scriptures be as a lantern of themselves, yet we
must consider withal how they do, as the Propet says, enlighten our eyes: for
what if a Candle be put under a Bushel? truly it will as then shine and burn,
but it will not give light to the standers by, except the bushel be removed.
Even so, if the light of holy Scripture, shall be placed upon the authority of
Gods Church, it will illuminate the whole house, but if it be comprehended
within the limits of every private man's wit and industry, as under a bushel,
though it remain in it self euercleere, yet to the Readers it shall be as
extinguished.

Thirdly, it is urged, that in the Prophet Isay it is said, that, Isa. 29.11.12.
The book was sealed: And in the Apocalypse we read that, C. 5.8.9.
The Lamb opened the book, therefore though in the old Testament the book of
Scripture was sealed or obscute, yet now in the new, it is opened and easy. In
sign whereof at the Death of Christ, Mat. 27.51.
The veyle of the Temple was rent in two pieces. Answer. 1. The words of Isay
are, The vision of all shall be unto you as the words of a book sealed; which
when they shall give to him that knows letters, they shall say, Read this:
and he shall answer, I cannot, for it is sealed. And the book shallbe given
to one that knows no letters etc. And he shall Answer, I know not letters.
Here the words do only import, that the vision should be obscure, as a book
sealed, which neither the learned nor unlearned could understand: whereas the
Scriptures of the old Testament were understood and expounded, by Moses,
Esdras, the Priests, and the Prophets. Secondly the difference of the old
Testament from the new, consists in this, that the mysteries of Christ were
not then understood, and therefore the Book was said to be sealed, as well to
the learned as unlearned, whereas now in the new, Christ having fulfilled the
figures and Prophecies, though many do not understand the Sentences of
Scripture, yet young Children and ignorant women, do know the mysteries of our
Redemption. And that in regard of the Sentences of Scripture, the book is
still sealed, even now during the time of the new Testament, learned Origin
testifyeth in these words: Hom. 12. in Exodus
Let us see if not only when Moses is read, but also when Paul is read, the
veyle be put over our hearts. And it is clear, that if we hear negligently, if
we do not add study to learning and understanding; not only the Scriptures of
the Law and Prophets, but of the Apostles and Ghospells are covered to us with
a great veyle etc. From whence it appears that we are not only to study for
the learning of the Sacred Scriptures, but we are also to pray to our Lord, and
day and night to entreat, that the Lamb will come from the Tribe of Judah, and
taking the sealed book, will vouchsafe to open it: for he it is who opening
the Scriptures, inflameth the hearts of the Disciples, in so much that they
say, 24 32.
Was not our heart burning within us, when he opened unto us the Scriptures?
With Origin agrees S. Hierome, teaching that, Ep. 13. ad Paulin. de iustitit.
Monach. c. ^
This veyle is not only put upon the face of Moses (or the old Testament) but
also upon the Evangelists and Apostles. Our Savior spoke to the people in
Parables, and witnessing that it was mystical which he spoke, he said, He that
has ears to hear, let him hear. Unless all things which are written be
opened by him, who has the key of David, Apoc. 3.7.
who opens, and no man shuts, who shuts, and no man opens, they
cannot be opened by any other: So clear it is, that even now during the time of
the new Testament, the Scriptures remain obscure, without some special light
and help from Christ, and our own pains, study and prayer.

Fourthly, some object these words of S. Paul: 2. Cor. 4.3.4.
And if our Gospel he also hid, in them that perish it is hid, in whom the
God of this world has blinded the mynds of the Infidels, that the illumination
of the Gospel of the Glory of Christ* etc. might not shine to them: Wherefore
to the faithful the Scriptures are easy. Answ. 1. The Apostle speaks not
here of the understanding of the Scriptures, neither is there any mention made
of Scriptures, but of the knowledge and faith in Christ, which the Apostles
preached. And so in the very next words following S. Paul says; For we preach
not our selves, but Jesus Christ our Lord: Now no man doubted, but that the
Apostles preaching was easy to be understood. Secondly in the former Chapter S.
Paul declares this to be the difference between the Old and New Testament,
that in the Old (as I noted before) men did not see the mysteries of Christ
(which thing the 2. Cor. 3.12.
veil of Moses, wherewith he covered his face when he spoke to the people,
signified) whereas in the new, they are generally known. Now because some might
say, If this be so, wherefore after the preaching of the Gospel, so many as
yet do not believe, nor see (especially the Jews) any thing but shadows and
figures? Therefore the Apostle annexeth, the Gospel to be hid to some, because
the Devil has blinded their understandings by wicked affections; to whom our
Savior also says, Io^ 5.44.
How can you believe that receive glory one* of another? Thirdly this place is
so insufficient to prove the Scriptures to be easy, as that the Protestant
Aretius answers the same and says, Loc. Com. l. 53. f. 164.
But many things remain obscure, even to the Godly etc. who did ever
sufficiently express the matter of the Trinity etc. I pass over in silence
the different understandings of the places of the Gospel, wherein thou may
find among the Interpreters, almost so many opinions as there be Interpreters.
So confessed is it, that not only during the time of the old Testament, but
even now in the new, the Scriptures are difficult to be rightly understood.

CHAP. IIII. The true State of the Question concerning the Interpretation of
Scriptures, and decyding Controversies by the Private Spirit of every
particular Man.
Whether the Sacred Scriptures are made easy to be vnderderstood, or our Judge
of all Controversies, by the Spirit reueyling to every Private man the true
sense and determination thereof. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
CONCERNING the Orat. Joan* de Ragusio.
certainty and security of things to be believed, it is taught in the Council
of Basil, that the same is not had by private Inspiration, because seeing such
Inspiration is hidden and supernatural, it ought to be manifested by some
supernatural signs or miracles, even at the Doctrine of the Apostles was
confirmed by signs and miracles. If therefore the doctrine of our adversaries
be had by inspiration, let them show the signs and miracles, and we will
believe them; which they will never do, seeing the chief Verity, to whom it
belongs to work miracles, cannot give testimony to a lie or falsehood. An the
like is taught by the Council of Sens in these words; Decret. 4.
He that follows the Judgment of his own Spirit, the steps of the
Orthodoxall Fathers contemned, as a Schismaticke, and rayser and favorer of
all heresies let him be restrained from so great temerity. In the second Nicene
Council it is taught, that, Act. 6.
Seeing some do endeavor to pervert true doctrines, according to that which
seems to them, let no man marvel if they use the words of Scripture: for
all Arch-hereticks do take occasion of their error from Scr pture divinely
inspired. What are truly taught by the holy Ghost, malignant men do adulterate
with their own senses: And this the chief trumpet of the Apostles foretold,
to wit Peter, saying, 2. Pet. 3.
which the unlearned and unstable pervert according to their desires. For it is
proper to heretics according to their desires, to pervert the knowledge of
divine and true doctrine. And the like insufficiency of the Private spirit, for
the deciding of Controversies, is Bellar. de verbo Dei, l. l. 3. c. 3 Rhem.
Test. p. 684.
generally taught by all Catholics.

Protestant Doctrine.
I have See before. c. 1. sec. 1.
formerly showed that Protestants do finally make the Private spirit the Judge
of their Controversies. So Whitaker De sacra script. p 127. Lub. de Princip. p.
573. Brent. Prolegom. cont. Petrum Sot. Whit. the way to the Church. p. ^. 17.
Rogers Def. of the Art. art. 10. p. 103.
confessed, that the ignorant in tongues, acknowledge and allow the Doctrine
being instructed by the holy Ghost. And the like is to be seen in Lubbertus,
Brentius, D. White, and M. Rogers.

Protestants agree with ancient Heretics.
S. Epiphanius Haer. 21.
reports, that Simon Magus pretended for his errors the assistance of the
holy Ghost. Only this holy Ghost he believed to be his Concubine Helena: even
as Protestants make their Private fancies to be their private spirit. S. Austine
observed that. Tract. 45. in Joan.
There are innumerable who do not only boast that they are videntes or
Prophets, but will seem to be illuminated, or enlightened by Christ, but are
heretics. And Ep. 222.
all Heretics who receive the authority of the Scriptures, persuade
themselves they follow them, whereas they rather follow their own errors. And
^ug de Genesis ad lit. l. 1. c. 18.
they contend not for the true meaning of Scriptures, but for their own
opinions, making that which is the opinion of their own, to be the meaning of
Scripture. Yea, Heresies have no other origene then this; that every Heretic
prefers his own opinion, drawn from his own proper Spirit, before the Common
opinion of the Church.

Protestant Errors.
The Protestant See before Chap. 1. sec. 1.
Libertines and Swenckfeldians do reject the written word, and rely wholly upon
the internal spirit: and they differ from other Protestants in this, that
though both of them rely upon the spirit, as the ground of their faith, yet
these cast away Scripture, and rely only upon the spirit: whereas ordinary
Protestants admit Scripture, but for the sense thereof, they subject it to their
spirit, which is no less pernicious then the other.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that the said Scriptures are not made
easy to be understood, or our Judge of all Controversies, by the Spirit
revealing to every Private man, the true sense and determination thereof.
Against this illusion and Private fancy challenged by all Sectmaisters,
Lutherans, Caluinists, Swinglians, Anabaptists, Puritanes etc. we are specially
forewarned by the sacred Scriptures saying; Ezech. 23.2.3.4.6.9.
Thou shall say to them that prophecy of their own heart etc. Woe to the
foolish Prophets, which follow their own Spirit, and see nothing etc. they see
vain things, and they divine lies, saying: Our Lord says, whereas our Lord
sent them not. Hier. 23.16.
Hear not the words of the Prophets that prophecy unto you, and deceive you,
they speak the vision of their own heart, not from the mouth of the Lord.
Hier. 14.14.
The Prophets prophecy falsely in my name: I sent them not, and I commanded them
not, neither have I spoken unto them: lying vision and deceyptfull divination,
guilefulnes and seduction of their own heart, they prophecy unto you. These
places show that it is usual with false Prophets, and lying teachers, under
pretense of being sent, or instructed by the Spirit, to broach their own
Private conceypts, and foolish fancyes: for this Spirit is said to be the Spirit
of their own heart, the effects whereof are blindness, they see nothing; vanity,
they see vain things; lies, they divine lies; fraud, as foxes in the deserts;
and finally punishment, woe to the foolish Prophets, which follow their own
Spirit etc. My hand shall be upon the Prophets etc. Let any man Judge whether
these things do not agree with our modern Spiritualists.

I will show a lively Pattern of this proud Spiritualist in Eliu the Busit,
who opposed holy Job, sayng, Job. 32.6. etc.
I am younger in time and you more ancient, therefore etc. I was afraid to show
you my sentence. For I hoped that longer age would speak, and that a multitude
of years would teach wisdom. But as I see there is a Spirit in men, and the
inspiration of the Omnipotent gives wisdom. They of many years are not the
wise men, neither do the ancients understand Judgment. Therefore will I speak;
hear ye me. I also will show you my wisdom etc. I am full of words, and the
Spirit of my belly streineth me etc. and sundry such like. Here you see a
Puritan in his lively colors, who though he be but of a late birth, yet by
the presumed inspiration of the omnipotent, he prefers himself before the
ancient, for wisdom and judgment. And his reason is, because his very belly
is full of the Spirit: as this proud young fellow against just Job, does not
every new Ghospeller speak the like against the Church, Councels, and Fathers,
and all upon conceit, that his brains and belly are full of the Spirit?

S. Paul affirms that 1. Cor. 12.8.10.
To one by the spirit is given the word of wisdom; and to another the word of
knowledge, and to another Prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to
another kinds of tongues; to another interpretation of languages. And all these
things works one and the same spirit, dividing to every one according as he
will. Here it is expressly taught, that God gives not to every man the gift
of knowledge, but to one that, and to others other gutftes; wherefore every
private man may not presume that he is endowed therewith. For which we must note
that these gifts do not necessarily depend or follow justifying Grace, and so
common to all the faithful and just; but are special guiftes freely given,
some upon one, some upon another, as the text says.

S. Peter having compared 2. Pet. 1.19.20.21.
the Prophetical word, to a Candle shyning in a dark place, immediately
adds, understanding this first, that no Prophecy of Scripture is made by
private Interpretation, for not by man's will was Prophecy brought at any time,
but the holy men of God spoke, inspired with the holy Ghost. Here by Prophecy
of Scripture, is understood the sense thereof, for so they are called Ephesians. 4.11.
Some Prophets, because they did foretell and expound hidden mysteries of
Scripture; which Prophecy or sense is not to be made by Private Interpretation,
because not by man's will, or self seeming humane conceit, was prophecy, or
the true sense of Scripture brought, or made at any time; but the holy men of
God, Prophets and Apostles, inspired by the holy Ghost, spoke and expounded the
same, not leaving it to the private interpretation of every particular man. S.
John's advise is, that, we 1. John. 4.1.6.
believe not every Spirit, but prove the Spirits if they be of God: because
many false Prophets are gone out into the world etc. He that knows God,
hears us, he that is not of God, hears us not. In this we know the Spirit
of truth, and the spirit of error. Here we are admonished not to believe every
one that pretends the spirit, because many false teachers will challenge the
same, but we are to try them by this, that those which be of God, will hear
and obey their Apostles and lawful Pastors, succeeding the Apostles, and
submit themselves to the Church of God, the other that be not of God, will not
hear either Apostle, Pastor, or Church, but be their own Judges, pretending
their Instruction by the spirit.

S. Paul, as it were, for the first conceiving of true faith, requires these
helps amongst others, of hearing and preaching: Romans 10.14.
How shall they believe him whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear
without a Preacher? But for the nourishing and preserving thereof, he further
exacteth obedience to Pastors, saying, Heb. 13.17.
Obey your Prelates and be subject to them, for they watch, as being to render
account for your Souls: Yea he affirms that these Pastors were placed by
Christ in the Church, to this end, that, Ephesians. 4.14.
Now we be not Children* wavering and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, in the wickedness of men, in craftines, to the circumuention of error.
Now, if the holy Ghost by himself alone, did infallibly teach every Private
man, inspiring into him the true sense of all the Scriptures, and consequently
true knowledge, for the infallible deciding of all doubts and controversies, to
what end is preaching commanded? to what end are Pastors appointed in the
Church of God, for the teaching and guiding of the people? But to these, who
every one so much glory of their own spirit, I may justly say, as Christ our
Savior said unto the Jews, Io. 8.44.
You are of your Father the Devil, and the desires of your Father you will do
etc. He stood not in the verity, because verity is not in him; when he speaks
a lie, he speaks of his own, because he is a liar, and the Father thereof.
For so every private Protestant expounding the Scriptures according to his own
spirit, speaks of his own, and consequently speaks lies.

But some Protestants will reply, that all these Scriptures alleged, are only
meant against those, who in truth having not the Spirit of God, do yet ever
pretend and challenge the same; whereas all faithful Protestants have the true
Spirit of understanding and judging: But besides that this is barely begged,
not proved, I demand whether Luther, Swinglius, Calvin, or any other Prorestant
now in rerum natura, be a faithful Protestant, and consequently had, or has
the true spirit of God, ever infallibly directing him, in the true
understanding of the Scriptures? If they affirm, then not only all
Catholics, who have equal Privilege of challenging the spirit, but even
others of the learned Protestants, will contest, that he erred, and that
grievously in sundry points of faith, and so was not infallibly directed by the
spirit of God. If they say, that the faithful Protestant is not at all times,
and in all points of Religion so infallibly assisted by the holy Ghost, but
that sometimes he may err; then it follows evidently, that no Protestant
pretending to be assisted in that sort, can be to himself or others an
infallible Judge, in all the weightiest matters of faith and Religion.

SECT. III. It is proved by the Ancient Fathers, that the Private spirit is not
a Judge sufficient, for the deciding of Controversies, and interpreting the
Scriptures.
VVHeras we have seen from S. Peter, that no Prophecy (or sense) of Scripture,
is made by Private Interpretation: th^^ is according to S Chrysostom, Hom. de
Spir. Sancto adorando.
not by the Spirit which many brag of, as the spirit of God, but falsely
pretending it, do speak that which is their own. According to S. Clement, L
10. Recog.
It is to be obs^rued, when the Law of God is read, it ought not to be read or
understood, according to the meaning of every man's own wit; for there are many
things in holy Scripture* which may be wrested to that meaning, which every one
of his own accord presumes to himself: but this cannot be. S. Hierome
affirms that, Ad Poulin Ep. 2.
whatsoever heretics speak they think it to be the Law (or word of God.)
Neither do they vouchsafe to know what the Apostles, what the Prophets thought,
but do apply incongruous testimonies to their own meaning: as though it were
not a great and most wicked manner of teaching, to deprave the Sentences, and
to draw the contrary Scriptures to their own will. In Ose c. 8.60.
They have turned the sacred words and senses into Idols, which they have
framed out of their own heart. Ep. ad Joan. Hieros.
The testimonies which the Manichees, Marcion, Ebion, Gnostickes do take from
the purest fountain of Scriptures they do not so interpret as they are
written, but they will have (simplicitatem sermonis Ecclesiastici) the playnes
of Gods word to signify that which themselves do think. S. Austine
reprehendeth the Pelagians, De Not. and Gra. c. 42.
For that they read all the Scriptures according to their private Senses. And he
says to the Manichees, Cont. Manich.
You see that your work is, that the authority of Scriptures may be taken
away, and that every man's mind may be author to himself, what he approves or
disaproueth in any Scripture, that is, not that he should be subject to the
authority of the Scriptures, but that he should subject the Scriptures to
himself. S. Bedes direction is, that, In 2. Pet. 1,
The Prophets did write, deliver, and preach, not their own words, but the
words of God: So also the reader of them must not use his own proper
Interpretation, least he decline from the sense of the truth. Therefore we
affirm that no man presume to expound Scriptures according to his own
pleasure.

SECT. IV. It is proved by Protestants that the Private Spirit is not our Judge
of Controversies.
THis point is so clear and undeniable, that sundry Protestants do agree with
us heerin against their other Brethren. D. Luther teaches that, De Potest.
Papae.
we are not certain of any Private man, whether he has the Revelation of the
Father or no: but the Church it is whereof it is not lawful to doubt. Ep. ad
Antwerp. Tom. 2. Ger. Ienae.
And, there is no Ass in this time so sottish and blockish, but will have the
dreams of his own head, and his opinion accepted for the instinct of the holy
Ghost, and himself esteemed as a Prophet: whereof ensues, as himself
complayneth a little before, That there are as many Sects and Religions among
us, as there be men. Calvin calls the^, In Ep. ad. Ephesians. 4.12.
Fanaticall, who feign to themselves secret Revelations of the Spirit; and
proud, who think the private reading of Scripture to suffice them, that they
need not the Common Ministry of the Church. In. 1^ Joan.
Many false Doctors belie (or counterfaite) the title of the Spirit: many
madmen start up, who rashly boast themselves to be endowed with the Spirit of
God etc. They speak in their own Private name, go out in their own name,
utter out of their own sense. Yea writing against Swenckfeldius, who
contemning the Scriptures, challenged only the Spirit for his Judge, he
disputes thus, Instit. l. 1. c. 9. 1.
If that were a good Spirit, it were the same with the Spirit of the Apostles,
and first believing Christians; but the Spirit of the Apostles, and first
believing Christians did not make it self Judge contemning the Scriptures:
Ergo, it is not a good Spirit.

Now in like manner may I argue against Calvin, and our English Protestants; If
the Spirit which they make their Judge, were a good Spirit, it were the same
with the Spirit of the Apostles, and the first Christians: But the Spirit of
the Apostles, and the first Christians, did not make it self Judge, but made
recourse in their Controversies to S. Peter, and other Apostles, and Priests,
sitting in Council at Jerusalem, and obeyed their sentence. Ergo the Spirit
of Protestants is not a good Spirit.

Chemnitius having taught, that, Exam. part. 1 f. 63.
The gift of Interpretation is not common to all, no more then the gift of
healing or miracles, he adds that, No man ought to stay upon his own wit, in
the Interpretation of Scriptures, not (so much as) in plain places, for it is
written, that no Scripture is of Private Interpretation. 2. Pet. 1.

D. Whitaker avouches that, Aduersus Staplet. l. 2. c. 6. p 370. 357. See
Hook. Eccl. Pol. Sec. 8. p. 147.
The testimony of the Spirit being Private and Secret, is not fit to teach and
refell others; And that as often therefore as controversy of the Scriptures
does arise, we must fly to common arguments taken from the Scriptures
themselves and the perpetual testimony of the Church. So enforced is he to
appeal from his Private Spirit, to the Scriptures themselves, and the Church.

M. Hooker and others do avouch that, Eccl. pol. l. 1. sec. 14. l 2. sec. 8. l.
3. Sec. 3 l. 2. Sec. 7. Whitak. aduers. Stapl. l. 2. c. 4. Zanchius in confess.
c. 1. Bren. in Proleg.
The outward letter sealed with the inward witness of the Spirit, it not a
sufficient warrant for every particular man to Judge and approve the Scripture
to be Canonical, the Gospel it self to be the Gospel of Christ: but the
authority of Gods Church (as he acknowledges) is necessarily required
thereunto.

So that Protestants themselves teach from the Scriptures, that the Private
Spirit is not a sufficient Judge for the decyding of Controversies, or
interpreting the Scriptures.

SECT. V. It is proved by reason, that the Private Spirit, is not our Judge of
Controversies.
IN Common Sense and reason we see, that in the temporal Common wealth, men
generally have that natural light wherewith the Law was made, and which is
sufficient to expound the same, and yet the interpretation of the Law is not
permitted to the Private Judgment of every man, though they pretend never so
much skill, or special assistance of any revealing spirit: And if it were, the
Commonwealth could not long continue in peace. How much less is the
interpretation of Scripture, to be permitted to every man, seeing all have not
that supernatural light, wherewith the Scripture is to be understood, as I
proved before from S. Paul 1. Cor. 12.10.

Again, the holy Ghost which directs another, is neither seen nor heard of
me; whereas a Judge must both be seen and heard of the parties in strife, they
being corporal men.

A Judge likewise must have authority to compel both parties to stand to his
sentence, otherwise his Judgment or Sentence would be idle and unprofitable.
But this authority Private men (though never so much replenished with the
Spirit) altogether want.

Again, if this Private Spirit of every man, might be approved for a competent
Judge, never could heretic be co^uinced or converted, or any Controversy ever
ended, every heretic preferring his own Spirit, before the Spirits of
others, yea every one demanding with Sedecias the false Prophet, against the
true Prophet Micheas, 2. Paral. c. 18. 23.
Which way passed the spirit of our Lord from me, that it should speak to thee.

Lastly, seeing Prot. ground their salvation upon only Faith, which say they,
does only justify; and Faith upon only Scripture, which according to them,
contaynes all things necessary to be believed; and the Scripture and sense
thereof, only upon the Private Spirit, by which (excluding Church, Councils, and
Fathers) they expound the Scripture; it thereof follows that the Private Spirit
is the principal, or sole ground to the^ of their sense of Scripture, the
Scripture sense the like ground of their faith, and this their faith the like
ground of their salvation: wherefore no Protestant can have greater certaynty of
his faith or salvation, then he has of this Private spirit; whereof seeing he
has none, either from Scripture, Church, Counsels, Fathers, common sense, or
experience; it must needs follow, that his sole relying upon the Private spirit,
must perforce bring him into infinite and inextricable Errors. So many ways is
this Private Spirit altogether insufficient for the final decyding of all
Controversies.

SECT. VI. Objections from the Scripture, for the Private Spirit, answered.
SOme object such places of Scripture as seem to affirm, that God himself
will teaches us all things, if we ask it of him: Luc. 11.13.
How much more will your Father from heaven, give the good Spirit to them that
ask him? Iac. 1.5.
If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all men
abundantly etc. And it shall be given him. And sundry such like. Answer. 1.
Here is not the least mention made of the spirit of Interpreting the
Scriptures, which is a gift gratis given, and whereof we only speak in this
question; but of the spirit of Faith, Hope, Charity, and wisdom necessary to
Salvation: for according to S. Augustine, Tract. 73. 81 and 103. in Joan.
Prayer does not infallibly obtain, but that which is necessary or profitable
to the salvation of him that prays. Now the gift of Interpreting as also the
gifts of tongues, and miracles, and such like numbered together by S. Paul,
are not always profitable to him that has them. Therefore as by prayer we
cannot ever infallibly obtain the spirit of tongues, miracles etc. Though it
be said, he will give the good Spirit to them, that ask him; so neither the
spirit of Interpretation. Secondly, although the places objected, were to be
understood of the spirit or gift of Interpretation, yet no man that prays
for it, can be certain that he obtayneth it, because no man can be certain
that he prays as he ought, C. 4.3.
You ask (says S. James) and receive not, because you ask amiss etc. And
this we see verified in all heretics, Luthera^s, Caluinists, Swinglians,
Anabaptists, Puritanes etc. all whom pray for the spirit, and yet they are
possessed with most different and contradicting Spirits. Such places also may
be urged, as seem to insinuate that God teaches all truth to every man, Hier.
31.33.34.
I will give my law in their bowels, and in their heart I will write it etc.
and a man shall no more teach his Neighbor etc. saying: know our Lord; for all
shall know me, from the least of them even to the greatest. Io. 6.45.
It is written in the Prophets, And all shall be docible of God. Every one that
has heard of the Father, and has learned, comes to me. Io. 10.27.
My sheep hear my voice etc. and they follow me, and sundry such like. Answer.
1. I answer in general, that both is true, that we are taught by God, as the
places objected do insinuate, and yet ordinarily we are not taught immediately
by himself, but by man's ministry, for it is usual in the Scriptures, that
those things which God does work as the Principal Cause, are attributed to
him as though he effected them without any isntrumental cause; and that for
this cause also, because he gives virtue and power to the Instruments, that
they may work: So S. Paul affirms that, 1. Cor. 3 7.
Neither he that planteth is any thing nor he that waters, but he that gives
the increase, God. And Christ himself said to his Apostles, Mat. 10.20.
It is not you that speak, but the spirit of your Father that speaks in you.
And yet it is clear, that men as Gods Instruments do plant, water, and speak;
therefore though it be said, that God does teach us, yet this is understood
ordinarily to be by man's Ministry, by whose mouth he speaks, and is heard,
according to that of S. Zachary, Luc. 1.70.
he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, that are from the beginning. And
agreably hereunto Christ, not by himself alone, but by Ananias Act. 9.7.10.
etc.
taught Paul, by Act. 8.26. etc.
Philip the Eunuch, and by Peter Act. 10.6.22.34.
Cornelius.

Secondly, in particular I answer to the first place with S. Augustine, that L.
de spiritu and lit. c. 24.
by those words, I will give my Law etc. is understood the Grace of the New
Testament, that is, Faith working by Charity, which God powers into our
hearts, not only that we may know him, but withal may fulfill his
Commandments. And by these words, A man shall no more teach his Neighbor, is
signified the reward of faith, to wit, Beatitude; in which all the Elect shall
see God face to face. And though we should understand these last words of this
present time, yet they only speak of knowing of one God, which not only the
Gentiles converted, but even Jews, Turks, and heretics do acknowledge.

To the second text, And all shall be docible of God, I may either answer with S.
Cyril, Cyril. in hunc. loc.
that this is meant of the doctrine of the Gospel, which Christ, not by
Prophets, but by himself, taught and preached, according to that of S. Paul,
Heb. 1.1.2.
Diversely and many ways in times past God speaking to the Fathers in the
Prophets, last of all in these days has spoken to us in his Son: Or I may
answer with S. Augustine, De gratia Christi c. 12. 13. 14.
that this is understood of the Grace of the holy Ghost, whereby a man is
inwardly and sweetly moved by God to believe and love.

To the third text, My sheepheare my voice, I answer with S. Augustine, In hunc
locum.
that Christ here speaks of the Predestinate, who before their death hear
Gods calling, and follow him. Besides, God speaks to his Sheep, not only by
the Scriptures, but also by internal inspirations, and by the mouths of their
Pastors, of whom he says expressly, Luc. 10.16.
He that hears you, hears me. So not excluding by those words (My sheep
hear my voice) his Vicars and Pastors, but only enemies, as himself directly
says, Joan. 10.5.
But a stranger they follow not, but fly from him, because they know not the
voice of strangers.

In like sort it is urged, that S. John says, Io. 2.27.
You have no need that any man teach you; but as his unction teaches you of
all things. Answer. 1. It is not here spoken absolutely of the knowledge of all
heavenly things, in such sort, that those who have received the holy Ghost,
should not need a master or teacher in any thing: for then to what end should
S. John have written this Epistle, instructing them thereby, whom the unction of
the holy Ghost did still instruct in all things? Or to what end should God
have placed in his Church Pastors and Doctors? It is therefore here only spoken
of such Doctrine, as they had learned from the Apostles; wherein that they
should persist, and not attend to teachers of the contrary, S. John warns
them, as is manifest by the verses precedent, Ver. 21.
I have not written to you, as to them that know it. Ver. 24.
That which you have heard from the beginning, let it abide in you. Ver. 62.
These things have I written to you concerning them that seduce you. Secondly
this place is answered by S. Augustine, speaking thus to S. John. Tract 3. in
1. Ep. Joan.
They had the unction to whom thou did speak: thou said (1. Io. 2.)
Because his unction teaches you all things: wherefore then did thou write that
Epistle? why did thou teach them? why did thou instruct them? why did
thou erect them? And now he answers for S. John, Brethren here you now see a
great Mystery. The sound of our words beats the ears; the master is within.
Do not think that any man does learn any thing of man: we may admonish with
the noise of our voice. If he be not within who teaches, in vain is our noise
etc. He has his Chair in heaven who teaches the hearts. The Prophet said, and
he in the Gospel, Mat. 23. Neither be ye called masters, for one is your
master, Christ. So learnedly teaching, that the Doctrine of faith ought to be
attributed to God, not that he alone without man's ministry, does ordinarily
teach us all things, but because he is the principal master of this Doctrine.

Others object those words of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 2.15.
The spiritual man judges all things, and himself is judged of no man. Ergo
he is to judge of the sense of the Scriptures. Answer. 1. Though there be some
spiritual men, which do truly Interpret Scriptures, as there be some who
Prophecy, and who work miracles, yet to them does not pertain the definitive
Sentence of the true sense of Scriptures, or other Controversies; because we
neither have certainty of faith, who these spiritual men be, as also it is
most clear, that the most spiritual are ignorant of some things. So Eliseus
who had received the double spirit of Elias, acknowledged of himself, 4. Reg.
4.17.
Our Lord has hid it from me, and has not told me. And sundry learned
Fathers had excellently the gift of Interpretation, yet neither did they
assume, or others attribute to any of them in particular, the infallible
knowledge of the true sense of all Scripture; wherefore, whereas it is said, that
the spiritual man Judges all things; the meaning is, That he judges as well
spiritual things as temporal, as well heavenly as earthly; according to which
S. Paul had said before, Ver. 14.
The sensual man perceives not those things that are of the spirit of God:
But from hence it will not follow, that the spiritual man is able to judge
either all divine and spiritual things, or all temporal and earthly matters.

D. Against the Rhem. Test. in Act. 17.11. Whitak aduersus Stap. l. 3 c. 7. p.
529.
Fulke, D. Whitaker, and others do urge, that it is written of the People of
Beroea, that, Act. 17.11.
They were daily searching the Scriptures, if these things were so as Paul
taught. Ergo, the people may judge by the Scriptures, whether the Church
teaches truly or no. Answer. Though S. Paul was an Apostle, and could not
preach false Doctrine, yet this was unknown to those of Beroea, and therefore
they were not bound presently to believe, except they had seen first some
miracle, or other credible motives of belief: when then S. Paul proved to the^
Christ, by the predictions of the Prophets, deservedly they searched the
Scriptures for the same. But Christians, to whom it is certain, that the
Church cannot err in matters of faith, are bound to receive her decrees,
without all doubt thereof. And if (as some think) the Beroeans formerly
believed, the^ their searching of the Scriptures, might be for their Comfort
and Confirmation. But this Objection is so weak, that D. Bilson answers the
same against M. Jacob saying, Survey of Christ's sufferinges. p. 84.
Where you say the Beroeans are commended by the holy Ghost, for not believing
that which Paul spoke of Religion, till they had examined by Scriptures, and
seen whether the truth were so as he uttered, you speak not only unwisely, and
untruly, but if you would have Christians to follow that Course, you show
intolerable pride against the word of God: for the Beroeans were commended,
(whereas yet they neither believed in Christ, nor acknowledged Paul's
Apostleship) for their readiness to hear, and care to search, whether Paul
spoke true or no. This if you now assume to your self over Paul's words or
writings, you incur the crime of flat impiety: Paul's words to us that
believe without further search or other credit, are of equal authority with
the rest of the Scriptures, and not to believe him, till we examine and see the
truth of his Doctrine, is mere infidelity; So confessedly impertinent is this
common objection.

Some object that the Church receives from God inspiring her the right sense
of Scripture, and so first decydeth the Controversy in her mind, before she can
exteriourly decyde what is to be believed: therefore the Spirit speaking in her
heart is the supreme Judge, even to Catholics. Anwere. The motions of the
Spirit inspiring the Pastors of the Church, are unknown to others, and to
themselves are uncertain, until they be outwardly decreed and subscribed by
the head and members of the Church, and so are no Judicial sentences, or
final decisions, or rules infallible, either to themselves, or others.

Sander. de vision. Mon. l. 4. c. 3.4.
Others urge, that in the law of Nature there was no other Judge but only the
Spirit instructing. Answer. (23) Adam during his life was the Chief head and
directour of Gods people in points faith: then Seth, Enos etc. And so in
succeeding ages, the first borne by Prerogative of his Primogeniture, or some
other by Gods special Election, discharged that Office.

Some object that the believing Gentiles were not subordinate to the high
Priest of the Jews, nor had any other appointed over them, and so were only
guided by the spirit. Answer. The faithful Gentiles were not subject to the
high Priest of the Jews; because they had no such positive Precept imposed
upon them, but the necessary mysteries of faith were revealed unto them, either
by God himself, or by an Angel, or by some other infallible Tradition. But
all this being Extraordinary, can be no warrant for paricular men to challenge
the like, nor prejudice the ordinary Course prescribed by Gods wisdom:
especially now in the Law of Grace, when both Jew and Gentile are subjected to
one head, according to that of Christ our Savior, Io. 10.16.
Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also must I bring, and
they shall hear my voice, and there shall be made one fold and one Pastor. This
cannot be understood of Christ, as inuisibly governing, for so there was
always one fold and one Pastor; but of his invisible headship, and of his
secondarie visible Pastor, who is his Vicar upon Earth; and of whom L. 1. ep.
6. ad Magnum.
S. Cyprian interprets these very words.

CHAP. V. The true State of the Question concerning the books of Scripture
Canonical, or Apocryphal.
Whether the books of Tobie, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the first
and second of Machabees, be Scriptures truly Canonical, or Apocryphal. SECT.
I.
Catholic Doctrine.
THE Catholic Church Council. Trid. Sess 4. Decret. de Canonicis Scripturis.
Setting always this before her eyes, that errors being taken away, the very
Purity of the Gospel may be preserved in the Church; what was promised before
by the Prophets in the holy Scriptures, our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God,
first published by his own mouth, and afterward commanded to be preached to
Mar. vlt.
every creature by his Apostles, as the fountain of all wholesome truth* and of
the discipline of manners: And seeing that this truth and discipline is
contained in the written books, and in the Traditions not written etc.
following the examples of Orthodoxall Fathers, with like affection of Piety and
reverence, it receives and honors all the Books both of the Old and new
Testament, seeing one God is the Author of both etc. It has further ordained
that the Table (or Catalogue) of the sacred books, should be adjoined to this
decree, lest doubt might arise to any, which books they are, which are
received by the Synod. They are these following of the old Testament, five of
Moses* that is, Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers, Deutronomy; Iosue,
Judges, Ruth, four of the Kings, Two of Paralipomenon, the first and second of
Esdras, which is called Nehemias, Tobias, Judith, Fsther, Job, David's Psalter
of 150. Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus,
Isaias, Hieremias, with Baruch, Ezechiel, Daniel, twelve lesser Prophets, that
is, Ose, Joel, Amos, Abdias, Jonas, Michaeas, Naum, Abacuc, Sophonias, Aggeus,
Zacharias, Malachias, the first and second of the Machabees. Of the New
Testament, four Ghospels according to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John: the Acts
of the Apostles written by Luke the Evangelist: fourteen Epistles of Paul the
Apostle, to the Romans, two to the Corinthians, to the Galathians, to the
Ephesians, to the Philippians, to the Colossians, two to the Thessalonians, two
to Timothy, to Titus, to Philemon, to the Hebrews: two of Peter the Apostle,
three of John the Apostle, one of James the Apostle, one of Jude the Apostle,
and the Apocalypse of John the Apostle. But if any man shall not receive for
sacred and Canonical, these whole books with all their parts, as they are
accustomed to be read in the Catholic Church, and as they are in the old
Vulgar Latin Edition etc. let him be accursed.

In the third Carthage Council it is defined, Can. 47.
that nothing be read in the Church under the name of divine Scriptures, but
Canonical Scriptures. The Canonical Scriptures are Genesis, Exodus etc. And
so the said ancient Council proceeds, making particularly the same Catalogue
of the Books of sacred Scripture, with the next before recited out of the
Council of Trent. And the same with these Councels do Bellar de verb. Dei. l.
1. c. 4. etc. The Translators of the Old Test. in the Argum. of the Macab. and
the other Books. And in the Prooemiall Annotations.
Catholics now believe.

Protestants untruths.
Luther affirms, that the ^. de Coneil. and Ecclesia.
Pope does bury the sacred Scripture in dirt and dust, and has almost
abolished the whole Christian doctrine. Exam. Sess. 4,
Chemnitius avouches, that Catholics are of opinion, that the Pope at his
pleasure, without all testimonies of Ancient writers, may of a Book not
Canonical, make it Canonical, and of the Contrary. And that if the Pope
would, the sacred Scripture would be of no more authority, then Aesops Fables.

Ochinus speaking of the Books of Machabees, says, Dialog. de Purgatorio,
that they are Apocryphal, it is manifest by the Laodicene, and the Africane
Councels, yea by all holy Doctors, who making a Catalogue of the Scriptures,
make no mention of the Machabees. But the contrary is evident by the third
Carthage Council cited, and by sundry Aug. l. 2. de doct. Christ. c. 8. and de
Ciu. Dei. l. 18. c. 36. Innocent. 1. Ep. ad Exsuperium. c. vlt. Isidor. l c.
Etymol. c. 1.
ancient writers. And though the Laodicene Council does not mention the Books
of Machabees, as neither does it mention the Apocalypse, yet does it no where
censure them for Apocryphal. So that all here said by Protestants are mere
impostures, and utterly detested by the Catholic Church.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Church has decreed, that, Article 6.
In the name of the holy Scripture, we do understand those Canonical Books of
the Old and New Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the
Church: and then follows, of the names and number of Canonical books,
Genesis, Exodus etc. For Apocryphal, they number these following: the 3. book
of Esdras, the 4. book of Esdras, the book of Tobias, the book of Judith,
the rest of the book of Esther, the book of Wisdom, Jesus the son of
Syrach, Baruch the Prophet, the song of the 3. Children, the story of Susanna,
of Bell and the Dragon, the Prayer of Manasses, the first book of Machabees,
the second book of Machabees. And these their Apocryphal, they say, the
Church does read, for example of life and Instruction of manners, but yet does
it not apply them to establish any doctrine. Of the books of the New
Testament, they only say in general, All the books of the New Testament, as
they are commonly received, we do receive and account them Canonical.

To this Rule of making such books Canonical, of whose authority was never
any doubt in the Church, D. Whitakers adds 2. more, whereby he discardeth the
Machabees, and sundry others: Answer to Reinolds. p, 22. 23.
They were written (says he) in Greek, or some other foreign language, and
not in Hebrew; nor had for their known Authors, those whom God has declared
to be his Prophets. So that no books must be Canonical with our English
Church, but such as were never doubted of in the Church, such as were
originally written in the Hebrew, and such as had their authors known to be
Prophets.

The Lutherans hence teach, that In Enchirid. p. 63. and Exam. part. 1. p. 55.
The 2. Epistle of Peter, the 2. and 3. of John, the Epistle to the Hebrews,
the Epistle of James, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalips of John are
Apocryphal: as Exam. part. 1. p. 56.
not having sufficient testimony of their Authority. And therefore, that Ibid.
p. 57.
nothing in Controversy may be proved out of these books.

Protestants agree with Jews, and Heretics.
S. Hierome In Proleg. Galeat.
relates, that the Hebrews rejected the books of Toby, Judith, Sapientia,
Ecclesiasticus, and Machabees. Eusebius Hist. l. 3. c. 25.
and S. Hierome L. de viris illustr. in Iacobo, Judah, Patro, Ioanne.
report, that some before their times doubted of the Epistles of James, Jude,
2. of Peter, 2. and 3. of John. The Anomeans Epiphan. haer. 76. Hieron. in c.
5. Michae. and Praefat. in Ep. ad Philem. Aug. l. 2. cont. Aduers. Leg. and
Proph. c. 2.
and other heretics taught, that all things in S. Paul's Epistles, were not
inspired by the holy Ghost, but some things written only by humane wisdom: the
same and worse do Protestants teach here next hereafter.

Protestants Errors.
Whereas Moses was the first that writ any part of Scripture, and he who writ
the Law of God, or ten Commandment, Luther thus rejects him, and his ten
Commandments. Tom. 3. Germ. f. 40, 41. and in Colloq. Mensal. Ger. fol.
152.153.
We will neither hear nor see Moses, for he was given only to the Jews,
neither does he belong any thing to us. In Colloq. Mensal. c. de lege and Euang.
I will not receive Moses with his Law, for he is the Enemy of Christ. Ib.
fol. 118.
Moses is the Master of all hangmen. Sermon. de Moyse.
The 10. Commandments belong not to Christians. In Conuiual. Colloq. cited by
Au^^ fab. cap. de lege.
Let the 10. Commandments be altogether rejected, and all heresies will
presently cease, for the 10. Commandments are as it were the fountain from
whence all heresies spring. Islebius Luthers scholar taught, See Osiand Cent.
16. p. 311. 312. 310.
That the Decalogue was not to be taught in the Church. And from him came
Sleidan. hist. l. 12. fol. 162.
the Sect of Antinomans, who publicly taught, that, See Confessio Mans^
feildensium Ministrorum. Tit de Antinomis, f. 89. 90.
The Law of God is not worthy to be called the word of God. If thou be a
whore, if a whoremonger, if an adulterer, or otherwise a sinner; believe, and
thou walk in the way of salvation: when thou art drowned in sin, even to
the bottom, if thou belieuest, thou art in the midst of happiness. All that
busy themselves about Moses, that is, the 10. Commandments, belong to the
Devil, to the Gallows with Moses.

Luther In sermon. Conuiual. Tit. de Patriarch. and Proph.
does not believe all things to be so done as they are related in the book of
Job: and with him it is, Tit. de libris Vet. and nou. Test.
as it were the Argument of a fable. He says of Ecclesiastes, Petrus
Rebeastock. l. 2. Colloq. Latin. Lutheri. cap. de vet. Test.
This b^^ke is not perfect, many things are taken away, it wants boots and
spurs, that is, it has no perfect sentence.

Castalio See Beza in vita Caluini.
commanded the Canticles of Solomon to be thrust out of the Canon, as an impure
and obscene song, reuiling with bitter reproaches such Ministers, as resisted
him therein.

Calvin Instit l. 2. c. 16. 10.
doubted whether the Apostles Creed, was made by the Apostles. He argues In
Math. 27.9.
S. Matthew of error, he rejects Harm in Math. 20.16.
these words, Many are called, but few are chosen.

Clebitius opposes the Evangelists one against another, Victoria veritatis,
and ruina, Papatus, Arg. 5.
Mark and Matthew deliver the contrary, therefore to Matthew and Mark being two
witnesses, more credit is to be given then to one Luke, who was not present at
the last supper, as Matthew was. Swinglius Tom. 2. Elenc. f. 10. Fotherby in his
4, Sermons ser. 2. p. 50. Magdeburg. Cent. 1. l. 2. ca. 10. Col. 580. Gualter.
in Act. 21.
and other Protestants affirm, that all things in S. Paul's Epistles are not
sacred, and that in sundry things he erred. Other Calvin. in omnes Pauli Ep. in
Gal. 2. p. 510. 511. Goad in the Towers Disp. 2. days confer. Arg. 6. Whit. de
Eccles. Contr. 2. q. 4. p. 223.
Protestants charge S. Peter to have erred in faith and manners, even after the
descending of the holy Ghost. Rogers confesses and names sundry of his
Brethren Protestants rejecting for Apocryphal Def. of the Articles, Art. 6. p
32.
the Epistle unto the Hebrews, of S. James, the first and second of John, of
Jude, and the Apocalypse. I desire the indifferent Reader here to Judge, whether
any men living, but professed Atheistes, did ever like unto our Protestants so
reject, deride, discarde, and censure the Scriptures themselves, so generally
received.

SECT. II. It is proved by sundry reasons and authorities, that the foresaid
Books are truly Canonical.
IN Confutation of the foresaid Rules given by Protestants for the discerning
of Canonical Scriptures from Apocryphal, I will begin with such books as
were rejected or doubted of by some Ancient Fathers. It is evident that the
Book of Hester was not admitted within the Athanas. in Synopsi. Greg Naz. in
carmine quod scripfit de geminis Scripturis. Melito apud Eusebius. l. 4. hist. c.
26.
Canon by S. Athanasius, S. Gregory Nazianzene, and Melito Africanus. And
Praefat. in Hester.
S. Hierome rejects the last 7. Chapters thereof. Baruch is not expressly
named or placed by such Ancient Councels and Fathers, as did make a Catalogue
of the several Books of Canonical Scripture. The ancient believing Jews
rejected Hier. Praefat. in Daniel.
the Hymn of the three Children, the hystory of Susanna, (which also was
refused by Apud Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 23.
Julius Africanus) and the History of the Dragon, as also the books of Tobis,
Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and Machabees. Neither do Melito,
Amphilochius, Nazianzenus, or the Council of Laodicea, number Tobie, Judith,
Ecclesiasticus, or the Machabees, in the Catalogue of their Canon; of all which
also S. Hierome Praef. in Judith. and l. 10. ad Furiam. c. 6. in Prolego.
Galeat. and Praef. in libros Salomonis. Praef. in Daniel.
seems to doubt. Some ancient writers doubted also of the Sea in S. Hier. Ep.
ad Hedibiam. q. 3.
last Chapter of S. Marks Ghospells; others of some part See Hilar. l. 10. de
Trinit. and Hier. l. 2. cont. Pelagianos.
of the 22. Chapter of S. Luke; others of the Sea Eusebius. hist. l. 3. c. 39.
beginning of the 8. Chapter of S. John, others of the Sea Eusebius. hist. l. 4.
c. 3. Hier. l. de viris illust. in Paulo.
Epistle to the Hebrews, others of the Sea Eus. hist. l. 3. c. 25. Hier. l. de
viris illust. in Iacobo, Judah, Petro, and Ioanne.
Epistles of James, Jude, the second of Peter, the 2 and 3. of John, and the Sea Eus. hist l. 3. c. 28. and l. 7 c. 23. Hier. Ep. ad Dardanum.
Apocalypse.

And it is so certain that these books and parcells of Scripture were doubted
of by some Doctors of the Ancient Church, as that M. Rogers who defends the
foresaid canonizing of Scripture, by being never doubted of in the ancient
Church, is enforced yet to say, In his defense of the 39 Articles, p. 31.
Although some of the ancient Fathers and Doctors, accepted not all the Books
contained within the volume of the new Testament, for Canonical: yet in the
end, they were wholly taken and received by the common Consent of the Church of
Christ in this world, for the very word of God etc. D. Bilson avouches, that,
Survey of Christ's sufferings p. 664.
The Scriptures were not fully received in all places, no not in Eusebius time:
He says, the Epistles of James, Jude, the 2 of Peter, the 2. and 3. of John,
are contradicted as not written by the Apostles. The Epistle to the Hebrews
was for a while contradicted etc. The Churches of Syria did not receive the 2.
Epistle of Peter, nor the 2. and 3. of John, nor the Epistle of Jude, nor the
Apocalypse etc. The like might be said for the Churches of Arabia: will you
hence conclude (says D. Bilson) that these parts of Scripture were not
Apostolic, or that we need not to receive them now, because they were
formerly doubted of? The Deanes of Paul's and Windsor, in the Towers
disputation had with the most illustrious Martyr Campian, in proof of this
point, do thus report of themselves. The 1. days Conference. D. 1.
For proof hereof, we alleged the testimonies of Hierome in Catal. where he
thus writes, The Epistle of James is said to be published by some other under
his name; and of the 2. of Peter he says, that it is denied by many to be his.
We also alleged Eusebius writing thus; Those books that be gainsaid, though
they be known to many, be these; The Epistle attributed to James, the Epistle
of Jude, the later of Peter, the 2. and 3. of John. With these agrees D.
Walker, affirming in the same Disputation, that 4. Days Conference f. 2. B.
S. Hierome says; Concerning that (Epistle) which is written to the Hebrews*
many have doubted of it: and also concerning the 2. of Peter, he says, It was
doubted of by many, and so with some were the 2. last Epistles of John etc. By
all which it is clear, and for such confessed, that if nothing must be
admitted for Canonical Scripture, whereof any doubt was made in the Primitive
Church, as Protestants formerly exacted; then must not only the Machabees,
Tobie, Judith, and other Books of the Old Testament be discarded out of the
Canon, but a farewell also must we give to some parts of the Ghospels, written
by S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the other
of S. James, S. Jude, S. Peter; S. John and the Apocalypse; all which yet
contrary to their former Rule, our English Pro^. are content to accept for
Canonical. So that the foresaid Rule prescribed by Prot. must be accepted for
good against Tobie, Judith etc. but it must be rejected for a most false Rule,
in regard of the Epistles of S. James, Peter, John etc. And what it is that
makes this incredible or rather impossible difference, in one and the same
Rule? Certainly nothing else, but that some Books so doubted of, spoke over
plainly against Prot. Doctrine; and others no less doubted of, they hoped they
could euade with better colors, and less difficulty.

But it is to be observed yet further, that the foresaid Books were never so
doubted of in the Primitive Church, but that some then there were, who could
testify, that they were set forth by Prophets or Apostles: for the want whereof,
the book of Enoch was never received by the Church. And although some others
doubted, and the Church then did not determine the truth; yet, that no more
infers that the Church since cannot determine it, then that the Council of
Nice could not decree the book of Judith to be Canonical, being formerly
doubted of.

Add lastly that although the Lutherans said, In Confessione Wittemberg.
We call sacred Scriptures those Canonical Books, of the old and new
Testament, of whose authority it was never doubted in the Church: Yet the
Divines of Geneua add to those words, thus, Although in the Catalogue of the
new Testament some books may be found, whereof sometimes doubt has been made
by certain Ancient Doctors of the Church: yet at length, by the consent of
the whole Catholic Church, they also were accounted and received for
Canonical; therefore undeservedly, for the doubts of some, are cast behind. So
crooked, imperfect and wanting is that Rule of making only such books
Canonical, as were never doubted of, in the Primitive Church.

To come now to the 2. Rule whereby true Scriptures must be discerned from
false, which is the restrayning the Old Testament to have been written only in
the Hebrew, so that whatsoever is not found in the Hebrew, must be rejected as
Apocryphal: But besides that, it is no little temerity to restrain the holy
Ghost, to one only language in the writing of the Scriptures; the falsehood and
vanity hereof is clearly discovered, by example of Daniel a good part, whereof,
To wit, from Chap. 2. ver. 4. to the end of the 7. Chapter.
though not written in Hebrew, is ^et by our See all our English Protestant
Bibles.
Adversaries themselves acknowledged for Canonical.

In like sort concerning the third Rule, it is most untrue, that God would
direct by his holy Spirit, no authors in their writings, but such as were
known, and also further declared by certain testimony to be Prophets: for
Protestants themselves cannot yet tell, who were Anthours of the several
Books of Judges, the 3. and 4. of Kings, the two of Paralippomenon, and the
Books of Ruth, and Job. In so much as D. Whitaker himself does directly
answer his own objection, saying, De sacra Script. p. 603.
The authors of many Books are not known; as of Iosue, Ruth, Paralippomenon,
Hesther etc. And Synops. p. 4.
we receive (says D. Willet) many Books in the Old Testament, the Authors
whereof are not perfectly known. Yea Calvin, Beza, and the Of Anno 1584. and
1579. See Calvin. in Heb. 2.2.
publishers of certain of our English Bybles, in the Preface or Argument upon
the Epistle to the Hebrews, do all of them profess to rest doubtful of the
Author thereof: Calvin and Beza there affirming, that it is not written by S.
Paul. So that though some parcels of the Bible have not their Authors or
Penners known, much less known to be Prophets, yet by like examples of other
approved Scriptures, it makes nothing against their sacred and divine
Authority.

Lastly, whereas Protestants make the written word of God, or the revealing
Spirit, their general Rule whereby to square them in all doubts; it is fo
manifest, that by neither of these means, the Canonical Scriptures can be
discerned from the Apocryphal, as that M. Hooker teaches to the contrary,
that, Eccl. Pol. l. 1. sec. 14 page 86.
Of things necessary, the very chiefest is to know, what books we are bound
to esteem holy, which point is confessed impossible for the Scripture it self
to teach: for Ibid. l. 2. c. 4. p. 102.
(says he) If any one Book of Scripture did give testimony to all, yet still
that Scripture which gives credit to the rest, would require another Scripture
to give credit unto it. Neither Ibid. p. 103.
could we ever come to any pause whereon to rest, unless besides Scripture there
were something else acknowledged. Herein M. Hooker writes so Catholikly, that
he is therefore reproved by a Puritan See the Christian letter to that Reverend
man M. R. Hook. p. 9.
Brother. In like sort D. Whitaker teaches, that true Scriptures cannot be
discerned from counterfeit, by the Aduersus Staplet. l. 2 c. 6. p. 370. and p.
357 and see Hook. in his Eccl. pol. sec. 8. p. 147.
testimony of the Spirit: the which (says he) being private and secret, is not
fit to teach and refell others.

Wherefore the only means remaining, whereby infallibly to discern true
Scriptures from false, is (as all Catholics teach) the Church of Christ. A
truth so clear, as that forbearing all other proofs, I may well content my
self with the manifold acknowledgments of Protestants themselves. To this
purpose then D. Fulke avouches, that, Answer to a Counterf. Cath. p 5.
The Church of Christ has Judgment, to discern true writings from
counterfeit, and the word of God from the writings of men, and this Judgment
she has of the holy Ghost. With him agrees D. Jewel, affirming, that, Defense
of the Apology. p. 201.
The Church of God has the spirit or wisdom, whereby to discern true
Scriptures from false. M. Hooker having before taught, that true Scriptures
cannot be known, unless besides Scripture there were some thing which might
assure us; this Something afterward he acknowledges Eccl. Pol. p 146. and
116. And see Aret. his Examen. p. 24. Bachmanus his Centuriae tres. p. 267.
To be the authority of Gods Church, or (as D. Whitaker terms it) Aduersus
Stap. p. 300. 298. 24. 25. and against Reinolds. p. 44.
The Ecclesiastical Tradition: An argument (says he) whereby may be argued and
convinced what Books be Canonical and what not. With whom accords another
Protestant writer Author of the Script. and the Church. f. 71. 72. 74. 75.
much commended by Bullinger, Ibid. in the Preface.
affirming that, The Church is endued with the spirit of God, and that the
diligence and authority of the Church is to be acknowledged herein, which has
partly given forth her testimony of the assured writings, and has partly by
her spiritual Judgment refused the writings which are unworthy. Yea he
further assures us, with S. Austine Tom. 6. cont. ep. Fundam. c. 5. Tertul. l.
1. de Praescript. c. 6.
and Tertullian, that, we could Scripture and the Church. p. 72. 74. 75. And
see Melancton in Ep. ad Romans c. 14. pa. 358. 359.
not believe the Gospel, were it not that the Church taught us, and witnessed
that this Doctrine was delivered by the Apostles. And the like might be showed
by sundry other See Pet. Mart. in his com. Pla. in English. part. 1. c. 6. Sec.
8. p. 42. Chemn. Exam. part. 1. p. 69. Lubb. de principijs Christ. dog. l. 1.
c. 4. p. 18.
Protestant writers.

Wherefore to conclude, seeing the sacred Scriptures of God cannot be discerned
from the Apocryphal writings of men, either by that they have been never
doubted of, or because they were originally written in Hebrew, or had for their
penners known Prophets, or by any Proof from the Scriptures themselves, or
the revealing spirit, but only in that the true discerning thereof, is
confessed by the sentence and determination of the Church of Christ; it
remains next to be examined, whether the foresaid books of Ecclesiasticus,
Wisdom, Toby, Judith, Machabees etc. rejected by Protestants as counterfeit,
and believed and defended by Catholics as Canonical, were ever admitted,
acknowledged and approved by the Church of Christ, as sacred, divine, and the
true word of God.

SECT. III. That the Primitive Church of Christ, and the Councels therein
celebrated, have admitted and approved for Canonical, the foresaid Books of
Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, Toby, Judith, Machabees etc.
Having elsewhere proved from the ample Confessions of the learned Protestant
Doctors, that the Primitive Church continued the true Church of Christ, during
the first 500. or 600. years; I will now only make manifest, that the said
Church admitted and approved the foresaid Books, as truly sacred, divine, and
Canonical. Which though I might convince at large, by producing the particular
sayings of Fathers, and Decrees of Councels, yet seeing the Case on our behalf
is so clear, as that our Adversaries themselves do confess what I intend to
prove, I will only set down such graunts as they affoard in our behalf.

Whereas in the third Carthage Council, whereat S. Austine and sundry other
Fathers and Bishops were present and subscribed, it is expressly defyned, that
Can 47.
Nothing be read in the Church, under the name of divine Scriptures, besides
Canonical Scriptures. And, the Canonical Scriptures are Genesis, Exodus etc.
five books of Solomon etc. (whereof Ecclesiasticus and Wisdom are two) Tobie,
Judith, Esther etc. two books of Machabees etc. Whereas also the same Canon of
Scripture is made and numbered particularly by De doct. Christ. l. 2. ca. 8.
Innocent. Ep. ad Exuperium. c. 7. Gel. Tom. 1. conc. in Decret. cum 70. Epis.
Isid. l. 2. Etymol. c. 1. Rabanus l. 2. Instit. cleric. Cassiodorus l. 2.
diuinarum lectionum.
S. Austine himself, as also by Innocentius, Gelasius and other Ancient
writers; the truth heerof is so manifest, that the same is confessed by sundry
Prot. writers, and the same Council and Fathers (instead of better Answer)
are severely reprehended for the same.

Mathaeus Hoe reproves the Carthage Council in these words, Hist. Tripar.
Theol. p. 46.
The Council of Carthage has decreed for Canonical, all the books of the
old Testament, excepting the 3. and 4. of Esdras, the 3. of Machabees etc. I
add, that the Council ought not to have Canonized more books, because it had
not authority. Poliander likewise says, In his Refutation p. 44.
To come now to the Error of some Councels, the Councels of Carthage, and
Florence have enrolled for Canonical Books, and as divinely inspired etc. the
books of Toby, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees etc. And the
Popes Innocentius and Gelasius, have reckoned these books among the Canonical.

Hiperius avouches, that Method. Theol. l. 1. p. 64.
In the third Carthage Council there are added to the Canon etc. Sapientia and
Ecclesiasticus, two books of Machabees, Toby, Judith etc. All which books in
the same order numbreth Austine, Innocentius, and Gelasius, for which he at
large afterward rejects their Judgment. I grant (says De princip. Christ.
dogm. l 1. c. 4 p. 8.
Lubbertus) certain of these books to be admitted by the Carthaginians, but I
deny that therefore they are the word of God, for no Councels have that
authority. So confessed it is that the foresaid Books were holden Canonical
by the Councels and Fathers of the Primitive Church.

Now, where our English Doctors in the Disputation The first days Conference.
had in the Tower Anno 1581. with Fa. Ed. Campian Martyr, did publicly and
seriously answer, that S. Austine numbering the foresaid Books* within the
Canon, used the word, Canon, improperly, as not meaning thereby that the books
now in question were properly Canonical, but only that they were in the Canon
of manners, not of Doctrine; first, this appears to be most untrue, in that
S. Austine ranketh these books in the same order with Genesis, and the rest of
undoubted authority, and therefore by the same reason according to S. Austin,
these other books should not be properly Canonical. Secondly S. Austine was
one who subscribed to the foresaid Carthage Council, and his meaning with the
said Council and other Fathers, is so Roman Catholic, as that they are
therefore all of them reproved by sundry Protestant Reinolds in his Conclusions,
annexed to his Conference. p. 699. 700. Zanchius de sacra Script. p. 32. 33.
Hospi^. hist. Sacram. part. 1. p 160. Trelcatius loc. com. p. 15. Hoe Tract.
Tripart. Theol. p. 46. Parker ag. Symbol. part. 2. pa. 60. Field of the Church.
p. 246. 247.
writers, which had been blamlesse, even according to Protestants, if they had
taken the word (Canonical) only improperly.

But Brentius avouches more in general, that Apol. Confess. Wittemb. And see
Bucers scripta Anglicana p. 713.
There are some of the Ancient Fathers who receive (says he) these Apocryphal
books into the number of Canonical Scriptures: and in like sort some Councels
command them to be acknowledged as Canonical. I am not ignorant what was done,
but I demand whether it was rightly and Canonically done? D. Couell aryseth yet
higher, not only confessing S. Augustines like Judgment had of the Book
Against Burges p. 76. 77.
of Wisdom, but withal further affirms of all these Books, that. If Ibid.
p. 87.
Ruffinus be not deceived, they were approved as parts of the Old Testament, by
the Apostles. And if you desire to ascend yet higher, you shall find Of the
Church. p. 245. 246. Hut. 2. part of his answer. p. 176.
D. Field, and M. Hutton both of them to acknowledge, that some of the Ancient
Jews received the foresaid Books for truly Canonical.

But though all the Jews had rejected the forsaid books, yet we Christians
are to be directed heerin (as is confessed See before Chap. 5. sec. 2.
before) by the Church of Christ. And according to this De Ciu. Dei. l. 18. c.
36.
S. Austine says of the Books of Machabees, not the Jews, but the Church
accounts (them) for Canonical. Saint Hierome also makes the like
opposition, between the Judgment of the Hebrews, and the Nicene Council
concerning the book of Judith, saying, Praef. in Judith.
With the Hebrews the book of Judith is read among the Hagiographall etc.
(which they received into their Canon) but because we read that the Nicene
Council accounted this in the number of holy Scriptures, I have yielded. In
like sort writes S. Isidore, L. 6 Etymol. c. 1.
Though the Hebrews do not receive (the Machabees) into their Canon, yet the
Church of Christ does honor them among the divine Books: So little forces it,
what the Jews thought, but what the Church determines concerning the
Canonical Scriptures: And so clear it is, that the foresaid Books reproved
by Prot. for Apocryphal, were confessedly approved by the Fathers and
Counsels of the Primitive Church for Canonical.

SECT. IIII. That Protestants themselves do defend the foresaid Books.
Whereas many of the Ancient Jews would not admit the foresaid Books into
their Canon, the Protestant Bibliander censureth this to be, The rashness of the
Jews; In which his Censure, he is approved by the Protetesta^t Sceltco in his
book of the second coming of Christ, englished by fol. 6.
M. Rogers, for the supposed worth thereof.

Concerning all the foresaid Books pretended now to be Apocryphal, the
Caluinists of Geneua do teach that, Admonitio ad lectorem ante Biblia Calu.
Anno 1551. per Joan. Tornesium in folio edita.
We are not to stand to the Censure of the Jews, in regard of this mayming of
the Canon of the Scriptures: and in these books there are true Prophecyes, and
hidden mysteryes, which could not be spoken but by the holy Ghost, who for
preservation of that Church which he governs and assisteth, has moved the
mind, and directed the hand of writers to write these things.

D. Bancroft in the very Page 60.
Conference before his Majesty, rejects the objections of the Jews made
against these Books, calling them, The old Cauils of the Jews, renewed by
Hierome, who was the first that gave them the name Apocrypha, which opinion
upon Ruffinus his Challenge, he after a sort disclaymed. Yea D. Bancroft so
fully defends the foresaid Books, that other of his Brethren charge him to
say that, The 2. part of the Ministers defense. page 108.
The Apocrypha were given by inspiration from God: which is all one, as to
affirm them to be truly divine and Canonical Scriptures.

And as concerning the book Ecclesiasticus, it is defended to be truly
Canonical by the Prot. writers Ep. ad Volanum.
Lascicius, and M. Parker: of which latter D. Willet says, Londoromastix. p.
69.
How audacious is this fellow, that contrary to the determination of this
Church (of England) dare make Ecclesiasticus a book of Canonical Scripture.
In Phychopannichia prope initium.
Calvin calls the author of this book A Saint. And other Prot. Clypaeus
Calu. fides dial. 2.
cite it, and ascribe it to Solomon. And also affirm, Admonitio Minist. ante
hunc librum edit. 1563. and 1570.
that therein are contained divine, singular, and ancient histories of men
approved by God.

D. Couell in answer to some that impugned these Books, says thus, Answer to
Burges p. 85.
We could without violence have affoarded them the reconcilement of other
Scriptures, and undoubtedly have proved them to be most true. In like sort
Conradus Pelican Professor at Tigure, writing his Commentary upon the foresaid
Books, says, Ep. Dedic.
I easily yielded etc. especially seeing those books were always accounted so
Ecclesiastical and Biblicall, that even from the Apostles times they were read
in the Catholic Church, with much reverence, although they were not produced
in authority against the Jews as Canonical, who received not these into their
sacred Canon: whereas they do not only not contradict in any thing, the
writings of the Law and the Prophets, but also etc. for the most part they
clearly carry the right style of the holy Ghost; certain knots (or
difficulties) being intermingled, which are found more easy to be loosed then
some have thought etc. Whereupon they were reverenced and read by holy men, yea
the sayings thereof are found to be alleged by the Apostles. So clear it is
that the forsaid Books are truly Canonical Scriptures, even by the
Confessions of Protestants themselves.

SECT. V. Sundry Objections produced against the foresaid Books, answered.
Where it is usually objected by many Protestants, that in the foresaid Books
there are many repugnancies or Contradictions, and Consequently that they are
not inspired by the holy Ghost: To omit that in those Scriptures, which are
believed by all to be Canonical, there are many hidden difficulties and
seeming 1. Reg. 8.9. 2. Paral. 5.10. and Heb. 9 4. Act. 9.7. and Act. 22.9.
Mat. 10.10 and Mar. 6.8. Mat. 26 34. and Mar. 14.68. Mar. 15.25. and Io. 19.14.
Luc. 3.35.36. and Genesis 11.12. And see Jewels Def. p. 36^.
repugna^cyes, which yet notwithstanding, we are bound to acknowledge the same
Scriptures to be true and sacred; I will for breuity only allege, what other
Protestants think, and answer themselves, to the foresaid pretended
Contradictions in the Books of Machabees, Tobie, etc. D. Couell (as before)
answers thus, Answer to M. Burges pa. 85.
We could without violence have affoarded them the reconcilement of other
Scriptures, and undoubtedly have proved them to be most true: And he Ibid. p.
87. 88 89. 90.
particularly answers certain of the pretended repugnancyes. Conradus
Pelican confesses, that in these book, Ep. Dedic.
certain knots (or difficulties) are intermingled, which are found more easy
to be loosed, then some have thought etc. Whereupon they were ever reverenced
and read by holy men, yea the sayings thereof are found to to be alleged by
the Apostles. And agreably heerunto M. Hutton at large answers and cleereth
the common Objection against 2. part. of the Answer p. 238. 239.
Judith, and the like in behalf of Ibid page 247.
Ecclesiasticus and Ibid. page 246. And see Bucers Scripta Anglicana.
Daniel. And where it is objected that these books were rejected, omitted, or
doubted of by S. Hierome, and some others of the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, as also that they were not first written in the Hebrew; these are at
large cleared and answered See heretofore. sec. 2. p. 117. etc.
heertofore by sundry Protestant writers.

But yet more in particular against the Book of Tobie, it is objected, that in
the third Chapter it is said, that Sara whom younger Tobie was to marry
dwelled in Rages a City of the Medes, where also Gabel was, Tob. 4. and yet in
the ninth Chapter it is said, that when Tobie came to the place where Sara was,
he sent from thence the Angel to Gabel in Rages: therefore Sara's house was
not in Rages, as it was said in the third Chapter. Answer. In the third
Chapter, not the City it self of Rages is there so called, but some place
there near unto it, as he is said to dwell in London, who dwells in
Westminster, or other place near adjoining.

Against the Book of Wisdom, Calvin Inst. l 1. c. 12.. 8.
obiecteth, that it erreth in affirming that Idolatry begun by
superstitiously honoring the Images of the dead, seeing Labans Idols and
others more ancient, were before any Images of dead men were honored. Answer.
Calvin supposes that which is false, to wit, that Labans Idol was not the
Image of a man: for the Hebrew word Teraphim, so signifies, and the English
Bibles of 1552. and 1578. translate Images. But because they were Images of
false Gods, and for that Laban called them his Gods, the Bible of 1603.
translateth it better, Idols, as the Latin and Greek have. It is also
certain, that See Eusebius initio Chron. Cyril. l. 3. in Iul. prope fin.
Ninus king of the Assirians long before Laban, set up the Image of his Father
Belus (called Jupiter) to be publicly honored by the people for a God: which
though it be the first that is recounted, to be publicly set up to be adored,
yet this does not hinder, but that the first private Idolatry, was the Image of
the Son dead, made by his Father, and by him privately honored, as the book
of Wisdom mentions, Cypr. l. de Idol. vanit. init. Chrisost. ho. 87. in Mat.
Egesip. apud Hier. l. de viris illust.
and several good Authors teach.

Sundry things are urged against the Books of Machabees, as first by D. Fulke,
that, Against Purg pa. 208.
the author commends one Razis for killing himself, which is contrary to the
word of God. But S. Austine shall answer him, saying, l. 2. cont. Ep. Gaud. c.
23. and ep. 61 ad Dulcit.
Touching this his death, the Scripture has told how it was done, (but) it
has not commended it as shough it were to be done: for though the Author
reporting the truth of the fact, say, that he ran boldly, and threw down
himself manfully, yet does he not commend it, as done virtuously. The Book of
Judges C. 16.30.
reports how Sampson killed himself and others, saying, Let me dye with the
Philistines; and the Apostle yet numbreth Heb. 15.32.
him among the faithful, and S. Austine De Ciu. Dei. l. 1. c. 21.
affirms that he was commanded hereto, by peculiar inspiration: therefore
though Razis had been commended, yet had it hereby been sufficiently answered
and explained.

Fulke Ag Pur. page 209.
and others further urge, that the Author craves pardon for his writing, a
thing (think they) far from the Majesty of Gods spirit. Also that his Book is
an Abridgement 2. Match. 2.24 27.
of the five Books of Jason the Cyrenean, whereas the holy Ghost makes (as
Fulke thinks) no abridgment of other men's writing. And that he shows, what
labor and sweat it was to him, in making this Abridgment, which sauoureth not
of that spirit, by which the Scriptures were written. Answ. He does insinuate
for pardon, not of errors, but elocution, if he has not spoken so worthily. In
which sense S. Paul said, 2. Cor. 11.6.17.
Though rude in speech, yet not in knowledge. And, Romans 15.14.15.
I speak not according to God, but as it were in foolishnes. And he affirms
the Romans to be To. 15.13.
Replenished with all knowledge, insinuating therefore his own excuse in
writing to them, saying, I have written to you more boldly in part, as it were
putting you in remembrance: he requesteth also the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 11.1.
to bear some little of his folly.

D. Morton would further euade, by affirming, that Apol. part. 2. l. 1. c. 3.
the Apostle speaks upon the adversaries supposall, but this Author (of
Machabees) (...), and upon the knowledge of his own weakness: as also the holy
Ghost never wills what he cannot, neither does he ever doubt that he cannot
what he will. But it is untrue, that the Apostle speaks in the forsaid
places, only upon his Adversaries supposall, for his words are much more
absolute, then these other of the Author of the Machabees, If well, and as
befitteh the History, this is that which I would: but if less worthily, I am
to be pardoned. Whereas S. Paul acknowledged, that he was rude in speech; that
he spoke not according to God, but as it were in foolishnes, and requested the
Corinthians to bear some little of (his) folly: neither can the pretended
doutfulnes of the Author of the Machabees, be more imputed to the want of the
holy Ghost directing, then the confessed rudeness and folly of the Apostle;
none of these arguing any want of truth in that which was written, but only
want of Elocution in the writers.

As to the second, the Book of Kings signifies in diverse places, that it
abridgeth stories, telling where they be written more at large in other books
not Canonical. S. Mark is called the Aug. de consensu Euang. l. 1. c. 23.
Abridger of S. Matthew: and every Sermon and Letter in the Acts of the
Apostles, is but an Abridgment.

To the third, S. Luke writ his Gospel, Luc. 1.3.
Having diligently attained to all things from the beginning. And Whitaker
acknowledges most clearly, that an Against Reinolds. p. 393 And see cont.
Duraeum l. 4. p. 347.
Endeavor to learn and write the certain truth, (and) to enquire the truth
with all diligence, detracteth nothing from the wisdom and majesty of Gods
spirit: And as for the labor taken in writing thereof, it is nothing more
prejudicial to him, then to S. Paul, who in the inditing of his Epistles, did
sometimes Romans 16.22. 2 Thessalonians 3.15.
for his ease, use another man's handwriting.

Others object a contrariety through ignorance of the story, as that in some
places it is said, Antiochus did dye in Babylon, and in others, that he dyed in
Nanca, and yet again, that he dyed by the way, so that This one man (as Willet
Synop. p. 11.
urges) dyed thrice. Answer. Thc Books of Machabees make mention of sundry
Princes, Enemies to the Jews, who bore the name of Antiochus, as Antiochus 1.
Machab. 1.11. and 8.9.
the great, Antiochus 1. Match. 1.11.
the noble, and Antiochus the son of Demetrius 1. Match. 15.1.
. But though the before mentioned cha^ces should all of them concern one and
the same Antiochus, yet they may be well taken to signify his one death in one
place: For in the chance at 2. Match. 1 13.14, 15. etc.
Nanca, Antiochus and the Captain there mentioned, were two several persons,
and the Captain only is there said to be slain. And as for the death of
Antiochus mentioned (1. Match. 6.16.) and his death elsewhere (2. Match. 9.5.28.)
mentioned to be by the way in a strange Country, this last signifies one and
the same death with that of 1. Match. 6.13. where he likewise mentions that he
must dye in a strange land, the presence of his friend Philip being alike also
mentioned in 1. Match. 6.14. and 2. Match. 9.29.
both the said places. But to answer in general, whereas Perkins professes
to Reform. Cath. p. 304.
reverence the Books of Macha^bes, and the rest of the Apocrypha, preferring
them before any other books of men, if Protestants did but reverence them as
Salust, or Liuy, they would never think them to be so grossly repugnant, as
their foresaid objection pretends. See heretofore Cap. 3. sec. 5.
And though some (25) examples of seeming incongruity (which we could not thus
easily avoid) should appear in any of the Scriptures, yet ought we religiously
to impute the difficulty to our own ignorance, rather then to charge the
Scriptures with untruth.

Others yet object, that those persons for whom Judas Machabeus caused
sacrifice to be offered, had 2. Match. 12.40.
under their Coats etc. some of the Donaries of the Idols etc. from which the
law forbids the Jews: and therefore Judas might not lawfully pray for them.
Answer. All may be prayed for, saving such as are known to dye in final
impenitence, and therefore Judas Machabeus (not knowing the contrary) might
charitably hope, that many of those that were slain, did repent them of that
offense before their death, according as the Prophet says, Ps. 78.34.
when he slew them, they sought him, and returned. And that Judas had this
opinion of them, is most plainly signified by these words, 2. Match. 12.45.
Because he considered, that they which had taken their sleep with goodlines,
had very good grace laid up for them. So childish and weak are these
objections, in regard of the greatest power and authority of the Church,
decreeing the foresaid Books to be truly Canonical.

CHAP. VI. The true State of the Question, concerning the Translation of the
Bible.
Whether the Translation of the sacred Scriptures, ordinarily called the Old
Vulgar Latin Translation, be to be used, and preferred before all Translations
made by Protestants. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
THE Catholic Church, Council. Trident. Sess. 4. Decret. de Editione and vsu
sacrorum Librorum.
considering that no little profit might come to the Church of God, if it were
made known amongst all the Latin Editions of the Scriptures which are
published, which were to be houlden for authentical; decrees and declares,
that this Old and Vulgar Edition, which by the long use of so many ages, is
approved in the Church, in public Lectures, Disputations, Sermons and
Expositions, should be houlden for authentical, and that no man under any
pretext dare, or presume to reject the same. And in the Council of Basil it
was taught, that Orat. de punitione peccat. public.
by the (Church) the Translation of Hierome, others omitted, is received. And
again, Orat. Joan. de Ragufio.
many have translated the Bible into Latin, whether from the Hebrew or the
Greek, yet the Translation of our only most glorious Hierome, by the
authority of the Church, is preferred. And the same is Bellar. de verbo Dei l.
2. c. 10. Rhem. Test. in the Preface.
still the constant Doctrine of the Catholic Church.

Points Disputable.
Some See Morton Apolog. par. 2. l 1. c. 6. Iacobus Episcopus Constantinop.
Praefat. in Psalmos. Canus de locis Theolog. l. 2. c. 13.
Catholic writers teach, that the Jews in hatred of Christian Religion, did
purposely corrupt and deprave many places of Scriptures. Others Driedo l. 2. de
Eccl. dogm. c. 1. Bell. de verb. Dei, l. 2. c. 2.. His igitur.
think that the Scriptures written in the Hebrew, were not generally corrupted
by the meames and malice of the Jews: neither yet, that they are altogether
perfect and pure, but have in them certain errors, which have crept in,
partly by negligence, partly by ignorance of the Printers; which yet are not of
such moment, but that in those things which belong to faith and manners, the
sacred Scriptures integrity, may not be thought to be wanting. And this is much
more probable.

Some See Mort. Apol. part. 2. l. 1. c. 6.
deny the Greek Coppies to be most pure fountains: but others affirm that
the Greek Copy which now is extant in the Church, to be the self same, which
the Greek Church used in the time of S. Hierome, and long before even unto the
times of the Apostles. Some See Mort. Apol. par. 2. l. 1. c. 8.
teach that our vulgar Edition was S. Hieromes Translation, but others deny it.
Some Ibid. l. 1. c. 11.
(as D. Morton reports) think, that there are therein some errors, through
the ignorance or negligence of the Translatour: but others think that there is
not any error of weight therein.

Protestants untruths.
Calvin Antidot. in Sess 4. Conc. Trid.
avouches, that the Fathers of the Tridentine Council decreed, that such were
not to be heard as produced liquor out of the fountain it self. But no such
thing is to be seen in the Council. He also affirms, Ibid.
that there are not 3. verses together in the Vulgar Edition, which are not
stained with some foul Corruption. And yet himself under taking to discover
the Corruptions of the Psalter, does not observe so much as one in the first
Psalm: so unmindful is this Liar.

Chemnitius forgeth, Exam. Conc. Tr^d. Sess. 4.
that in the Index Librorum prohibitorum, published by Paul the fourth, all
Editions of the Bible, even of the Old Interpreter, are condemned: whereas only
such are there condemned, as were either made by Heretics, or suspected
Printers. He also pretends, that therefore the Vulgar Edition is made
authentical by the Council, because it makes wholly for Popish doctrine. But
in this, besides impudency, he shows Imprudence, for Prot. See hereafter in
the 2. Section.
do acknowledge the vulgar Edition to be most ancient, and most sincere: and so
then consequently are our Catholic Doctrines most ancient and sincere.

Protestant Doctrine.
Although there be many Translations of the Bible made by Protestants, yet, we
account (says D. Whitaker De sacra Scrip. Contr. 1. q 2. pa. 128. Piscator
volum. Tbesium Theolo. p. 34.
no Edition to be authentical, but only the Hebrew in the Old, and the Greek
in the New Testament. And as for the Vulgar Latin Edition, it is, in Whitakers
opinion, Whitak in his Answer to Reinolds. Pref. p. 25. 26.
an old rotten Edition etc. full of faults, errors, and Corruptions. De sacra
Scrip. q. 5. c. 11. p. 543.
then which nothing can be more faulty or disteyned: and, of all Answer to
Reinolds. p. 213 318.
others most corrupt. Yea Way to the Church. p. 29.
I think (says White) the Sun never saw any thing more defective and
maimed, then the Vulgar Latin. But I shall shortly show, that even in the
sunshyne of the Reformed Gospel, there are many Protestants Translations
published, most defective, and maimed, and the vulgar Latin Translation for
sincerity, confessedly to be preferred before them all.

Protestant Errors.
Swinglians, Praefat. ^igurinae Editionis Bil.
Anabaptists, and Caluinists agree in this, that they will have no Translation
of the Bible to be authentical: and they think it unjust, that the Church
should be tied to any one Translation.

SECT. II. It is proved by sundry Arguments, that the Vulgar Latin Translation
of the Bible, is to be preferred before all Translations made by Protestants.
TO make trial with M. Whitaker, and that by Jurors of his own pack, whether
our Vulgar Edition of the Bible, for purity and sincerity, be not much to be
preferred before any Edition Protestant that ever was; first concerning the
Translation of the Bible made by Luther, Swinglius writing unto him concerning
the corruptions thereof, says, Tom, 2, ad Luther. l. de Sacram. page 412. 413.
Thou do corrupt the word of God, thou art seen to be a manifest and common
Corrupter, and peruerter of the holy Scriptures: how much are we ashamed of
thee, who have hitherto esteemed thee beyond all measure, and now prove thee to
be such a man. Keckemanus affirms likewise, that System. 8. Theol. l. 1. pa.
188.
Luthers Dutch Translation of the old Testament, especially of Job, and the
Prophets, has its blemishes, and those no small ones Some few of Luthers
corruptions I will only touch, as where it is said, ^. Io. 5.7.
There be three which give Testimony in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
holy Ghost and these three be one: this being a most evident place in proof of
the B. Trinity, is wholly omitted, and left out by Luther in his Dutch Bible. In
like manner where it is said, Romans 3.28.
We account a man to be justified by Faith, without the works of the Law;
Luther here translateth justified by Faith, alone, so adding to the text in
maintenance of his error, the word, alone; yea being admonished of this so
foul a Corruption, he persisted wilful, saying, Tom. 5. Germ fol. 141. 144.
So I will, so I command, let my will be instead of reason etc. Luther will
have it so. And concludes lastly, the word (alone) must remain in my new
Testament, although all the Papists go mad they shall not take it from thence:
I am sorry that I did not also add these two words, omnibus and omnium, to
wit sine omnibus operibus omnium legum, without all works of all laws. Also
where it is said, 2. Pet. 1.10.
Wherefore Brethren, labor the more, that by good works you may make sure
your vocation and Election; Luther here omitteth those words (by good works)
which yet are acknowledged to be parcel of the Text by the Protestant
Redemption of Mankind. p. 382.
Kinnedoncius, and by our English Translations.

Luther in some requital to Swinglius, rejects the Translations of the
Swinglians, terming them in matter of Divinity, See Swinglius Tom. 2. ad
Luther. l. de Sacram. f. 388. 389.
Fools, Asses, Antichrists, deceivers, and of a like understanding: In so
much, that when Froscheuerus the Swinglian Printer of Zurick sent him a Bible
translated by the Divines there, Luther would not receive the same, but sending
it back, rejected it, as witness Hospinian Hist Sacram. part. alt. fol. 183.
Lauath. hist. Sacram. f. 32.
and Lauatherus.

The Tigurine Translation was in like manner so distasteful to other Protestant
Divines, that Hospin. in Concord. Discord f. 238.
The Elector of Saxony, in great anger rejected it etc. and placed Luthers
Translation in room thereof, though you have seen before how foul it was.

The Translation set forth by Oecolampadius, and the Divines of Basil, is
reproved by Beza, who affirms that, In Respons. ad Defens. and Respons.
Castal.
The Basil Translation is in many places wicked, and altogether differing
from the mind of the holy Ghost

The Translation of Castalio (which D. Humfrey affirms to be De Rat.
Interpret. l. 2. p. 62. 63. 189.
thoroughly conferred, examined, and polished, and which, as Gesnerus In
biblioth Seb. Castal.
says, does far surpass all the Translations of all men hitherto set forth,
in like commendation whereof other Protestants See Castal. Defense p. 236. and
Hipperius and Melancton set before Castalios great Bible of 1573.
do agree) is nevertheless condemned by Beza, as being In Test. 1556. in Praef.
and in Annot. in Mat. 3. and in 1. Cor. 1. and Mat. 4. and Luc. 2. and in Act.
8. and 10.
Sacrilegious, wicked, and Ethnicall. In so much as Castalio wrote a special
Treatise in defense of his own Translation, complaining there in his Preface,
and saying, Some reject our Latin and French Translations of the Bible, not
only as unlearned, but also as wicked, and dissering in many places from the
mind of the holy Ghost.

As Concerning Caluins Translation, that famous Protestant Carolus Molinaeus
affirms, that In sua Translat. Nou. Test. part. 12. fol. 110.
Calvin in his Harmony, makes the text of the Gospel to leap up and down,
he uses violence to the letter of the Gospel, and besides this, adds to
the Text.

Touching Beza's Translation, the same Molinaeus charge him, that In Testam.
part. 20. 30 40 64. 65. 66. 74. 99. and part. 8 13. 14. 21. 23.
He actually changes the Text, and gives further sundry instances of his
Corruptions. Castalio also, that Osiand. cent. 16. p 753.
learned Caluinist, and most skillful in the tongues, reprehendeth Beza in a
whole book of this matter, and further says, In. def. Translat. p. 170.
I will not note all his Errors (in Translation) for that would require a
volume over great. All which but confirms K. James his true and learned
Censure in Conference before the K Majesty pa. 46
thinking the Geneua Translation to be worst of all: And his further affirming,
That in the Ibid. p. 47.
Marginall notes annexed to the Geneua Translation, some are very partial,
untrue, seditious etc. Agreably to this also says M Parkes to D. Willet,
Apology concerning Christ's descending into hell. at Ddd.
As for the Geneua Bibles, it is to be wished, that either they may be purged
from those manifold errors, which are both in the Text, and in the Margent, or
else utterly prohibited. Thus far of the confessed corruptions in the foraine
Protestants Translations.

But to come now to our English ones, the Puritanes complain unto his Majesty,
that, A Petition directed to his Majesty. pa. 76.
Our Translation of the Psalms, comprised in our Book of Common Prayer, does
in addition, subtraction, and alteration, differ from the truth of the Hebrew
in 200. places at the least. In so much, as they rest doubtful, Ib p. 75.
whether a man with a safe Conscience may subscribe thereto. Yea they have
written and published a special Treatise entitled, A Defense of the Ministers
reasons for refusal of subscribing; the whole Argument and scope whereof, is
only concerning mistranslating, and the title upon the frontispice of every
page throughout the Book, is, concerning Translations: Yea whereas it
contains 26. Chapters, the Reader may see before the beginning of the Book,
the title of every such Chapter pointing to the Mistranslatings there in
particular handled.

M. Carlisle avouches, that the English Translatours have That Christ descended
into Hell p. 116. 117. 118. 121. 144.
depraved the sense, obscured the truth, and deceived the ignorant; that in
many places they do detort the Scriptures from the right Sense, and that they
show themselves to love darkness more then light, filshood more then truth;
wherun to D. Whitaker has no better answer then to say, Answer to Rainolds p.
255.
what M. Carlisle with some others has written, against some places translated
in our Bibles, makes nothing to the purpose; I have not said otherwise, but
that some things may be amended, which yet to this day, remain not amended.

Yea sundry Ministers have not forborne in their great Zeal, to signify unto
his Majesty, that the English Translation of the Bible, is The Abridgment which
the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese delivered to his Majesty p. 12.
A Translation that takes away from the Text: that Ib. p 11. 12.
adds to the text, and that sometimes to the changing or obscuring of the
meaning of the holy Ghost: Calling it yet further. Ib p. 13.
A Translation which is absurd and senseless, Ib p. 13. 14.
perverting in many places the meaning of the holy Ghost.

In regard of which perverting the meaning of the holy Ghost, Protestants of
tender Conscience make great scruple to subscribe unto them: for so does Burges
excuse himself saying, Apology sec. 6. And in Couels Answer to Burges. p. 93.
How shall I approve under my hand, a Translation which has many omissions,
many additions, which sometimes obscureth, sometimes peruerteth the sense,
being sometimes senseles, sometimes contrary.

Now, in prevention of so great an evil, and scandal following, Broughton,
one of the chiefest of the Puritanicall Linguists, wrote an Epistle to the
Lords of the Council, desiring them to procure speedily a new Translation:
because that (quoth he) which is now in England, is full of Errors. And in his
Aduertisements of Corruptions, he tells the Protestant Bishops, that, their
public Translation of Scriptures into English is such, as that it peruerteth
the text of the Old Testament in 848 places, and that it causes millions of
millions to reject the New Testament, and to run to eternal flames. A
dreadful saying for all Protestant Professors.

Now these our Pro^estant English Translations, being thus confessedly corrupt,
absurd, sensles, contrary, and perverting the meaning of the holy Ghost had not
his Majesty just cause to affirm, that he Conf. before his Majesty pa. 46.
could never yet see a Bible well translated into English? From all which then
it further ensues, that our Protestant Bibles being thus falsely translated,
they can be no certain and infallible means, whereby to decyde Controversies
in matters of Faith; Translations (according to D. Whitaker) Answer to Rein p.
235.
being so far forth only the word of God, as they faithfully express the
meaning of the authentical text. Which none of them do, but the direct
contrary is clearly here made manifest by no weaker proofs, then by their
plain Confessions, to their eternal shame, and like spiritual ruin to all
that follow the said Translations.

Who can now expect, but that Prot. inueighing thus bitterly against all their
own Translations, which yet they, and their simple followers, do daily read
and follow; but that they will make most serpentine Satyrs against the Vulgar
Latin, which all Catholics approve? But have a little patience, and you shall
see, that as they do thus agree to disagree in their own Translations,
mutually condemning (as before) each other: so also have they upon a second and
more advised Consideration, affoardedd honorable testimony even of our Vulgar
Latin Translation, had from Rome, and See before. sec 1.
approved since by General Council: for so Beza confesses that, Annot. in
Luc. 1.1.
The Old Interpreter seems to have interpreted the holy Books with greatest
Religion. In Praef. nou. Test.
And, I do embrace, says he, for the most part, the Vulgar Edition, and
prefer it before all others. So that with Beza, all Protestants Translations,
must come behind our Vulgar.

D. Humfrey confesses that, De ratione Interpret. l. 1. p. 74.
The old Interpreter was much addicted to the propriety of words, and that over
scrupulously, which yet, I interpret him to have done upon Religion (or
Conscience) not upon ignorance. Here is he free from malice and ignorance in
translating.

In regard of which integrity and learning, Molinaeus signifies his like
special liking thereof saying, In Nou. Test. part. 30.
I can very hardly depart from the Vulgar and accustomed reading, which also I
am accustomed earnestly to defend: In Luc. 17.
Yea I prefer the Vulgar Edition before Erasmus, Bucer, Bullinger, Brentius,
the Tigurine Translation, also before John Calvin, and all others. What could
be spoken more honorably for our Vulgar?

And yet Conradus Pelican 2. part. of the Def. of the Ministers. page ^6.
(A man much commended by Bucer, Swinglius, Melancthon, and all famous men
about Basil, Tigure, Berne etc.) adds a far higher Commendation, in these
words, In Praef. in Psalter. Anno 1584
I find the Vulgar Edition of the Psalter, to agree for the sense, with such
dexterity, learning, and fidelity of the Hebrew; that I doubt no^ but the
Greek and latin Interpreter, was a man most learned, most Godly, and of a
Prophetical Spirit. Which certainly are the best properties of a good
Translatour.

Now, in regard of these laudable premises, D. Dove gives wholesome counsel,
saying, Persu^sion to Recusants. p. 16.
We grant it fit, that for uniformity in quotations of places, in Schools and
Pulpits, one Latin Text should be used. And we can be contented for the
antiquity thereof to prefer that (to wit the Vulgar) before all other Latin
books.

And if the Antiquity thereof may carry with it any good respect, D. Couell will
tell you, that Answ. to Burges p. 94.
It was used in the Church 1300. years ago, and himself doubts not to Ibid.
prefer that Translation before others: In so much that whereas the English
Protestant Translations, be many and among themselves disagreeing; he
concludes, that of all those, Ibid pa. 91.
The approved Translation authorized by the Church of England, is that which
comes nearest to the Vulgar, and is commonly called the Bishops Bible.

Add lastly hereunto, that S. Hierome by the appointment of Pope Damasus, was
author, or rather Reuiewer, of this our Common Edition: In so much, that in his
Preface before the new Testament dedicated to Pope Damasus, he says thereof;
You cause me to make a New Work of an old, that I after so many Copies of the
Scriptures, dispersed through the world, should sit, as a certain Judge, and
determine which of them agree with the true Greek. In Catal. fine See Heb. de
verbo Dei. l. 3. c. 9.
I have restored the New Testament, to the truth of the Greek, and have
translated the Old according to the Hebrew. Praef psalt. qua est ep. 134. and
in Prologo ad lib Regum.
Truly I will affirm it confidently, and will produce many witnesses of this
work, that I have changed nothing from the truth of the Hebrew etc. ask any
of the Hebricians, and you shall clearly see it.

But peradventure S. Hierome with some Protestants, will be thought partial in
his own case, let us therefore see S. Austines worthy testimony of S. Hierome
and this Translation. De ciu. Dei. l. 18. c. 43. and ep 80. ad Hieron. c. 3.
See Greg. l 20. Mor. c. 23. Isidor. l 6. Etym c. 5. 7. and de divine. officijs.
l. 1. c. 12. Beda in Martyrolog. Cashod. 11 Instit. ca. 1 l. 21 Crispinus of
the Estate of the Church. p. 137. Fulke. ag. Rhem. Jest. in 1. Cor. 14. sec.
14. pa. 548.
There was not wanting (says S. Augustine) in these our days, Hierome the
Priest, a man most learned, and skillfull in all the three tongues, who not
from the Greek, but from the Hebrew translated the same Scriptures into latin:
whose learned labor the jews yet confess to be true; yea the truth and due
respect heerof is such, that D. Whitaker (upon a more sober and stayed
judgment) does alter the former vehemence of his style saying. Answer to
Reinolds p. 241.
S. Hierome I reverence, Damasus I commend, and the work I confess to be
godly and profitable to the Church.

From all this I may conclude, that the sacred Scriptures translated by Prot.
cannot be to them any certain Judge in matters of faith, seeing all the said
Translations are confessedly false, corrupt and impious: and further, that in
all their Disputes, Pulpits, and Writings, they are bound to follow our Vulgar
Edition, seeing themselves prefer it for truth and sincerity, before all others.

SECT. III. Objections against the Vulgar Translation, answered.
IT is objected, that we we are rather to have recourse to the fountaynes of
the Hebrew and Greek, which were written by Prophets and Apostles, who could
not err, whereas the latin Translations are of diverse interpreters, who may
err. Answer. The fountayns or originalls are to be preferred before
Translations, when it is certain that the fountaynes are pure, and not
troubled or corrupt; but it is most certain, that they are in some places
corrupted. And it may truly be thought, that as the Latin Church was ever more
constant in keeping true faith, then the Greek: so it was always more
careful in preserving the Scriptures from corruption. And though it be true,
that an Interpreter may err, yet in that which the Church has approved, he
has not erred in any matter of faith or manners, though some smaller errors
of Printers I do not deny.

Chemnitius obiecteth that these words (Ipsa Genesis 3.
conteret caput tuum) are corrupted, that thereby we may prove the Intercession
of the blessed Virgin Mary: And that instead thereof, we should read, Ipsum
conteret caput tuum, seeing it was spoken of the seed, which ^as Christ, as all
ancient writers do teach. Answ. 1. Some books of the Vulgar Edition have
Ipsa, and some others ipse. 2. Though many Hebrew books have ipse, yet there
has not wanted some which have ipsa, and the points being taken away, the
Heword may be translated ipsa. L. 2. de Genesis cont. Manich. c 18. and l. 51 de
Genisi ad Literam c. 36. Amb. l. de fuga saeculi. c. 7. Chrysostom. hom. 17. in
Genesis Greg. l. 1. Mor c 38. Beda and alij in hunc locum.
And, ipsa, is read by S. Austine, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Gregory,
Bid, and sundry others. And though the word, Conteret, in the Hebrew be of the
Masculine gender, and so should relate to Semen, which also in Hebrew is of the
Masculine gender; yet it is not rare in the Ruth. 1.8. Ester. 1.20. Eccles.
12.5.
Scriptures to have Pronounes and verbes of the Masculine gender, to be joined
with Nownes of the feminine. He likewise urges, that in these words, Genesis 14.
Melchisdech Rex salem proferens panem and vinum, erat enim Sacerdos Dei
altissimi, the word obtulit, and the Conjunction enim, are not in the Hebrew,
but so translated, in proof of the Sacrifice of the Mass. Answ. The Vulgar
Edition has not obtulit, but protulit, and the Conjunction is in the Hebrew
equiualently.

Lastly, he obiecteth, that in these words Eccles. 16.
Misericordia faciet locum vnicuique secundum meritum operum suorum, that the
word merit, is not in the Greek, but added to prove the merit of works. Answ.
(...), does signify in Latin most properly, pro meritis operum, for the merit
of their works. Such poor stuff do Heretics find against our Vulgar
Translation.

CHAP. VII. The true State of the Question, concerning Traditions.
Whether, besides the sacred Scriptures, or written word of God, there be not
another word of God, not written, which is called Traditions. And whether their
authority be certain and infallible, in deciding matters of Faith. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
HAVING hitherto proved, that neither the Scriptures of themselves, nor as
conferred together, nor yet as expounded by the Private Spirit, can be our sole
Rule of Faith, or Judge of all Controversies; It now next follows, that I
speak of the word not written, but delivered from Christ or his Apostles, by
word of mouth: In which the Catholic Church knowing, that the truth of the
Gospel, which was first taught by Christ, and afterward by his Apostles,
Council. Trident. Decret. de Canon. Scripturis.
is contained in the written Books, and Traditions not written, which being
received by the Apostles from the mouth of Christ, or from the Apostles
themselves, the holy Ghost teaching them, as it were, from hand to hand
delivered, have come unto us: The Church (I say) following the Examples of the
Orthodoxall Fathers, receives and reuerenceth with like affection of piety,
all the Books as well of the Old Testament as the New seeing one God is the
author of both; as also the Traditions belonging both to faith and manners, as
taught from the mouth of Christ, or from the holy Ghost, and by continual
succession preserved in the Catholic Church. Here the Council receives and
reuerenceth, with like piety, the word written, and not written, to wit,
Traditions.

The second Council of Nice decrees thus, Act. 7. p. 686. Tom. 3.
We confess with one consent, that we will keep Ecclesiastical Traditions,
whether by writing or custom, being in force and decreed etc. Again, These
things being so going the Kings high way, and continuing in the Doctrine of the
holy Fathers, and the Catholic Church, in which the holy Ghost dwells,
observing Traditions we do defyne etc. who shall dare to think otherwise, or
teach, or after the Custom of wicked Heretics to violate Ecclesiastical
Traditions etc. If they be Bishops or Clergy men, let them be deposed, if
monks or lay men, let them be excommunicate etc. If any shall not regard the
Traditions of the Church being in force, whether by writing or Custom, let him
be accursed.

In the eight General Council it is defyned, that Act. 10.
The great Apostle Paul does clearly admonish us, To keep the Traditions which
we have received, whether by speech, or by the Epistle of holy men, who have
formerly shyned.

In the Council of Sens, it is taught that, Decret. 5.
It is dangerous to be in that Error, that nothing is to be thought to be
admitted which is not drawn from Scripture: for many things are derived from
Christ to posterity by the hands of the Apostles, from mouth to mouth etc.
which though they seem not to be expressly contained in sacred Scripture, yet
they come to be houlden without all doubt. That sundry things are to be
received, believed, and observed by Tradition, which are not expressly taught by
the Scriptures, it is generally acknowledged by all Bellar. de verbo Dei l. 4
c. 3. Rhem. Test p. 559. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Catholics.

Protestants Untruths.
Calvin affirms, that Instit l. 4. c. 10.. 19.
The Romish masters will urge, that there is not any little Ceremony with them,
which is not to be judged Apostolical: but Calvin cannot allege any one of
those masters, so much as intimating any such thing. Chemnitius avouches us
to teach, that Exam. Sess. 4. p. 68.
God appointed that the Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, should not be
written in books, but only delivered by word of mouth: And Ibid. page 18^.
himself affirms, that the Apostles were commanded to write. But both these
are untrue, and the truth in the mean; for we do not teach that God prohibited
the foresaid writing, for then the Apostles and Evangelists should have sinned
in writing: neither can he prove, that God did command it, as shall appear
hereafter. Again, speaking of some words in the Consecration of the Chalice,
he says, Ibid. pa. 410.
Popish writers have noted by what Roman Bishops they were added. But this is
most false, for though they have noted, what other parts of the Canon of the
Mass were added, and by whom, yet not any one is noted to have added any thing
to the words of Consecration. Yet further, Ibid.
If any one shall but show himself to doubt, that all the Canon of the Mass
is from Apostolical Tradition, he is to be accursed. But this is gross
forgery, for though we say, that the chiefest part of the Canon is from
Apostolical Tradition, yet we deny not, but that there is commemoration made
of diverse Saints, who lived above 200. years after Christ.

And again: L. Theol. Jesuit. etc.
Reader, thou shall observe in this place, what difference Jesuits make
between the Written Traditions of the Apostles, and those which themselves do
invent under the name of the Apostles; They say, those that are written, are
arbitrary (or may be changed at pleasure) but those that are feigned, to bynd
under peril of salvation. Who would think, that any man should run the
peril of Damnation, for the belying of Jesuits, not being able to show the
least proof thereof.

John White very wisely thinks, that Traditions Way to the true Church. p. 3.
being once admitted, every Friars dream, and base Custom of the Romish
Church shall be thrust upon you for an Article of Religion necessary to Eternal
life. It seems the poor man thought that Catholics are as simple as
himself. Melancthon blushed not to say, L. Concordiae. p. 188. In Apolog. Art.
15.
Great books are extant, yea whole Libraries containing not one syllable of
Christ, of faith in Christ, of good works for every man's vocation, but only
gathering Traditions. And Lib. Concor. p. 263. in Apol. de Potest. Ecclesiast.
they require their Traditions to be observed more exactly then the Gospel.
The Def. of the Articles Art. 6. p. 29.
Papists (says M. Rogers) more cruelly do punish the violators of their own
Traditions and Ordinances, then they do the breakers of Gods Commandments. But
certainly Rogers, and his lying Brethren, will be cruelly punished for feygning
such Impostures, and broaching such incredible lies.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Church has decreed, that the Art. 6.
holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation: So that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required
of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the faith, or be
thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. Here it teaches, that nothing is
to be believed or thought necessary to salvation, which is not proved by
Scripture. And now you shall hear what it thinks of Traditions.

Whitaker expressly says, Controu. 1. quaest. 3. c. 10. p. 327.
We do not respect Traditions not written. Reform. Cath. contro. 20. c. 2.
We do acknowledge (says Perkins) only the written word of God. According to
Calvin, In gratulat. ad Praecentorem. p. 377.
Nothing is to be believed, which is not expressed in Scripture. Yea, says
Beza, In Romans 1.17.
Christians do acknowledge no other object of that faith, then the written word
of God. But I showed a little before how hardly they treated their sole object
of faith, the written word of God: And I shall shortly make it appear, that
they are enforced to acknowledge another object of faith, even unwritten
Traditions.

Protestants agree with ancient Heretics.
The (21) Donatists in their Disputations, Aug l. de vnitate Eccl. c. 19
urged only the Scriptures, and S. Austine objected to them Traditions, and the
custom of the Church. For the same Error were the Arrians condemned by S.
Epiphanius Haer. 75. Aug. cont. Maximin. l. 1. c. ^. and vlt.
and S. Austin: the Eunomians by S. Basil: L. de Spir. Sancto. c. 27. 29.
the Nestorians, Eutichians, and others by the 7. Act. 1.
Synod; and the Apostolicks by Hom. 66. in Cantic.
S. Bernard. From such infamous Ancestors are our modern Sectaries descended,
who deny all Traditions, and the word of God not written.

SECT. II. It is proved by the Sacred Scriptures, that besides themselves, or
the written word, there are certain Traditions of the Church or word of God,
not written, which we are bound likewise to believe and observe.
IT is evident, that Moses, Exodus 24.4.
Who wrote all the words of our Lord, was (as Perk. Reform Cath. p. 133.
Whitak. de sacra Scrip. p. 99. 583. 752. Zanch. de sacra Scrip. p. 133.
Perkins, Whitaker, and Zanchius confess) the first penman of holy Scripture:
And yet before his time the Church continued two thousand years, only by
Tradition without Scripture: whereby it is evident that during all that time
before Moses, the true belieuers were not instructed, nor their differences
decyded by Scripture which was not then written, but otherwise by Tradition of
the Church of those times.

But Reform. Cath. p. 133. Whitak de sacra Scrip. p. 752.
Perkins and Whitaker do answer heerunto, that, God during all that time,
supplied the want of Scriptures by apparitions to the Patriarchs. But this is
only imagined, for in the written apparitions, no such thing does appear: for
the Patriarchs unto whom he so appeared before Moses time, were Genesis 14.6.
Cain, at what time Abel was so religious, that he Genesis 4.4.
offered of the first begotten of his flock etc. and our Lord had respect to
Abel and to his gifts. Also Noe, Genesis 6.13. and 7.1. and 8.15. and 9.1.
who being likewise faithful, Genesis 8.20.
built an Altar to our Lord etc. and offered holocausts upon the Altar.
Abraham, Genesis 12.1. and 13.14. and 15.1. and 17.1. and 18.13.
at what time God made or repeated the promise to him, not then instructing him
in any point of faith which Abraham had forgotten, for Abraham then believed,
and Genesis 12.7.
builded an Altar to our Lord. Isaac, Genesis 26.2.24.
to whom he also rehearsed the forsaid promise, Isaac being then so faithful,
as that Genesis 26.25.
he builded an Altar, and called upon the name of our Lord. Lastly he appeared
to Jacob, Genesis 28.13.
to whom he renewed the same promise, Jacob being at that time so faithful, as
that God then said to him, Genesis 28.15.
I will be thy keeper whither soever thou go. The Apparitions therefore of God
unto the Patriarchs before Moses time, were not to supply the Scriptures
want, by instructing them in any Points of their Religion then formerly
forgotten, for it appears fully by the Premises, that the Patriarchs, to
whom these Apparitions were made before Moses time, were at the time of the
said Apparitions, not forgetful of Gods Law, but faithful and Zealous therein:
And therefore the Apparitions so made to them, were not to instruct them in
Doctrine then forgotten, but to signify to them Gods other pleasure: which
truth is yet more evident, in that as well in Exodus 3.4. and 4.1. and 6.1. Nu.
12.4.
Moses time, as also after Ios 1.2. and 4.1. and 7.10. Iudic. 6.39. and 7.2.
and 10 10. and 20 23. and 1. Reg. 3 10.17. and 8 7. and 15.10. and 16.^. and
23.4. and 2. Reg. 2.1. and 7.4. and 3. Re. 3.5. and 9.2.
the same, when the Scriptures were extant, God used Apparitions, no less then
before.

After the law was written, it was yet for many years lost, during which time,
yet the Jews continued true belieuers, 4. Reg. 22.8.
Helcias the high Priest, said to Saphan the scribe, I have found the Book of
the law, in the house of our Lord: Of which book Marginall notes of the
English Bible of 1578. in the 2. Reg. 22.8. And Sparks in his Answ. to Albin.
pa. 56.
Protestants thus say, This was the Copy which Moses left them, as appears
2. Chron. 34.14. which either by negligence of the Priests, had been lost, or
else by the wickedness of Idolatrous kings, had been abolished.

It is likewise certain, that after the Captivity, 4. Esdras 14.22. See
Irenaeus l. 3. c. 25. Tertul. l de habit. mul.
Esdras did either restore the Books of Scripture, as being before time lost
for many years, or else (as some ancient Chrisost. ep. ad Heb. hom. 8.
Theodoret. Praef. in in Psalmos.
Fathers think) did collect and gather the Scriptures, into certain Volumes,
as being then before dispersed, and disordered, or (as D. Cowper Chronicle fol.
50.
thinks) scattered and destroyed.

And it is no less certain, that sundry parts of Scripture are yet to this
day wanting, as the Book Number. 21.14.
of the wars of our Lord: Iosue 10.13. and 2. Reg. 1.18.
The Book of the Just: 2. Paral. 20.34.
The book of Iehu the son of Hanani; 2. Paral 12.15.
The Books of Semeias the Prophet, and of Addo: 1. Reg. 10.25.
The Book which Samuel wrote: 1. Paral. 9.29. and see 2. Par. 26.23. and 2.
Par. 33.19.
The words of Nathan the Prophet: the Books of Ahias the Silouite: the vision
of Addo, besides many Parables and verses of Solomon, for he spoke 3. Reg. 4.32.
three thousand Parables; and his songs were a thousand and five. It is also
certain, that Col. 4.16.
S. Paul writ an epistle to the Laodiceans, and peradventure another 1. Co. 5.9.
to the Corinthians. Whereof Calvin upon these words, 1. Co. 5.9.
I wrote to you in an Epistle, says In 1. Cor. 5.
This Epistle is not extant at this day, and no doubt, but that many others
have perished. But it suffi^eth, that there remain to us, those which the Lord
foresaw to suffice And Luther upon these words, Ose 10.14.
As Salamana was destroyed by his house that took vengeance on Baal in the day
of battle etc. teaches that, In Ose. 10.
This History is no where else extant in the Scriptures, and many such like
things have happened which are not written; as that which Judas has in his
Epistle of Michael contending with Satan for Moses his body. Mention also is
made in the Epistle of Jude, Ver. 14.
of Enoch his Prophecy, which yet is not to be read in any other part of the
Scripture: as neither the names of Iannes and Mambres the Egyptian Magicians,
but only in 2. Tim. 3.8.
S. Paul.

This loss and want of these Scriptures, Is a thing so evident, that Zanchius
confesses that, De sacra Script. p. 117.
There were other Books inspired by God etc. of which we have most certain
Testimonies in the Scriptures, but they have perished, especially at the
burning of the Temple, and the destruction of the City, when the people were
taken into Babylon: those that are wanting, are the Book of the wars of our
Lord, the Book of the Just, the Book of Nathan the Prophet, the words of
Ahias the Silonite, the visions of Addo, many Proverbs and verses of Solomon.
Agreably whereunto says Whitaker, De sacra Script. p. 593.
we grant somethings now to be wanting, which long since were in the Canon of
Scriptures. And according to Willet, Syno^. 1. Controu. q. 4. ^. 21. 36.
It is not to be doubted, but that some part of the Canonical Scripture is
lost. All this notwithstanding, such is the ignorant boldness of D. Morton,
that he denies Apol. pa^s 2. l. 1. e. ^4.
Any Canonical Book of the Old Testament, or that Epistle of the New
Testament to the Laodiceans, to have perished.

But now from these clear and confessed Premises, I may strongly argue, that
if the Church and true faith have for many years be^n preserved, before any
Scripture was written, and after when it was lost, and yet to this day we have
nor the entyre and full Canon of the Bible, but still many books are wanting;
then it evidently follows, that by Tradition true faith and Religion has
been taught and preserved; and the written word, neither is, or can be our sole
and perfect Rule of faith, seeing we have not the whole Canon ^hereof. And I
will suppose for the present, that none will be so absurd as to affirm, that any
one Book, the Apocalypse for Example, is a sufficient square or Rule of all our
faith. And if any one should be so mad, as to affirm it, then must I demand,
what part that is, and why that, rather then another? To which demand the best
answer will be his deepest silence; and so the whole Canon of the Scripture
cannot be the sole and perfect Rule of faith, seeing the whole Canon is not
extant, neither will any one parcel be assigned, which contains all matter
of faith.

Perkins and Hospinian perceiving how conuincing this was in proof of
Traditions, thought it still better, though over bouldly, yet plainly to deny,
that any Scripture was lost: I take it to be a truth (says Reform. Cath p.
145. Hospinian Hist Sacram. p. 463.464.
Perkins) though some think otherwise, that no part of the Canon is lost etc.
Again to hold that any Books of Scr^pture should be lost, calls into
question Gods providence: But this being directly contrary to the former
Scriptures, and to the Judgment of other more learned Protestants, I omit all
further Confutation thereof.

And will only add, that so many books thus perished, being all of them
divine, and inspired by the holy Ghost, were not superfluous or less
necessary, then these other parcells which we have, and therefore though these
which are extant, be very profitable, yet they are not absolutely necessary, no
more then those that have perished; wherefore it is the word which is placed in
the mouths of Bishops and Priests, which shall never perish. 1. Pet. 1, 25.
The word of our Lord remains for ever, and this is the word which is
Euangelized among you. Agreeable to this are the ancient Prophecies, Malach. 2.7.
The lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and the law they shall require of
his mouth, because he is the Angel of our Lord. Isa. 59.21.
And, this is my Covenant with them* says our Lord: my Spirit that is in thee,
and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says
our Lord, from this present and for ever; which certaynty of continuance, we no
where find to be promised to the written word.

But to proceed yet further, though Moses writ the Law, yet somethings did he
deliver by Tradition, where of not obscure mention is made in the fourth Book
of Esdras, where it is said in the person of God, touching Moses, C. 14. 4. 6.
16. See Orig ho. 5. in Numeros. Hilar in Psalm 2. Eusebius. hist. l. 7. c. 28. and
l. 4. c. 21.
I brought him upon Mount Sina, and held him with me many days, etc. And I
commanded him saying, These words thou shall publish abroad, and these thou
shall hyde. And to omit, that these truths following, were not found written in
the Old Testament, but continued by Tradition, the miraculous Pond upon
Probatica at Jerusalem, recorded by S. John, C 5. 2.
the prayer of Elias concerning rain, whereof C. 5 17.
S. James speaks: The altercation between S. Michaell and the devil about
Moses his body, which Ver. 9.
S. Jude mentions: as also that Iannes and Mambres resisted Moses, whereof
2. Tim. 3.8.
S. Paul writes: But I say, to omit all these, we find it contained in the Old
Testament, that in remedy of Original sin, Circumcision was ordained, only
for the Male Children of the Jews, and that not before the eight day, whereof
it is said, Genesis 17.22.14.
An Infant of eight days shall be Circumcised among you, all malekind in your
Generations etc. The male, whose flesh of his prepuce, shall not be circised,
that soul shall be destroyed out of his people, because he has broken my
Covenant: But what means or remedy God used herin, either with male Children
dying before the eight day, with women, or with the Gentile belieuers, we find
it not expressed in the Scriptures, and yet the knowledge hereof was necessary
to Salvation.

And whereas D. Whitaker would euade in behalf of women, only by affirming
that in respect of their remedy from Original sin, the De sacra Scrip. q. 6
fol. 598.
unmarried (women) did pertayne to their Parents, and the married to their
husbands, being as it were circumcised in them; this is barely affirmed, not
proved by any place of the Old Testament, and therefore indeed it impugneth D.
Whitaker himself, and other Protestants, who teach that all matters of
Salvation are taught in Scripture. Secondly, this nothing helps the Male
Children dying before the eight day, or the Gentile belieuers. And thirdly if
the women unmarried had their remedy herein by their Circumcised Fathers, what
need they further remedy, when afterward they were married by their husbands?
So impertinent, wanting, and absurd is this Evasion of D. Whitaker.

From Moses time until Christ, when the Scriptures were extant, they were yet
reserved only with the Jews, and yet nevertheless there were many true
belieuers in other See Aug. de Ci^, l. 18. c. 47. de peccat Orig. l. 2. c. 24.
l. 1. de Praedest. Sunct. c. 9.
Nations, as with Job his friends, and others. Yea the Jews themselves who had
the Scriptures did notwithstanding depend especially upon the Tradition of
their Forefathers, accordingly as is said: Deuteronomy. 32.7.
Remember the old days, think upon every Generation: Ask thy Father and he
will declare to thee: the Elders and they will tell thee: Job. 8.8.
Ask the old generation and search diligently the memory of the Fathers, for
we are as but yesterday etc. and they shall teach thee etc. Ecclesiastic. 8.11.
Let not the narration of the Ancient escape thee, for they learned of their
Fathers: because of them thou shall learn understanding etc. So evident it is,
that during the Old Testament, both Jews and Gentiles believed many things
only by Tradition.

To come now to the New Testament, we find that Christ our Savior intended to
have all things preach^d, and therein gave special Commandment to his
Apostles, saying, Mat. 28.19.
Teach ye all Nations, baptizing them and teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you. And Mar. 16.15.
going into the whole world preach the Gospel to all Creatures. But that he
intended to have all things written, we find not: for had his intention herein
been the like, it would have appeared in the Scriptures by his like
Commandment, which it no where does. Secondly had our Savior intended to have
all things written, and so, not the Church, but the Scriptures to be the only
Rule of faith, then doubtless would he have left certain direction and
knowledge which had been the Scriptures, and not have left it to the Tradition
and Judgment of his Church, as shall be See hereafter sec. 4.
proved hereafter.

And though Chemnitius Exam. part. 2. f. 42.
obiecteth against this, that Christ commanded S. John to write a Book: Yet
this is answered by these words in the same place, Apoc. 1.11.
That which thou see write in a book, to wit, his Revelations, which neither
do contain all points of faith, whereof the now Question is, as also are so
obscure and mystical, that according to Luther, Prolog. in Apoc.
no man can understand them.

In like sort though the Apostles according to Christ's command preached all
needful points of faith, yet they never intended to set down in writing all
such points; for whereas they preached the Gospel without expectation of any
occasion, they did not yet undertake to write, but when they were provoked
thereto by some urgent cause, accordingly as M. Hooker affirms, that, Eccl.
Pol. l. 1 sec. 15. p. 87.
The several Books of Scripture are written upon some several occasion, and
particular purpose etc. So did S. Matthew at his departure from the Hebrews,
write his Gospel to them, Hist. l. 3. c. 18.
provoked thereunto (as Eusebius says) by certain necessity. So likewise did
S. Mark write his Gospel urged thereto by the earnest Eusebius. Hist. l 2. c.
14.
request of the Romans. And whereas many (as may be gathered from Luc. 1.1.
Eus. Hist. l. 3. c. 18.
S. Luke and Eusebius) did presume to write of of our Savior, and his actions,
not having perfect notice thereof, upon this occasion did S. Luke write his
Gospel, the which labor he did especially Luc. 1.^.4.
undertake for Theophilus. In like manner did Eusebius. his. l. 3. c. 18.
S. John preach the Gospel till his last age without Scripture; and did (as
S. De Scriptoribus Ecclesiast.
Hierome affirms) take occasion to write, by reason of the Ebionites, whose
heresy was then arysing. S. Paul also did write his Epistles upon like special
occasions, as that to the Romans, and the other to the Galathians, See the
Argument upon the Epistle to the Galathians in the Engl. Bible of 1576.
against such as thought Circumcision needful (that opinion being then an
error of those Act. 15. 1.
beginning times.) The other Epistles of S. Peter, James, John, and Jude, were
written against certain Heretics, who misunderstanding S. Paul (as S. Peter
2. Pet. 3.16.
notes of some) did thereupon teach, that faith only without works sufficed
to salvation: Of which very point S. Austine says, De fide and operibus. c. 14.
Because this opinion was then began, other Apostolical Epistles of Peter,
John, James, Jude, do chiefly direct their intention against it, that they
might strongly confirm, Faith without works to profit nothing. And a little
before, he likewise writes that, Even in the Apostles time, certain obscure
sayings of Paul the Apostle not being understood, some thought, that he
affirmed the same. By all which it is evident, that the Apostles and
Evangelists, did write their books, not by any command from Christ, but upon
some or other accidental occasion urging them thereto.

We do not read that the Apostles were sent to write, but to preach, and so
accordingly all of them preached, whereas the greater part of them writ nothing
at all. And of those which did write, some testify, that their intent in
writing, was not to set down the Law, Romans 15.14.15. 2. Pet. 1.13.15. 2. Pet.
3.1.
but only to exhort, comfort and admonish them, to whom they writ of such
things, as they had formerly taught them. And S. John expressly denies, that
he has comprehended in writing all such things, as were worthy writing, and
that he will deliver the rest by word of mouth, 2. Io. ver. 12.3. Io. ver.
13.14.
Having more things to writ unto you, I would not by paper and ink: for I hope
that I shall be with you, and speak mouth to mouth, that your joy may be full.
Now that these things which the Apostles did not write, but teach by word of
mouth were matters also of weight and belonging to faith, S. Paul assures us
in these words, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.
Night and day more abundantly praying, that we may see your face, and may
accomplish those things that want of your faith. So evident it is, that the
Apostles besides their writings, did preach other things which were wanting to
their faith.

This truth yet further appears by order of their writings, for the
Evangelists did not purposely set down in their Ghospels principles of faith,
but penned only historically, and by way of Narration, a brief abstract of our
Saviors Acts, especially those wherein were fulfilled the Prophecies fortold of
him. And so also did S. Luke accordingly set down in his Acts, the
Ecclesiastical history of those times. In like manner the Apostles in their
Epistles, do but treat obiter of matters of faith, discoursing thereof, as also
of other matters nothing pertaining to faith, casually and as occasion is
ministered, which occasion is for the most part but particular, concerning only
but sometimes a special people, as the Romans, Corinthians etc. sometimes but
private persons, as Titus, Timothy etc. And (which is most worthy of
observation) all their Epistles be written to such persons only as were then
before converted to the faith, which thing was done, as Swinglius
acknowledges, not so much to instruct, as to confirm. His words are, Tom. 2.
l. de Ecclesiast. fol. 43.
In the times of the Apostles, there was not any of the new Testament written,
but the Apostles as yet taught by word of mouth: Epistles were sent to and fro,
not so much to instruct, as to confirm, in the faith before received. Now had
the Apostles intention in writing been such, and so full as it was in their
preaching, then like as they preached generally to all, so likewise their
writings would have been written indifferently for all.

Again, if the intention or occasion of the Apostles had been to write all
needful points of faith, then doubtless like as our Savior did, Act. 13.
after his passion appear to them for forty days speaking of the Kingdom of
God, and as then See Clement. apud Eusebius. l. 2. c. 1. and Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10.
Col. 581. Fulke against Rhem. Test. in Apoc. c. 1. fol. 463.
instructing them in all needful points of faith; so also they all, or some
one of them, would in like manner have employed his labor, to have set down
the same specially in writing, and being assisted by the holy Ghost, would
accordingly have performed the same: Nay it follows heerupon, that every of
them who did write (this being according to Protestants the occasion of his
writing) should have performed the same. And so by this reason S. Iudes
Epistle, for example, only should be sufficient.

And whereas D. Whitaker answers heerto, that the Apostles De sacra Scrip. q.
6. p. 597.
knew that God would so govern their wills and hands, that those whom it
behooved should write, and should write so much as should suffice, and that in
time they should do all things; and so, that they had a general inte^tion or
notice, that what was wanting in one man's writings, should be supplied in
another: this neither does satisfy, for the Apostles being dispersed into
sundry Nations, did not for the most, especially at the time of their writing,
so much as know one of others writings, much less then did or could they
write, with intention to supply what was wanting in others writings: which
appears yet more fully, in that one and the same writer, as namely S. Paul,
in sundry of his Epistles, does handle for the most part, one and the same
matter, as in his Epistle to the Romans, and the other to the Galathians: and
also the Evangelists do in like manner, for the most part, discourse and make
mention of sundry matters; which are in others of them fully set down: which
their doing were superfluous, had their occasion of writing been to supply
what was wanting in others. Upon all which premises I do conclude, that the
holy Ghost did not intend or command, that the Apostles and Evangelists should
write all needful points of faith, seeing none, or all of them did ever
perform the same.

But what more conuincing for Traditions, then those express words of S. Paul,
Therefore 2. Th^ss. 2..15
Brethren stand, and hold the Traditions which you have learned, whether it he
by word, or our Epistle; so plainly affirming that some things be taught by
word, others by writing. This place is so powerful, that it enforces
Protestants to very desperate shifts.

D. Reinolds answers, that, Def. of the Posit. p. 335.
by the word speech (or word) S. Paul comprehends other Scriptures, and so
confounds and makes all one, speaking and writing, which is to make S. Paul
to speak most absurdly. But these not satisfying, D. Reinolds Conference fol.
456. 689.
answers further, that though the Apostle here mentions Traditions,
delivered to the Thessalonia^s by word, yet those Traditions also were (though
unwritten to them yet) contained elsewhere in the Scriptures: for it appears
in the C. 17.3.
Acts, where the history is written, and those Traditions set down, that S.
Paul preached to the Thessalonians, that, it behooved Christ to suffer, and to
rise again, and that he is Jesus Christ whom the Apostle preached. Now, this
Doctrine being the Tradition, which he meant in the place objected, and which
he delivered to them by word, is manifestly contained, though not in his said
Epistle to the Thessalonia^s, yet in other Scriptures. But the weakness of this
Answer appears many ways, for first it is without color, unless it could
be proved, that the Apostle by those Traditions delivered by word, did
understand only that doctrine, which is here alleged out of the Acts, which
D. Reinolds neither does, nor could prove. Secondly the Doctrine alleged out
of the Acts, was before written by him to the Thessalonians themselves in his
first Epistle, wherein he instructs them touching out Savior, that he is 1.
These. 2.15.19.
Jesus Christ, and that Jesus was killled, and raised up from the dead, and
therefore the Apostle speaking in the place by me objected of Traditions
delivered by word, cannot be thought to mean thereby this only doctrine which
he delivered to the same persons before by writing; his words implying so
plain diversity of Traditions, which be taught them either by word or writing.
Thirdly the forsaid answer is without all probability, unless it can be
showed that all the doctrine which S. Paul taught the Thessalonians, is wholly
expressed in that place of the Acts; for if all be not there written, how then
can it from thence be known, what those Traditions delivered by word are,
whereof the Apostle speaks in his said Epistle to the Thessalonians. And that
all such Doctrine as S. Paul did teach the Thessalonians, should be set down
in that place of the Acts, it cannot be showed; yea the contrary is evident,
for as he taught them by writing many things concerning Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians.
2.5.
the Judgment Ib. ver. 2.3.
day, and other matters Ib. ^.3.9.
not mentioned in that said place of the Acts: so doubtless he did preach by
word no less to them, then he did to his other hearers, Act. 20.27.
all the Counsel of God, and concealed from them Act. 20.^0.
nothing that was profitable, but preached it to them; all which cannot be
found expressed in that place of the Acts. Fourthly the Apostle did by these
Traditions of his, delivered either by word or writing, understand his
universal doctrine, concerning all needful points of faith; but that all
this was written in S. Paul's time, much less at the time of his writing this
his Epistle to the Thessalonians, cannot be proved; but to the Contrary it is
certain, that many parts of the New Testament were written after this Epistle:
from whence it follows, that the Apostle by the foresaid words, did refer the
Thessalonians to be instructed, not only by the Scriptures, because they were
not all then extant, but also by the Tradition of Doctrine, which was then
unwritten. This truth is so clear, that it is confessed by D. Whitaker,
saying; De sacra Script. q. 6. fol. 630.
How is it like, if these things were so fully written, that the Apostle should
make any mention of Traditions: but because he perceived that these things,
were not yet written, he therefore warns the Thessalonians, that these
Traditions were to be kept. And the same is acknowledged by Reform. Cath. p.
142.
M. Perkins: so many ways, and so confessedly is this Evasion insufficient
against so clear a Text of Scripture.

Wherefore D. Whitaker and M. Perkins, perceiving the insufficiency of Reinolds
replye, do further answer, that though these Traditions delivered them by
word, were at that time unwritten, that yet they were afterward written, and
are now to be found in the Scriptures: But this they barely say without all
proof; and yet admitting so much, it thereby is granted, that S. Paul did
refer the Thessalonians, for that time, to Tradition, even in things
necessary, as D. Whitaker Vbi supra.
and M. Perkins are forced to confess. But if in things necessary, then idle
is that other Evasion related by D. Whitaker, saying; Controu, 1. q. 6. c. 10.
Others think Paul to speak of certain external things and Ceremonies, not
of very great moment: But this neither can be proved, but is only nakedly
affirmed.

I may also add hereunto that of S. John, Ep. 2. ver. 12.
Having, more things to write unto you, I would not impart them by paper and
ink. Also of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 11.34.
The rest I will dispose when I come. And speaking of Christ's Priesthood, he
says, Heb. 5.12.
Of whom I have great speech, and inexplieable to viter. And to Timothy, 1.
Tim. c. 6.20.
O Timothy keep the Depositum. To the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11.2.
I praise you Brethren, that in all things you be mindful of me, and as I have
diliuered unto you, you keep my Precepts, or Traditions according to the
Greek. Yea he terms the Corinthians. The Epistle of Christ written 2. Cor.
3.2.
not with ink, but with the Spirit, if the living God, not in Table of stone,
but in tht tables Carnal of the heart. According to which, the Holy Ghost
prophecieth of the New Testament by Hieremy, saying, Hier, 31, 33.
I will put my law into their bowels, and in their hearts will I write it. So
manifest it is, that the Apostles delivered many things by word and not by
writing.

Protestants perceiving the former Scriptures to be so plain, that none of the
foresaid answers do any thing satisfy, they wage a new war against the
Scriptures themselves, tearing the same in pieces, by many and several
corruptions. As first Beza (a man in this kind most expert and audacious) in
his Of Anno 1598. And see him in Whitaker. Controu 1. q 6 c. 10.
Translation, changes in S. Paul's words, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. the disjunctive
particle, sieve (Whether) into the Co^iunctiue, tum (both) in this manner; Hold
the Traditions which you are taught, both by word, as also by our Epistle. And
in another Apud Tremelium.
Edition he likewise tra^slateth the Text thus, Hold the Doctrine delivered
which you are taught, and per sermonem, and per Epistolam, both by speech and
Epistle. Where for Traditions, he puts Doctrine delivered, which word
Doctrine, is his own addition, which he makes also in the singular number,
whereas the true word Traditions, is both in Greek and Latin in the plural:
and he also changes Whether, into and, whereas between those two words, there
is no less difference then between Beza, and an honest man. But such is the
hatred of other Prot. besides Beza against Traditions, that wheresoever the
Scripture speaks against certain Traditions of the Jews, partly frivolous,
partly repugnant to the Law of God; there all the English Translations follow
the (...).
Greek exactly, never omitting this word Tradition: but where it speaks in
commendatio^ of Traditions, to wit such as the Apostles delivered to the
Church; there none follow the Greek, which is the selfsame word. For example
thus they translate, Mat. 15.2.3. (...).
Why do thy Disciples transgress the Traditions of the Elders? And again, why
do you also transgress the Commandment of God by your Tradition? And again,
you have made frustrate the Commandment of God, for your Traditions. Heeres
still the word Tradition. But now concerning good Traditions, the Apostle by the
selfsame word, both in Greek and Latin, says thus, Therefore 2 Thessalonians. 2.15.
(...).
Brethren stand and hold fast the Traditions which you have learned, either by
word, or by our Epistle. And again, Withdraw 2 Thessalonians 3.6.
your selves from every Brother walking inordinatly, and not according to the
Traditions which they have received of us. And again according to the Greek,
1. Cor. 11.2.
I praise you Brethren that in all things you are mindful of me, and as I have
delivered unto you, you keep my Traditions, (...) (...). But in all these
places instead of Traditions they translate either, ordinances, instructions,
preachings, institutions, or the like. And Beza as before, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and 3.
traditam doctrinam, putting the Singular number for the Plural, and adding,
Doctrine, of his own. Yea they use the word Tradition, when it may tend to the
discredit thereof, it not being in the Greek Text, Col. 2.20. (...).
as, Why as though living in the world are yeeled with Traditions? Or as the
Translation of Anno 1579. has, Why, are ye burdened with Traditions? And yet
a little before, Col. 2.14. and Epb. 2.15.
they translate (...), ordinances, decrees: and therefore why not now (...),
quid decernitis, why do you ordain or decree, or why are you led with decrees?
their Translation cannot be justified, either by Scriptures, Fathers, or
Lexicon. But by this liberty any Heretic, though never so impious, may make
the Scriptures speak what himself best pleases.

SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the sacred Scriptures in Proof
of unwritten Traditions.
IN the eight General Council, it is taught that Act. 10.
The great Apostle Paul does clearly admonish us, to keep the Traditions which
we have received, whether by speech, or by the Epistles of holy men, who have
formerly shyned.

S. Chrysostom expounding the same words of S. Paul, affirms that, In 2 Thessalonians. ho. 4. And see Basil de Spir. Sant. c. 29. Theophil. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Damasc. c. 17. de Imag. Sanctorum.
Hereby it appears, that the Apostles did not deliver all things by Epistle,
but many things without writing, and these are worthy of faith; wherefore also
let us esteem the Tradition of the Church to be believed. It is a Tradition,
seek no further. And the same exposition is given by S. Basil, Theophilact,
and Damascene, as also by S. Epiphanius, Haer. 61.
We must use Tradition (says he) for all things cannot be received from divine
Scripture, wherefore the holy Apostles have delivered some things by Tradition:
Even as the holy Apostle says. As I have delivered to you, and elsewhere, so I
teach, and have delivered in Churches.

S. Austine laboring to prove that those who were baptized by heretics should
not be rebaptized, says; De Bap. Conc. Dou. l. 5. c. 2^.
The Apostles commanded nothing hereof, but that Doctrine which was opposed
herein against Cyprian, is to be believed to proceed from their Tradition; as
many things be which the Church houldeth, and are therefore well believed to be
commanded of the Apostles, although they be not written. This saying is so
clear, that Cartwright speaking thereof, says, In Whitgif. Def. p. 103.
To allow S. Austines saying is to bring in Popery again. And Ibid. And his 2.
Reply ag. Whitg. part. 1. p 84. 85. 86.
if S. Austines Judgment, be a good Judgment, then there be some things
commanded of God, which are not in the Scriptures, and thereupon no sufficient
doctrine contained in the Scriptures.

But the Fathers Expositions and belief, are so clear for our Doctrine of
Traditions, that Chemnitius reproves for the same Exam. part. 1. p. 87. 89. 90.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and Origin, also Epiphanius, Ambrose, Hierome, Basile,
Maximus, Theophilus, Damascene. And Against Purg. p. 362. 303. 397. Against
Martial. p. 170. 178. Against Bristow. p. 35. 36.
D. Fulke rejects herein, Chrysostom, Tertullian, Cyprian, Austine, Hierome,
and a great many more. And the like is acknowledged by De sacra Script. p. 678.
68^. 683. 685. 686. 690. 695. 696. 670.
Whitaker of S. Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Austine,
Innocentius, Leo, Basile, Eusebius, and Damascene. By the premises then it
appears, that S. Austine and all the forenamed Fathers, did confessedly teach
and believe our Doctrine of Traditions.

SECT. IV. That the learned Protestants are enforced to acknowledge, and
believe our Catholic Doctrine of Traditions.
I Proved before that in the time of Nature, and much also in the time of the
Law, the faithful were instructed by Traditions not written: And accordingly
the Protestant D. Westphailing affirms that there was a time when Sermon. 5.
fol. 56. and Ser. 6. fol. 60.
Traditions not delivered in writing, or taken out of Books, but delivered
from one to another by word of mouth, were Rules of faith and manners: And thus
it was first in the time of nature, secondly in the time of the Law. And in
those times Traditions might well be Rules of truth to such as knew they came
from those, whom Gods spirit would not suffer to err. So confessedly
Traditions have been, and may be Rules of truth.

Concerning our learning the true sense of the Scriptures, the Protestant
Author of Catholic Traditions prescribes thus; In the preface fol. B. 35.
when the Scriptures have not sufficient light, to make the truth apparently
perceived, yet may a man now a days use that means, which S. Irenaeus
counsaileth us, which is to etc. learn the Apostolical Tradition. And this
with greatest reason, for M. Powell teaches that, Of things Indiffer. c. 2. p.
7.
Ecclesiastical Traditions are not merely humane, but also divine, because the
Church is directed and governed by the spirit of Christ. Now, if this be the
confessed Privilege of the Church, in things indifferent, and less concerning
us, it is much the rather to be acknowledged in such greater points of faith,
as do more importantly concern, even our faith and Salvation.

But to give particular instance of several Traditions acknowledged by
Protestants, the knowledge whereof is necessary to faith and salvation:
Concerning the question of discerning Canonical Scriptures from Apocryphal,
M. Hooker affirms that, Eccl. Pol. l. 1. sec 14. p. 86.
of things necessary the very chiefest is to know what books we are bound to
esteem holy, which point is confessed impossible for the Scripture it self to
teach: for Ibid. l. 2. sec. 4. p. 102.
says he very well) if any one book of Scripture did give testimony to all,
yet still that Scripture which gives credit to the rest, would require another
Scripture to give credit to it: Ibid. pa. 103.
neither could we ever come to any pause whereon to rest, unless besides
Scripture there were something else acknowledged. Neither is this something the
testimony of the spirit, which (as Whitaker Aduersus Stap. l. 2. c. 6. p 370.
357. and Hook. Eccl. Pol. sec. 8. p. 147.
acknowledges) being private and secret, is not fit to teach and refell
others: but it is even according to him, Vbi supra. l. 2 c. 4. p. 300, 298.
the Ecclesiastical Tradition, an Argument (says he) whereby may be argued and
convinced, what Books be Canonical, and what not. Which authority of the
Churches Testimony in this behalf, he further avouches and teaches in fundry
Vbi supra. l. 1. c. 1. p. 14. and 25 And against Reinolds. p. 44.
other places. And with him agree many others of his brethren, for M. Hooker
supposes that, Eccl. Pol. l. 3. p. 146.
We all know, that the first outward motive leading men so to esteem of the
Scripture is the authority of Gods Church. Yea, says another, Treatise of the
Script. and the Church c. 15. 16 p 72. 74.
We would not believe the Gospel, were it not that the Church taught us, and
witnessed that this Doctrine was delivered by the Apostles.

Zanchius (so much renowned amongst Protestants) in plain terms confesses De
sacra Script p. 281.
the unwritten Tradition of the Canonical and Apocryphal books: and that Ib.
pa 61.
the Ecclesiastical Tradition is the first mean of our certain knowledge
herein. As also that Ib p 265.
The Fathers thought that we have this thing only by Tradition of the Apostles,
and Apostolical men. In which due respect says Chemnitius, Exam. part. 1. p.
69.
We reverently receive this Tradition, whereby the Books of holy Scripture are
to us delivered.

Luther like a dutiful Child ascribes thus much to the Church his Mother,
that, Tom. 2. de Captiu. Babyl fol. 89.
This truly has the Church, that it can discern the word of God, from the
words of men, as Austine confessed himself to have believed the Gospel,
being moved by the authority of the Church. Melancthon, Resp ad Act. Ratisb. T.
3. p. 732.
We acknowledge in the Church this Authority of testifying of Apostolical
Scriptures, or of discerning the writings of the Apostles from counterfaite.
Calvin, De vera Eccles. Refor. p. 323.
I do not deny but that it is the proper office of the Church, to discern true
Scriptures from feigned. Peter Martyr, In loc. class. 1 c. 6.
We do acknowledge it to be the function of the Church, that seeing it is
endued with the holy Ghost, it may discern sincere and true Books of divine
Scriptures from adulterate and Apocryphal. Perkins, Tom. 2. of the Sermon of
our Lord. col. 252.
The Church has the gift of judging of things of greatest weight; she can
judge of the Books of Scripture, which are Canonical, which not, of the
Spirits of men, and their Doctrines, and therefore she can judge which company
of men are the true Church, and which not. What more for the authority of the
Church and her Traditions, in this so important a question of discerning true
Scriptures from false, could be said by any Catholic?

D. Whitaker, a man so renowned in this Kingdom for his supposed greatest
learning, acknowledges this same truth, no less plainly then the rest,
Controu. 1. q. 3. c. 1. page 315.
We do not deny (says he) that it belongs to the Church, that she approve,
acknowledge, receive, promulge, commend the Scriptures to all hers, and we say
that this testimony is true, and ought to be received by all. Ib. c. 2. p. 316.
It is the office of the Church that she determine and discern true, right,
and proper Scriptures from false, counterfeit, and Adulterate. Ib. c. 7. p. 324.
We may truly be compelled by the authority of the Church, that we acknowledge
the Canonical Scripture. Ib c. 9. p. 326.
We confess with Irenaeus, the authority of the Church to be firm, and a
compendious demonstration of Canonical doctrine aposteriori. Yea he affirms,
that the testimony of the Church concerning the Scriptures, De Script. l. 1. c
1 sect. 9. p. 19.
Ought to be received, because it is true: and he that does not receive it, is
guilty of sacrilege. Wherefore all Protestants that deny this Ecclesiastical
Tradition, of the Churches discerning Canonical books from Apocryphal, in D.
Whitaters Judgment are sacrilegious.

If it were not to be thought tedious in so clear a Case, I would show the same
to be taught by In Zanchius de Ser. p 123 124.
Brentius, De principijs Christ. dog. l 1. c. 4 p. 18. Pet. Mar. com. plac. in
Engl part. ^ 1. 6. sec. ^ p. 42. Jew. in Def p. 201. Fulke in answer to a
Counterf. Cath. p. 5.
Lubbertus, Peter Martyr, Jewel, and Fulke, most of them, and others
affirming, that the Church is directed in her foresaid Testimony, even with the
presence and assistance of the holy Whitak. aduers. Stapl. l. 1 c. 5. p. 69.
The Treatise of the Scripture and the Church. c. 15. p. 71. Jew. Fulke and Pet.
Mart. vbi supra.
Spirit. So clear it is that this so necessary knowledge of true Scripture from
false, we have not from the Scripture it self, nor from the Private Spirit,
but from the Tradition of the Church. And if the Tradition of the Church be so
forcible, in this Chief question of discerning true Scriptures, shall the same
Scriptures make it of lesser Credit in other smaller questions?

Rogers in the name of the Church of England, says, Def of the Art. art. 20. p
108.
All of us do grant, that the Church as a faithful witness may, yea of
necessity must testify to the world, what has been the doctrine of God his
people, from time to time; and as a trusty Recorder, is to keep, and make known
what the word of God, which it has received is, which truly has been
performed before the word was written, by the Patriarchs, and after the same
was committed to writing, before Christ his incarnation, by the Jews, Christ
his life time, in the Primitive Church, from the Apostles time by the godly
Christians throughout the world. Again, Ib. Art. 34. p. 196.
The Church and every member thereof in his place, is bound to the observation
of all Traditions and Ceremonies, which are allowed by lawful authority, and
are not repugnant to the word of God; for he that violateth them, contemns
not man, but God, who has given power to his Church, to establish whatsoever
things shall make unto comlines, order, and Edification. Here then confessedly
we have one main point of faith necessary to salvation, made known unto us,
not by the Scriptures, nor by the Private Spirit, but only by the Tradition of
the Church.

To allege yet further another example, and that of great importance, which is
concerning the abrogating of Saturday the Jewish Saboth, and the establishing
of Sunday for our Saboth, First it is granted, that the now observation of
Sunday, is not a thing arbitrary, and of indisserency, but necessary and
unchangeable: for thus expressly teaches D. Whitguift, Defense p. 89.
I do not think it now arbitrary, or to be changed: and surely there had been
very little Judgment in me, if I had made it changeable. D. Fulke expressly
teaches, that this obserua^ion of Sunday Against the Rhem. Test. in Revel. 1.
sec. 6. fol. 463.
Is not a matter of indifferency but a necessary Prescription of Christ
delivered to us by his Apostles. And that to change it, or keep it on Monday,
Twesday, or any other day the Church has no Authority. And with him does
Synop. Controu. 9. q. 8 p. 382.
M. Willet agree, expressing his like Judgment almost in the same words. But
none more fully confi^me this truth, then the Divines of Geneua, who in their
Principles of diuini^y disputed in the University of Geneua, and there Preface.
discussed and determined even by Epist. of the Transl.
the whole consent of the learned in the Church of Geneua, and especially by M.
Theodore Beza, do conclude and teach that, C. 33 p. 80. sec. 12. 13.
The Apostles by direction of the holy Ghost instead of that seventh day
observed under the Law, did appoint that day, which was first in Creation of
the former world: and that the Observation therefore of this Lords day, is not
to be accounted as an indifferent thing, but as an Apostolical Tradition to be
perpetually observed.

This then being supposed, that the observation of our now Sunday, is a matter
obligatory, and of necessity; we will next examine whether the same be taught
us by the written word, or only by Tradition: and to omit what already heerin
is granted by D. Fulke, Willet, and the Divines of Geneua; Bullinger avouches
that Sermon. in Eng. Dec. 2. Sermon. 4. p. 140.
We do not in any part of the Apostles writings find any mention made that
Sunday was to be kept holy. And, we believe says Comment. Catech. in ^^olog.
p. 36.
Vrsinus, this Apostolical Tradition, and see it to be profitable. According
to Whitguift, Defense. p. 88.
The Scripture has not appointed what day in the week, should be most meet
for the Saboth. And he urges Cartwright thus, Ib. p. 89.
You should have proved it to be appointed by the Scriptures, which no doubt
you would have done if you could, for that is it which I deny. And yet both he
and Ib. and p. 89. 10^.
Cartwright do confess, that it was taught by the Apostles. And the same
witnesses Fulke, saying, for Ag. Rhem. Test. in 1. Revel. fol. 463.
the Prescription of this day, the Apostles had either the express
Commandment of Christ before his Ascension, when he gave them Precepts
concerning the Kingdom of God. (Act. 1.2.) or else the certain direction of
his Spirit. So evident it is, and for such further confessed by De Relig
Christiana. n. 12. pa. 7. and in Compend. doct. Christ. page 645. 646.
Zanchius, that the observation of Sunday is an Apostolical and unwritten
Tradition. And the same is maintained at large by Survey of Popery. l. 3. part.
4 c. 5.
Bell. But D. Morton Morton Apol. par. 2. l. 1 c. 41.
obiecteth, that S. John makes mention of the Apoc. 1.10.
Lords day; that in the Acts mention is made of the first of the Act. 20.7.
Saboth, when S. Paul and others were assembled to break bread. And that S.
Paul likewise commands the Corinthians to make Collections for the poor,
upon 1. Cor. 16.2.
the first of the Saboth. But all these are impertinent, for S. John calls it
the Lords day, not in regard that Saturday was then abrogated, or Sunday
established (for neither of these points does he affirm) but only in respect
it was the day of our Lords Resurrection. And as for the first of the Saboth,
Calvin and the Centurists do In Catena August. Marloreti. and Cent. 1. l. 2.
Col 503.
affirm, that thereby is not meant Sunday, but Saturday; and indeed the Greek
Text being the Original, has not, The first of the Saboth, but only (...).
Act. 20, 7.1. Cor. 16 2.
one of the Saboth days, and so do Engl. Bible of Anno 1566. Fulke ag. Rhem.
Test. in Act. 20.7 and Cent. 1. l. 2. 495. 503.
Protestants translate the same. But though the Text were that the Sacrament
was usually celebrated, and Collectio^s made for the Poor, upon the first of
the Saboth: yet this proves not either that Saturday (whereof no mention in
these places is made) should be abrogated, or that Sunday should be to us, not
only as a Holy day, but also as our Saboth, and day of rest. This answer is
so clear, as that it is likewise made and allowed by sundry Protestants,
whereof says M. Bell, Survey of Popery.
No text of holy Scripture can be alleged, which commands to keep our
Christian Sabbath upon the first day, or any other determinate day. M. Calvin
denies flatly that, (...), does signify the first day, or Sunday. And that the
Revelation proves nothing, but that S. John had his Revelation upon the day of
our Lords Resurrection: but neither says, that Christians must observe that
day for their Sabbath, nor that the Apostles kept the same, which thing both
Peter Martyr, and Erasmus do willingly grant. So generally is it acknowledged
by Protestants that the Abrogation of Saturday, and our Observation of Sunday,
is no where prescribed or commanded in the written word, but only received by
Tradition, and yet the same is a matter of necessity: And so tryfling is M.
Mortons Objection.

D. Field acknowledges and summeth together many Traditions, saying, L 4. c.
20.
We admit first the Books of Scripture Canonical as delivered by Tradition:
Secondly the chief heads of Christian doctrine, contained in the Creed:
Thirdly the form of Christian Doctrine, and distinct explication of many
things, somewhat obscurely contained in Scripture etc. Fourthly the continued
practices of such things as are not expressed in Scripture: Fifthly such
observations as are not particularly commanded in Scripture: Amongst which, and
the former he numbreth the Fast of Lent, the Baptism of Infants, and
observation of our Lords day. And some few lines after he confesses that, Many
other things there are, which the Apostles doubtless delivered by Tradition.

We have it here then acknowledged most plentifully by the learned
Protestants, that sundry Points of faith necessary to salvation, are not made
known to us by the written word, or any Private spirit, but only by the
Tradition of the Catholic Church.

SECT. V. Objections against Traditions taken from Scriptures, answered.
IT is incredible, that men professing learning, should not be much ashamed to
produce such poor and weak stuff, against so clear and confessed a Truth:
for example, such Texts are objected Rogers Def. of the Art. art. 6. p. 27.
by M. Rogers, as seem to forbid all Addition to the written word, as that of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
You shall not add to the word that I speak to you, neither shall you take
away from it: As also that of S. John, Apoc. 21.18.
If any man shall add to these things, God shall add upon him the Plagues etc.
I answer to the first, It concerns not the written word only, but the word
delivered by mouth; which (says he) I spoke to you, and is therefore
impertinent, for it proves not that all the spoken doctrine was written.
Secondly though it did concern the written word only, yet the speech of adding
or taking away, is (as Cartwright confesses) to be referred only to the
observing wholly of that which God commanded, In whitgift. Defense p. 124.
that is, to do no more nor less then he has commanded: which sense is yet
made more plain with conference of the premises, with this other like saying
in the same Book, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
What I command thee, that only do to our Lord, neither add any thing nor
diminish. Thirdly howsoever it be understood, it can yet no more seclude the
Apostles adding of their unwritten Traditions to that which Moses spoke, then
it does seclude their adding thereto of their written Gospel, and the
Prophecies which were written after Moses. Add further that S. John (as Exam.
p. 202.
Chemnitius confesses) writ his Gospel after the Apocalypse, and so adds
thereunto.

But Calvin Instit. c. 14.
replyeth, that the Doctrine of the Prophets and of the new Testament, were not
additions to the Law, but Explications thereof (as being taught or contained in
the Law, though not in particular, yet in general.) But I suppose Caluinists
will not deny, but that they believe more then is written in the Law, and no
otherwise does the Law contain them then in general, and (as it were)
virtually: but so likewise are Traditions contained therein, and so no Additions.

M. Rogers also Def. of the Art. art. 6. p. 28.
obiecteth these words of S. John, Io. 20.30.31.
Many other signs also did Jesus in the sight of his Disciples, which are not
written in this Book. And these are written that you may believe, that Jesus
is Christ the son of God, and that believing, you may have life in his name,
therefore all things are written that are necessary to faith. Answer. This so
plainly concerns only Christ's Miracles, and not the Doctrine which he taught,
that D. Whitaker says thereof, De Scrip. q. 5. p. 619.
It is evident that the Evangelist speaks of the signs and Miracles of
Christ, not of his doctrine. and so is altogether impertinent. Secondly,
though it should concern doctrine, yet it concerned not the whole Scripture,
but the only doctrine (as the Text says) written in this Book, and is
therefore also impertinent, unless we will thence also infer, that S. John's
Gospel only is sufficient to instruct us to Salvation. Which sequel D.
Reinolds well perceiving, affirms thereupon that, Conclusions annexed to his
Conference. p. 686.
There is contained in S. John's Gospel, so much as is sufficient to faith and
salvation; and that S. John's Gospel alone is sufficient: whereof it further
follows, that as well the rest of the Scriptures, as also the institution of
the Sacrament in forms of Bread and wine, and all needful doctrine concerning
the same, which S. John's Gospel does not express, are not in his opinion
necessary to Salvation: all which is most absurd and impious to affirm.

It is further urged, that the Scriptures do condemn Traditions, as, You Mat.
15.6.
have made frustrate the Commandment of God for your own Tradition. And,
Beware Col. 2.8.
least any man deceive you, by Philosophy and vain fallacy, according to the
Tradition of men. Answ. Such Traditions are not reprehended, as the Jews
received from Moses, and the Prophets; but only such as they had received of
later times, whereof some were Idle, others contrary to the Scriptures
themselves, as Why Mat. 15.3.
do you transgress the Commandment of God, for your Tradition? And as here
are condemned certain Traditions, so before we have heard others to be
commended: which plainly argues, that as some were forged, and contrary to
Scripture, and so to be eschewed; so others were Apostolical and to be
observed.

Many Rogers Def. of the Art. art. 21. p. 118.
much insist upon those words of S. Paul, Gal. 1.9.
If any preach to you besides that which you have received, be he accursed.
Answ. Here by the word, besides, is meant, against, or contrary, for so do both
S. Ambrose Ambr. in hunc locum. Aug. l. 17. cont. Faust. c. 3.
and S. Austine expound this place: Yea S. Austine says of this very text, In
Joan. ^ract. 98.
He does not say more then you have received, but besides that which you have
received: for if he should have said so, he should have wronged himself etc.
And though D. Whitaker will not acknowledge so much of this place, yet De
Scrip. p. 718.
I confess (says he) that (...) is sometimes fitly translated, Contra,
against. And so does the same word signify in the same Apostle, Romans 16.17.
in which place Erasmus, and Fulke in their Translation thereof, do translate
it, Contra, against. Yea here the sense is so evident, that Piscator does
affirm the Apostle to mean, Doctrinam In Gal. 2.9.
Euangelio aduersam, doctrine contrary to the Gospel; which exposition these
other words of the Text, Another Gospel, do fully confirm. Secondly
howsoever we understand the same word, yet this place is merely impertinent, as
not concerning only the written word (which is the only thing whereof the
question now is made) but such doctrine in general, as was preached. And that
he did preach all needful things Act. 2^.20.7.
we steadfastly believe, as a matter out of question: but that he, and other
Scribes of holy Writ, did write all needful things, is the very point in
question, and that which we deny. Thirdly this makes no more against
Traditions, then it does against sundry parts of the new Testament, which were
written after this Epistle, which would make the Apostle himself and others,
in danger of his own Curse. Lastly Rogers Def. of the Art. art. 6. p. 28.
Morton Apol par. 2. l. 1. c 44.
it is made their chief and common objection, that 1. Tim. 3 16.
All Scripture etc. is profitable to teach, to argue, to correct, to instruct
in justice, that the man of God may be perfect, instructed to every good work.
And, From 2. Tim. 3.15.
thine infancy thou have known the holy Scriptures, which can instruct thee to
Salvation. But the answer is easy and manifold, first, that whereas it is said,
All Scripture etc. is profitable, the same praise of being profitable, is
attributed to every part of the Scripture, as to the whole body thereof, for by
the Judgment of all that understand Latin, whatsoever is said of all
Scripture, is understood of every Book thereof; and so indeed every part of
Scripture, and every good Sermon, or spiritual Book is profitable, but not
sufficient to salvation. Secondly these places do not concern the Scriptures
of the New Testament, which were not then all written, but only the other of
the Old Testament, which, says the Text, Timothy had known from his infancy,
for these and not the other were they, which Timothy had to study from his
Childhood. A truth so clear, that M. Henoch Clapham confesses with us,
saying, In the song of songs, lecture 15.
Nor was it other Scripture then the old Testament, which is commended to
Timothy for able to make the man of God perfect unto all good works. And the
same understanding here only of the old Testament, is made by Aretius, Loc.
com. de Tradit. loc. 82. p. 264. Swingl. Tom. 2. l. Ecclesiast. fol. 43. Hook.
Eccl. Pol. l. 1. sec. 14. p. 88. Ochinus l. 2. Dial. p. 198. Treatise against
the Def. of the Censure. pa. 325. Chemnit. Exam. part. 1 f. 38.
Swinglius, M. Hooker and others: In so much as one of them perceiving thereby,
that this foresaid place is impertinent, unless we will withal thence
affirm, that the Old Testament only is sufficient, doubted not therefore to
acknowledge that sense, and so accordingly to urge the same, maintayning
thereupon contrary to M. Hookers Collection Vbi supra.
upon this place. In the Treatise against the Def. of the Cens. p. 325.
that the Old Testament is sufficient to Christian men, for their Salvation,
without any other writ: to such Jewish absurdities do these impertinent
Objections drive our Protestants.

CHAP. VIII. The true State of the Question, concerning S. Peter's Primacy.
Whether Christ our Savior ordained S. Peter Supreme Head or Pastor, not only
of the Apostles, but of the Universal Church. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
HAVING hitherto proved not the Scripture alone, but the Church of Christ, to
be our absolute Judge of all Controversies in Religion, it seems necessary to
find out the Head of the said Church, and to inquire something into his power
and authority: concerning which in the first Nicene Council it is said, Can.
39. Arabico.
He who houldeth the Sea of Rome, is the head and chief of all the
Patriarchs, seeing he is the first (or Chief) as Peter, to whom power is
given over all Christian Princes, and all their people, as he who is the Vicar
of Christ our Lord, over all people, and the Universal Church of Christ: and
whosoever shall contradict this, is excommunicated by the Synod.

The Fathers of the Council of Ephesus avouch, Part. 2. Act, 3.
That no man doubts yea it is known to all ages, that holy and most Blessed
Peter, Prince and head of the Apostles, Pillar of Faith, and foundation of the
Catholic Church, received from our Lord Jesus Christ etc. the keys of the
Kingdom; and that power of loosing and bynding sins was given him, who in
his Successors lives and exercises judgment to this very time, and always.
And agreably to this, we Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 10. Rhem. Test. in Io.
21.17.
still teach, that S. Peter the Apostle was ordained by Christ, to be in his
place the Head and Prince not only of the Apostles, but of the whole Church,
that so as Chief Pastor upon Earth, he might govern the same in matters
Ecclesiastical.

Points Disputable.
It was a Point much disputed by S. Hierome and S. Austine, whether the thing,
for which S. Paul reproved S. Peter, was truly any fault, though not in
Doctrine, yet in conversation or Government. S. Hierome and others think it
was no fault at all, nor any other thing, then what Saint Aug. ep. 9. 11. 19.
Paul did himself upon the like occasion: But S. Austine houldeth the contrary.

Protestants Untruths.
Act. 21.26.
Tindall affirms, that, In Fox Act. Mon. p. 1139.
Paul by the testimony of Christ was greater then Peter. But it will be
impossible to find out this Testimony of Christ. D. Whitaker avouches that,
Controu. 3. q. c. 3. page 604.
Whersoeuer mention is made of Peter, if we look diligently into the place, we
shall find nothing to be given to him, which does not agree to other Apostles.
But this in the Sections next following, we shall clearly see to be most false.
And again, Controu. 4. q. 2. c. 2. p. 545.
Peter is not a Rock* because Christ does not build his Church upon Peter. A
saying most direct against sundry playnest textes of the Scriptures themselves.
Swinglius makes our Savior to speak contrary to himself thus, De vera and
fall. Relig. c. de clauibus.
I will build my Church upon this Rock, not upon thee, for thou art not a
Rock etc. Only Christ, not Peter, is the Rock, upon which the Church built,
remains.

Protestant Doctrine.
Most Luther in Assert. Art. 25. Calu Inst. l. 4. c. 6.. 7. Magdeburg. Cent. 1.
l. 2. c. 7 fol 524.
Protestants affirm, that S. Peter was only equal, and fellow with the other
Apostles, nor superior. And that the Government of the whole Church was no more
committed to him by Christ, then to the rest.

For the time since the Apostles, Protestants greatly differ among themselves,
for Illyricus Cent. 1. l 2. c. 7.
some give the supreme Government of the Church to the Ministers and the Laity.
Calvin Instit l. 4. c. 11. 6.
chiefly ascribes it to the Congregation of Seniors or Ministers. Brentius In
Prolegom. cont. Petrum a Soto.
and sundry others, to secular Princes, men, women, or Children.

Protestants agree with ancient Heretics.
The Council of Constance condemned as heretical this Article of Wiccliffe
and Husse, Sess 15.
Peter neither was, nor is the Head of the Holy Catholic Church. And the same
error was taught by Apologia ad Ludouicum Bauarum.
Marsilius of Padua.

Protestant Errors.
Swinglius affirms that, In Explanat. Art. 50.
The Papists contend the Church to be built upon Peter, which is plain
Idolatry. Whitaker avoucheth that Controu. 2. q 2. c. 2. p. 455.
The Church is not founded upon Christ, as he was to be seen, but as he could
not be seen. And Controu. 4. q 1. c. 2. p. 525.
Christ was not a visible Monarch in the Church.

Vallada affirms that, Apol. cont. Epis. Luzon. c. 5. p. 122.
It is gross ignorance to make Jesus Christ the head of the Church, as he is
man. Yea says Swinglius, Tom. 4. in Col. 1.
It is impossible for a visible man to be head of the Church, seeing it is
invisible.

So that now not only Peter and his Successors, were not head of the Church,
but neither Christ himself, as he was man, and visible upon earth. But if
visibility and Manhood do hinder Christ from being head of the Church, It may
seem strange, that the same Causes should not hinder Princes and Ministers
from the said Headship, which I think few Ministers, or other Prot. dare
affirm.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that S. Peter was appointed by Christ
the Supreme Head, not only of the Apostles, but of the universal Church.
THe often Mat. 20.26. Mar. 9.34. Luc. 9.46.
Contention had amongst the Apostles, who should be greatest, argues that they
had some notice, that some one of them was to have Primacy. And though our
Savior in sundry places does forbid ambition in them, and amongst others,
where he says, Luc. 22.26.
Let the greatest amongst you, be as the least, and the chiefest, as he that
serves; yet even here he secludeth not Primacy, but affirms rather that one
is greatest and Chiefest, whom he instructs to be humble. And this he
illustrateth by the different Government of the kings of the Gentiles, who reign
over their Subjects, and of himself who was Luc. 22.27.
amongst them, as one that served, and yet was their Superior.

Now, that this greatest and chiefest was S. Peter, it is plain by Christ's
directing his speech to him presently after, saying, Ib. ver. 13.
Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired you, to winnow you as wheat, but I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, and thou sometimes converted,
confirm thy Brethren. Here though the danger was common to all, yet Christ
prays only and particularly for Peter, that his faith should not fail,
preferring him likewise to be the confirmer of the rest.

Calvin Calu. Inst. l. 4. c. 20.. 7.
replyeth that, Christ says, Mat. 20.25. Luc. 22.25. Mar. 10.42.
but you not so, that is, you must not bear rule over the Church, which thing
the Kings of the Gentiles do. But much more rightly may I conclude, if not so,
that is, after the manner of the Gentiles, then some of them were to Rule, but
after another manner, to wit, that he that was greatest, should be as the
least, and he that is the leader, as the wayter, to wit, by mildness, humility
etc. he does not say, none shall be greater, none shall bear rule, none shall be
leader, but only that he that is such, let him be as lesser; yea he declares
this by example of himself, saying, Mat. 20.28.
Even as the Son of Man is not come to be ministered unto, but to minister.
Luc. 22.27.
And, I am in the midst of you, as he that ministers. And yet he says of
himself, Io. 23.13.
You call me Master and Lord, and you say well, for I am so. By which it
appears, that nothing is here said against Primacy in the Church, but only
the best manner of using the same, is prescribed.

This form of Government S. Peter himself after prescribes to Bishops, 1.
Pet. 5.
Feed the flock, which is in you, providing for it, not by constraint, but
willingly, not for filthy lucres sake, but voluntarily: not as though you were
Lords in the Clergy, but that ye may be ensamples to the flock. So clear it
is, that one amongst the Apostles was to be Chiefest and greatest, and this, S.
Peter, and other Bishops succeeding him.

And I verily persuade my self, that it is not unworthy of observation, that
though we search into all Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, and histories, we
shall not find that any other of the Apostles but S. Peter, was thought or
pretended by any to be the chiefest over the rest, and over the whole Church.

Another strong proof of S. Peter's Primacy, is taken from this promise of
Christ made unto him, Mat. 16.18.19.
And I say also unto thee, thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it: And, I will give
unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind
upon Earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth,
shall be loosed in heaven. Out of this place four principal points may be
proved; first, that Peter was that Rock or foundation upon which Christ
promised to build his Church. Secondly, that to be the foundation of the
Church, is to be the Governor of the Church. Thirdly, that the said Peter it
was, to whom Christ promised to give the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. And
lastly that by those keys is understood the full power of governing the Church.

The first point is proved sundry ways, as first by the pronowne (this) which
demonstrateth some Rock whereof Christ had spoken a little before: now,
immediately before Christ had called Peter a Rock, for he spoke in Siriacke, in
which language Peter signifies a Rock, according to that in S. John, C. 1.42.
Thou art Simon the son of Iona; thou shall be called Cephas, which is
interpreted Peter, or a Rock, so that our Savior said, thou art a Rock, and
upon this Rock etc. Now the reason why the Latin Translatour says, tu es
Petrus, and not, tu es Petra, is because translating it out of Greek, in which
both (...), and (...), signity a Rock, it was more convenient to translate it
by a word of the Masculine gender, as more agreeable to a man.

Secondly, as of the exchange of Abrams name to Abraham, God expressed the
cause to be Genesis 17.5
for that a Father of many nations he had made him: so our Savior having
changed Io. 1.42.
Simons name to Peter, which signifies a Rock, gives this reason thereof,
because Mat. 16.18.
upon this Rock I will build my Church: and so to that end Simons name was
changed to Peter, thereby to signify that Peter was the Rock upon which Christ
promised to build his Church.

But Reynolds in his Conf. c. 2. diuis. 1. Bills. part. 1 pa. 63.
D. Reinolds replyeth, that by Rock is meant Christ himself, according to
that of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 3.11.
For other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ. But this is insufficient, for though Christ be the first and principal
foundation, yet in a secondary manner, both the Prophets and Apostles are
called foundations by S. Paul Ephesians. 2.20. Apoc. 21.14.
and S. John. And the same is also cleared and answered by S. Basil, who
excellently teaches, that, Concione de Poenitentia.
God imparteth his dignities, not depriving himself of them, but enjoying he
bestows them; he is the light, and yet he says, you are the light of the
world; he is a Priest, and he annoynteth Priests: he is the Lamb, and he
says, Behold I send you like lambs amongst the midst of wolves: he is a
Rock, and he makes a Rock. So plainly does he teach that there is another
Rock besides Christ. And immediately before refuting this objection, he tells
who this other Rock is, saying; Though Peter be a Rock, yet he is not a Rock as
Christ is: for Christ is the true Rock, immovable of himself, Peter
immovable by Christ the Rock. What more clearly can be spoken to make Peter a
Rock? And agreably D. Whitguift Defense. p. 300.
teaches that, names proper to God, are yet like in a secondary sense,
communicable to creatures. Again, the pronowne This, must relate to that which
is nearer, which is Peter, not to the more remote, which is Christ: and what
inconseque^ce of speech would this be, Thou art Peter, or a Rock, and upon my
self will I build my Church? Lastly, the Church was already builded upon
Christ, and therefore if it had been meant of himself, he would not have
said, I will build, which betokens a thing to come, but, I do build, himself
being already a Rock.

Luther and others De potestate Papae. and Cent. 1. l. 1. c. 4. Col. 175.
yet reply, that by Rock is understood Peter's faith, or Peter's confession, not
Peter himself: But for the true understanding hereof, we must note, that this
faith or Confession may be considered two ways, first with reference to Peter's
person, as if our Savior had said, upon thee Peter confessing, and believing
me to be Christ the son of the living God, will I build my Church; so that
neither Peter's person alone, nor faith and Confession alone, but both joined
together do make the forsaid Rock. And this is but agreeable with that
Catholic Doctrine, which teaches that Peter's faith in two regards is called
the Rock of the Church: first because for the merit thereof, Peter obtained
that he was to be the Rock of the Church. Secondly, in that Peter is therefore
chiefly the Rock of the Church, that seeing his faith could not fail, he was
to strengthen and confirm all others in faith, for so our Savior said to him,
Luc. 22.32.
I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, and thou sometimes
converted, confirm thy Brethren: Therefore, seeing that Peter by reason of
this indefectible faith, is a most strong Rock, sustayning the whole Church, it
is all one then to say, upon Peter, and upon his faith, the Church to be
builded, and in those respects, may we truly say, the Church to be builded upon
Peter's Faith, or Confession.

Now, the second way whereby Faith and Confession may be understood, is barely
of themselves without all reference to Peter's person, and in this sense
Protestants urge it: but it is false, for then our Savior would not have said,
upon this Rock I will build, but, I do, and have built my Church, for as then
already many had believed him to have been the son of the living God, as the
Old Prophets, the B. Virgin Mary, Simeon, Zacharias, his Apostles and
Disciples. Secondly, Faith so taken is rightly said (according to Sermon. 22. de
verb. Apost.
S. Austine) to be the foundation of our Justification, and all virtues, not of
the Church; for the foundation and the rest of the building must be both of the
same kind. Now the Church is a Congregation of men, as it were 1. Pet. 2.5.
of lively stones, therefore the stone which must be the foundation, must be
some man, not any virtue. Thirdly, all words of the Text do plainly argue, that
some Privilege or peculiar authority was given to Peter for that his
Confession; all which were taken away, if that only faith of Christ (which was
common as then to others with him) were only the Rock of the Church.

S. Peter then being the Rock whereupon Christ promised to build his Church,
the next thing to be declared is, that to be the Rock or foundation of the
Church, is to be the chief Pastor or Governor thereof; that the foundation in
a building, is as the head in a Body, a governor in a City, and a king in his
kingdom. For the proving hereof we must note, that in holy Scriptures the
Church or company of faithful, is called Heb. 3.6.
the house of Christ, and 1. Cor. 3.9.
Gods building; now as the rest of the building in a material house, depends
of the foundation, as upon that which wholly vphouldeth it; so in that
spiritual building of the Church (which Christ promised to found upon a Rock,
and which Rock we have proved to be Peter) the same depends upon that Rock
whereupon it is founded. Now what other dependence can be imagined, between the
rest of the Church, and Peter their foundation, then that upon him, as a firm
Rock, they should wholly rely in all matters of faith and Religion, to be
instructed, governed, and confirmed, and so ever vpholden and sustained in true
faith, against all the storms of false Doctrines, and the Professors thereof.

But some reply, that as Peter here, is called the foundation of the Church, so
are likewise the Prophets and Apostles in other Ephesians. 2.20. Apoc. 21.14.
places. Answ. They are called so indeed in three respects; first, in that they
were the first, as well as Peter, that planted Churches, and converted
Countries to Christ, in which sense they are so called in the Apoc. 21.14.
Apocalypse. Secondly, in that the faith of the Church depends upon the
Reuelarion which the Prophets and Apostles received from God, and which they by
their preaching and writing,, have left to Posterity, and so they are called
foundations by S. Paul; and in these two respects all the Apostles were equal.
Thirdly in regard of Government, for they were all Rectors and Pastors of the
whole Church, but not in the same manner that S. Peter, he being as an Ordinary
Pastor, from whom (as shall be hereafter See hereafter.
proved) the orderly succession of true Pastors, was to continue until the end
of the world, they only but as Apostles, or Legates for the time. And in this
respect (which pertayneth only to the present Controversy) as also in that
Peter was the head or chief amongst the Apostles themselves, the Church is
said to be built upon Peter, and not upon the rest of the Apostles.

The third Principal point therefore remaining to be proved, is, That those
words, To thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, are meant of
Peter. And in truth so many words of the Text it self do so plainly show it,
as a man would more admire, that any should deny it, then much trouble himself
in seeking to prove it: for who reading, Blessed art thou Simon, the son of
Jonas etc. And, I say also unto thee, thou art Peter etc. And, I will give unto
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, would not say, that to Simon, who was
afterward called Peter, the said keys were given?

But some conceit, that whatsoever is here said to Peter belongs to the
whole Church, which he only at that time did represent. But for answer hereto,
we must observe, that two ways Peter may be said to bear the person of the
Church; first historically, which is, when one having done a thing himself,
does also therein represent a thing to be done by another, as Abraham having
indeed two sons, did therein also represent, that God was to have two people,
as S. Paul Gal. 4.24.
expounds. Secondly parabolically, when nothing truly done is proposed, but
something alike is feygned, to signify another thing, as in the Gospel, he
that sowed good seed, signified Christ preaching. And in the first sense, it is
true, that Peter as then represented the Church, in that to him were given the
keys, which after were to be Communicated to the Church: but this makes not
against, but with us; unless we will say, that Abraham had not two sons,
because therein he represented God to have two people. And that it is not to be
understood in the second sense, is plain, as well that every circumstance does
(as it were) mark out the very particular person of Peter, as also in that to
the same, it is said, To thee I will give the keys etc. to whom it is said
immediately after (verse 29.) Go after me Satan, for the name Peter is alike in
both places; and that by Satan, is meant Peter's person is plain, and for such
Hilar. de Trinit. l. 6. and 10. and in Ps. 131. Aug. l. 2. cont. duas ep. Gaud.
c. 23.
acknowledged by the ancient Fathers, and all Protestants (in their known love
to Peter) do easily believe it.

Others object that Peter spoke in the name of all the Disciples, when he said,
Thou art Christ etc. And therefore he likewise heard in the name of all, To thee
I will give the keys. Answer. Peter spoke in the name of the rest, not as a
Crier, foreknowing what would be the answer of the rest, for neither had they
given him that in charge, no nor Hilar. in hunc locum. and l. 6. de Trinit.
Chrysostom. hom. 55. in Math. Cyril. l. 12. in Joan. c. 64. Aug. Ser. 114. de
Temp. Leo Ser. 11. de pass. Domini. and ser. 2. de SS. Petro and Paulo.
consulted with him thereof, as many ancient Fathers do observe; he alone
knowing it by revelation from God, according to that which Christ presently
therefore said, Flesh and blood has not reueyled it unto thee, but my Father
which is in heaven: he is therefore said to speak in the name of the rest,
because to that, which he as chief and head had uttered, they by their
silence, gave their assent, which thing makes wholly for Peter's Primacy.

It is further replied, that as to Abraham Romans 4.9
Faith was imputed to justice, so also it is imputed to all others that
believe, therefore if Peter received the keys because he confessed Christ, then
all such as confess Christ, shall likewise receive them. Answ. Abraham by
faith was not only justified, but also made Romans 4.17.
a Father of many Nations, and yet all such as believe are not made such
Fathers. The answer therefore is, that faith of its own nature does lead and
bring a man to Justice, if other things necessary thereunto be not wanting, as
Hope, Charity etc. But Confession of Christ does not of its own nature lead a
man to receive the keys, for sundry other ways might Christ have rewarded
Peter worthily for his Confession, if it had so pleased his heavenly wisdom.

Some demand whether Peter dying, the keys remained in the Church, or ceased
with him? If the first, then they were given to the Church; if the second, then
no man now has authority to loose or bynd. Or thus, When the Pope is chosen,
he either brings the keys with him, or not; if the first, then he was Pope
before he was made; if the second, from whence had he them? Did some Angel
bring them from heaven, or rather did he not receive them from the Church, to
whom they were given in the beginning? Answ. Peter, or the Pope dying, the
keys do not perish, neither remain formally in the Church but only as they
are communicated to inferior Pastors, but they remain in the hands of
Christ: and when a new Pope is chosen, he does not bring them with him, neither
are they given him by the Church, but by Christ, neither by any new delivery,
but by his ancient Institution. Even as a King when he does place a Viceroy
over some Country, should withal make known, that it is his Royal pleasure,
that the said Viceroy dying, the Country shall choose and nominate another, to
whom he already gives the same power and authority, as to the former.

Lastly, it is objected, that as here to Peter are promised the keys, so the
same authority to be promised to the Mat. 18.18.
rest of the Apostles, Whatsoever you shall bynd upon earth, shall be bound in
heaven, and whatsoever you shall loose etc. Answ. As before it is showed in
what sense they are truly called foundations, so here likewise they are said to
have authority to bynd and loose, but that this was given to them, not as to
ordinary Pastors, but only as to Legates for the time, and withal with
certain subordination to Peter, shall be showed hereafter. And I wish only, that
it may be further observed, that Christ speaking of one matter, to one person,
in one and the same sentence, to whomesoeuer he made the first promise, to him
he made the rest. Therefore if he promised the keys to all the Apostles, upon
them all he promised to build his Church, and not upon himself. Or if he
promised to build his Church upon himself, to himself he promised the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, to himself he promised all power of bynding and
loosing, which had been as impertinent to our Saviors discourse, as dissonant
from truth: for Christ had all that power before given by his Father, when he
was first sent.

The last principal thing then to be proved, is, that by giving the keys to
Peter, is understood the giving of the chief authority over the whole Church
unto him; for by keys, is understood Isa. 22.22.
principality, as where the Institution of the high Priest Eliachim, being
described, it is said, And I will give the key of the house of David, upon his
shoulder, and he shall open, and there shall be none to shut, and he shall shut,
and there shall be none to open: here, by key is understood Ecclesiastical
principality, whereunto pertayneth that, Isa. 9.6.
And his principality is upon his shoulder; for therefore is Principality said
to be upon the shoulder, because the keys (wherewith it is signified) were
accustomed to be laid upon the shoulder. Christ's Principality also is plainly
signified by keys, Apoc. 3.7.
These things says he that is holy and true, which has the key of David;
which opens, and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens. As also it
is a common custom in politic government, that when any City is yielded to
any Prince, or Governor, the keys thereof are delivered withal, in sign of
their subjection. So our Savior to signify the ample power that he would give
to Peter over his Church, promised him the keys of the kingdom of heaven. So
many ways it is proved clearly, that by the foresaid words of our Savior unto
Peter, he thereby promised to make him supreme head of his Church.

To come therefore to the performance of the foresaid promise; S. John tells
us that, Io. 21.15.
Jesus said to Simon Peter, Simon of Iona love thou me more then these? he
said unto him; yea Lord thou know that I love thee: he said unto him, feed
my Lambs. He said unto him again the second time, Simon of Iona love thou
me? he said unto him yea Lord etc. he said unto him, feed my sheep etc. Here
our Saviors speech is so direct to Peter alone (as is manifest by all
circumstances, especially by those words, Love thou me more then these?) as
all other special proof thereof is needless. Now, that by those words, Pasce
oues meas, feed my sheep, the chief Ecclesiastical power is given to Peter,
is proved first by the word Pasce, feed, which in Scriptures signifies to
govern or bear rule; so where it is said, For out of thee shall come a Mat.
2.6.
Captain, or as Prot. English, Bib. of Anno 1578.
translate a Governor, which shall govern my people of Israel; in the Greek
it is (...), which signifies to feed: Now that there is understood Christ's
Government, and chief power over the people, is of it self manifest. As also
it is said Michaeas 5.2.
from whence S. Matthew took that saying, Out of thee shall come forth unto me,
he that shall be the Dominatour or Ruler in Israel; where the Hebrew word
signifies not, pascere, to feed, but dominari, to rule. In like sort it is
said of our Savior, Apoc. 19.15.
He shall rule them with a rod of Iron: in the Greek it is (...), feed. So
also Homer (l. 2. Iliad) calls king Agamemnon (...), pastorem populorum, the
Pastor of the people.

Secondly, he is not properly said to feed another which in any respect helps
another to meat, but he that provides and procures meat for another, which is
a thing proper to a Master, or Luc. 11.41.
Governor, who is a faithful steward and wise, whom the Master shall make
Ruler over his household to give them in season their measure of wheat: So that
it is his part to feed, who is appointed over the family for Steward and Ruler.
Besides, it is not the part of a Pastor or Shepherd, only to give meat to his
flock, but also to guide them, defend them, govern them, and correct them
when they go astray.

Thirdly, no reason can be alleged, why so severally it should be said, to
Peter, To thee I will give the keys: and feed my sheep, and that for his
singular faith and Charity, if thereby he had received nothing above the rest.

Fourthly, by those words, My sheep is understood the whole Church of Christ,
not any one or other part thereof: for seeing without all restriction, the
Pronowne, Mine, is joined to the Nowne, Sheep, it manifestly follows, all
those sheep to be commended to Peter, to whom the Pronowne Mine, extends:
now, it is certain that it extends to all, for there is not any in the
Church, who will not glory himself to be Christ's sheep. Besides when one dying
says, I leave my goods to my Children, he excludes none of his goods, nor any
of his Children; further our Savior either commended hereby to Peter, all his
sheep, or none, or some determinate company, or some indeterminate: Now none
will say, that he commended none, or some determinately, for that is manifestly
false; neither any indefinitely, for no wise Prouider does leave an uncertain
care, when he may determinate the same, seeing certain confusion and
perturbation arises thereby: yea to commend some, and not to determine which,
is as much as to commend none; for which shall he feed, who knows not his
flock? It remains therefore that Christ assigned to Peter even all his flock
to be fed, and consequently the rest of the Apostles themselves, seeing they
were part of Christ's flock.

D. Whitaker answers hereto, that, Controu. 4 q 2. c. 4. p. 573.
Christ commended his sheep to Peter indefinitely, not to feed these or those
sheep, but sometimes these, sometimes those. Agreeable to which says Beza, In
hunc locum
Is the word of God thus to be profaned? Truly Christ did add (...), not
(...), (that is, all, not universal) and the difference is known between
indefinite, and universal propositions. But all this is frivolous, for Prot.
do limit propositions universal, as well as indefinite. And therefore Calvin
himself shall answer this, telling them, that In 1. Joan. 3.3.
an indefinite speech imports as much as an universal. Wherefore if, as
Whitaker confesses, Christ commended his sheep to Peter indefinitly; he
commended all, and every one of his sheep.

Another proof from Scripture for S. Peter's Primacy, is taken from the manner
of numbering the Apostles, which is commonly by beginning with Mat. 10.12.
Peter. Now the names of the twelve Apostles were these, the first Simon who is
called Peter, and Andrew his Brother, James etc. See also Luc. 22.8. Io. 21 2.
Mat. 17.1. Mar 5.37. and 13.3.
whereas the order of the rest is often changed. Mat. 10.2. Mar. 3.16. Luc.
6.14. Act. 1.13.
Yea where two or three are but named, he is commonly the first, Mar. 5.37.
Luc. 8.51.
and so in all other places, one only Gal. 2.9.
excepted, where it is said, James, Cephas, and John. And yet it is not
certain whether S. Paul so said: for diverse Ambrose Aug and Hieron. upon this
place, and in the text, and in their Commentaries.
ancient Fathers both in the text and in their Commentaries read, Peter, James,
and John. But if we admit, that it should be so read, then, it may either be
said, that it was so done, because James was Bishop of Jerusalem, where those
three Apostles then were, or else that S. Paul did not observe any order in
this place: for that S. Paul knew that Peter was above James, may appear, in
that in the same Epistle he says, C. 1.18.
He went to Jerusalem to see Peter, not to see James, though he were in the
same place, as also 1. Cor. 1.12.
he proceeds ascending, and placing Peter next unto Christ.

Further, Peter is not only placed in the first place, but also is described as
a Captain or Prince of the rest; for as it is said, Apoc. 12.7.
Michael and his Angels, Ib. verse. 9.
The Devil and his Angels; so it is said, Mar. 1.36.
And Simon, and they that were with him, followed him; Luc. 8.45.
Peter said, and they that were with him; Mar. 16.7. See also Luc. 9.32. Act.
2.14.5.29. 1. Cor. 9.5.
Tell his Disciples and Peter. Neither can it be answered to these, that Peter
is thus placed, either because he was first called by Christ, for that was not
he, but his brother Io. 1.39, 40.
Andrew, or because he was the eldest in years, for Andrew was Elder, which
thing our Cent. 2. l. 2. c. 10.
Adversaries acknowledge for probable, or else because of his excellent gifts;
for either that is meant of those gifts which he had in regard of the Church,
as that he received singularly the keys, that he was made the foundation of
the Church, and Pastor of all Christ's sheep etc. or else it is meant of his
personal gifts and virtues: if the first, it makes wholly for us; not the
second, for the Evangelists could not easily know, neither durst judge, which
of the Apostles was most virtuous, for John was called the Apostle whom Jesus
loved, and James the less was of such sanctity as that he was called the Just,
and the Brother of our Lord. Lastly, it cannot be said to be casual, in that
some one was to be put first in the Catalogue, as well in that, as all the
Evangelists ever put Peter first, so yet they keep no one certain order in
placing of the rest, excepting Judas, who for unworthiness, they still place
last, as they do S. Peter for his pre-eminence, first; which argues a special
respect of Peter's placing: as also in that S. Matthew C. 10.2.
calls Peter, primus, the first, not reckoning the rest, one, the second, and
another the third etc. but without all observation of order: so that betwixt
Peter and the rest he observes order, because Peter was Superior, and the
rest Inferiors; but amongst the rest he observes none, because they were all
equal amongst themselves: And of the word, Primus, comes Primatus, even as of
Princeps, Principatus, of Consul, Consulatus.

This is so conuincing, that Beza In his annotations upon the New Test. of Anno
1556. in Mat. 10.2.
for want of better answer, barely suspecteth the word, first, to be thrust
into the Text by some favorer of Peter's Primacy. What if this word, Primus
(says he) be added by some, who would establish Peter's Primacy? And yet (says
he) we find it so written in all Copies. But if this might suffice for an
answer, every heretic might euade all Scriprure, though never so clear.

But that you may better know this Beza, here he confesses that the word,
first, is written in all Copies; and yet he will needs suspect, that it is
thrust into the text by some friend of Peter's. And yet Mar. 3.16. where it is
only said; He gave to Simon the name Peter, here himself thrusts it into the
Text, saying, And the first was Simon; and the same Addition is also made in
some of our Of Anno 1578. 1579.
English Bibles. What a mass of Contrarieties may be found in this man? In the
first place, where the word, first, is to be truly seen in all Copies, there
will he have it to be added to the Text by some forger: here where it is not,
he will have it part of the true Text, and that because Matthew reads so, and
yet next before he suspecteth not Matthew, but some late Papist to have read so.
In the first place, there could not be, first Simon, because there is no
consequence of second, third etc. here he says, that is no impediment, because
there be many examples of such speech, and namely in that place of Matthew.
There it is not so, though all Greek Copies have it so: here it must needs be
so, because Beza will have it so, though it be only found in certain odd
Copies of Erasmus, which Erasmus himself, as Beza confesses, allowed not.

If after Christ had given to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Apostolical
authority in common, saying, Whose sins you forgive etc. Preach the Gospel
etc. he had nevertheless said severally to Peter, Peter thou art not a Rock,
I will not give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, Thou shall not
feed my sheep, Peter is not the first of the Apostles, and the like; what
Protestant reading this, would doubt to affirm, but that the chief authority
over the Church, were denied to Peter? Seeing then, in these Negative
Propositions, they doubtless would affirm chief authority to be denied to
Peter, they must like wise affirm by the contradictory affirmative
propositions expressed in Scripture, chief authority to be given to Peter.

Lastly, it is not to be neglected, that diverse Privileges and honors were
given to Peter, which were not given to the rest of the Apostles, at that he
was the only man among the Disciples, that Mat. 1^.29.
walked upon the waters with Christ: that he was the only man for whom Christ
Mat. 17.27.
paid tribute: In Peter's Luc 5.2.3.
ship, and not in the other did Christ teach: the Apostles in general being
asked by Christ, who he was, Peter was the only man that Mat. 16.16.
answered: for him only Christ prayed, Luc. 22.31.
that his faith should not fail: To him only he said, Luc. 21.16.
Feed my sheep: him only he Mat. 16.13.
calls Peter, or a Rock and accordingly promises to build his Church upon
this Rock: Peter is the first that speaks in the Council Act. 1.15. and
5.29. and 15.7.
of the Apostles: he prescribes Election Act. 1.22.
to be made of one in Judas place: he standing Act. 2.14.
among the Eleven, takes upon him to make the first Sermon to the people: When
Ananias had fraudulently left a porion of his riches at Act. 5.2 3 5.
the feet of the Apostles, Peter only rebukes him, and inflicteth upon him
present death: Peter was the only man of all the Apostles Gal. 10.18.
whom to see, Paul went to Jerusalem: Lastly he is the only Apostle that has
the usual pre-eminence in the order of being first named, as is before showed;
In so much as when the Apostles are but spoken of in general, yet often he
only for honor sake is named. All which things being so peculiar only to
Peter, from the other Apostles, could not be casual to him rather then to the
other, but purposely observed, and so set down in regard of his known Primacy.

I will only add hereto, that seeing the best Government is acknowledged by all,
to be Monarchical, that therefore the Government of the Church is to be by one
supreme Pastor upon Earth. And although Calvin Inst. l. 4. c. 6.. 9.
replyeth, this not to follow, because Christ is the King and Monarch of the
Church: yet this is insufficient; for though Christ be the true and proper
Monarch of the Church, governing the same spiritually and inuisibly, yet the
Church being corporal and visible, needs some one visible Judge, by whom
Controversies in Religion arysing, may be composed, and who may keep the other
inferior Prelates in unity and due performance of their offices. Yea this
makes no more against one supreme Pastor, then it does against all other
Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors, who by the same reason were needless, for
Christ is 1. Pet. 2.25.
the Pastor and Bishop of our soul, he is our Master whom we are commanded
Mat. 17.5.
to hear; he it is, who baptizeth Io. 1.33.
in the holy Ghost. And therefore, as other Bishops and Pastors do that as
Christ's Ministers, which himself does principally; so the like may be said of
one supreme Pastor. Thus much of the plain Texts of Scripture in proof of S.
Peter's Primacy.

SECT. III. That the Fathers expound the sacred Scriptures agreably with
Catholics, in Proof of S. Peter's Primacy.
NOw, that the ancient Fathers do expound the foresaid Scriptures agreably with
us Catholics, in b^hal^e of S. Peter's Primacy, it shall sundry ways appear;
as first concerning the change of his name from Simon to Peter, which
signifies a Rock; S. Cvrill affirms, that, In Joan. c. 11.
Christ etc. foretold that his name should not be ^^mon, but Peter, aptly
signifying by the very word, that upon him as upon Rock and firm stone, he was
to build his Church. To the same purpose S. Hilary In Math. Can. 16.
says most eloquently, O happy foundation of the Church, in naming of the new
name, and worthy Rock of that building, which should dissolve the infernal
Laws, and gates of Hell etc. O happy Porter of heaven, to whose arbitrament
the keys of Eternal entrance are delivered etc. S. G^^gory is so confident in
this, as that he demands, L. 6. Ep. 3.
Who knows not that the holy Church is founded upon the solidity of the
Prince of the Apostles seeing the firmenes of his mind he took in his name that
of a Rock he should be called Peter? to whom by the voice of Truth it is said:
To thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven. These Fa^^ers show
from the Scriptures, that therefore the name Simon was changed to Peter, which
signifies a Rock, because he was to be the Rock, upon which Christ would build
his Church.

Now, that S. Peter was the Rock, upon whom Christ would build his Church, it
is taught by S. Chrysostom in these words, Ho, 55. in Mat.
Our Lord says, Thou art Peter, and upon thee I will build my Church: what
more clear then, Upon thee? S. Hierome avouches that, In. c. 16. Math.
According to the Metaphore of a Rock, it is rightly said to him, I will build
my Church upon thee. S. Athanasius, Ep ad Felicem.
As the divine Scripture says truly, Thou art Peter, and upon thy foundation
the Pillars of the Church are strengthened. S. Ambrose, Ser. 68. and 47. and
see S. Leo Ser. 1. de anniuersario assumptionis suae ad Pontifi^atum.
If therefore Peter be the Rock upon which the Church is built etc. These
Fathers expressly teach from the Scriptures, that upon Peter himself, as upon a
Rock, the Church was to be built.

S. Austine makes not only S. Peter, but even his Sea after him to be the
Rock, saying, ^n psalm. cont. part. Donat. and de Bap. cont. Don l. 2. c. 1.
Number the Priests from the very Sea of Peter, that is the Rock which the
gates of Hell do not overcome. And again* Ser 5. in fest. Pet and Pau and ser.
15. de sanctis. Ep. ad Quint.
only (Peter) amongst the Apostles deserved to hear, Amen, I say to thee, thou
art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church; worthy truly who to the
people, which were to be builded in the house of God, might be a stone for
their foundation, a pillar for their stay, a key to open the gates of the
kingdom of heaven. And eis where he says, In ^sal. 30. Con. 2.
O Church, that is, O Peter, because upon this Rock I will build my Church:
kill and eat. S. Austines opinion in this was so clear, that the Prot.
Hamelmannus confesses that, De Tradit. Apost. part. 2. l. 3. Col. 622.
Austine in his book against the Epistle of Donatus, teaches that the Church
was founded upon Peter, as upon the Rock, and he proves this his opinion by
the verses of Ambrose.

S. Cyprian, no less plainly writes: De unit. Eccles.
Our Lord says to Peter, I say to thee that thou art Peter, and upon that Rock
I will build my Church etc. But to be brief, the like is taught by the
Council Act. 5. Orig. hom. 5. in Exodus Epiph. in Ancorato. Basil l. 2. in
Eunom. Tertul. l. de Praescript.
of Calcedon, Origin, Epiphanius, Basil, and Tertullian.

Now that the Fathers thus expounding S. Peter to be the Rock, did thereby
understand, that the supreme care of the whole Church was committed to him, it
is evident by S. Chrysostom, who interpreting those words, Thou art Peter, Ho.
55. in Mat.
affirms that Christ ordained him Pastor of the Church; And that, the Father
placed Hieremy over one Nation, but Christ placed Peter over the whole world.
S. Ambrose avouches that, Ser. 47.
Peter is called a Rock, because as an immovable stone he sustayneth the
joining, and wayght of the whole Christian work or building. S. Gregory
teaches that, L. 4. Ep. 32.
It is clear to all that know the Gospel, that by our Lords mouth, the care
of the whole Church is committed to holy Peter, the Prince of all the Apostles,
for to him it is said, Io. 21.15,
Peter love thou me? feed my sheep. To him it is said, Luc. 22.31.
Behold Satan has desired to winnow you as wheat, and I have prayed for thee
Peter, that thy faith may not fail, and thou sometimes converted, confirm thy
Brethren. To whom it is said, Mat. 16.18.
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it, and to thee I will give the keys etc.
Behold he takes the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, power of bynding and
loosing is given him, the care and principality of the whole Church is
committed to him etc. These sayings are so pregnant, that if Bellarmine were
living, he could not speak more favorably for the Popes Primacy. In like sort
whereas Christ said to Peter, Simon love thou me, and Peter answered, Thou
know Lord that I love thee, and then Jesus says to him, feed my sheep; S.
Ambrose expounding these words, says, Ad cap. 24. Lucae.
Therefore is he preferred before all, because amongst them all, he alone
professed his love.

But no man speaks more expressly in this then S. Cyprian, De unit. Eccl.
(21) To Peter our Lord after his Resurrection said, feed my sheep, and builded
his Church upon him alone, and to him he gives the charge of feeding his
sheep; for although after his Resurrection, he gave his power alike to all,
saying; As my father sent me, so I send you, take the holy Ghost, If you remit
to any their sins, they shall be remitted etc. Yet to manifest unity, he
constituted one Chair, and so disposed by his authority, that unity should
have origene of one: The rest of the Apostles were that Peter was in equal
fellowship of honor and power, but the beginning comes of unity: the Primacy
is given to Peter, that the Church of Christ may be showed to be one, and one
Chair.

Let us hear S. Chrysostom, L. 2. de Sacerdoti^.
Why did our Lord sheed his blood? truly (says he) to redeem those sheep,
the care of which he committed both to Peter, and also to his Successors. And a
little after, Christ would have Peter endued with such authority, and to be
far above all his other Apostles; for he says, Peter do thou love me more
then all these do? Whereupon our Master might have inferred, if thou love me
Peter, use much fasting, sleep on the hard floor, watch much, be Patron to
the oppressed, Father to the Orphans, and husband to the widows: but omitting
all these things, he says, feed my sheep; for all the foresaid virtues may
easily be done by many subjects, not only men, but also women: but when it
comes to the government of the Church, and committing the Charge of so many
souls all womankind must needs wholly give place to the burden and greatness
thereof and a great number of men also. And whereas Christ said to S. Peter, feed
my sheep. L. 2. de Consider.
What sheep (says S. Bernard?) the people of this or that City? of this or
that kingdom? My sheep (quoth he) to whom is it not manifest, he designed not
some, but assigned all? nothing is excepted where nothing is distinguished. And
the like is taught by S. Chrysostom, S. Austine, and S. Cyril, upon this
place, and by S. Leo Ep. 89. ad Episcopos Viennensis Prouinciae. Max. ser. de
S. Pet. and Pau.
and Maximus.

S. Austine speaking of our Saviors paying Tribute for himself and Peter,
interprets the words thus, Quaest. vet. and nou. Test. q. 75.
They that received the didrachmes, say to Peter the Apostle: Your master does
not pay the didrachmes etc. upon which words they went to the master, that he
might pay for all his Disciples. But our Savior when he commands to pay for
himself and Peter, seems to have paid for all: because as in our Savior
were all the Causes of Superiority, so after him all are contained in Peter:
for he ordained him the head of them, that he might be the Pastor of our Lords
flock. And a little after upon those words. Luc. 22.
I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, he says further: It is
evident that all are contained in Peter, for asking for Peter he is known to
ask for all. Always in the Superior, the people is reproved, or commended.

S. Hilary writing upon these words, Go after me Satan, thou art a scandal
to me, expounds them in this manner, In Ps. 13. multo ante med.
When he had spoken certain things concerning his Passion to his Disciples,
and Peter had detested this as unworthy the son of God, Peter, to whom before
he had given the keys of the kingdom of heaven, upon whom he was to build his
Church, against whom the gates of hell should nothing prevail, who what he
either loosed or bound upon Earth, those should remain either loosed or bound
in heaven; This man detesting this Sacrament of his Passion, he received with
this reproach, Go after me Satan, thou art a scandal to me: for so great was
his Religion (or care) to suffer for the salvation of mankind, as that with the
reproach of Satan he named Peter, the first Confessor of the son of God, the
foundation of the Church, the Porter of the kingdom of heaven, and for earthly
Judgment, the Judge of heaven.

Upon these words of S. Paul, Gal. 1.18.
After three years I came to Jerusalem to see Peter, S. Ambrose writes, In
Gal. 1.
It was fitting that he should desire to see Peter, because he was the chief
among the Apostles, to whom our Savior had committed the care of Churches. Yea
according to S. Hierome, Ep. 89. ad Aug. c. 2.
Peter was of so great authority, that Paul in his Epistle writes, Then after
three years I came to Jerusalem to see Peter etc. Showing that he had not
security of Preaching the Gospel, unless it were confirmed by the sentence of
Peter, and the rest of the Apostles that were with him. S. Chrysostom says
hereof, Ho. 87. in Joan. 21. See also Oecumenius in Gal. 1.
Peter was the mouth of the Apostles, and the Prince and top of that Company,
and therefore Paul went to see him above others.

Lastly, whereas in the numbering of the Apostles it is said, Mat. 10.12.
The first Simon, who is called Peter, S. Ambrose says hereof; In 2. Cor. 11.
Andrew first followed our Savior before Peter, and yet the Primacy Andrew
received not, but Peter. S. Bernard affirms, that, L 2. de Confid. c. 8.
Peter walking upon the waters, as Christ did, declared himself the only Vicar
of Christ, which should be ruler not over one people, but over all, for many
waters are many peoples.

But the Fathers are so confessedly clear in their expounding of the
Scriptures for S. Peter's Primacy over all the Apostles, and the whole Church,
that Danaeus for his best answer unto them, says, Resp. ad Bell. disp. part.
1. p. 277.
They are not to be believed, for the saying of Christ, Mat. 16. thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, most badly they expound of
the Person of Peter. Agreably also confesses Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 6. Sec. 6.
The Church to be built upon Peter, because it is said, upon this Rock etc.
Some of the Fathers have so expounded, but the whole Scripture gainsayeth. And
if we will believe D. Fulke, Confut. of the Papists Quarrels. p 4.
Many of the Ancient Fathers etc. were deceived to think something more of
Peter's Prerogative, and the Bishop of Romes dignity, then by the word of God
was given to either of them. The Centuristes affirm that, C^nt. 5. Col. 1262.
Leo very painfully goes about to prove that singular pre-eminence was given
to Peter, above the other Apostles, and that thence rose the Primacy of the
Roman Church.

But Protestants forbear not to reprove, and charge with affected Primacy even
S. Peter himself, and the other next succeding to him Bishops of Rome, for
thus write certain Caluinists, Catalogus testium veritatis. to. 1. p. 27.
It may not be denied, but that Peter was sometimes faulty in ambition and
desire of power etc. By which infirmity of Peter, doubtless it was signified
that those Bishops which bragged of Peter's succession, were to be faulty of the
like etc. Wherefore this so perverse ambition of Peter, and ignorance of
heavenly things, and negligence withal etc. did without doubt signify, that
the Roman Bishop, because he would be Chief, and heir of Peter's privileges,
was to be ignorant and a contemner of heavenly things etc. To the same purpose
another Prot. says, Philippus Nicolai in Comment. de regno Dei. p. 221.
The affectation of Primacy, was a common Infirmity of the Apostles, as also of
the first Bishops of the City of Rome.

But that you may see that this claim was not only made by Popes, the
Centurists confess that, Cent. 3. Col. 84.
Tertullian not without Error (as they dream) seems to think the keys to
be committed only to Peter, and the Church to be built upon him. Cent. 3. Col.
84.
Cyprian says every where the Church to be founded upon Peter, Cent. 3. Col.
85.
Origin says Tract. 5. in Matthew. Peter by promise deserved to be made the
foundation of the Church: and Hom. 17. in Luc. he calls Peter the Prince of
the Apostles. Retentiue p. 248.
Fulke charge Opratus with absurdity for saying of Peter, he deserved to be
preferred before all the Apostles, and he alone received the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven, to be communicated to the rest. So manifest it is, that all
the Fathers of the Primitive Church, believed Peter to be the supreme Head of
the Church.

SECT. IV. That Protestants also do agree with Catholics, in the Doctrine of
S. Peter's Primacy.
John Husse proves both by Scriptures and Fathers, that S. Peter was head of
the Apostles and the whole Church. De Ecclesia. c. 9.
The saying of B. Dionisius (says he) is true, that Peter is Chief among the
Apostles, and was the foundation of Churches; And the saying of Austine also is
true, that he was first among the Apostles, according to some Prerogative. And
the saying of Marcellus is true, that Peter was the head of the whole Church
etc. There were three virtues in which Peter excelled, faith, humility, and
Charity etc. from that faith Peter received the burden of the Rule of the
Church: And I say to thee, says the Rock, because thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock I will build my Church etc. Peter was the first Vicar of Christ by
him chosen, and deputed spiritually to the Church.

Perzibranes Confession in this point is this, In professione fidei. cap. 38.
I confess that the keys of loosing and bynding, of forgiving and retaining
sins, were given by Christ to the holy Church in B. Peter principally, and in
other Apostles.

D. Bilson alleging these words of Christ, He that is greater among you, let
him be as the least, affirms that, Perpet. Govern. c. 6. p. 53.
In these words the Lord notes a manifest distinction of some greater, some
less, some chiefer, some lower. D. Sarauia says of the forsaid doubt of the
Apostles, and our Saviors said answer, Diverse degrees of Ministers. l. 2. c.
21. p. 173. 174.
Far be it from me, that I should rashly condemn those good men of
sacrilegious ambition, seeing the Lord did not so much correct, as direct them
in their demand. And the like is taught by D. Def. page 70.
Whitguift.

Calvin speaking of the change of name from Simon to Cephas, or Peter, faith,
In Joan. 1. 42.
The Evangelist recites as it were this Prophecy, that Simon should have a new
name given him. I call it a Prophecy, not only because Christ foresaw the
Constancy of faith which would be in Peter, but because he foresaw what he
would give him: therefore now he commends in words the grace which he resolved
afterward to bestow upon him. He does not therefore say that this is his name
for the present, but differreth it to the time to come, Thou shall be called
Cephas, says he, It is meet that all the Godly be Peter's, who founded in
Christ may be made fit to build the Temple of God: but this one is so called
for his singular Excellency.

D. Whitaker relating what himself and other Prot. think heerof, says,
Controu. 4. q. 2. page 544.
We do not deny Peter to be the foundation of the Church, and the Governor,
and we will grant, if they shall require, that to be promised him by Christ in
these words. And Con. Dur. l. 5. sect. 4.
who does not confess Peter to be the Rock and the foundation of Church?
Reynolds acknowledges it to be true, Confer. Cap. 2. sec. 1.
That the words of Christ to Peter do contain this sense, upon thee I will
build my Church. Marcus Antonius de Dominis confesses that, L 1. de Repub. c.
7. mum. 1.
It is expressly said by Christ, speaking to Peter, I will give to thee the
keys. Let them therefore be gone and depart, whosoever offering violence to
this Text, do contend that the keys are given or promised not to Peter
immediately, but Peter's person excluded, either to the whole Church, or to
another which is not Peter. Whitaker likewise says, Controu. 4 q. 2. c. 4 p.
557.
I grant, that to him (to wit Peter) the keys were truly promised, for that the
place conuinceth, and I will never deny it. Who doubts (says D. Resp. ad
Apol. Bellar. c. 8.
Andrews) that the keys were given to him? So free from all doubt is S. Peter's
Primacy.

D. Whiteguift alleges Calvin to say, Whiteg. Def. p. 373.
The twelve Apostles had one among them to govern the rest; and he proves it,
in that there is, Ibid. p. p. 469.
no College without a Governor, no Society without a master; and hereupon he
further concludes, saying, So should it not be any absurdity, if we should
confess, that the Apostles gave such pre-eminence to Peter. Affirming further
himself, that, Ibid.
Among the Apostles themselves, there was one chief etc. that had chief
authority over the rest, that Schisms might be compounded.

Musculus avouches, that, In Whiteg. Def. p. 66. 68.
Celestial spirits are not equal etc. The Apostles themselves were not
equal, Peter is found in many places to have been Chief, which we deny not.
But D. Whitegui^^ is so full in this, as that he not only answers Ibid. p.
62. 63 65. 68. 70. 395.
certain places of Scripture, objected by some against Peter's Primacy, but
also expounds Ibid. p. 70. 304.
in behalf of the same sundry of the said Scriptures before alleged. And
although he would euade something from our Catholic Doctrine, by affirming
that Peter was only as an Archbishop, over other Bishops in one Province,
having Chief authority over the rest to this end especially, that Schisms and
contentions might be compounded: yet Cartwright heerto well replyeth, that by
the same reason it necessarily follows, In whiteg. Def. p. 380.
that, for the keeping of the universal Church in unity, there is like
necessity of one Bishop over all Christendom.

Luther thinks, In resolutionibus.
That Peter was first in order no man denies etc. We confess Peter to be the
Prince of the Apostles, the first member of the Church, the head of the
College of the Apostles, and the rest which holy Fathers have said of him.

D. Field, Of the Church, l. 5. c. 32.
We deny not but that B. Peter had a kind of Primacy and honor. D. Couell is
so full herein, that he gives the true reason of this Primacy, for having
spoken of Ag. the Plea of the Innoc. c. 9. p. 106.
one above the rest to suppress the seeds of dissension, he says further,
Ib. p. 107.
If this were the principal means to prevent Schisms and dissentions in the
Primitive Church, when the graces of God were far more abundant and eminent
then now they are: Nay if the twelve, were not like to agree, except there had
been one Chief among them; for says Hierome, among the twelve one was
therefore chosen, that a Chief being appointed, occcasion of dissension might
be prevented etc. and then speaking of Puritanes, he urges well, How can they
think that equality would keep all the Pastors in the world in peace and unity
etc. For in all Societies, authority (which cannot be where all are equal)
must procure unity and obedience. Thus far in proof that Protestants do teach
from Scriptures, the Primacy of S. Peter.

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture against S. Peter's Primacy answered.
SOme object those words of S. Paul, Gal. 2.11.
When Cephas was was come to Antioch, I resisted him in face, because he was
reprehensible. Ergo, Paul was not subject to him. Answ. An Inferior may
reprehend his Superior, so that the matter require it, and due reverence be
observed: and as for the fault here reproved, Tertullian affirms that it was,
De Praescript. number. 7.
Conuersationis, non Praedicationis vitium, a default in Conversation, life, or
regiment, not in doctrine. And S. Austine, and those that make most of it,
think no otherwise of it. But S. Hierome and other Fathers deem it no fault
at all, nor any other thing then what Art. 21.26.
S. Paul himself did upon the like occasion, and that this whole combat was a
set thing agreed upon between them. It is a school point much debated
between S. Hierome and Aug. Ep. 9.11.19.
S. Austine. Howsoever the Ancient Fathers do answer this objection. S.
Cyprian says, Ep 71. ad Quint.
For neither Peter whom our Lord chose the first, and upon whom be built the
Church, when Paul disputed with him of Circumcision, challenged insolently, or
arrogantly took any thing to himself, saying, That he had the Primacy, and
therefore the later Disciples ought rather to obey him. According to S. Austine
Ep. 19. c. 2. and l. 2. de Bap. c. 1.
. That which was done of Paul profitably, by the liberty of Charity, the same
Peter took in good part by holy and benign godliness of humility, and so he
gave to posterity a more rare and holy Example, if at any time perhaps they did
amiss, to be content to be directed by their Iuniors, then Paul to be bold
and confident: Yea the inferiors to resist their betters for defending the
Truth of the Gospel, brotherly Charity always preserved. And see the like
answer in In Gal. 2.
S. Hierome and Ho. 18. in Ezech.
S. Gregory.

Reynolds urges that, Conf. c. 4. diuis. 3.
the Apostles Act. 8.14.
Which were at Jerusalem, sent Peter and John to the people of Samaria: Act.
31.35.
The Apostles and Brethren that were in Jury, called Peter to an account, when
he had preached to Cornelius, which seem to argue, that he was not head of the
rest. Answ. All mission does not suppose superiority in the sender, for the
holy Ghost Io. 14.26. and 15.26.
is said to be sent from the Father and the Son, and yet is inferior to
neither: so also fellows in Colleges, and partners in Incorporations, do by
Election, send some of their Company, equal in authority to the rest about
their affairs. And others are sent by advise and humble entreaty, as the
Iosue. 22.
people of the Jews sent Phinees the high Priest to the sons of Ruben and
Gad. And thus the Council may send the King to undertake some enterprise for
the good of the Common wealth. And thus was Peter by entreaty sent to the
people of Samaria. And so also of curtesy, or charity rather, he gave account
why he preached to the Gentiles, by telling the vision he received of gods
divine pleasure therein, to instruct such of the Apostles, as doubted whether
the time were yet expedient to admit the Gentiles. Or it may be said, he gave
that account, to free himself from the calumniation of his Enemies, and
scandal of the Jews.

It is further urged, that the first Controversy arysing in the Church, was not
defyned by any one supreme Judge, but by the Assembly of the Apostles and
Seniors, Act. 15.6.
The Apostles and Ancients assembled to consider of this word. Answ. S. Peter,
who was the chief, was there present, who therefore, though S. James Bishop of
that Diocese being then present, did speak first in the Council; which he
durst not have done, if he had not been the head thereof: neither does it
impugn a Monarchical Government, that things be defyned in a public
assembly, with the common counsel and consent of the Princes or chief Nobles.

In like sort it is objected, that S. Paul says to Bishops, Act. 20.28.
Take heed to your selves, and to the whole flock, wherein the holy Ghost has
placed you Bishops, to rule the Church of God etc. And the like says 1. Pet.
5.1.2.
S. Peter. Answ. It is not denied, but that Bishops and Priests are to feed and
rule the Church, every one being to take particular care and charge of the
people committed unto him: but the question is, of the chief power over the
whole Church, for which the forsaid places enforce nothing.

Others object that Christ alone is a head sufficient for the government of the
whole Church, and therefore no necessity that S. Peter, or any Pope should be
esteemed as head of the universal Church upon Earth. Answ. Christ alone as our
Supreme Lord and King, is sufficient to go^erne all Empires, Kingdoms,
Cittyes, armies, families, and flocks: and yet therefore we must not infer,
that Emperors are to be driven out of their Empyres, Kings out of their
kingdoms, Governors out of Cittyes, Commanders from their Armies, Masters
from their families, and shepherds from their flocks: wherefore in this as in
sundry other things, we are to consider the sweet course of Gods Providence,
who uses the concurrence of secondary causes in the productio^,
administration, and preservation of things. So that as he uses the Sun, the
Air, the Rain, the Earth, as secondary causes and instruments for our
corporal nourishment; so does he use man, as his Instrument, to instruct us in
faith, to feed us with his Sacraments, and to be our Governor and Commander
in matters spiritual. And though it be most true, that Christ is the chief
Head or Rock of the Church, yet that S. Peter in a good sense might also be a
head or Rock, S. Basil does teach us saying, L. de Poenit.
Though Peter be a Rock, he is not a Rock as Christ is, for Christ is the true
immovable Rock of himself, Peter is immovable by Christ the Rock: for Jesus
does communicate and impart his dignities, not voyding himself of them, but
houlding them to himself, bestows them also upon others: Mat. 5.14.
He is the light, and yet you are the lights, he is the Priest, and yet Luc.
22.19.
he makes Priests, he is the Rock, and he made a Rock. So weak are the
Objections which Prot. take from Scriptures.

CHAP. IX. The true State of the Question, concerning the Bishop of Rome his
Primacy, in matters Ecclesiastical.
Whether the Primacy given by Christ to S. Peter was given also to his
Successors: and whether the Bishops of Rome be the said Successors. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
THAT the Primacy given to S. Peter, was to continue to his Successors the
Bishops of the Roman Sea, the Catholic Church does constantly believe. The
Council of Trent teaches that, Sess. 14. c. 7.
Popes deservedly in regard of the Chiefest authority given them in the whole
Church, might reserve some more grievous Criminal causes to their own
peculiar Judgment. The Church in the Profession of our faith directs us to
say, Bulla Pij ^. ^uperforma Iuramenti Professionis fides.
I acknowledge the holy Catholic, and Apostolic Roman Church, the mother and
Mistres of all Churches, and etc. the Roman Bishop, the Successor of S. Peter,
the Prince of the Apostles, and the Vicar of jesus Christ.

The Decree of the Fathers of the Council of Florence was this, Sess. vlt.
We defyne the holy Apostolic Sea, and, the Bishop of Rome to have Primacy
over the whole world, and that the Bishop of Rome is the Successor of B. Peter,
Prince of the Apostles, and the true Vicar of Christ, and the head of the whole
Church, and the Father and teacher of all Christians, and that to him in S.
Peter full power was given by our Lord Jesus Christ, of feeding and governing
the universal Church, even as it is contained in the Acts of general
Councels, and in the sacred Canons. This decree was made by the consent both of
the Greeks and Latin Fathers present in that Council.

In the very Council of Basil it was acknowledged, that, Respons. Synod. de
authorit. Conc. general.
the Pope was head and Primate of the Church, the Vicar of Christ, and the
Prelate and Pastor of Christians: from Christ, not from men or other Synods,
to him are given by our Lord the keys, and to one it is said, Thou art Peter;
and he alone is called into the fulness of power, others into part of the care
etc. These things we plainly confess and believe, and do intend to give our
diligence in this Council, that all may believe the same.

In the first Nicene Council it is said, Can. 39. Arab.
He who houldeth the sea of Rome, is the head and Chief of all the
Patriarchs, seeing he is the first (or chief) as Peter, to whom power is given
over all Christian Princes, and all their people, as he who is the Vicar of
Christ our Lord over all people, and the universal Church of Christ, and
whosoever shall contradict this, is excommunicated by the Synod.

In the Council of Ephesus, Pope Celestine is called S. Peter's Part. 2. Act. 3.
Successor, and he that houldeth his place. And in the Council of Laterane it
is taught, that, Conc. Later. sub Innoc. 3. c. 5.
The Roman Church by our Lords Ordinance has Principality of ordinary power
above all others, as being the Mother and Mistres of all Christian Belieuers.

In the second Council of Nice it was decreed, that, Act. 2.
Blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, who first governed the Apostolic Sea,
did leave the Principality of his Apostleship and Pastoral care to his
Successors, who are to sit for ever in his most sacred sea; To which
successors Bishops he gave and delivered by Commandment from God the power of
authority, even as it was granted to him by our Savior etc And the same
Primacy of the Bishop of Rom and his succession to S. Peter, is taught by all
Catholic Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 2 c. 12. Rhem. Test. in Io. 21.17.
writers of these times.

Points not defyned.
Some Pighius Hierarch. Eccl. l 4. c. 8.
probably teach that the Pope cannot be an Heretic, and consequently that he
cannot in any case be deposed. Turrecrem. l. 4. par. 2. c. 20.
Others, that the Pope falling into heresy, though only interior, is thereby
out of the Church and deposed by God, and for such may be declared by the
Church. Others Caietan. Tract. de authorit. ^apae and Conc. c. 20. 11.
that the Pope being a manifest heretic, is not thereupon deposed, but may
and ought to be by the Church. Others Driedo de Script. and Eccl dogm l. 4 c.
2. p. 2. sent 2. Canus de locis. l. 4. c. 1. Bellar. de Rom Pont. l. 2. c. 30.
and most probably, that the Pope if he be a manifest heretic, does thereby of
himself desist to be Pope and head, even as he cease to be a Christian and
member of the body of the Church, and so may be judged and punished by the
Church.

Some Canus de locis. l. 6. c. 4. 5. 6 Driedo de varijs dogm. c. 4 part. 3.
Turrecrem. de Eccl. l 2. c. 40.
teach most probably, that by Christ's Institution, the Bishop of Rome is, and
so ever to continue, the successor of S. Peter in the care of the Universal
Church, Others Sotus l. 4. Sent. did. 24. q. 2. Art. 5.
affirm, that this Succession in the Sea of Rome, is only annexed by authority
of the Church, and therefore by the same authority may be removed to the Bishop
of another Diocese, or to belong to no Diocese determinatly, but to be an
universal Pastor of the universal Church. But none of these are defyned by
the Church.

Protestants Untruths.
Luther is not ashamed to say, that, In colloquus Latinis. Tom. 2. cap. de
Papistis.
The Pope teaches foolishly Christ's Priesthood, to be translated to the Pope
the Vicar of Christ denying the Eternal Priesthood of Christ. Look only upon
two Chapters of his Decretals, where with great Majesty he extolleth himself
above the authority of Scripture. In expounding them he gives place to the
Fathers, in defyning Causes, he prefers the Authority of the Apostolic
sea, because he will be Lord of Scripture, not judged by it. And in a Book which
he wrote but a year before his death, he affirms the Pope to say, L.
aduersus Papatum Rome fundatum.
No man without me, my keys and Masses can give help; Christ and faith here
can help nothing. Again, Christ is drunk, foolish, mad, and forgetful how
great power of bynding with keys he has given me. Also, be that does not
adore the Crackes of my belly commits mortal sin, and is worthy of hell.
Yea he seriously affirms, that the Pope and all that adhere unto him, do know
nothing in the Scriptures, nothing of God, of Christ, of Baptism, of the
Eucharist, of the keys, of good works, and that without doubt no Catholic
knows any one of the 10. Commandments, or one Petition of the Lords Prayer,
or any article of the Creed. But these are over gross to confute.

Chemnitius follows his lying Father, auouching tha^, Exam. Council. Trid. See
the like in Illiricus de forma and praxi Council. Trident.
The Fathers of the Council say, that the Pope has will for reason in those
things which he wills, that he may change the form of Sacraments delivered
from the Apostles, that he may decree contrary to the Epistles of Paul, that he
may dispense against the 4. first Councels, and against the words of the
Gospel. And this is as true, as if a man should say that Chemnitius were not
a most impudent liar, forger, and deceyuer.

Rogers avouches Catholics to believe, Defense of the Art. art. 22. p. 122.
that the Pope is God in that he can at his pleasure discharge guilty souls,
both from the guilt of sin, and from the punishment due for the same. Instead
of this which Catholics utterly deny, they do indeed avouch that Luther,
Rogers, and other Prot. writers, are known to be most lying Companions.

Our English Prot. Church has decreed, that, Art. 37.
The Queens Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and other
her Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all causes does appertain, and
is not, or ought to be subject to any foraigne Jurisdiction etc. The Bishop of
Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

Other Prot. deny this, affirming that the Church has no other Head but Christ
alone, for so the Heluetian Prot. say. Harm. of Confess page 309.
We hold and teach that Christ our Lord is and remains still, the only
universal Pastor, and highest Bishop before God his Father, and that in the
Church he performs all the duties of a Pastor or Bishop even to the worlds
end: and therefore stands not in need of any other to supply his room, for he
is said to have a substitute, who is absent: but Christ is present with his
Church, and is the head that gives life thereunto. He did straightly forbid
his Apostles and their Successors all Superiority or Dominion in the Church.
Again, Ib. 310.
We acknowledge no other head of the Church then Christ. And, Ib. 308.
We do not allow of the Doctrine of the Romish Prelates, who would make the
Pope their general Pastor, and supreme Head of the Church of Christ militant
here on Earth, and the very Vicar of Christ. So that according to these good
fellows, not only the Pope, but also all Temporal Princes, are rejected from
all Headship or Superiority in the Church, this being reserved only to Christ
himself: And yet it is See before Chapter 8. sec. 1.
not long since they denied it to Christ himself, as man.

Protestants agree with ancient Heretics.
The Claim of Ecclesiastical Primacy was condemned in the Emperor
Constantius, to whom the Catholic Bishop Hosius said, See Athanas Ep. ad
solitar. vitam agentes. Ambr. Ep. 82.83. Zozom. l. 6. c. 7. Aug. Ep.
48.50.162.165. Conc. 3. Carth^g. Can. 9.
Do not intermedle in Ecclesiastical affairs neither command us in this kind,
but rather learn those things from us. God has commuted the Empire to you,
and to us those things which belong to the Church etc. Take heed least drawing
unto you such things as concern the Church, you be guilty of great crime etc.
And again, Who seeing him in decreeing to make himself the Prince of Bishops,
and to be Chief Judge in Ecclesiastical Judgments, will not justly say, That
he is that Abomination of Desolation, which was foretold by Daniel.

The Centurists also confess that Cent. 4. Col. 549. Polanus in Symphon pa.
836. and Ofiand. Cent. 4. page 477. Cartw. in Whitg. Def. p. 700.
Emperors so metimes vnfittingly assumed to themselves the Judgment of
matters of faith, which thing Athanasius reprehendeth in Constantius, and
Ambrose in Valentinian. The same Synod. 8. Can. 21. Conc. Roman 2. and 3.
Platina in Nicolao. 1.
Error is condemned in Photius Patriarch of Constantinople. And Baron. An. 313.
n. 30.
Donatus the heretic condemned by Pope Melchiades, appealed to the Emperor.
Wicliffe and Huffe for denying the Popes Primacy were condemned by the Sess 8.
and 15.
Council of Constance. So directly do Protestants iumpe with Ancient
Heretics.

Protestants Errors.
Luthers Error was, that, In Assert. Tom. 2. Art. 30.
Although S. Peter should govern at this day at Rome, I will deny (says he)
the Bishop of Rome to be Pope. For the Pope is a thing feigned in the world,
neythes was, nor is, nor shall be, but feigned to be. And, Ibid Art. 27.
I permit that the Pope make Articles of faith etc. as are, The bread and wine
to be transubstantiated in the Sacrament: the essence of God neither to beget,
nor to be begotten: The soul to be the substantial form of man's body:
Himself to be the Empero^r of the world, and the King of heaven and God upon
Earth: the soul to be immortal, and all those infinite Monsters in the Roman
dunghill of decrees; that such as his faith is, such be his Gospel, and such
the faithful and such the Church. And he places in the Margent, Articles made
by the Pope. Swinglius also disliketh ^he Bishop of Rome, in that, De vera and
falls. Relig. c. de clauib. To. 2. fol. 187.
He has decreed that the souls (of men) do not dye, when the body is
extinguished. Who professing Christianity would hold in themselves such
Atheistical opinions, and condemn in others such certain and generally
received truths?

SECT. II. It is proved from Scriptures and reason, that the Primacy given to
S. Peter, was given also to his Successors: and that the Bishops of Rome are
the said Successors.
THe first Argument in proof that the Primacy given to S. Peter was likewise
to be derived to his Successors, and in them to continue until the end of the
world, is taken from the Old Testament, where we find, that for the Synagogue
of the Jews, God still provided one supreme Pastor, by whose authority
Controversies might be decyded. So to Number. 20.28.
Aaron succeeded Eleazarus, and to Iud. 10.28.
Eleazarus Phinees, and so of the rest: now we may not think, that the love
and care of God toward his Church, is less then was to the Synagogue.

Neither does it suffice to answer with Inst. l. 4. c. 7.
Calvin, that the Synagogue, as also the Church in S. Peter's time was contained
in a little compass, and therefore though one Pastor was as then expedient, yet
not so would it now be, the Church being dispersed all over the world. Even as
if the tillage of one or two fields may conveniently be committed to the Care
of one husbandman, would it thereupon follow, that the tillage of the fields of
the whole world, might commodiously be committed to his Charge? This I say is
impertinent, for the more dispersed the Church is, the more danger of
dissentions, and thereby the more need of one Pastor, by whose authority
Contentions may be composed: proof whereof may be the irreconciliable or
everlasting dissentions amongst Protestants, by not acknowledging one supreme
Pastor. The example also of the husbandman proves nothing, for though he
alone cannot till all the fields in the world, yet the supreme Pastor of the
Church, whose authority is spiritual, by committing to Inferior Officers so
much power as is sufficient for them, may well govern the same: yea it makes
as much against the Bishops of several Diocesses, for neither can one
husbandman till all the fields in one Province.

The same necessity of one Pastor ever to continue, is further proved two
several ways out of those words of Christ to S. Peter Io. vlt. 15.
Feed my sheep: first heerby he ordained the Office of a Pastor, which is an
Office ordinary and perpetual; for as the nature of the thing requires, so
long the Office of the Pastor must continue, as the fould or Sheepcote does
continue. Now this being the Church of Christ, does and must continue until
the end of the world: and Saint Peter being long since departed out of this
world, cannot as now feed the same in his own person, therefore it must be
done by his Successors. Secondly in that he says, my sheep, which even until
the end of the world will make one fould; now these, Peter being dead cannot by
himself feed. And therefore S. Chrysostom demanding, De sacerd. l. 2 init.
Why Christ shed his blood? answers himself that, It was to gain that
flock, the care whereof he committed to Peter, and to Peter's Successors.
Accordingly says S. Leo, Ser. 2. de Anniuers. Assumpt suae ad Pontificatum.
Peter continues and lives in his Successors.

Again the Office of supreme Pastor was given to Peter for the good of the
Chuch, according to that of S. Austine, L. de Pastoribus c. 1.
In that we are Christians, it is for our selves, in that we are Prelates (or
Superiors) it is for you. Now this good, is the preserving of the Church in
unity, as L. 1. cont. Iouin. Cypr. l. de unit. Eccl. Optatus l. 2. cont. Parmen.
S. Hierome teaches; but in the Church there are now more Christians and worse
then in the time of the Apostles, therefore there is the like, or greater
necessity of one supreme Pastor.

The Church is one body, which besides Christ has a certain head upon Earth,
as appears by S. Paul, who after he had taught the Churches to be one body,
annexeth, 1 Cor. 11.21.
The head cannot say to the feet, you are not necessary for me; which cannot be
understood of Christ our head, for he may truly say unto us all, you are not
necessary for me: But no other head can be assigned then S. Peter, and Peter
dying, the body of the Church cannot be without a head, therefore some man must
succeed him. Lastly, all arguments that prove the best government to be
monarchical, prove also this.

Now, that the supreme Pastor succeeding S. Peter is the Bishop of Rome, is
proved first, in that there was never any one who affirmed himself to be the
successor of Peter, or for such was accounted by others, but only the Bishop of
Rome, and the Bishop of Antioch. Now the Bishop of Antioch succeeded not S.
Peter in the government of the whole Church, for succession to any is not but
to him that yields his place, either by natural death, or by deposition, or
giving up of the same: whereas S. Peter yet living, and bearing rule himself,
left the Church of Antioch, and placed his Sea at Rome, where he likewise dyed.
Besides the Bishop of Antioch, had never but the third Conc. Nicaen. Can, 6.
place amongst the Patriarchs, neither ever sought he for a higher, whereas
the Successor of Peter was doubtless to have the first.

Secondly, the histories of all ages do testify, that the Bishop of Rome has
exercised authority over all other Bishops even in foreign Nations, as by
creating them himself, by confirming them created by others, by deposing them,
by restoring them being deposed by others, by appointing them his Vicars, by
final decyding their Controversies, by accepting their appeals, by making
laws over all the Church, by dispensing in them, by inflicting his Censures,
by being President in General Councels and the like; All which do plainly
prove him the supreme Pastor of the Church.

SECT. III. That the Fathers expound the Scriptures in proof of the Bishop of
Rome his succeeding S. Peter in the Primacy of the whole Church.
GElasius affirms, that In Decretis cum 70. Episcopis.
The Roman Church is preferred before other Churches, not by any Constitutions
of Councels, but she obtained Primacy by the Evangelical voice of our Lord,
saying, thou art Peter, and vpou this Rock etc. The Centurists say of
Gelasius, that Cent. 5. Col. 1274.
he contendeth the Church of Rome by Gods law (iure diuino) to be the first (or
chief) of all* in Ep. ad Brut. c. 11.

S. Hierome writing to Pope Damasus says, Ep. 59. ad Damas.
I being a sheep, do require from the Priest the Host of Salvation, and from
the Pastor safeguard etc. I speak with the successor of the fisher etc. I
following none first but Christ, am joined in Communion to thy Holiness, that
is, to the Chair of Peter; upon that Rock I know the Church to be builded:
whosoever out of this house eats the lamb, is profane; whosoever shall not
be in the Ark of Noah, shall perish in the deluge. Here S. Hierome
acknowledges Pope Damasus to be the successor of S. Peter, and his Chair, or
Sea, to be the Chair of Peter.

S. Austine uses against heretics, this Argument of the Bishop of Rome his
succeding S. Peter, saying, Ep. 165.
If the Order of Bishops suceeding one another be to be considered, how much
more certainly and indeed safely, do we number from Peter himself, to whom
bearing the figure of the whole Church, our Lord said, Upon this Rock I will
build my Church. For Linus succeeded to Peter, etc. Damasus to Liberius,
Siricius to Damasus, Anastasius to Siricius. In this order of succession no
Donatist is found. And writing to Pope Innocentius, he says, We Ep. 92.
think etc. that by the authority of thy Holiness, derived from the authority
of holy Scriptures, that they will more easily yield, who believe such perverse
and pernicious things: So attributing the Popes authority to the Scriptures
themselves. Again, De vtilitate credendi. c. 17.
Shall we doubt to hyde our selves in the bosom of that Church, which etc.
from the Apostolical sea by succession of Bishops has obtained the height of
authority; To which not to give the Primacy, is truly either the greatest
impiety, or headlong arrogance.

Yea he teaches further, that, Ep. 165.
Although any Traitor in those times, had crept into that rank of Bishops,
which is continued from Peter himself to Anastasius, who now sits in the
same Chair, it would nothing hurt the Church and innocent Christians; for whom
our Lord providing, says of evil Pastors, what they say, do you, but what
they do do you not. Lastly, this wholesome Counsel he gives to all
Heretics, In Psalm. cont. part. Donati versus filinom.
Come ye Brethren if you will be ingraffed in the vine, it is a grief when we
see you cut of so to lie. Number the Priests from the Sea of Peter, and see in
that Rank of Fathers who succeeds another: that is the Rock which the proud
gates of hell do not overcome.

S. Bernard writing to Pope Eugenius, amongst many other excellent things,
says thus: De Consider. l. 3. ca. 8. and Ep. 190. ad Innoc. PP.
Thou alone art not only the Pastor of sheep but also of all Pastors. Thou
demaundest how I prove this? Out of the word of our Lord. For to whom, I do not
say of Bishops, but also of the Apostles, were all the sheep so absolutely and
indeterminatly committed? Peter if thou love me feed my sheep, which? the
people of this or that City, Country or kingdom? He says my sheep. To whom
is it not plain, that he did not assign some, but all? nothing is excepted,
where nothing is distinguished etc. To conclude, James who seemed a Pillar of
the Church was content with only Jerusalem yielding the universality to Peter.

The Fathers are so manifest for the B. of Romes Primacy, that D. Bilson
affirms, that, True Differ. part. 1 p 143.
The ancient and learned Fathers call the Roman Bishop, Peter's Successor. The
Centurists say of S. Leo, Cent. 5. Col. 1262.
Leo very paynfully goes about to prove that singular pre-eminence was given
to Peter above the other Apostles, and that thence rose the Primacy of the
Roman Church. But to be brief, In Praeparatoriis ad Concilium. And see this in
Chromerus de falsa and vera Relig. l. 3.
We plainly confess (says Bucer) that among the ancient Fathers, the Roman
Church obtained Primacy above others, as that which has the Chair of S.
Peter, and whose Bishops have almost always been accounted the Successors of
Peter. So co^fessedly does the B. of Rome succeed S. Peter in the Apostolical
Chair.

SECT. IIII. That sundry of the learned Protestants do acknowledge, and teach
the Primacy of the Roman Bishop.
Our very Puritanes do acknowledge and approve from Scriptures, English
Puritanisme. p. 16.
The high Priest of the Jews was Typically and in a figure the supreme head of
the whole Catholic Church: which though (say they) it were visible only in the
Province and nation of Iewry; yet those of other Nations and Countries (as
appears by the history of the Acts, even though they were Aethiopians) were
under this high Priest, and acknowledged homage unto him. So that he was not a
Provincial Metropolitan, but in very deed an Oecumenicall and universal
Bishop of the whole world etc. And therefore the Pope of Rome who alone makes
claim unto, and is in possession of the like universal Supremacy, has more
warrant in the word of God to the same, then any Metropolitan, or Diocesan, not
dependant upon him, has or can have. So that by the word of God, either there
must be no Metropolitanes and Diocesans, or else there must be a Pope. Hereof
also says Carwright, In Whiteg. Def. p. 428.
the high Priest was the head Priest over all the whole Church, which was
during his time unto our Savior Christ, and that therefore if by this Example
we will have an Archbishop, he must be such a one as shall govern the whole
Church. The Centurists confess that, Cen. 1. l. 1. c. 7.
In the Church of the Jews there was by Gods Law one only Chief Priest, whom
all were enforced to acknowledge, and to obey him. And the same is acknowledged
by Inst. l. 4. c. 6.. 2.
Calvin.

Wicliffe submits his faith to the B. of Rome, as to the Chief Vicar of
Christ, saying, Ep. ad Urban. Sextum apud Poxum. l. 1. Comment.
I am plainly glad to discover to every one my faith, and specially to the B.
of Rome; because I suppose that if it be orthodoxall, he will humbly confirm
my faith, and if it be erroneous, he will amend it etc. I suppose also that the
B. of Rome, seeing he is the chief Vicar of Christ upon Earth etc.

Perzibran the Hussites Confession is this, In Professione fidei.
I profess with a faithful heart and mouth, that with all my will and desire,
I am in hope and desire to be indeed wholly, inuiolably, and inseparably, a
member of the holy Mother the Catholic, Universal, and Roman Church, spread
over the whole world, founded in the Apostolical Seas by B. Peter, Prince of
the Apostles, and continued until this time, and so firmly strengthened upon
the firm Rock that the gates of hell cannot any ways prevail against it.

Husse himsel^e says, Questione de Credere. f. 170.
We are not to believe in the Pope, or the authority of the Pope; but we are to
believe, that the Popeis the immediate Vicar of Jesus Christ, and the Chief
Priest here upon Earth, by reason of his Office etc. having authority to
absolve and excommunicate, to give Indulgences, and lastly of doing other
things which belong to the keys. In so much that in Luthers In Assert. art 30.
opinion, Husse seems not to withstand, but that there may be the Monarchy of
the Pope. And Luther reproves him, for that, Ibid.
He did not resist the Popes Monarchy, but did attribute too much to the Roman
Idol. M. Johnson also says; In Jacobs Defense etc. p. 13.
Did not John Husse, that worthy Champion of Christ, and others also of the
Martyrs in former times say and hear Mass, even to their dying day etc? Did
not diverse of them acknowledge, some the Popes calling and Supremacy etc?
Morgenstern confesses, that, De Ecclesia p. 41.
These things were pardonable in the godly, who held the Pope to be the Vicar
of Christ, and the head of the Church, the Papacy for the Church ande.

Luther yet himself affirms, that Loc. com. class. 1. c. 37.
Whereas God would have one Catholic Church throughout the whole world, it is
necessary to have one people; yea and of this one people one Father ought to be
chosen. But yet more particularly he writes to Pope Leo, thus, In
resolutionibus priorum Disput. ad Leonem decimum.
Wherefore most blessed Father, I offer my self prostrate at the feet of thy
Holiness with all that I am, and have. Quicken, kill, call, recall, approve,
reprove: I will acknowledge thy voice, the voice of Christ ruling and speaking
in thee. And in proof of the Popes Primacy, he further says, In
resolutionibus aliarum propositionum.
The first thing that moves me that the Bishop of Rome is before all others
etc. is the very will of God, which we see in that fact, for the Bishop of Rome
could never have come into this Monarchy, without the will of God; but the will
of God, howsoever it be known is to be received with reverence: and therefore
it is not lawful rashly to resist the Bishop of Rome in his Primacy. This
reason is so great, that though there were no other cause, yet this were
sufficient to repress the rashness of those who resist. And cyted to Augusta
before Cardinal Caietan the Popes Legate, he left this Protestation written: I
Martin Luther an Augustine Friar do protest to reverence and follow the holy
Roman Church, in all my sayings and deeds, present, past, and to come. But if
any thing has, or shall be spoken contrary or otherwise, I do, and will have it
for not spoken. A good protestation, but badly performed.

Melancthon does acknowledge, that, Centuria Epistol. Ep. 74. p. 244.
As certain Bishops are president over certain Churches, (so) the Bishop of
Rome is President over all Bishops; And this Canonical Policy, says he, no
wise man does, or ought to disallow etc. For, says he further Ibid. p. 245.
And in Schlusselb. catal. haeret. l. 13. p 633.
the Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome is profitable to this end, that consent of
Doctrine may be retained: wherefore an agreement may easily be established in
this Article of the Popes Primacy, if other Articles could be agreed upon.

And whereas I proved before, that S. Peter was head or Chief of the Apostles,
and of the whole Church, D. Couell very pertinently says, If Ag the Plea of
the Innoc. p. 106.
it concern all persons and ages in the Church of Christ (as surely it does)
the government must not cease with the Apostles, but so much of that authority
must remain to them, who from time to time, are to supply that Charge. And D.
Downham speaking of the Apostles and their times, teaches that, In his Sermon
at Lambeth p. 79. Sarauia in his diverse degrees of Minist. c. 16. p. 44.
The authority which they had etc. was not to end with their persons, but to be
continued in their Successors. Hence with great reason D. Field teaches that,
Of the Church. l. 5. c. 32 p. 166. 167.
Peter had a kind of Primacy of honor and order, that in respect thereof, as
all Metropolitanes do succeed him etc. so the Patriarchs yet more especially,
and amongst them the Roman Bishops in the first place etc. as being chief for
order sake, and to preserve unity, and in such sort that all things must take
their beginning from him. And Ibid. c. 35. p. 189.
we willingly confess the Roman Church to have been in Order and honor, the
first and chiefest of all Churches. Yet more, Ibid. c. 52. p. 408.
He that is in order first among the Patriarchs with the Synods of Bishops
subject to him, may call the rest together, as being the Principal part of
the Church, whence all actions of this nature take beginning. And lastly says
he, Ib. p. 243.
It is evident etc. that the Bishop of Rome as first in Order among the
Patriarchs, (assisted with his own Bishops, and the Bishops of him that is
thought faulty,) may Judge any of the other Patriarchs, that such as have
complaints against them may fly to him and the Synods of Bishops subject to
him, and that the Patriarchs themselves in their distresses may fly to him,
and such Synods for relief etc. By all which it appears that the Roman
Bishop is confessedly the true Successor of S. Peter, and the supreme Pastor,
or Head of the universal Church.

SECT. V. Objections taken from Scripture against the Popes Primacy, answered.
SOme object hose words of Christ our Savior spoken to Pilate, Io. 19.11.
Thou should not have any power against me, unless it were given thee from
above; whereby it seems that Imperial power was given by God against him: and
therefore much more the Pope, who terms himself the Vicar of Christ, ought to
be subject to the power of Emperors and Princes. Answ. No man can dream, that
Christ who was God, and the son of God, was by right or any law subject to
any man, but that for the love of man he voluntarily subjected himself to the
Judgment of Pilate, not thereby giving him any authority over him, but humbly
permitting that which he had not of right, but of fact. And this he shows
elsewhere, Mat. 17.27.
when being demanded Tribute, he proved that he was not bound to pay it, but
yet that he might not scandalize them, he caused it to be paid. And thus S.
Cyril In hunc locum.
and S. Chrysostom do expound this place of S. John, not of the power of
Jurisdiction, but of Gods Permission.

Others urge that of S. Paul, Act. 25.10.11.
At Caesar's Iudgment-seat I stand, where I ought to be judged etc. I appeal to
Caesar. But if Paul acknowledge Caesar his Judge, then ought the Pope to do the
like. Answ. Turrecrem. sum. de Eccles. l. 2. c. 96.
Some affirm that Paul appealed to Caesar, because though not of right, yet of
fact he was then Judge. Others Pighius l. 5. Hier. Eccl. c. 7.
think the difference to be great between Heathen and Christian Princes; for
no Bishop is Judge of the Heathen, but only of the faithful, according to that
of the same Apostle, 1. Cor. 5.12.
What is it to me to judge of them that are without? And so every Bishop is
subject to his heathen Prince in all Civil causes, the law of Christ depriving
no man of his right and Dominion: and so 1. Pet. 2. Romans 13. tit. 3.
S. Peter, and S. Paul, do exhort the faithful to be subject to their Princes,
who were then Heathen: and accordingly S. Paul appealed to Caesar as his Judge,
being accused of raising sedition amongst the People. Now, Christian Princes
having voluntarily undertaken the laws of the Gospel, do thereby subject
themselves to the supreme Pastor of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, as sheep to
the Pastor, and members to the head, and therefore cannot now judge him, but
be judged by him.

Others yet allege, that in the old Law the King did Judge and depose the high
Priest, for so 3 Reg. 2.27.
Solomon deposed Abiathar, and substituted Sadoch: In like sort therefore in
the new Law a Christian Prince may be Judge and depose a Bishop. Answer.
Solomon did not depose Abiathar, as a King, but as a Prophet, and the
Executioner of Gods Justice, doing this as the text says, that the word of our
Lord might be fulfilled. Secondly, the similitude is not good, for seeing in
the Old Testament, the promises were only temporal, and in the New spiritual
and eternal, as Saint Hierome L. 1. cont. Pelagianos. and Ep. ad Dardanum.
Aug. q. 33. in librum Numer. and l. 19. cont. Faust. c. 31.
and S. Austine teach; it was no marvel, if in the Old Testament the
temporal power were greatest, and in the New, the spiritual. But yet the
Truth is, that even in the Old Testament, the high Priest was greater then the
King, as might be proved from the Number. c. 27.21. Leuit. 4.3.13.23.28.
Scriptures, Philo l. de victimis. Theodoret. q. 1. in Leuit. Procopius in c.
4. Leuit.
and the Fathers.

It is yet further objected, that seeing it is lawful for any man to kill the
Pope, if he should unjustly invade him to take away his life; much more lawful
may it be for Kings or Counsels to depose him, if he should trouble the
Commonwealth, or by his bad example endeavor to ruin souls. Answ. The
consequence is not good, no authority being required for the resisting an
Inuader, and defending a man's self, whereas to judge, or punish, authority is
necessary: wherefore as it is lawful to resist the Pope, inuading the Body, so
also is it lawful to resist him inuading the Soul, troubling the
Commonwealth, or endeavoring to destroy the Church. I say it is lawful to
resist him, not doing what he commands, or hindering the Execution of his
will; but it is not lawful to judge him, punish him, or depose him, because
these only belong to him that is Superior.

CHAP. X. The true State of the Question, concerning Antichrist.
Whether Antichrist be yet come; And whether the Bishop of Rome can be said to
be Antichrist. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
FORMER ages not dreaming of so senseles a Paradoxe, as the Pope being
Antichrist, there is not therefore in any ancient Councels any thing to be found
concerning the same. But the uniform Bellar. de sum. Pontifice l. 3. c. 1.
etc. Rhem. Testam. Apoc. 13. and in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
consent and doctrine of the Catholic Church is, and ever has been, that
Antichrist is not yet come, that he is to come near the ending of the world,
that he is to be one man, and to work strange wonders, that his reign is to
be short, and sundry such like, which cannot be ascribed to any Pope that ever
was.

Points not defyned.
Concerning the name of Antichrist, S. Ireneus L. 5.
thinks it probable, that the name (...) may be applied unto it, but more
probable, that it shall be called (...). Others Primasius, Anselmus, Richardus in
hunc locum. Apoc.
think, that he shall be called (...). Others, Rupertus in Apoc.
that these figures 666. shall not signify his name, but the triple
preuarication of the Devil to be fulfilled in Antichrist. Others Iren l. 5.
Arethas in hunc locum Apoc.
most truly acknowledge herin their ignorance, auouching that his name is not
yet known. And most clear it is, that the foresaid figures do agree with
several most distinct Names.

As touching Antichrists Character, some Primasius, Beda, Rupertus.
affirm the leters wherewith his name is to be written to be the same. Hippol.
Orat. de consum. mundi.
Others, the contemning, and abolishing of the Sign of the Cross. Bellar. de
Romans Pont. l. 3. c. 11.
Others profess their ignorance thereof.

Some understand by Gog and Magog, Heretics. Aug. de Ciuit. l. 20. c. 11.
Others by Gog the Devil, and by Magog, Antichrists Army. Bellar. de Romans
Pont. l. 3. c. 17.
Others, that the war of Gog and Magog shall be the war of Antichrist against
the Church. And that by Gog is signified Antichrist, and by Magog his Army.

Protestants untruths.
Hier. in Ezech. c. 38.
Rogers avouches that, Def. of the Artic. art. 37. p. 210.
The Pope does perform no part of a Christian, but every part of an
Antichristian Bishop, in corrupting the doctrine of the truth with errors and
cursed opinions, in polluting the Sacraments of Christ by superstitious
Ceremonies, in persecuting the Church and Saints, with fire and sword, in
making merchandise of Gods heritage, in sittting in the Temple of God as God,
showing himself that he is God, and exalting himself against all that is
called God, or that is worshipped. And Ib. Art. 37. p. 211.
his Jurisdiction has been, and is justly renounced and banished out of
England by Kings and Parlaments, as by King Edward the 1. 3. and 6. by King
Richard the second, by King Henry the 4. and 8. etc. There is not one Point
here avouched by M. Rogers which is not a gross lie; and in particular, that
the Popes Jurisdiction was not banished out of England by Kings and Parlaments,
as Rogers pretends, will easily appear, by viewing only F. Parsons Answer
to S. Edward Cooks Reports.

Calvin produces several reasons in proof that the Pope is Antichrist, as
that, In 2 Thessalonians. 2.
He boasts, that he can bynd Consciences with what law be pleases, and make
them subject to Eternal punishments: He at his pleasure either ordayneth new
Sacraments, or corrupts those which are ordained by Christ; yea altogether
abolisheth them, that in place of them he may substitute those sacriledges
which himself has invented. He deuiseth means of gaining Salvation
altogether different from the Doctrine of the Gospel. To conclude, he
sticks not at his pleasure to change the whole Religion. What, I beseech you,
is it to extol a man's self above all that is reputed God, if this the Pope
does not? If abominable lies were strong proofs, certainly these would
demonstrate and conclude the Pope to be Antichrist.

Protestant Doctrine.
Calvin Instit. l. 4 c, 7. 23.24.25. Whitak. of Antichrist. pa. 66.
and other Prot. teach, that Antichrist is already come, and that not one man,
but the whole succession of Popes for many ages, is the said Antichrist. A
Point of such importance, that the Prot. assembled at Vapingum Anno 1603. did
make it an Article of their faith, that, Article 41.
they should believe and defend the Bishop of Rome to be properly Antichrist,
and the son of Perdition, foretold in the Word of God.

Whitaker De Eccles, p. 144. Fulke in his Answ. to a Counterf. Cath. p. 27.
Downham of Antichrist. p. 4.
and sundry other Prot. teach that, Boniface the third (who lived Anno 607.)
and all his Successors to have been Antichrists. Rogers obiecting many Crimes
against the B. of Rome says, Def. of the Art. art. 37. p. 211.
In respect of which fruits of impieties, the said B. of Rome in the holy
Scripture is described to be very Antichrist, that wicked man, that man of
sin, the son of Perdition, and the Adversary of God. But how absurd this
is, and directly contrary to Scriptures, Fathers, and many others more learned
Prot. I shall presently discover.

SECT. II. It is proved by the Scriptures, that Antichrist is not yet come; and
that the Bishop of Rome cannot be said to be Antichrist.
IN cleerer Confutation of this foolish Paradoxe of the Pope being Antichrist,
we must observe that the word Antichrist, signifies one who opposes himself
to Christ; for the Proposition, (...), does properly signify opposition; now
because those things are not only said to be opposite, which impugn one
another, but also those which are equipollent, therefore (...) in composition,
does sometimes signify Contrariety, and other times equiualence, but never
subordination, which the word Vicar does, when the Pope is titled the Vicar of
Christ. Again, in Scriptures he is called Antichrist 2 Thessalonians. 2.
who is extolled above all that is called God, and 1. Joan. 2.
who denies Jesus to be Christ, and affirms himself Mat. 24.
to be Christ, none of which is to be the Vicar, but the professed Enemy of
Christ. And in this sense is understood the word, (...). by Henricus In his
Thesaurus.
Stephanus the great Grecian of Geneua.

But to come to the matter it self, Christ our Savior says, Io. 5.43.
I am come in the name of my Father, and you receive me not, if another shall
come in his own Name, him you will receive. Here our Savior speaking of
Antichrist, (as Fathers See hereafter. next. sec. 3.
generally understand) opposes not a kingdom or succession of men to
himself, but another person, whom S. Paul calls 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
The man of sin, the son of Perdition; whom Christ also foretells, that
the Jews will receive, which yet they never did the Pope.

S. Paul speaking of Antichrist gives this good Counsel, 2 Thessalonians. 2.34.
Let no man seduce you by any means for unless there come a Revolt first and
the man of sin be reueyled, the son of Perdition, which is an adversary,
and is extolled above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he
sits in the Temple of God, showing himself as if he were God. This is
spoken of Antichrist by our Adversaries Lambertus, Antichristus, etc. p 75.
Confession, and yet almost every word does convince them. For first it is
said, that there shall come a Revolt, or falling away before Antichrists
coming, which whether it be understood of the Roman Empire, (as sundry Ambr.
in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Hier. q. 11. ad Algasiam. Aug. de Ciu. Dei. l. 10. c. 19. Cyr.
Catech. 15. Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians 2.
Fathers, and the Prot. Piscator In Epistolas Pauli p 468.
do think) or of Faith and Religion (as some Prot. contrary to all Scriptures
do imagine) is yet in neither sense performed before that time in which
Protestants place Antichrists first coming.

Secondly, these words, The man of sin, the son of Perdition, he sits
showing himself, do signify one determinate person; and the rather in that the
Greek Article is prefiged, which does determine Epiphan. haer, quae est
Samaritanorum.
the signification to one certain thing: which is yet more manifest by those
words of S. John, 1. Ep. 2.18.
(...): where speaking of Antichrist, who is to be one man, the Article is set
before, but speaking of Antichrist as it is taken for all such as any ways
impugn Christ, the Article is omitted.

Thirdly Antichrist must be not only an (...). 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
Adversary to Christian Profession, but also (as In Pauli Epistolas p. 245.
Zanchius understands the said words) an open and professed Adversary, such
an one, as shall Ep. Io. 2.22.
deny the Father, and the Son, and extol himself above all that is called
God; showing himself as though he were God, not Dan. 11.37.
caring for any God; And, Io. 5.43.
will come in his own Name, causing those to be Ap. 13.15.
slain, that will not adore his Image. None of all which, yet did any Pope.

Fourthly, he is to sit in the Temple of God, whereby is understood the Temple
of Jerusalem, which Antichrist will seek to reedify. So S. John telling that
Enoch and Elias shall be slain by Antichrist, affirms, that, Apoc. 11.8.
The Beast shall kill them, and their Corpse shall lie in the streets of the
great City (which spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt) where also their
Lord was crucified. Whereby is evidently understood Jerusalem, there, and not
at Rome, Christ being crucified: the same also being called Sodom by the
Prophet Esaias in his vision concerning C. 1.1.
Jude and Jerusalem, saying: Ib. ver. 10.
Hear ye the word of our Lord, Princes of Sodom, give ear to the Law of our
God, ye People of Gomorrha. Yea the word (spiritually) does plainly argue,
that thereby is meant one material and particular place, spiritually called,
in regard of the wickedness, Sodom and Egypt.

Fifthly, Antichrists Reign must be but of short continuance, namely, as
Christ preached but three years and a half; so likewise to Antichrist must be
permitted no longer time for his preaching or teaching. This term is mentioned
by the Prophet Dan. 7.25. Apoc. 12.14.
Daniel, and S. John, to be A time and times and half a time: or as some Prot.
translate, Dan. 12.7. in the Engl. Bible of Anno 1576.
A time, two times, and half a time. For as In Dan. c. 12. Aug. de Ciu. Dei.
l. 20. c. 23. Hier. in Dan. c. 7.
Lyra (a natural borne Jew) S. Austine and S. Hierome do observe, the word
times, without any other determinate number, signifies according to the Hebrew
phrase, two years, and the word, time, in the singular number, one year:
which said understanding of times for years, is made yet more evident by the
same Prophet Daniel, who by the like phrase of Dan. 4.20.
seven times, signifies (as Protestants See the Marg. Notes of the Engl. Bible
of Anno 1576. in Dan. 4.31. And see Fr. du. Ion. in Revel. 12. p. 151.
themselves do understand him) the seven years of Nabuchodonosors changed
Estate.

To this yet further add, that the continuance of Antichrists Persecution is
elsewhere explayned in a prescribed certain time, not only of forty two Apoc.
11.12. and 13.5.
months, but also of a Apoc. 12.6. and 11.3.
thousand, two hundred, sixty days: both which do literally amount to the
foresaid time of three years, and a half. Now, there was never any Pope which
by any Prot. was imagined to be Antichrist, that reigned precisely three years
and a half. Add also that the shortness in general of Antichrists reign, is
in many places of Scripture taught, as where it is said, Mat. 24.22.
(his) days for the Elect shall be shortened: that, he Apoc. 12.12.
has but a short time: He Apoc. 17.10.
must tarry a short time: He Apoc. 20.3.
must be loosed for a little season. And lastly that Antichrists reign Dan
7.9.10.12. Apoc. 20.3.4. Mat. 24.14. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.1. Io. 2.18.
is to be but a little before the end of the world. By all which it does
evidently appear, that Antichrists Reign must be but of short continuance,
and therefore Prot. making the Pope Antichrist, for these thousand years last
past, do thereby impugn the cleerest Scriptures.

Now, whereas sundry Chytraeus in Apoc c. 12 and 13. Bulling. in Apo. c. 11.
Ser. 46. fol. 141. and ser. 47. fol. 143. Deuteronomy. upon the Revel. p. 132.
Prot. would euade by affirming, that in those foresaid numbers, of a time, two
times and half, 42. months, and 1260. days, S. John uses a certain number
or time, for an uncertain, not understanding thereby indeed any definite
certainty of time at all. This yet is insufficient, for though the numbers, 10.
100. 1000. should be used sometimes in the Scriptures for an uncertain time,
yet that course houldeth only in such like full and perfect numbers, whereas the
other foresaid numbers now in example or question, being each of them
compounded of a mixed variety or inequality of numbers, as one, two and a half;
forty and two, and 1260. are unlike to the other full and equal numbers, of
10. 100. 1000. And therefore not subject to the like understanding. Neither
could that variety of numbers be to any end, if only an uncertain number be
understood. But this is so evident, that, Fox In Ap. p 316. 365. Dan. cont.
Bell. part. 1. p. 372. Nappier up* the Revel. page 145 161. Brocard up. the
Revel. fol. 110 123. Ford in Ap. p. 70. 71. 84. 87.
with sundry other Prot. do all of them understand heerby a certain definite
time, answerable to the event thereby fortould.

In the determining of which event, Protestants do much vary amongst
themselves; for Cont. Bell. part. 1. p. 372.
Danaeus, by a time, two times and half a time, understands the 350. years,
during which the Waldenses were persecuted. And by Ib. p. 374.
the 42. months, and 1260. days, he understands three years and a half,
in which Husse and Hierome of Prague preached. In Apo. c. 11. p. 304. 316. Ford
in Ap. 11. p. 71. 84.
Fox and Ford do by the 1260. days understand the time of Herod's first
persecution: And by the 42. Months, In Ap. c. 13. p. 365. and Ford in Ap. c. 13
p. 97. and in c. 11. p. 70.
Fox after great study and doubtfulnes had thereof, upon a suddayne receives,
to use his words (arcano quodam admonitionis sibilo) by a certain secret
whispering admonition, the sense thereof to be, a Sabbath of years, which,
says he, amount to 294. years, wherein the Primitive Church was persecuted
before Consta^tines time. By the 1260. days, and the 42. months Brocard Upon
the Revel. f. 110. Nap. up. the Revel. p. 43. 68. 145. 161. 168. 233.
and Nappier do understand the preuayling of the Papacy for the last 1260.
years, since the time of Siluester and Constantine. So variable and uncertain
are Prot. in their determining the time of Antichrists coming and Raygne.

But supposing these different Interpretations were all of them true, as indeed
not any one is, neither can any thing be alleged in good proof thereof, yet
none of them do prove the Pope to be Antichrist: for first the Sea the Prot.
Apol. p 334. etc. 337. etc.
Waldenses, Husse and Hierome of Prague, were in the opinion of Prot. confessed
Papists, and therefore in no danger to be persecuted by the Pope. But being
truly heretics, and holding sundry gross errors, which Protestants
disclayme, and for which they were most justly punished, this strongly argues
the Pope to be a faithful servant of Christ, not Antichrist. Secondly Herod's
Persecution was before any Pope was. Thirdly the Persecution of the Primitive
Church, during the said supposed 294. years until Constantines time, was done
not by the Pope, but by the then Heathen Emperors, who persecuted the then
Popes of Rome.

Fourthly the 1260. years of the Papacy preuayling since the time of Siluester
and Constantine (the confessed antiquity of the Papacy being thereby deduced up
to the Ancient Fathers of those purer times) does argue the Pope to be a true
Bishop and Prophet, rather then Antichrist: as also the Church having been
grievously persecuted before Constantine, if it has also been persecuted ever
since till now, then the Predictions of the Prophets concerning the Churches
flourishing, quiet, and increase, were not as yet performed, which were wicked
to think.

But at Antichrists coming, the persecution shall be such, Mat. 24.25.
as was not since the beginning of the world, nor shall be: In so much as then
Satan Apoc. 20.7.
shall be loosed out of his Prison, and shall go forth and seduce the Nations
that are upon the four corners of the Earth: so that the persecution shall be so
much more grievous then all former, by how much the Sea hereof S. Aug. de Ciu.
Dei. l. 20. c. 8. 9.
Devil being loosed, and set at liberty, may tempt and tyrannize more then
when he was bound: yea, as then the Divine Sacrifice Dan. 12.11. See Iren. l.
5. Hier. and Theodoret. in hunc locum.
shall be taken away, which clearly hitherto is vnacco^plished. And lastly the
persecutions raised by sundry Heathen Emperors, as Nero, Domitian, and
Diocletian, did both for cruelty and number of persons persecuted, incomparably
exceed all pretended cruelties of all Popes in all ages.

The same also is confirmed by that of S. John, Ap. 10. 1. 2. etc.
The Angel etc. apprehended the Old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan,
and bound him for a 1000. years etc. that he seduce no more the Nations, till
the thousand years be consummate etc. And when the 1000. years shall be
consummate, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison etc, and shall seduce the
Nations etc. Here though the number of a 1000. years be uncertain, as
signifying more years, yet to signify fewer years it cannot: a thing so
evident, that some Prot. do Fr. d^ Ion. up the Revel. in c. 12. p. 153.
accordingly affirm the same, collecting thence that Antichrists coming is to
be Ib. in c. 20. Revel. p. 257.
after the first 1000. years from Christ. To which purpose also Hospinian
speaking of the pretended corruption, which, as he affirms, prevailed at the
end of the 1000. years after Christ, says, Hist. Sacram. l. 4. c. 2. p. 295.
and see Ep. Dedic.
Now began to draw near the end of the Period of 1000. years, whereof John in
his Apocalips c. 20. writes, then Satan is to be loosed again. Willet
affirms that Wicliffe taught the said 1000. years to end Synop. p. 63.
Anno Domini 1600. And that then Antichrist should begin to appear. In Apo.
c. 11. p. 245. and in c. 12. p. 346.
Fox and In Will. Synops. p. 63.
Walter Bruth think the said 1000. years to end 1300. Hence it now appears
that most Prot. placing Antichrists coming within the first 1000. years next
after this Revelation (during which time at the least Satan was bound not to
seduce the Church) do thereby impugn the sacred Scriptures, and their own
other writers.

Before this persecution to be raised by Antichrist, Mat. 24.14.
The Gospel shall be preached in all the world, for a Testimony to all Nations;
so as no Nation may excuse its Infidelity. But this so general preaching has
not yet been performed, as is evident in several Kingdoms of the East and
West Indies lately found out, wherein no memory at all of Christ, or his
Gospel was found; neither will it suffice to answer, that here it is not
spoken of all the world absolutely, but only by a figure, the whole is taken for
a part; for otherwise S. Paul should have said untruly Romans 10.18.
Into all the Earth has the sound of them gone forth, and unto the ends of the
whole world the words of them. And Col. 1.6.
elsewhere speaking of the Gospel he says, In the whole world it is, and
fructifyeth and grows: And Col. 1.23.
is preached among all Creatures, that are under heaven. But Christ makes this
preaching in all the world, to be a sign of the end thereof, for so he
immediately adds, and then shall come the consummation; wherefore if this
preaching were not taken to be properly in all the world, but only in some
parts thereof, then it were no sign, for in that sense, in the first twenty
years after Christ, the Gospel was preached by the Apostles in all the
world: neither in that sense could it be a Testimony to all Nations at the day
of Judgment. Besides, it was promised properly to Christ, that Ps. 71.
All Nations shall serve him, and he dyed generally for all, and therefore in
the (39) Apocalips, the Elect are described out of all Nations, Cap 7.
and peoples, and Tribes: and in the same sense are these words understood by
S. Austine Aug. Ep. 80. ad Hesych. Hier. and Orig. in Math. c. 24.
S. Hierome and Origin.

Now, to the place objected from the Romans, S. Aust. Ep. 80.
answers, that S. Paul took the preterperfecte^se for the future, as David
also did, whose words they were: And that in the other place, S. Paul affirmed
the Gospel, to be in all the world, not actually, but virtually, because the
seed of Gods word was cast by the Apostles into the world, which fructifiing
and increasing, might fill the whole world, as one putting fire to several
parts of a City, may truly be said to have burned the whole City, because he
placed the fire, which by little and little increasing, consumed the whole City.
It may also be answered with S. Hierome In Math. c. 20. D. Tho. in Romans c. 10.
and S. Thomas, that the same of the Gospel came to all Nations then known
in the time of the Apostles, and that hereof only speaks S. Paul.

Enoch and Elias are reserved alive, that they may oppose themselves to
Antichist at his coming, and preserve the Elect in the faith of Christ, and at
length convert the Jews; To which purpose it is said, Behold Mal. c. 4.5.6.
I will send you Elias the Prophet, before the coming of the great and fearful
day of our Lord etc. Elias Mat. 17.11.
indeed shall come, and restore all things. Ap. 11.3.
And, I will give to my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy 1260. days.
Some answer that the words of Malachy are to be understood of S. John Baptist,
of whom Christ said, Mat. 11.14.
he is Elias that is for to come. But the truth is, that though S. John
Baptist, in regard of his office of being Precursor before the first coming of
our Savior, as also in regard of his preaching unto the people, was called
Elias, in that Elias is to be the Precursor before the second coming of Christ,
and is to preach and convert the Jews; yet that the former words are to be
understood of the true Elias it is plain, in that the Prophet speaks of the
second coming of Christ, when he shall come to Judgment, to wit, at the great
and fearful day: whereas the first coming, when S. John Baptist came, was not
to judge, but to be judged, not to destroy, but to save. Besides S. Luke
explaineth the same saying, C. 1.17.
And he shall go before him in the spirit and virtue of Elias; and our Savior
himself, even after S. John's death, avouched that, Mat. 17.11.
Elias should come and restore all things.

Some also reply, that by the two witnesses are understood all the faithful
Ministers, which God rayseth up in the time of Antichrist, as Luther,
Swinglius, Calvin etc. But this is idle, for of the two witnesses S. John
says, Ap. 11.3.6.7.8.11.12.
They shall prophesy 1260. days, clothed with sackcloathes, they shall have
power to turn waters into blood, and to strike the Earth with all plague.
Antichrist shall kill them, and their bodies shall lie in the streets in the
great City etc. where their Lord also was crucified. And, after three days
and a half, the spirit of life from God shall enter into them. And, they shall
go up to heaven in a Cloud, and their Enemies see them: Now that all, or any of
these particulars were performed in Luther, or any other Prot. Minister, I
think no man will avouch.

At Antichrists, coming his name and Character shall be so known, as that, Ap.
13. 16. 17.
He shall make all little and great, and rich and poor etc. to have a Caracter
in their right hand, or in their foreheades. And, that no man may buy or sell,
but he that has the Character, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his
name. Now what this name or Character is, hitherto is unknown.

Antichrist, at his Coming will work many strange signs and feigned miracles,
his 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
Coming is according to the operation of Satan in all power, and lying signs
and wonders. Mat. 24.24.
And both he and his Ministers Ap. 13. 13.
shall show great signs and wonders: Yea he shall seem to make fire Ap. 13.13.
to come down from heaven: and to make Ap. 13.15.
the Image of the Beast to speak. In so much that Ap. 13.
All the Earth will be in admiration of him. Now never did any Pope work such
wonders as these. But the greatest wonder to me is, that so many men endowed
with common sense and reason as Prot. are, and professing to believe the sacred
Scriptures for most true, should so directly contrary to all sense and reason,
and to so many cleerest textes of sacred Writ, maintain a Paradoxe so gross
and absurd.

SECT. III. That the Fathers expound the Scriptures agreably with Catholics,
in proof that the Pope cannot be Antichrist.
S. Hierome Ep. ad Algasiam. q. 11. Damasc. de fide. l. 4. c. 24.
and S. Damascene, do interpret the word (...), to be one who does emulate and
oppose himself to Christ. The Centuristes confess that, Cent. 5 c. 4. Col.
^16.
S. Austine teaches the Etymology of Antichrist, in Epist. Ioannis, Tract. 3.
He is called Antichrist in Latin, who is contrary to Christ etc. Some
understand Antichrist to be so called, because he is to come before Christ etc.
It is not so said, it is not so written, but Antichrist, that is contrary to
Christ etc. Likewise in Tract. de Antichristo, desiring to know of Antichrist,
first you shall mark why he is so called to wit, for that he will be contrary to
Christ in all things etc. he will dissolve the Evangelical law, and will
recall into the world the worshipping of Devils.

S. Austine Tract. 29. in Joan.
himself expounding those words of S. John, Hom. 15. in Io. 5. and Orat. 4.
in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Cyr. Alex. l. 3. in Io. c. 6. Ambros. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Ruffinus
in Expos. Symb. Iren. l. 5. cont. haer. c. 25.
He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory, affirms that, This
shall be he who is called Antichrist, extolling himself, as the Apostle says*
above all that is called God, and which is worshipped: for our Lord declaring
that he will seek his own glory, not the glory of the Father, says to the
Jews: I came in the name of my Father, and you received me not, another shall
come in his own name, him you will receive; he showed, that they would receive
Antichrist, who would seek the glory of his own name. And the same exposition
of this place is given by S. Chrysostom S. Cyril. S. Ambrose, S. Irenaeus, and
Ruffinus.

Concerning the time of Antichrists reign, S. Irenaeus L. 5. cont. haer. c.
25.
alleging those words of Daniel, A time, times, and half a time, that is
(says he) three years and six months, in which Antichrist coming, shall
reign upon the Earth. Hipolitus De Consum. mundi. and Antich.
writing upon those words of Daniel, C. 9 27.
He will confirm the Covenant to many one week, and in the half of the week
shall the host and the sacrifice fail, says: When Daniel said, he will
confirm his Covenant to many one week, is signified seven years. The
Prophets shall preach half a week etc. that is three years and a half
Antichrist shall reign upon Earth, after his kingdom and glory shall be taken
away. S. Chrysostom affirms, Catech. 15.
that, Ho. 49. ex c. 24. Math. operis imperf.
Many Scriptures do signify, and especially S. John in his Revelation, that
Antichrists kingdom is to continue three years and six months. Saint
Hierome writing upon the 11. Chapter of Daniel, teaches that, Ours do better
and more truly expound, that in the end of the world Antichrist is to do these
things, who is to rise from the Jews etc. and is to persecute the Saints
three years and a half, that is, 1260. days, and after to perish upon the
famous and holy mountain. And also, In Cap. 7. Dan.
Time signifies a year, Times, according to the propriety of the Hebrew
speech, who also have the Duall number, prefigure two years, and half a time
six months, in which the Saints are permitted to the power of Antichrist. S.
Cyril: Antichrist shall reign only three years and a half, which we affirm
not from Apocriphall Books, but from the Prophet Daniel S. Austine is so full
herein, that he doubts not to write, that, L. 20. de Ciu. Dei. c. 23. And
according to the Engl. Translation p. 823.
he who being half a sleep, reads these things, may not doubt of the most
cruel reign of Antichrist against the Church, although it is to be endured but
a short time. For time, and times, and half a time, are one year, and two
years, and a half. And by this it is manifest to be three years and a half;
the number also of the days being afterward set down: sometimes in the
Scriptures it is declared by the number of months.

S. Austine likewise affirms that he shall spring from the Jews, saying.
Tract. de Antichr. and de Benedict. Jacob. and see Cent. 5. c. 4. Col. 416.
As our Authors say, Antichrist shall be borne of the people of the Jews, of the
Tribe of Dan, according to the Prophet, saying, Genesis 49.17.
Be Dan a snake in the way, a serpent in the path. This Prophecy is understood
of Antichrist, by Iren. l. 5. adu. haer. Hip. Orat. de Consum saec. Ambr. c. 7.
de bened. Patriar. Aug. q. 12. in Iosue. Pros l. de praedict. q. 4. Theod. q.
vlt. in Genesis Greg. l. 30. Mor. c. 18.
Irenaeus, Hippolitus, Ambrose, Austine, Prosper, Theodoret, Gregory, and many
others upon the 7. Chapter of the Apocalypse, where they suppose that S. John
did omit Dan, from amongst the Elect of the Israeliticall Tribes, in
detestation of Antichrist to be borne of that Tribe. And certain it is, that
the Jews will receive and follow him for their Messiah, as our Savior
himself says, Io. 5.43.
If another shall come in his own name, him you will receive; which makes it
very probable, that he shall be a Jew borne, else they would not so easily admit
him.

The Fathers also teach, that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of Jerusalem,
and not in the Church of Rome. S. Cyril demands, Catech. 15.
What Temple says the Apostle? In the Temple of the Jews which is left: for
God forbid that it should be in this, in which we are. S. Hilary affirms
that, Can. 25. in Math.
Antichrist is therefore called by Daniel, Abomination, because coming against
God, he challenges Gods honor to himself etc. And, received by the Jews,
shall sit in the place of Sanctification, that where God was inuocated by the
prayers of Saints, there he received by Infidels, should be worshipped with
Gods honor. S. Gregory Nazianzen writes: Orat. 47.
As concerning this place, The Abomination of desolation standing in the holy
Place, they say, that the Temple of Jerusalem is to be built again, and
Antichrist is to be believed to be Christ, by the Jews; and that he is to sit
therein, and is to be thought to be the king of the whole world: But he shall
come at the Desolation and ruin of the world. Arethas writing upon the
foresaid words of the Apocalypse, avouches that, In Apoc. 11.
He shall cast their bodies unburied into the streets of Jerusalem: for there
shall he reign as king of the Jews. And the like is taught by S. Irenaeus L.
5. c. 30. Hipol. l. de Consum. mundi.
and Hypolitus.

Concerning Enoch and Elias their Coming to resist Antichrist, S. Ambrose
writing upon these words of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 4.9.
I think that God has showed us Apostles the last, as it were deputed to
death, expounds them thus: In. 1. Cor. 4.
This therefore does he apply to his person, because he was always in need,
suffering persecutions and pressures above the rest, even as Enoch and Elias
are to suffer, who are to be Apostles in the last time for they are to be sent
before Christ to prepare the people of God and to strengthen all Churches for
the resisting of Antichrist, who, the Apocalypse does testify, (...) suffer
Persecution, and be slain. And the like is taught m^^t plainly by De Ciu. Dei
l. 20. c. 29.
S. Austine, saying, That Elias shall convert the Jews to Christ, vltimo
tempore, before the end of the world etc. is most commonly believed and taught
of us Christians, and is held as a point of Infallible truth, for we may well
hope of the coming of him before the Judgment of Christ, whom we do truly
believe to live in body at this hour, without ever having tasted of Death.

But the Ancient Fathers were so wholly Roman Catholic in this Point, as that
Fulke confesses, saying, Ag. Rhem. Test. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
Indeed most of the Ancient Fathers did Judge that the Roman Empire should
first be decayed, before Antichrist were reueyled. Whereof also says Calvin, In
These. 2.3.
For as much as they have expounded this place, of the defection of the Roman
Empire, it is more frivolous then that it needs any long Confutation: and I
do marvel that so many writers, otherwise learned and witty, have been
deceived in so easy a thing, but that when one had erred, the rest without
Judgment followed the troop. Of this also write the Centurists, Cent. 5. c.
4. Col. 420.
Austine in his Treatise of Antichrist, declares in few words the time of
Antichrists coming, therefore the Apostle Paul from hence affirms,
Antichrist not to come before into the world, unless first a departure shall
come, that is, unless all Kingdoms shall depart from the Roman Empire, which
were before subject unto it. So many se^erall ways do the Ancient Fathers
testify from the Scriptures, that the Pope is not Antichrist.

SECT. IIII. That Prot. agree with Catholics in the Doctrine of the Pope not
being Antichrist.
THough nothing be more frequently declaimed in Prot. Pulpits, the^ the Pope
being Antichrist; yet how much that foolery is disclaymed by the learned
Prot. Writers, this present Section shall testify. M. Fox writing upon the 11.
Chapter of the Apocalypse, where S. John mentions Antichrists Reign to be
(42) months, acknowledges that, In Ap. c. 11. p. 239. and in c. 12. p. 347.
347. And Fr. du Ion. up the Revel. in c. 20. p. 257. 258.
It cannot be that a long time should be figured by the same short time, for by
a short time, a short time is signified; to which end he also alleges the
testimonies of Lambertus and Chytraeus. Wherefore it cannot be imagined, that
the Popes of Rome for so many hundred years to have been Antichrists.

Bucer is of opinion that Mahomet Liber Psalmorum, 5. in Ps. 22. fo. 146. 147.
is that very Antichrist, who for many ages has subjected most Nations of the
(believing) Gentiles unto the bondage of Satan. Fox affirms that, Act. and
Mon. p. 739.
Although, as S. John says, there be many Antichrists, which are forerunners,
yet to speak of the head and principal Antichrist he is to come in the later
end of the world, whereby is meant no doubt the Turk. And he makes the like
exposition of Ib. p. 743.
Satan being loosed at the end of the 1000. years, which he understands to
be directly meant of the Turk, and but Anagogically of the Pope. Peter Martyr
determines as well Com. plac. pa. 351.
Mahomet, as the Pope to be Antichrist.

Zanchius In Ep. Pauli ad Phil. Col. etc. p. 245.
having recyted the opinion both of the Papists and Prot. concludes, that Ib.
p. 246.
It may not be denied, but that near the end of the world, a certain man
shall arise in the Church of Christ, who shall exceed all the other
Antichrists in malice, power, and other wickedness: And of this man may be
understood the Prophecy of John and Daniel, of 3. years and a half, in which
he shall reign.

Lambertus in his Treatise much commended by Fox, In Apoc. c. 11. p. 239.
affirms that See Antichristus sieve progn. finis mundi p. 74.
Antichrist is not yet come: and that the foresaid place Ib p. 75.
to the Thessalonians, is to be understood of an open professed Enemy; as also
that Ib. p. 79.
the Pope although he does (in his opinion) corrupt with his lies, the true
sense of the Mysteries of faith; yet for so much, as he does not openly forbid
to believe them, he therefore is not that great Antichrist. For which belief D.
Dove reproves some of his own Brethren, saying, Sermon. of the second Coming
of Christ and the disclosing of Antichrist versus fin.
Some learned Prot. being over much modest, make a doubt whether Antichrist be
yet reueyled or not.

Add hereunto that such Prot. as do absolutely affirm the Pope to be
Antichrist, do yet mainly differ in the assigning of the Man, or the time of
his coming: for first, Fulke, Answer. to a Counterf. Cath. p. 36. Whitak. of
Antich. p. 66. Willet Synop. p. 160. Perkins up. the Creed. p. 307.
Whitaker, and others do give instance of Boniface the third Anno 607. Nappier
collecteth the year of his coming, to be about Up. the Revel. p. 66. 68.
Anno 313. and that Pope Ib. p. 43.
Siluester was the man. Bullingers Judgment is, that Antichrist should appear
In Apo. in c. 13. ser. 61. fol. 198.
that fatal year of our Lord 763. And another Prot. writer Fr. du Ion. up.
the Revel. in. c. 20. p 257.
assigns yet a longer time, and names Hildebrand (who was Gregory the
seventh) and who lived Cowpers Chron. f. 197. 199.
1074. Fox In Apo. p. 98. 245. 346. 347.
thinks his coming to be Anno 300. So variable is the Collection which Prot.
make from Scriptures, concerning the person, and time of Antichrist: Whereas no
doubt, at his coming, he will be easily known by reason of the great wonders
he shall work, the strange persecutions he shall raise, and sundry such like,
so plainly foretold us by the Scriptures themselves. And yet this their
confessed incertainty notwithstanding, Fox terms this point, In Apo. c 11. p.
326.
the head, and body of all Controversies. But the Premises considered, I think
I may more truly term it a mere fiction, begun upon spleen or choler, and
desperately continued without Scripture, or reason.

SECT. V. Objections from Scriptures that the Pope is Antichrist, answered.
Sundry Fulk. ag. Rhem. Test. in Ap. 17. sec. 7. Nap. upon the Revel. in c. 17.
p. 205. Willet. Synop. p. 171.
Prot. do urge for their chiefest objection, that by the Ap. 17.9.
7. hills upon which the woman sits, is described the City of Rome, and
consequently Rome is Antichrists seat. But I answer first, In the same verse,
those 7. hills, are said to be 7. Kings. Secondly, In Ps. 26. Arethas, Beda,
Rupertus, in Ap. c. 17.
S. Austine and others do understand by the Whore, the universal City of the
Devil, which in the Scriptures is often called Babylon, and is opposed to the
City of God, which is his Church: and by 7. mountains they understand the
whole company of the Proud, and especially the Kings of the Earth. Thirdly,
though thereby be understood Rome, (as some rather Apoc. 17.15.18. see Tertul.
l. cont. Iud. and l. 3. cont. Marcion. Hieron. Ep. 17. ad Marcellam, and q. 11.
ad Algasiam.
think) yet seeing the whore is the^ said to be in being, for five of the
Kings mentioned, Verse. 10.
upon which the woman sat, are said to be then fallen, and that the sixth then
Verse. 10.
was, whereby it is manifest that the woman her self was then also in being,
it cannot be understood of the Church of Rome, whose Romans 1.8. and 16.19.
faith was then renowned in the whole world, but of the heathen City Apoc.
17.18.
which has Kingdom over the Kings of the Earth, and which was Verse. 6.
drunken of the blood of the Saints, and of the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.
In which manner was the City of Rome, during the extremest Persecutions of
Nero, Domitian, and other Roman Emperors.

But some reply that Antichrist is to sit 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
in the Temple of God, and therefore in the true Church; and whereas we
answer, that by the Temple of God, is understood the Temple of Jerusalem,
they urge that, Dan. 9.27.
that long since was destroyed and shall never again be reedifyed. But that
thereby is truly meant the Temple of Jerusalem, is plain, as is See before,
and see Apoc. 11.18.
before proved; as also in that in the Scriptures of the New Testament, by the
Temple of God, are never understood the Churches of Christians, but always the
Temple of Jerusalem: yea the Ancient fathers both Greek and Latin, for
diverse ages did forbear to call the Churches, Temples, but either Oratories,
or howses of prayer, or the like. And this they did either in regard, that as
then they had no Temples, but places in private houses appointed for prayer, or
else that thereby they might distinguish the Church from the Synagogue; the
memory of the Jewish Temple, being as then fully abolished: for which reason
likewise the Apostles in their writings, called not Christian Priests, Priests,
but either Bishops, or Seniors.

Further, the Jews who are to receive Antichrist for their Messiah and King,
will receive none that sits not in Jerusalem, they dreaming nothing more,
then of restoring Jerusalem and the Temple: yea at Antichrists coming Rome (if
thereby be understood the Apoc. 17.16.
harlot) shall be made desolate, and burnt with fire, so that it cannot be now
said to be the Seat of Antichrist. Lastly, if Antichrist be to sit in the true
Church, and to be accounted the head and Prince thereof, as Prot. Melanc. in
Apol. Conf. Aug. art. 6 Call. Instit. l. 4. c. 2.. 12. etc. 7.. 25. Illyr. Cent.
1. f. 2. c. 4. Col. 435. and many others.
teach, and withal, if the Pope of Rome be Antichrist, as they further auoch,
then it evidently follows, that the Pope sits in the true Church, and is
the head thereof. Now there is but one true Church, and there is but one
Christ, which thing also Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 1.. 2.
Calvin confesses, therefore Prot. and all others who are not in the Church
which is under the Pope, are out of the true Church of Christ.

Calvin foreseeeing this great inconvenience to follow, answers, Instit. l.
4. c. 2.. 11.
That as oftentimes buildings are so pulled down, that the foundations and
ruins remain; so Christ has not suffered his Church either to be overthrown
by Antichrist from the foundation, or to be laid even with the ground etc. but
even after the very wasting, he wills that the building half pulled down,
should yet remain. But this makes against Calvin, for first, if the ruins of
the Church of Christ only remain, then the Church is ruinous, and consequently
the gates of hell have prevailed against it, contrary to our Saviors promise.
Math. 16.18.
Secondly, if the Church has suffered ruin, and the ruins and foundation,
yea the building half pulled down, be possessed by the Pope, then Prot. have
no Church, for the Church entyre and perfect, according to them is fallen to
ruin, and the ruins are under Antichrist. What then have they? Peradventure
some new building; but in that it is new, it is not the house of Christ: Who
then (not besotted) does not plainly see that it is far more safe to remain in
a Church, (though ruinous and half fallen) then in no Church? And who would
think (considering the premises, and much more which may be gathered from the
Fathers and otherwise) that men endued with common sense and reason, would
endeavor to defend a fancy so idle, as this conceit of the Pope being
Antichrist?

CHAP. XI. The true State of the Question, concerning Evangelical Counsels,
and the State of Perfection.
Whether there be Evangelical Counsels, or works of supererogation, which
if they be observed or done, are good and commendable, if omitted, not
sinful; or whether all things that are good, be commanded by God, and the
omission of them be sinful. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
ALTHOUGH men Sensual, as ordinarily all Sectaries are, cannot endure to hear
of the State of Perfection, or any thing that may tend to the contempt of the
word and the mortification of the flesh, yet the same has ever been approved,
taught and practiced, by the Catholic Church. So in the Council of Basil we
are taught, that, Oration Henrici Kalteisan de libera Praedicatione verbi Dei.
Counsel is a persuasion of a greater good, to which Christians are not bound
unless they will, but Commandment is obligation of a necessary good, to which
all are bound, although they would not. In poofe heerof is also here eyted the
fourth Carthage Council to say, Counsayles are of our Lord, not commanding but
exhorting. And so Bellar. de Monachis l. 2. c. 8. 9. and Rhem. Test. p. 55.
all Catholics believe, that there are sundry works which are not enjoined by
Christ by any Precept, but only counseled as matter of Perfection: and these
if they be done in the state of Grace are commendable and meritorious; if
omitted, not sinful.

Protestants Untruths.
Luther affirms that, In Epithalam^^.
Moses commanded Marriage to all the Jews, so that it was not lawful for any
in the old Testament, to want a wife. But how then did Elias, Elizeus, Hieremy,
and S. John Baptist, who had no wives, as S. Hierome L. 1. cont. Iouin.
proves. Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 13.. 11.
avouches that Monastical life was no where aproued by our Savior, not so
much as by one syllable. But this lie is confuted by Ep. 89. q 4.
S. Austine and Hom. 17. ad popul.
S. Chrysostom. Instit. l. 4. c. 13.. 12.
He likewise auerreth, that none of the Ancient Fathers thought that Christ
counsayled any thing, but that every word he spoke was of necessity to be
obeyed. But this will appear most false in the 3. Section following. Rogers
avouches Catholics to say, that, Supererogatory works, Def. of the Articl.
art. 14. p. 61.
are tokens of forgiveness of sins, so well as Baptism; yea deliver from the
wrath of God, so well as Christ. But if lying were a work of supererogation
and perfection, I would hold Rogers and his Brethren, to be men of the
greatest perfection this world has known.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Prot. Church decrees that, Article 14.
Voluntary works besides, over, and above Gods Commandments, which they call
works of supererogation cannot be taught without arrogance and impiety, for by
them men do declare, that they do not only render unto God as much as they are
bound to do, but that they do more for his sake, then of bounden duty is
required etc.

Calvin avouches that, Instit. l. 4. c. 13.. 12.
There is no little word uttered by Christ, which we are not necessarily to
obey. Beza much disliking Counsels confesses thus of himself, In 1. Cor.
7.15.
I willingly avoid that false difference, between Precept, and Counsel. And
Melancthon thinks, that In loc. tit. de paupert.
The Gospel neither counsaileth nor commands to depart from riches, if they
be not taken away, neither does it counsel nor command to give things in
common. So that according to Prot. whatsoever we do, or can do, that is good,
we are bound of necessity under precept, and sin to do it.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
S. Hierome Ad cap. 4. Osee. Aug. haer. 54.
and S. Austine condemn Eunomius for affirming Virginity to be of no greater
merit then Wedlock: and that leaving Monachisme he seduced Virgins to marry.
And for the impugning of Virginity, Vigilantius and Heluidius are condemned by
S. Hierome, Cont. Vigilant. c. 1. Cont. Heluid. c. 10.
Iouinian and Faustus Haer. 82. and cont. Faust. l. 30. c. 4.
by S. Austine, and Ebion by Haer. 30.
S. Epiphanius.

S. Damascene Haer. 98.
reproves the Lampetians for teaching that Monks ought to be free in their
Monasteries, and not subject to any Superior. S. Hierome impugneth Vigilantius
for defending that it was better for a man to keep his goods, and out of them
to give Alms, then to give all away at once. The same heresies are the
ordinary Tenets generally maintained by all New Sectaries.

Cont. Vigilant.
Protestant Errors.
It is wonderful to observe the gross Errors that the Enemies of Perfection
do ordinaly fall into. No man could possibly imagine that any man but a Luther
In Epithalamio.
would affirm, that women were created for no other end but to marry: and that
it is all one to advise whether a man should marry, or whether he should eat
or drink. Who also teaches that virginity excels Marriage, and yet a
married wife is better before God, then a Virgin: but here the fool fights
with himself. Yea such was his lust, that he blusheth not to say, In 1. Cor. 7.
f. 107.
We conclude, Marriage to be as it were gould and the spiritual State as dung.
And, Tom. 6. in Genesis 2. fol. 26.
Generation is the chiefest work, after the preaching of the name of God,
which certainly is the reason that moves Prot. preachers to marry so fast,
Tom. 7. in Ep. ad Wolfang fo, 305.
To marry, and to e^te and drink, necessity compels to do both alike, and
God commands both alyke to be done. Who would not be ashamed, and afraid to
follow a Religion first taught by a man so carnal? He L. de vobis Monasticis.
thinks also that it would be the best form of Religious Profession, if none
should be admitted thereto, before he were 70. or 80. years of age. With him
Tom. 4. in c 9. Isaiae. fol. 109.
a Turk is better then these, who have brought in this horrible error of
Cou^sayles. Peter Martyr: In These. p. 1002.
It is not good for man to be alone, because it is not pleasant, not honest,
not profitable. Heerby we see in what carnality our Prot. ministers do place
their ction.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that there are Evangelical Counsayles
or works of supererogation: if they be observed or done, they are commendable
and meritorious; if omitted, not sinful.
TO find out the truth by the sacred Scriptures, the Prophet Isay writes: C.
56. 4. 5.
Let not the Eunuch say, Behold I am a dry tree, because thus says our Lord
to Eunuchs: They that shall keep my Saboths, and shall choose the things that
I would, and shall hold my Covenant, I will give unto them in my house, and
within my walls a place and a name better then sons and daughters, an
everlasting name will I give them, which shall not perish. To be without
children was ignominious amongst the Jews in the Old Testament, because God
having then chosen that only Nation for his peculiar people, the conservation
and increase of his Church depends much upon their multiplication: But seeing
the Church of Christ in the new Testament, should be gathered and consist of
all Nations, the Prophet here forsheweth, that Christian Eunuchs living
continent, should not be ignoble or inglorious, but more glorious, and have a
better name then (Gods other servants) sons and daughters: because keeping
Gods Precepts (such as was the Saboth) they also of their free election, choose
this state of life to keep perpetual Chastity, more then is commanded. And
that this is spoken of voluntary Eunuchs, not of such as are so borne, or
after cut, it is clear; for there is no reason why to these should be promised
greater glory then to those that are married: And if it were understood of these
who contain because they cannot do otherwise, and so to them be promised
greater glory then to the married, then with far greater reason is it promised
to them who will contain when they might do otherwise.

Now that this Continency of Eunuchs is not here commanded, but counseled,
appears by these words, Who will choose the thing that pleases me? for they
are said to choose, who are not compelled by precept, as also in that those who
are not Eunuchs, are not excluded from the kingdom, which they were if this
continency of Eunuchs were here commanded. Lastly, that the said Continency is
not only profitable, but likewise meritorious of eternal life, is proved by
those words, I will give them an everlasting Name that shall not perish.

But Peter Martyr L. de Caelib. and votis Monast.
replyeth, that God does not here prefer Eunuchs before others that keep his
law, but only before them that transgress the Law: But this does not satisfy,
for God here calls them not transgressors, but his sons and daughters,
before whom he prefers holy Eunuchs: neither speaks he of such as shall be
excluded from good place, or good name, but of such as shall enjoy both, and
says, These Eunuchs shall have a better place and better name.

Agreably hereunto, when the Apostles had said, Mat. 19.10.
It is not expedient to marry; our Lord said, Not all take this word, but they
to whom it is given: for there are Eunuchs which were borne so from their
Mothers wombes; and there are Eunuchs which were made so by men, and there are
Eunuchs who have gelded themselves for the kingdom of heaven: He that can
take, let him take. Here Continency is not commanded, for in the beginning of
the Chapter, Marriage is approved, and yet here it is said, that some lived
chaste for the Kingdom of heaven. And though Peter De Caelibatu and votis.
Martyr expounds these words. For the kingdom of heaven, only for the
better preaching of the Gospel, yet this is only his own Imagination without
ground: Neither will it agree to many women who lived chaste, surely not for
preaching, which to them is prohibited, but for their greater merit in the
kingdom of heaven; And I see few Protestant Ministers live Eunuchs for the
better preaching of the Gospel.

Our Savior said unto the young man, Mat. 19.21.
If thou will be perfect go sell the things that thou have, and give to the
poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come follow me. That these
words import no precept is plain, in that the only observance of the
Commandments is alleged by our Savior a little before as necessary to
salvation. As also if it were any Precept, it were of charity: now this only
exacteth that we love our Neighbor as our self; wherefore it does not bynd us
to give all that we have to our Neighbor, but that we may reserve part for our
selves. Lastly if it were a Precept, all whosoever, were bound to give all that
they have unto the poor, which is absurd.

D. Fulke Against Rhem. Test. in Mat. 19. sec. 9. Parkins in his Reform. Cath.
p. 241. Calvin l. 4. c. 13. sec. 13.
and other Prot. reply, that Christ neither Commands nor counsaileth this
Perfection to all men, but only to this one, to discover the hypocrisy and
vain confidence that he had in himself: But this instead of an answer, is a
sclanderous falsehood, for besides that the Evangelists do none of them accuse
the young man of any such fault, no sooner had he said that he had kept all the
Commandments from his youth, but Christ thereupon behoulding him, loved him,
as S. Mark C. 10. 21.
witnesses; which he would never have done, if he had known him to be a lying
Hypocrite. Secondly the young man hearing our Saviors speech of Perfection,
Mar. 10.22.
went away sorrowful, for he had many possessions, which sorrow he would never
have had, if he had come with a dissembling mind. Thirdly, after this his
sorrowful departure, Peter hereupon agreeable to our Saviors said admonition
given, said. Behold Mat. 19.27.
we have left all things, and followed thee, what therefore shall we have? To
which our Savior answered not, that he would give them nothing, or that which
he had spoken was only to the young man, and that not seriously, but only to let
him see his hypocrisy, as Prot. expound it; but instead hereof, he promises
them for their reward, Mat. 19.28.
That they shall sit upon twelve Seats, judging the twelve Trybes of Israel:
Yea to every one whosoever that Ver. 29.
has left house, brethren etc. or lands for his name sake, he has promised
they shall receive an hundred fold, and shall possess life everlasting. But M.
Perkins limiteth those words, If thou will be perfect etc. to that only man,
saying Cases of Conscience l. 3. c. 4. col. 1626.
Those words contain a personal and particular command. But this to be most
false appears, in that Christ expressly distinguishes here matters of
Command, from matters of Perfection. But whether it be command or counsel, it
is ridiculous to apropriate the same to that only man: and clearly most false,
in that the Apostles immediately after affirmed of themselves that, they had
left all things and followed Christ.

Against the state of Perfection Calvin Concione 1. in Job.
writes, Both the Greek and Latin (writers) do interpret this word
(perfectum) perfect: But because in later ages the name of Perfection has been
ill expounded, it is better to use the word, Integrity. For many that are
ignorant, do think, when a man is called perfect, thence to follow that
Perfection may be found in us, whilst we are conversant in this life. So
displeasing is to Calvin the state, and the very word of Perfection.

In the time of the Apostles themselves, many Christians, Art. 4. 34. 35. 37.
who were owners of lands or houses, sold, and brought the price of those
things which they sold, and laid it before the feet of the Apostles; And to
every one was divided according as every one had need. That this was commanded
we do not read in any part of the Scriptures, but to the contrary to Ananias it
was said, Act. 5.4.
Remaining, did it not remain to thee, and being sold, was it not in thy
power?

D. Fulkes answer hereto is, that, Against Rhem. Test. in Act. 5.2.
Neither can it be proved that they promised the whole, but they affirmed they
brought the whole, when they withdrew part. But this is so false, that D. Fulke
himself a little after confuteth it, saying, Ibid. in Act. 5.6.
They that have as great power to keep the vow of Virginity advisedly made, as
Ananias had to deliver the whole price of his land, sin damnably if they
break it; Where he must needs suppose, that Ananias had made a vow of giving
the whole, as the other had made a vow of keeping Virginity, otherwise their
sin could not be alyke damnable.

S. Paul teaches in express words the difference between Counsel and
Command, saying, 1. Cor. 7.8 9.
I say to the unmarried and to widows, it is good for them if they so abide,
even as I also; but if they do not contain themselves, let them marry: Ver. 25.
Concerning Virgins a Commandment of our Lord I have not, but Counsel I
give: Ver. 28.
Art thou loose from a wife? Seek not a wife, but if thou take a wife, thou
have not sinned: Ver. 38.
He that joins his Virgin in Matrimony, does well, and he that joins not,
does better; Let the widow Ver. 39.40.
marry to whom she will, only in our Lord, but more blessed shall she be, if
she so remain, according to my Counsel. These Textes are so plain to
distinguish Counsels from Commandes, and to the praise and advise of
Counsels, that no Catholic at this day can speak more clearly.

Yet Calvin answers In. 1. Cor. 7.25.
to these so plain Textes, that they are not to be taken absolutely, but
conditionally, and that the meaning is only this, that to live chaste is good if
a man could, but 1. Cor. 7.2.
because of Fornication, let every man have his own wife: even as it were good
(says In Comment. huius loci.
Calvin) for a man not to eat or drink, if it might be, but because it cannot
be without a miracle, therefore let every one eat and drink. But first the
words of S. Paul are clear to the contrary, for he says not, It were good
for a man not to touch a woman, or I would give Counsel, (but) It is good
etc. I do give Counsel. Secondly, if to live chaste, were so impossible, as
Prot. Ministers both by their words and lives make show of, then would S. Paul
never have so highly commended it: yea how absurd a thing had it been, may
appear by applying the words of S. Paul to the Example of Calvin, as if he
had said, It is good for a man not to eat: want thou meat, seek not for
meat: of not eating I have no Precept of our Lord, but I give Counsel that
no man eat, and the like. This absurdity conuinceth, that S. Paul speaks not
of any impossibility. Thirdly, by those words, because of fornication, let
every man have his own wife, S. Paul does not admonish every man to marry, but
that the married man do keep his own wife, and others unmarried, that they
rather marry then burn, if they perceive themselves in frequent temptation
thereof; and so accordingly he counsaileth that, Verse. 9.
If they do not contain themselves, that they marry. Lastly, if it be as
difficult to live chaste, as to live without meat, in what wicked state live
the fellows of Colleges in Cambridge and Oxford, and sundry other Ministers
abroad, who live not only, the most dangerous time of their youth unmarried,
but even many of them all their lives: These men I think live not without
meat, and yet without women, I hope themselves at least will acknowledge, and
not publicly confess the contrary, howsoever the case truly stands with
them.

But the truth is, the foresaid words of S. Paul, As concerning virgins a
Commandment of our Lord I have not, but Counsel I give, are so clear and
unanswerable, as that the Rhemistes thereupon truly inferring, that a Counsel
is one thing, a Commandment another; D. Fulke who undertakes to make some
answer or other to whatsoever they shall say, yet here is content to pass it
over in deepest silence not so much as taking the least notice thereof: which
certainly could be for no other cause, but that the words were so splendent, as
that his bleared eyes were not able to behold them.

S. Paul might have received 1. Cor. 9.7.11.14.
maintenance for his preaching, yet, he used not Ver. 12.15.
this power, but, being free, Verse. 19.
made himself the servant of all, that he might gain the more: and, so Ver.
18.
preached the Gospel without cost, for which he expected a reward, Ver. 17.
and glory Ver. 15.
so great, that it was good for him to dye rather then that any man should make
his glory void. Here S. Paul might have taken maintenance for his preaching,
and yet preached without cost to his auditors, for which he hoped for a reward
and glory.

Peter Martyr In Comment. buius loci.
replyeth heerunto, that S. Paul in sight of God was bound to do the same,
though not in the Judgment of men; for he says, Ver. 15.
It is good for me to dye rather etc. Now for a work not necessary, no man can
suffer himself to be slain: and, Ver. 16.
If I preach it is no glory to me, that is, if I receive gain of the people,
Ver. 18.
what is my reward then? that preaching the Gospel, I yield the Gospel
without Cost, that I abuse not my power in the Gospel. But this does not
satisfy, for in all this Chapter S. Paul goes about to prove, that it was
lawful for him to live at the Charges of the people, which he confirms by
the Example of the rest of the Ver. 5.6.
Apostles, by the example of Ver. 7.
Souldiars, sheepheards, and husbandmen, by the law of Ver. 8.9.
Moses, and by the Ver. 14.
ordination of Christ. Secondly in answer to the places cyted, a man may
lawfully suffer death for a work not necessary or commanded, but only of
Perfection, and so have many Virgins been martyred for refusing Marriages: so
also by the second place, S. Paul did not think, that he should receive no
glory, but only that singular glory, which is due to a work of Perfection.
Lastly, by the word, abuse, is Chrysostom. bo. 8 de poen. oecum. and Theophil. in
hunc locum. Plato Ep. 8.
often understood a full and absolute power of using, as if he had said, that,
I use not my power in the Gospel as much as I may; and so also is the Greek
(...), abutor, often taken in a good sense.

Add yet heerunto, that, to avoid absurdity, we must either hold an arbitrary
freedom, in the omitting or doing of certain lawful actions, as for example,
that we may lawfully in our Prayer bestow time and leisure, and in our Alms
give to the Poor more then in either we are bound; or else that in these, and
other our particular actions, there is such a determinate point or period, as
that to exceed the same, or to be short thereof, were sin: which to affirm,
is no less absurd, then scrupulous, and troublesome to all men's Consciences.

SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Sacred Scriptures answerably with
Catholics, in proof of Evangelical Counsayles and works of Supererogation
and Perfection.
COncerning the foresaid place of Esaias, S. Austine writes, De sancta Virginit.
c, 25.
Why do thou wrangle impious Blindness? what do thou promise only te^porall
profit to the chaste Saints? I will give them an Eternal name, and if perhaps
here thou do endeavor to take eternal, for long, I add, I heap, I
reiterate, it shall never be wanting: what seek thou more? What say thou
more? This eternal name whatsoever it is to the Eunuchs of God, which certes
signifies a certain proper and excellent glory, shall not be common with
many, although placed in the same kingdom, and the same house: for therefore
peradventure it is called a name, because them, to whom it is given, it
distinguishes from the rest. This place of Esaias is understood of such as are
voluntary chaste, by sundry Hieron. and Cyril. in hunc locum. Basil. l. de vera
Virg Ambr. in Exhort. ad Virg. Greg. 3. part. Pastor c. 29.
other Fathers.

S. Cyprian in his book of the habit of Virgins, writes thus: Let not them
affect to be decked, or to please others then their Lord, from whom they expect
the reward of Virginity, himself saying, There are Eunuchs who have gelded
themselves for the kingdom of God. Again in the same place, Now when the
world is replenished etc. those who can take Continency, living after the
manner of Eunuchs, are gelded to a kingdom: neither does our Lord command
this, but exhorts; he does not impose the yoke of Necessity, when the free
Power of the will remains. But seeing he says, There are Io. 14.2.
many mansions with his Father, he shows the lodginges of a better house;
these better lodginges you seek; gelding the desires of the flesh, you obtain
the reward of a greater grace in heaven. Whereof also says S. Austine. De
sancta Virginit. c. 24.
Christ praising those who have gelded themselves, not for this world, but for
the kingdom of heaven, shall a Christian gainsay it, affirming this to be
profitable, for this present life, but not for the life to come? And yet all
Prot. will make bold to say it.

As touching the young man mentioned in S. Matthew, S. Ambrose says: That L. de
viduis post med. and see Dorotheus doctrine. r.
thou may understand the difference of Commandment and Counsel, remember
him to whom in the Gospel it was formerly prescribed, that he should not
murder, not commit adultery, not speak false witness; for there is a
commandment, where there is punishment of sin. But when he had said, that he
had kept the Precepts of the law, a Counsel is given him, that he sell all
things and follow our Lord; for these things are not given upon Command but
upon Counsel are bestowed. To which sense also says S. Austine, Ep. 89. q.
4. and cont. lit. Petil l. 2. c. 104. and in Ps. 103 And see Chrysostom. in illud
ad Roman. Salutate Priscam etc. Hieron. Ep. ad Demetr. 8. q. c. 7.
The young man saw how he had kept the Commandments of the Law, but the good
Master has distinguished the Commandments of the law, from this more
excellent Perfection: for there he said, if thou will come to life, keep the
Commandments, but here, If thou will be perfect go, sell all things etc. And
the like Exposition is given by S. Hierome in his book against Vigilantius.

But S. Austine is so clear in this, that M. Trig says, Upon Iud^ p. 216. See
Aug. Ep. 89.
S. Austine counting it a degree of Perfection in Christianity, not to seek
after the riches of the world, thus writes of himself: I who write these
things have loved that Perfection whereof our Lord spoke to the young man, Go,
and sell all thou have: How far I have gone forward in this way of Perfection,
I know more then any other etc. And to this purpose with all my might I exhort
others, and etc. have Companions to whom this is persuaded by my ministry.

S. Austine alluding to those words of the Samaritan, Luc. 10.53.
Whatsoever thou shall supererogate, I, at my return, will repay thee, says:
De Virginit. c. 30.
Those things are exacted, these are offered; if these be done, they are
commended if those be not done, they are condemned; in those our Lord
commands what is debt, but in these if you shall any thing supererogate, at
his return he will repay you. And again: De Temp. ser. 61.
One thing is Counsel, another Command etc. He that willingly hears
Counsel and does it, shall have greater glory; he that fulfilleth not the
Commandment, unless he repent cannot escape punishment. What can be uttered
more clear for Evangelical Counsails?

Now in proof of S. Paul his counsailing of Virginity, S. Austine expounds
his words wholly agreably with our Catholic Doctrine, saying, De sancta
Virginit. c. 14. 15. 30. and de verb. Apost. sermon 18. prope fin. Hypog l. 3. c.
8.
There is no Commandment of our Lord concerning Virgins etc. and, because life
Eternal is to be gone unto, wherein there is a certain excellent glory, not to
be given to all who are to live there for ever, but to some, for the gaining
whereof, it suffices not to be freed from sin, unless to the Redeemer
somewhat be vowod, which were no sin not to have vowed, and yet to have vowed
and performed were praise; therefore the Apostle says, But I give Counsel.
Again, De Temp. ser, 68.
one thing is Counsel, another Command, Counsel is given that virginity be
kept, that flesh be abstayned from, that all things be sold and given to the
poor. But command is, that Justice be kept etc. He that willingly hears and
does counsel, shall have greater glory, he that shall not fulfill the
Commandment, unless he shall do penance, cannot escape sin.

The same Exposition of S. Paul's words are given by S. Hierome: Ep. 22. c. 8.
Concerning Virgins the Apostle says, I have no Commandment of our Lord.
Wherefore? because that himself should be a Virgin was no command, but his own
will.

S. Chrysostom thus explaineth the same much more largely: Hom. 56. quae est
8. de poenitentia.
Do not accuse our Lord, he does not Command impossible things, many do exceed
the Commandments themselves. Therefore if they were impossible, they would not
of their own accord exceed them. He no where commands virginity, and many
keep it, he no where commands to possess no goods, and many give from
themselves their own substance, the very works giving Testimony, that there
is great facility in the laws of the Co^mandments. They would not therefore
have exceeded them, unless those things which are commanded were easy. He
commanded not Virginity, for he that commands Virginity, subiecteth also him
that is not willing to the necessity of the law, but he that admonishes,
leaves the hearer Lord of his own will. Therefore Paul said of 1. Cor. 7.25.
Virgins, I have no Commandment, but I give Counsel. Thou see not a
Commandment, but a Counsel. Thou see not a Precept, but an admonition. The
one, says he, is of Necessity, the other of will. I do not command, says he,
that I may not burden: I admonish and give Counsel, that I may persuade. A
pure Papist was S. Chrysostom.

Yet no less clear herein is S. Cyprian, Sermon. de Natiuit. Christi.
Concerning Virgins the Apostle says, I have no Precept of our Lord, but I
give Counsel etc. Because although Marriage be good, yet Continency is
better, and Virginity more excellent, which not Necessity or Command
compels, but the Counsel of Perfection persuadeth.

Lastly, Origin, says, L 10. in Ep. ad Romans c. 15 post. med.
Those things which we do above debt, we do not by Command; for example,
Virginity is not paid of debt, for it is not asked by Command, but offered
above debt. Finally, hear Paul saying of Virgins, I have no Precept of our
Lord.

S. Austine repeateth many things done by Christ and his Apostles not
commanded, but counsayled, saying: De Adulter. Coniug. l. 1. c. 14. And see l.
de opere Monachorum. c. 5.
Many things are to be done, the Law not commanding, but upon free Charity, and
those things in our services are more grateful, which when we might lawfully
not bestow, yet for Charity we do them: whereupon our Lord himself, when he had
showed that he owed not tribute, yet he paid it, least he should scandalize
etc. How the Apostle commands these things, his words do testify, where he
says, 1. Cor. 9.19.
Whereas I was free of all, I made my self the servant of all, that I might
gain the more; when he had said a little before, Have not we power to eat and
drink? have we not power to lead about a woman, a sister, as also the rest of
the Apostles etc. Who ever plays the soldier at his own charges? who
planteth a vine, and eats not of the fruit thereof? etc. thus he shows
those things which are lawful, that is, which are forbidden by no Precept of
our Lord etc. So manifest it is according to the Fathers Exposition of the
Scriptures, that many things are lawful, laudable, and Counseled, which are
no where commanded by any Precept.

SECT. IV. That Prot. do agree with Catholics in the Doctrine of Evangelical
Counsels, and works of Supererogation.
TO come now to our Prot. writers expounding the Scriptures for Evangelical
Counsels, and believing the same truth; D. Humfrey testifies that, the
Waldenses did leave Jesuit. par. 2. rat. 3. p 270.
all things, and follow the Evangelical Perfection, professing a kind of
Monastical life: and the same is reported of them by Luther; Loc. com.
Lutheri. class. 4. p 83.
who also affirms, that, In Assert. art. 30.
John Husse believed the Evangelical Counsels: And Husse himself says,
Paul In 1. Cor. c. 7.
shows, that though both be good, yet Virginity is better then Marriage.
Again, Tom. 2. f. 243.
one is said more perfect then another, in as much as he does not only keep
the Commandments, which are of necessity, but also Counsels, which are of
supererogation. And so Christ says, Mat. 19. If thou will be perfect go and
sell all that thou have, and give to the poor, and coming follow me. Hereof
also says Luther, In Colloq. Latinis To. 2. c. de Sanctis.
John Husse etc. affirmed 12. Evangelical Counsels, and Luther himself
acknowledges that one of In Assert. art. 30.
Virginity, or unmarried life, though he was content to practice the contrary
with abominable sacrilege.

Chemnitius affirms of those Enchyrid. de coniugio. p. 411.
who are endued with the gift of Continency, that it is good for them to
remain unmarried, and yet if they will marry, they may do it without sin. And
the same is decreed by the Confession Harmory of Confess. p 543. 544. 545.
of Bohemia in these words: Concerning the Condition of single life Virginity
and Widowhood, our Preachers do teach, that every man has free liberty, either
to choose it to himself, or to refuse it: for by way of a law nothing is
Commanded of God to men touching these things etc. And we now teach, that the
gift of Chastity, by the peculiar goodness of God etc. both in times past was
given, and at this day also is given to some etc. as Christ his speech does
evidently witness etc. And, the Examples of certain in the Prophetical and
Apostolical writings, and of John Baptist, and of many Ministers, and women
Ministers of the Church, do witness this thing. Again, the Lord says, Mat.
19. Ib. p. 544.
Those who have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven, that is,
who be such as might be married, yet they do omit, and abstain from it, because
of the affection of the inward heart, and their love toward God and his word.
And a little after, speaking of the Commodities of the single life of the
Minister, it says, Ib. 545.
By these things he may with less hindrance, and more easily and readily with
great leisure, and more commodiously employ his labor to the Salvation of the
Church etc. And he may be a more Convenient Minister then others etc. Yea it is
certain, that by the state of marriage, many lets many cares, and many things,
whereby necessary quietness is disturbed are cast in our way: And this is it,
which Paul says, I would that you should be without such Cares; He that is
unmarried, is careful for those things that pertain to the Lord, how he may
please the Lord etc. Yea Paul Ib. 546.
concludes after this sort: He is more happy in my Judgment, if he remain
such a one, that is, unmarried, then if he mary: and I think that I have the
spirit of God. In like sort in comparison of others, there be bountiful and
peculiar promises and singular rewards offered unto those that keep
themselves, to wit, that their worthy works shall be recompensed with a great
reward; and that no man shall in vain forsake any thing, as house, Father,
Brother, so also his wife etc. as the Apostles did, for the Lords Cause. Here
not only Evangelical Counsels, but many other Catholic points of Doctrine
are taught by these Bohemian Protestants.

Bucer acknowledges that, In Mat. c. 19.10. f. 150.
There are who have gelded themselves, that is, when they might have married,
have of their own accord chosen single life, and that for the kingdom of
heaven, that they may prove themselves in all things holy in body and spirit,
and that they may adhere unto him without any distraction.

Calvin writing upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians cap. 7.8. confesses
that, This place shows that the Apostle was then unmarried: and he directly
confuteth Erasmus teaching, that S. Paul was married: yea in In 1. Cor. 7. in
ver. 26.28.32.33.34.38.
several places he prefers single life before Marriage, and concludes
thus, The sum of the whole Disputation comes to this, that single life is
better then Marriage, because in it is greater liberty, that men may more
readily serve God.

M. Hooker collecteth and teaches, upon certain of the before alleged
Scriptures, that Eccl. Pol l. 3. sec. 8. p. 140.
If when a man may live in state of Matrimony, he make rather choice of a
contrary life, in regard of S. Paul's Judgment 1. Cor. 7. that which he does,
is manifestly grounded upon the word of God, but not commanded in his word,
because without breach of any Commandment, he might do otherwise. And again,
explaining more fully, what Ib. l. 2. sec. 8. p. 122.
belongs to the highest perfection of man, he affirms, that to do cetayne
things which we may lawfully leave undone, is of great dignity and acceptance
with God, and, that most ample reward in heaven is laid up for them: that,
heerupon depends the difference between the states of Saints in glory; and
so withal concludes, that, Ibid.
God does approve much more then he does command. For which very saying, he is
charged by some Puritanes, The Christian letter to M. Hooker. p. 14. 15.
to sow the seed of the Doctrine of works of Supererogation. But he, and his
Doctrine of the works of supererogation, are defended by Def. of Hook art. 8.
p. 49, 50, 51, 52.
D. Couel. And thus we see that many of the learned Prot. do teach and
maintain from the Scriptures, our Catholic Doctrine of Evangelical
Counsels.

SECT. V. Objections from Scriptures against Evangelical Counsels, are
answered.
SOme pretend, because Gods Mat. 22.37.
Command is, that thou shall love thy Lord God from thy whole heart, and with
thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind; that therefore all that we can do, we
are bound unto. Answ. The word All, or whole, does not signify all the thoughts
of our heart, or all the intention possible, so that we should be commanded to
think of nothing else in our heart, but only of loving God, and that with
greatest vehemence of love; but thereby is only meant, that we love God in such
sort, that in our love, we prefer or equal nothing with him: so the word,
all, in Scripture is often taken, not absolutely, but only for many, as Mat. 2.3.
Herod was troubled and all Jerusalem with him; many Act. 1.41.
wonders were done by the Apostles in Jerusalem, and there was great fear in
all, and the like. Secondly in the Prot. sense it were impossible to keep this
Precept of loving God, whereas the Scriptures Deuteronomy. 10.12.13. Luc. 10.25.
teach it not only to be possible, but easy, as shall be proved hereafter; and
withal 3. Reg. 14.8.4. Reg. 23.25. Ps. 118.10. Eccles. 47.8.
gives Example of such as kept it with all their hearts.

Secondly it is objected, that Mat. 7.14.
the way to heaven is strait and narrow, which could not be, if a man can do
more, then the law requires. Answ. The law of God of its own nature is hard,
and now the harder by the corruption of man, and so the way is said to be
strait; but to one that has Gods Grace (which cures and perfecteth nature)
the same law is easy, according to that, Mat. 11.30.
My yoke is sweet, and my burden light: 1. Io. 5.3.
And his Commandments are not heavy.

Thirdly such places are urged, as seem to prove that in all our works we are
wanting, wherefore we do not fulfill the law, and much less do any works of
supererogation. So S. Paul said, Romans 7.25.
With the mind I serve the law of God, but with the flesh, the law of sin:
According to Esaias, C. 64.6.
All we are become as one unclean, and all our Justices as the cloth of a
menstrued woman. King David prays, Enter Ps. 141.2.
not into Judgment with thy servant, because no man living shall be justified in
thy sight. Answer. S. Paul only speaks of the inuoluntary motions of the
Concupiscence, which are not sin, but only the punishments of sin. Esaias
speaks (according to In hunc locum.
S. Hierome) in the person of grievous sinners, who if they did any Works at
least morally good, yet they defiled the same with many heinous crimes, whereas
the question here is not of sinners, but of the just, when we say, that a man
may not only fulfill the law, but do more then the same. That of K. David, In
hunc Ps.
S. Austine, S. Hierome, and S. Gregory, do all of them expound of venial
sins, in that no man lives, who offends not therein, but these not
depriving man of Grace, do not hinder, but that otherwise he may be just. In
hunc locum.
Arnobius, S. Hilary, and others do heerby understand, that no man can be
justified, if he be compared with God, his Justice being so infinitely perfect,
that in respect thereof, the justice of all men and Angels may seem
Injustice, even as a Candle lighted in the sun, serves not to shine, but to
make a shadow, according to that of Job, C. 4.17.
shall man be justified in comparison with God?

Fourthly, most insist upon those words of our Savior, Luc. 17.10.
When you shall have done all things that are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants, we have done that which we ought to do. Answer. Christ
here speaks expressly of things commanded, not of works of Perfection.
And so S. Ambrose expounds it, saying, L. de v duis post med.
Those who have fullfilled the Commandment, may say, We are unprofitable
servants, we have done that which we ought. This the Virgin does not say, nor
he who has sold his goods, but expects rewards laid up, even as the holy
Apostle says, Behold we have left all things and followed thee, what
therefore shall we have? not as an unprofitable servant does he say, he has
done that which he ought to do, but as profitable to our Lord, who has
multiplied the talents committed unto him etc. So clearly does S. Ambrose
answer his their common Objection.

And the same answer is given by L. 10. in c. 16. ad Romans
Origin. Add yet heeru^to, that it is not said of those who observe the
Precepts that they are unprofitable servants, but only it is counseled that
they say so of themselves, that is, to be humble, and not to brag of their
deserts. And so Christ himself calls not his servants unprofitable, when
they have done their labor, but speaks thus, Mat. 25.21.
Good and faithful servant, because thou wast faithful in a little, I will
place thee over much: enter into the joy of thy Lord. Yea he affirms of such,
that he will not now Io. 15.15.
name them servants, but friends. And S. Paul says expressly, 2. Tim. 2.21.
If any man therefore shall cleanse himself from these, he shall be a vessel
unto honor, sanctified and profitable to our Lord, prepared to every good
work. So many ways is this Objection insufficient.

CHAP. XII. The State of the Question, concerning Vows is proposed.
Whether Vows of Works of Perfection, as Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, be
Lawful, and Commendable now in the Law of Grace. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
TO examine now what the Church of Christ belieueth and practices concerning
the Vows of works of Perfection; in the fourth Carthage Council it is
decreed, that, Conc. Carth. 4. c. 104.
If any widows etc. have vowed themselves to our Lord, and casting of the
lay-habit, shall appear in Religious habit under the testimony of the Bishop
and the Church, and afterward have passed to secular marriages, according to
the Apostle, they shall have damnation, because they have dared to make void
the faith of Chastity, which they have vowed to our Lord. In the second
Council of Arles it is defined that, Cap. 25.
Those who after the holy Profession do Apostatate, and return to the world,
and do not afterward seek the remedies of Penance, shall not at all receive
Communion without Penance. Whom also we command, not to be admitted to the
Office of the Clergy. And whosoever he be, after Penance let him not presume
to take a secular habit; but if he shall presume, let him be houlden an Alien
from the Church. Agreably to this the Catholic Church still teaches, that,
Bellar. de Monach. l. 2. c. 14 16. and Rhem. Test. in Luc. 10. p. 169 and p. 55.
A vow being a Religious promise of some greater good made freely to God, is in
it self lawful, and a true and proper worship of God.

Points Disputable.
Some Caiet. q. 89. art. 7.
think, that the breach of a Vow deliberately made, though in a matter or
small moment to be a mortal sin: but others Sotus l. 7. de Iustitia. q. 2.
art. 1. Nauar. in Man, c. 12. n 40.
more probably teach, that it is but venial. Some S. Thom. q. 88. art. 7.
teach, that the solemnity of a vow of chastity does essentially consist in a
certain spiritual Consecration or Benediction of a Person, by which he is
made incapable of marriage. Others Scot. in 4. Did. 38.
affirm, that it essentially consists in the Decree of the Church,
forbidding Marriage to them who solemnly do vow: Yet others Sotus l. 7. de
Iustitia. q. 2. art. 5. Richar. in 4. Did. 38. art. 7. q. 2.
most probably think, that it consists in an actual delivery of a man's own
power, into the hands of God, and them who supply his place. S. Thom. q. 88.
art. 11.
Some teach that the Pope cannot dispense in a solemn vow of Chastity, made by
Profession of Religion: but others Richar. in 4. Did. 38. art. 9. q. 1. Nauar.
in Man. c. 12. n. 71.
affirm the contrary. None of these are defyned.

Protestants Untruths.
Luther L. de votis Monasticis.
avouches, that the Primitive Church and the New Testament, were wholly
ignorant of the use of making Vows: but this is disproued in the next 2. and
3. Sections. Melancthon In Confess. Aug. art. 27 and in Apol. eiusdem Articuli.
affirms, that in the time of S. Austine, Monasteries were free Colleges not
tied to any vows: but S. Austine In Ps. 75. and 99.
teaches expressly the contrary. He also reports that Monachisme is but a
late invention; and that we believe a Religious life to merit Justification and
Remission of sins, and being applied to others, will save them: but these are
only his own foolish fictions.

Protestant Doctrine.
Luther L. de votis Monast. Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 13.. 7.
and some other Prot. teach, that though vows of things indifferent, may be
made for some respects, as for the better avoiding of sin, and other good
ends; yet to do the same for any worship to God, or as a thing of Perfection,
they think unlawful; but as for the vows of Poverty, Chastity, and
Obedience, they utterly condemn them. According to Perkins, Tom. 2. in Gal. 2.
Col. 82.
The vows of perpetual Continency, Poverty, and Regular Obedience, are indeed
the state of Abomination. And Calvin thinks, that, In Refut. Catalani, page
384.
The vow of single life is Rebellion against God. Beza says, In Confess. c. 5.
sect. 39.
We think with the Apostle the vow of Perpetual Chastity to be Diabolical
Doctrine; but where he fyndeth this in any Apostle, he does not mention. One De
Cap. Babyl f. 77.
thing I here add (says Luther the Apostata Friar) which I would to God I
could persuade all men, that is, that all vows might be altogether taken away
or eschewed; that is, that all would break their vows as himself did. The
Decree of Tyndall and Fox is, Act. Mon p. 1138.
All vows are against the Ordinance of God. So that Prot. do utterly condemn
all vows of Perfection.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
Guido reproves one Gerhard for teaching that, De Erreribus Pseudo-apostolorum.
It was more Perfection to live without Vow, then with Vow. The Lampetians are
impugned by S. Damascene, Lide 100. haeres. circa. fin.
for affirming that Monasteries ought to be free without Perpetual vows. And
the same Error is condemned in the heretics Turrecrem. l. 4. Summae de Eccl.
punct. 2. c. 37.
Fraticelli, and Wicliffe; Waldensis Tom. 3. c. 75. Conc. Constant. Act 8.
yea for impugning of Religiou^ men, the Arrians were condemned by S.
Athanasius In vit. S. Antonij. Theodoret. hist. c. 8. Ruffinus. l. 11. hist. c.
3.
and other Fathers, and the Donatistes by S. Austine L. 3. cont. Petil c. 40.
and in Ps. 132.
; and consequently are condemned for Heretics all Prot. that defend the same
Errors.

Protestant Errors.
Luther L. de votis Monast.
thinks that if a man will vow piously, he must do it in this form: I vow
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience even unto death freely, that is, that I may
change it when I will. But if he promise continency until death, how then
freely? if freely, how then until death? Melancthon In confess. Aug. art. 27.
and in Apol. eiusdem Articuli.
avouches, that S. Bernard and S. Francis became Religious only for corporal
profit. But I persuade my self, Melancthon would deem it little corporal
profit for him, to walk barefooted, to wear hayrcloth, to fast with bread and
water, to sleep upon the ground and the like corporal austerities, which these
good Religious men did use, and many others likewise at this day.

SECT. II. It is proved from the Scriptures, that the foresaid Vows of
Perfection are Lawful, and Commendable.
THat God was worshipped by the vows of the faithful in all times, appears
first by the doctrine of the Old Testament, where it is said Ps. 76.11.
Vow ye, and render your vows unto God. Deuteronomy. 23.21. Number. 30.3. Eccl. 5.3.
When thou shall vow avow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not be slack to pay
it, for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and sundry such like.
And accordingly Genesis 28.20.
Jacob vowed a vow, saying etc. And, Ps. 131.2.
David vowed a vow to the God of Jacob. Now whereas Peter Martyr, Fulke, and
others seek to euade, in answering that, Pet. Mart. de caelib. and vot. p.
302. 303. 304. Fulk. in his Retentiue. p. 153. Bulling. Dec. in Engl. p. 380.
Hospin. de orig. Monach. fol. 104. Luth. to. 2. Wittemb. fol. 276.
vows were Ceremonies of the old Testament etc. abolished by Christ's Coming,
this is evidently false. First, In that vows were made even in the state of
Nature before Moses time, as appears by the forementioned vow of Jacob.
Secondly, in that vows are foretold Esa. 19.21. See the Marg. notes of Bible
an. 1576.
to continue during the New Testament. Thirdly, in that, as shall be showed in
the next Section, the Ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, taught the
lawfulnes of vows. And lastly, in that the Prot. themselves, as shall be showed
in the 4. Section, do likewise prove and maintain from the Scriptures, the
lawfulnes of Christian vows.

But to come now to our time of Christianity, seeing according to M. Perkins,
and other Prot. Reform. Cath. p 155. Muscul. loc. com. de votis. p. 524. Willet
Synop. p. 241.
Now in the New Testament we have warrant to vow, certain things that be
lawful, and not Willet Synop. p. 241. 243.
commanded us, as for example, Perk. Ref. Cath. p. 156.
to keep set times of fasting, to task our selves in prayer, to give set
Alms etc. it has been proved in the precedent Chapter, that voluntary
Poverty, Chastity* and the like are works of Perfection, and lawful, therefore
it evidently follows, that they may be vowed to God by us Christians.

And to descend to particulars concerning the vow of Poverty, S. Luke relates
that, Act. 5.1.
Ananias sold a piece of land, and defrauded of the Price of the land etc. and
bringing a certain Portion laid it at the feet of the Apostles. And Peter
said, Ananias, why has Satan tempted thy heart, that thou should lie to the
holy Ghost, and defraud of the price of the land? Remaining, did it not remain
to thee, and being sold, was it not in thy power? etc. Thou have not lied to
men, but to God. Ananias, hearing these words, fell down, and gave up the
Ghost. Here the words, defrauding of the Price lying not to men, but God, do
convince, that his sin was the breach of his vow, he having no other
Obligation to give all, or any portion of the Price.

Whereas D. Fulke and M. Willet do answer herunto, that Ananias his offense was
only his false Against Rhem. Test. in Act. 5 sec. 4. f. 191. Willet Synop. p.
245.
affirming that he brought the whole, when he withdrew a part, and so only
sinned in lying and covetousness; but this is but barely said, and indeed is
most untrue, for that he and his wife, had vowed with other Christians the
Common life, appears in that, he defrauded of the price of the land, his wife
being privy thereto; for he could not have been said to have defrauded, unless he
had stolen away that which was bound by promise, and which after the said
promise or vow so made, was due in Justice to others no less then to himself.
Now that they vowed a thing not commanded, is clear by these words,
Remaining, did it not remain to thee, and being sold, was it not in thy
power? And that this vow was made to God, and so the breach sacrilege, these
words convince, Ananias, why has Satan tempted thy heart, that thou should
lie to the holy Ghost etc. Thou have not lied to men but to God. Now what is it
to lie to God, but to break his promise given to God? Add yet hereunto, that
so grievous a punishment as the inflicting of sudden death does strongly
argue, that the fault was greater then only a Lie, or Covetousness. Yea that it
was the breach of a vow, D. Fulke himself tells us, saying, Against Rhem.
Test. in Act. 5. sect. 4.
They that have as great power to keep the vow of Virginity, advisedly made,
as Ananias had to deliver the whole price of his land, sin damnably if they
break it: where he must needs suppose that Ananias vowed the giving of the
whole, as the other had vowed the keeping of Virginity, otherwise their sin
could not be alike damnable.

To come now to the vow of Chastity, that the B. Virgin Mary vowed the same, is
proved from these her words, Luc. 1.34.
How shall this be done, because I know not man? that is, because I cannot know
man: for if she had only meant, that as then she had never known man, then her
demand had been needless, and idle, seeing it might have been easily
answered; that though now she did not, yet shortly afterward she should:
whereas the Angel declaring the manner how it should be, instead thereof
says, Ver. 35.
The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall
ouershaddow thee. But Peter Martyr De votis.
replyeth, that by the like reason Moses saying, Ex. 6.12.
How shall Pharao hear me, being of uncircumcised lips? And Nicodemus
asking, Io. 3.4.
How can a man be borne when he is old? should thereby, the one vow
uncircumcision of lips, and the other old age. But this is impertinent, for
these things not depending of man's freewill, do therefore cause such
impediments, whether of speaking, or being borne, as cannot be removed from
man, and therefore they prudently asked those questions, though they had made
no vow of the things, because without all such vow, they had such impediments
of speaking, or being borne, as by themselves they could not remove: whereas the
B. Virgin being married, had it in her free power to have known man: and
therefore she had foolishly asked, how shall this be done, if by no law she had
been hindered to know man; now there was no general or Common law, or Precept
forbidding the same, therefore some Private law, which was her vow.

Christ our Savior affirms that, Mat. 19.12.
There are Eunuchs which have gelded themselves for the kingdom of heaven; he
is not an Eunuch who only contains, but who cannot but contain; wherefore
seeing the Eunuchs here spoken of, are not such by nature, or by cutting, as
is plain by the Text, where 3. several sorts of Eunuchs are distinguished;
it follows, they are such by voluntary vow: Also, none can be said absolutely
to have gelded themselves, who only for a time contain, and afterward at
their pleasure marry.

All that D. Fulke has to answer to this place is that, Against. Rhem. Test.
in Mat. 19. sect. 12.
They that are assured of the gift of Chastity unto their lives end may
lawfully vow, or determine of it, but without such assurance no man can vow
continency lawfully. But this does nothing satisfy the Text, which affirms
that some Eunuchs did geld themselves, that is, did actually vow Chastity, but
of any assurance they had to continue chaste, there is no mention. But besides I
would know what assurance this is which D. Fulke requires? Either it is some
Revelation from God of his perseverance in Chastity, and then none must vow
chastity without this Revelation, which is absurd: Or else it is a consident
hope in the assistance of Gods Grace, and his own good care and endeauours,
and this no doubt every man has, who freely and willingly do make the said
vow, to the honor of God, so that according to D. Fulke with this ordinary
assurance any man may make the vow of Chastity.

S. Paul's advise concerning Widows was this, 1. Tim. 5.9.11.12.
Let a Widow be chosen of no less then 60. years, which has been the wife
of one husband etc. but the younger widows avoid, for when they shall be wanton
in Christ, they will marry, having damnation, because they have m^de void their
first faith. Here it is evident, that whether the Widow were young or old, if
after she was once chosen, or professed, she married, she thereby incurred
damnation, because by her second vow or faith given to her carnal husband in
marriage, she did cast away her (other) first faith, or vow made to God, when
she was chosen.

But Luther L. de votis Monast.
understands by faith, our Christian faith, or belief, which some Widows
forsook, that so they might the better mary again: but besides that this faith
is not properly said to be made void, but to be lost or perish, whereas of
vows it is sometimes properly said, that they are irritated or made void, when
they are broken; there was no cause why those widows, if they had not vowed
Chastity, might not marry, unless they fell from the Christian faith, for who
forbad them to marry with Christians? Does not the Apostle say of such a one,
1. Cor. 7.39.
Let her mary to whom she will, only in our Lord? But Luther shall be answered
by one of his own saying, Antichristus sieve Prognostica finis mundi p. 148.
149.
In that Luther understands this first faith, of justifying faith, and not of
the faith of Chastity, it is plainly enforced. Which opinion, as he was the
first that had it, so was it without the assent of any learned man, and against
Paul. The Apostle speaks of the faith, or vow of office etc. but because Paul
blamed them, that they would after marry, it is most clear that this Condition
was in their vow. Calvin Inst. l. 4. c. 13. n. 18.
answers, that they sinned returning to marriage, in that withal they gave
themselves to all wantones, according to that, when they shall be wanton in
Christ, they will marry.

In answer heerto, some understand Tertul. l. de Monogamia. Cypr. l. 3. ad
Quirinum c. 74.
those words of Spiritual delights, with which those Widows being
replenished in the house of God, became ungrateful to their heavenly Spouse,
by desiring earthly Marriages. Others, Theodoret and D. Th. in bunc locum.
of the abundance of temporal things, wherewith they were sustained at the
charges of the Church: Chrysostom. in hunc locum. Hier. Ep. ad Ageruchiam de
Monog.
Others of Carnal fornication, which having committed, they withal proceed to
marriage. But howsoever it be understood, the answer is of no force, for if it
be not taken for fornication, then could they be only reprehended, in that they
would mary against their vow: If it be taken for the same, then if they had not
vowed, instead of reprehension, they should have been much commended, for
passing from Fornication to honest Marriage, Lastly, Calvin confesses, that
they not only sinned by dishonest life, but also in breaking their faith given
to the Church; which, says he, was a bond of continual unmarried life, the
breaking whereof was sin and damnation; but what is this in plain words,
but that they had made a vow or promise or unmarried life? Calvin yet further
replyeth, that by the first faith is understood the faith given in Baptism:
But this is idle, for none at Baptism, do promise not to marry, therefore why
should they be damned marrying after?

A third answer yet has Calvin, that these widows promised Continency,
which promise they made void by marying; but none could make this promise but
such as were 60. years old, and so not fit for Marriage, S. Paul saying, Let a
Widow be chosen of no less them 60. years. But first here is granted a
Promise of Continency, the breach whereof was damnable. Secondly, though the
Apostle advises old Widows to be chosen, yet not them, but the young Widows
he accuses, that by marying they will make void their first faith: which
reprehension the Apostle would not have given to young Widows, if they might
not have vowed. Thirdly, when he says, Let a Widow be chosen, he means not
to the vow of Continency, but as some Tertul. l. de velandis Virg. and l. 1. ad
vxorem.
think to the Prefecture or Order of Diaconesses: or as others Chrysostom. and
Ambr. in hunc loc. Hier. Ep. ad Saluianum.
think more probably, to the number of those Widows who were maintained by
the Church, of which number S. Paul would not have the young widows to be,
both because they were able by their own labors to maintain themselves, as
also in that it would be greater difficulty to keep them continent, which
otherwise would tend to the dishonor of the Church and scandal of others. So
unanswerable are our cleerest Texts of Scripture in proof of Christian vows.

SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the foresaid Scriptures in proof of
the vows of Poverty, Chastity, and the like.
TO begin with S. Austine, he expounding these words of the Psalmist, Vow ye
and render to our Lord your God, says of the Christians of his time, In Ps.
75.11.
One voweth to God Conjugal Chastity, that besides his wise he will not know
another. Others also vow, that although they have made trial of such marriage,
yet never after they will, nor desire, or admit any such thing; and these have
vowed something more then the other: Others do vow Virginity it self from
their very youth, that they will not experience that which others have, and
have left, and these have vowed much: others vow their house to be an hospital
to all holy people coming to it, these make a great vow: Another voweth to
leave all the goods he has, giving them to the poor and to enter into a
Common life, into the Society of Saints, this man voweth a great vow. Yea S.
Austine gathers from those words of S. Paul, Cor. 6.10.
As having nothing, and possessing all things, In Ps. 113.
that the Apostles did vow Poverty. See the variety of lawful and holy vows,
recounted by S. Austine, and practiced by the Primitive Christians, and still
continued by Catholics: but amongst Prot. not so much as ever heard of, that
they were ever practiced by any one of them.

Theodoret advises that, Quaest. 19. in Deutr.
After thou shall promise any thing to God, thinking the promise to be due, use
diligence that forthwith thou perform it; for this he says Deutr. 23.21.
Thou shall not slack to pay thy vow, because our Lord thy God will require it;
and it shall be reputed to thee for sin. Afterward teaching, that it is in
the power of the mind to promise or not to promise he adds but if thou will
not vow, it shall not be sin unto thee; Whereupon also B. Ps. 65.13.
David, I will pay thee my vows. The Fathers with unanimous consent do expound
the Scriptures in behalf of Ananias his vow, S. Hierome writes, Ep. ad
Demetriadem.
Ananias and Saphira fearful dispensers, yea of double heart, and therefore
condemned, because after vow they offered as their own, and not as his to whom
they had once vowed them, and now reserved part to themselves of another
substance.

S. Austine, Whilst he De verbis Apost. sermon. 17.
withdrew apart of that which he had promised he is condemned both of
sacrilege and fraud. And, if De Diuersis. ser. 10. alias 12.
it displeased God to take from the money which they had vowed to God, how is
God angry when Chastity is vowed and not kept? And a little after, that may be
said to a sacred Virgin marying, which Peter said of the money; Thy virginity
remaining, did it not remain to thee, and before thou had vowed it, was it
not in thy power? For whosoever have vowed such things, and have not paid them,
let them not think to be condemned to corporal death, but to everlasting
fire. A fearful saying for Luther and other Apostataes.

S. Chrysostom, Ho. 11. in Act. Ap.
Why have thou done this? would thou have it? thou should at the first
have kept it, and not promised it, but now after thou have consecrated it, thou
have committed greater sacrilege: for he that steals other men's goods,
peradventure does it for the desire of them, but it was lawful for thee to
have kept thine own, wherefore then did thou consecrate them, and
afterward take them? S. Fulgentius, Ep. de Debito Coniugali. c. 8.
How evil it is, and how carefully to be eschewed, if any man, of that which
he vowed to God, shall endeavor by deadly transgression, to retain or steal
any thing, let Ananias and Saphira serve for Example.

S. Gregory, L. 1. ep. 33. ad Venantium. See S. Basil. de Instit. Monach. ser.
1.
Ananias had vowed money to God, which afterward he withdrew, being overcome
by the persuasion of the Devil, but thou know with what death he was
punished. If then he were worthy of that death, who took away the money that
he had given to God, consider what great peril in Gods Judgment thou shall be
worthy of, which have withdrawn not money, but thy self from Almighty God, to
whom thou had vowed thy self under the habit or veil of a Monk. How
different are these Expositions from D. Fulkes, affirming that Ananias his
sin, was only lying, not breaking any vow.

As touching our B. Virgin Mary's vowing of Virginity, Saint Austine writes,
De S. Virginit. c. 4. Greg. Niss. Orat. de Natiu. Domini. Bern. ser. 4. super
Missus est. and Ser. signum magnum.
Christ before he was conceived, had chosen her dedicated to God, of whom he
would be borne. This the words show, which Mary gave to the Angel telling her
of her offspring: How says she, shall that be done seeing, I know not man?
which truly she would not have said, if she had not formerly vowed herself a
Virgin to God. But because the customs of the Israelites did yet refuse this,
she was despoused to a just man, who would not violently take away, but rather
preserve against the violent, that which she had vowed. This is so clear, that
D. Fulke says, Aga. Rhem. Test. Luc. 1.34. sec. 13.
Though S. Austine gather, that she vowed Virginity, yet it follows not etc.
And although Gregory Nyssen be of S. Augustines opinion etc.

In like sort touching the Eunuchs, S. Epiphanius writes, Haer. 58.
Valesiorum.
who were these who gelded themselves for the Kingdom of heaven, but the
generous Apostles, and Monks, and Virgins? Now that Monks and Religious
Virgins do vow Chastity it is certain. S. Austine alluding to this place,
says, De S. Virginit. c. 30.
He that can take, let him take, but you who have not yet vowed this, who can
take, take. And, De S. Virginit. c. 23.
what can be said more true or more clear? Christ says, Truth says, Virtue
and the Wisdom of God says, those who with godly purpose contain themselves
from Marriage, do geld themselves for the kingdom of heaven. And on the
contrary, humane vanity with impious rashness contendeth, that those who do
this, do only avoid the present necessity of the troubles of Marriage, but in
the kingdom of heaven shall have no more then others. S. Fulgentius expressly
says, L. de fide c. 3.
Whosoever has gelded himself for the kingdom of heaven, and vowed to God
Continency in his heart, etc. not only if he be stained with the deadly Crime of
fornication, but also if either a man will take a wife, or a woman mary,
according to the sentence of the Apostle, he shall have damnation, because he
has made his first faith void.

In proof that the widows mentioned by S. Paul vowed Chastity, S. Austine
writes, In Ps. 85. de S. Virgin. c. 23. de bono viduitatis. c. 8. 9. see de
Ciu. Dei. l. 17. c. 4.
What says the Apostle of some who vowed, and performed not? Having damnation
(says he) because they have made void their first faith; what is this, They
have made void their first faith? they have vowed and not performed. And the
same he teaches most plainly in sundry other places.

In the fourth Carthage Council it was decreed that, Can. 104. Conc. Tolet. 4.
c. 55.
If any widows though of younger years etc. have vowed themselves to our Lord,
and casting away their Laical habit, have appeared in Religious habit under the
Testimony of the Bishop, and the Church, but afterward shall return to
secular marriages, according to the Apostle, they shall have damnation, because
they dared to make void their faith of Chastity, which they had vowed to our
Lord. This Canon is so disliking to Daneus, that he charge the Council and S
Austine, Primae part. alt. part, p. 1011.
with abusing manifestly the word of God; and as Osiander thinks, Cent. 5. l.
1. c. 1. p. 20.
This Canon has great errors in it. But I suppose all of Judgment will give
greater credit to this Exposition of Scripture, made by this Council and S.
Austine, then to any given by New Sectaryes.

S. Epiphanius, Haer. 61. Apostolicorum.
If she who is a widow, and dedicated to God, and afterward has married,
shall have Judgment and Condemnation, because she has cast away her first
faith; how much more the Virgin dedicated to God, and maryeth, and being wanton
against Christ, and casts away a greater faith, shall have Judgment? S.
Chrysostom, Ho. 15. in 1. Tim.
When they have vowed themselves, they will mary, having Damnation, because
they have made void their first faith. And the same exposition is given by
sundry other Tertul. l. de Mon^g. prope fin. Basil. l. de. Virginit. post med.
Hieron. l. 1. in Iouin, and in. c. 44. Ezech. Ambr. Theodor. in hunc locum.
Fathers.

The ancient Fathers did so confessedly allow of vows, as that Chemnitius
says, Exam. part. 3. p. 41.
We are not ignorant that the Fathers allowed the vows of perpetual single
life, and that they also brought them to be Obligatory. Peter Martyr thinks
De votis. p. 524.
Epiphanius with many other of the Fathers to err, in that they said, It was
sin to break such a vow, when need required, and that they badly ascribed it
to Apostolical Tradition. Calvin, Instit. l. 4. c. 13. n. 17.
They say this was observed from longest memory, that those who would dedicate
themselves wholly to our Lord, should bynd themselves with the vow of Chastity:
Truly I confess that this Custom was anciently received, but I do not grant
that this age was free from all vice. Hospinian affirms further, that, Not De
orig. Monach. fol. 102.
only Austine, but other Fathers also erred in the vowed Chastity by mutual
Consent of married Persons. So clear and confessed it is, that the Ancient
Fathers did expound the Scriptures in behalf of the lawful use of vows, and
that themselves did approve and practice the same Doctrine.

SECT. IV. That Protestants defend with Catholics the vows of Poverty,
Chastity, and the like: And that they confirm the same from the sacred
Scriptures.
BVllinger confesses that in the Old Testament, Decades in Engl. p. 380.
The Nazarites, because they should more freely attend upon God, did of their
own accord, take upon them a more strict trade of life, then the Common people
used: and so Ib p. 381.
were consecrated to the Lord, by a certain peculiar kind of living: Of whose
Vow and Profession the Numer. 6.2.3.5.9.12.21.
Scriptures make mention.

And although Aga. Rhem. Test. f. 191.
D. Fulke will not acknowledge any sacrilege in Ananias, yet Bullinger
affirms tha^, Dec. in Engl. dec. 4. 8. p. 717.
Peter accused Ananias of theft, yea and also of sacrilege. M. Hooker
maintayneth that, Eccl. Pol. l. 2. p. 103.
It was indifferent for Ananias to have sold or held his possessions until
his solemn Vow and promise unto God had strictly bound him one only way; So
confessed it is that Ananias vowed, and committed sacrilege by breaking his vow.

Calvin affirms of S. Paul's Widows, that in regard of their attendance upon
the Church, Instit. l. 4. c. 13. sec. 18.
They had undertaken the law of a perpetual unmarried lyse, and that if they
married they cast of the Vocation of God etc. and sinned. And he is otherwise
so agreeable with us, that as D. Bancroft alleges him, Survey. p. 218.
by the wife of one husband in that place, he does (as does also In 1. Tim 5.9.
p. 374.
Marloret) understand such a Widow as was never married but once: his Survey
p. 218.
Judgment (being that) there might no Widow have attained to the said Church
Office, if she had been twice married: which exposition being the same with
Catholics concerning Bigamy, is therefore misliked by Survey p. 219. Fulke ag.
Rhem. Test. in 1. Tim. 5. sec. 5. fol. 180.
Beza, Cartwright, and D. Fulke.

Chemnitius Exam. part. 3. p. 23. 38. Bohemian Confess. in the harmony. p. 544.
and other, Prot. do confess, that the said Widows made public profession
to live unmarried; Marloret says more fully of them, In 1. Tim. 5.21. pa. 375.
they will marry (says the Apostle) and truly to marry is of it self without
fault, for marriage is honorable etc. but because they did once give their
faith to Christ the spouse, and the Church, and willingly barred themselves
from marriage, hence it is etc. that their marriage does decline to the ignominy
of Christ. Another Prot. says, that Anticbristus page 148. 149.
Luther understands this first faith, of justifying faith, and not of the
faith of Chastity, it is plainly enforced etc. the Apostle speaks of the
faith, or vow of office etc. But because Paul makes it a fault, that they
would afterward mary, it is most clear that this Condition passed by vow.

With these agrees M. Alison, telling how some of Confut. of Brownisme. p. 71.
these younger widows through the lust of youth, do betake themselves to
marriage again, which, says he, though it be a matter lawful in it self, yet
it is unlawful to those, that before God and his Church have vowed the
Contrary. And thus is this place (of Paul) expounded by Theophilact, Ambrose,
Bullinger, Claudius, Guilliand, and others.

John Husse is so confident in this, that he wishes all to In 1. Cor. c. 7.
note, according to Hierome, that for such as vow Virginity, it is not only a
sin to mary* but to will to marry etc. The third impediment of Marriage is a
vow made to God, to keep Continency.

But what shall we expect from Luther? certainly no less ^hen this, tha^ D^
Ecclesiasticis and Monasticis votis. To. 6. Germ. p. 181. 216.
No man can deny that it is commanded by God* that vows be kept, as the
Scripture says, Vow y^e and pay, so that it is lawful for no man to dispute,
whether vows are to be kept. It is Gods Commandment Vow ye and p^y. This
will deceive no man but him alone who does not believe that it is commanded and
agreeable to truth. Again De 10. Praeceptis in 6. Praecepto.
It is sacrilege, when a Religious man, Priest, Nun, and all others who have
vowed Continency to God to commit fornication etc. It is Sacrilege, where not
only Chastity is defiled, but she who also was offered to God alone, is taken
away etc. But this in Priests is rather from the Institution of the Church,
then from God, but in Religious men it is most grievous, because they have of
their own accord consecrated themselves to the Lord, and withdrawn themselves
again. But this being most true which Luther here teaches, what may we think
is become of Luther, who not only through Pride and Carnality broke his own
vows, which he had made in a Religious life, but withal took away her also,
who was offered to God alone, Katherine Bore? But it seems he would have us to
do what he says, not what himself does. But howsoever, it is manifest by the
Premises, that many of the Primest Protestants have expounded the sacred
Scriptures agreably with Catholics, in proof of the lawful use of vows.

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture against the vows of Poverty, Chastity, and
the like, Answered.
PEter Martyr L. De vocis and cae^batu.
obiecteth, that vows are only mentioned in the Old Testament, not in the New:
but when there is mention made of Judicial vows, therefore they only belong to
the Jewish Ceremonies. Answ. Though the word, Vow, be not in the New Testament,
yet the thing it self, I have formerly proved from several places thereof:
Usury is mentioned, and forbidden expressly in the Old Testament, in the New
Testement it is not expressly mentioned, and yet is forbidden to Christians.

But this Peter further urges, that professing our selves Christians, we are
thereby bound to give our selves wholly to Christ, and therefore no place is left
for vows. Even as it were ridiculous for a Child to bynd himself by Bill or
Bond to obey his Father; and therefore were the Israelites forbidden to vow to
God the first borne of their cattle, because they were otherwise dew. Ans. The
Jews were wholly bound to God by reason of their Creation and delivery from
Egypt, and yet according to Prot. they might lawfully vow. Wherefore true it
is, that all we have, we have from God, who if he pleased might require it from
us again, and we bound to do what he commands; But because he leaves to us
many things free, in which according to our liberty, we may do this or that,
therefore many things are both Gods and ours; Gods, because by his gift we have
them; ours, because we may freely dispose them, so that it be not against God,
and of these we may therefore vow. And so a son may bynd himself to his
Father in those things, which are in his own power, of which sort, is to
marry or not to marry: So that if he promise to marry, when, and in what sort
his Father commands, he is bound to perform it. That of the first borne of
Cattle, makes for us, for the rest of them might be vowed to God, and yet all
are Gods guiftes.

The next Objection is taken from those textes, which affirm that good works
ought to be done freely and voluntarily, not of necessity, which vows cause:
2. Cor. 9.7.
Every one as he has determined in his heart, not of sadness, or of necessity,
for God loves a cheerful giver. And, Philem. 14.
that thy good might be not as it were of necessity, but voluntary. Answ. These
places only speak against Necessity by compulsion or coaction, whereby a man is
forced by fear, to do that which willingly he would not; but as for necessity
which arises by Precept, or vow, which a man at first does voluntarily
undergo, and afterward if he will sin, has power and liberty to break the
same, this does so well stand with the commendation and merit of a good work,
as it does rather increase then diminish the same. And this is so far from
any compulsion, that it is often done with greatest alacrity, according to
that, 1. Paral. 29.9.
The people rejoiced when they promised vows of their own accord, because
they did offer them to our Lord with all their heart. And if at any time it fall
out otherwise, the fault is not in the nature of the vow, but in the vice of
the Votary.

Thirdly, Roger^ Def of the Art. art. 32. p. 188.
are objected such places, as seem to persuade marriage to those who suffer
temptations, Ver. 2.
and therefore the vow of Continency should be rash and unlawful, seeing no
man knows how long he shall live without the said temptations: 1. Cor. 7.9.
If they do not contain themselves, let them marry, for it is better to marry,
then to be burnt: Because of Fornication let every one have his own wife: 1.
Tim. 5.14.
I will therefore the yo^ger to marry, to bring forth children. Answ. In none of
these places are those called to marriage who only are tempted, but who live
incontinently: for first the words are, because of Fornication: If they do not
contain: for your incontinecy, and the like. And this Exposition is made by
sundry Clem. Alex. l. 4. strom. init. Hieron. in Apol. pro libris conc. Iouin.
Aug. l. de S. virginit. c. 34. and de bono Coniug. c. 10.
fathers, Besides, 2. Cor. 11.7.8. Romans 7.15.16.19.23.25.
Saint Paul, Hieron. Ep. 22. ad Eustoch.
S. Hierome, and sundry others have suffered many temptations of the flesh, and
yet never married, which they had been bound unto, if the Objection were of
force: Yea seeing according to Prot. all motions of the flesh, even the most
inuoluntary are mortal sins, and none without special Privilege are free
thereof, it follows, that all without exception were bound to marry, which is
against common, and allowable practice.

Secondly, though by burning we understood not only Incontinency; but even
every Temptation, yet in none of these places objected is there found any
Command, but only a permission of Marriage, as let them mary, let them have a
wife: and so is this place understood by several Ambr. l. de viduis. Hieron.
Ep. 11. ad Agerucb. Aug l. de bono viduit. c. 8. Chrysostom. in hunc locum.
Fathers. Besides this is confirmed by the reason given by S. Paul, saying, It
is better to mary, then to be burn, for this concludes not, that marriage is
necessary, but only lawful, and better then fornication; and yet there is a
third thing better then them both, to wit, by fasting, praying, and other holy
Exercises to contain. As if one should say, he that will not fight, let him
fly, for it is better to fly, then to be slain; this man does not forbid
fighting, and ouercoming, which is better then either flying, or being slain,
but only permits flight: So also the Apostle, when he bad the married, who by
consent had contained for a time, to return again together, explicateth
himself, saying, but I say this by Indulgence, not by Commandent.

The words, Let every one have his own wife, are spoken of those (according to
S. Gregory) In l. Regum. l. 6. c. 1.
who are married already, whom, for fear of incontinency, he persuades to live
together, and this not by Command, but by Indulgence. Lastly, as he says, I
will therefore the younger to marry, so he also says, I would all men to be as
my self: therefore if the first should imply a Precept, the second also should
do the like, and so he should command contraries: he therefore wishes the one
absolutely, and permits the other, in reguard of the weakness of the younger
widows. Thirdly I answer, that whether the words objected, import Permission
or Command, yet they concern nor such as are bound with vow, but only such as
are at liberty to marry: and thus is this place understood by many Ambr. ad
virg. lap. c. 5. l. 1. in Iouin. Aug. l. 1. de Adult. coniug. c. 15. and de
bono viduit. c. 8. Greg. l. Pastor. part. 3. Admon. 28. Chrysostom. l. de Virgin.
c 39. and bo. 19. in 1. ad. Cor. Epiph. haer. 61.
Fathers.

Fourthly, are objected such places as teach, that Continency is the gift of
God, which is not given to all, and therefore that none may vow the same, seeing
that none knows whether he has, or still shall have the said gift, Mat
19.11.12.
not all take this word, but they to whom it is given; he that can take, let
him take. I 1. Cor. 7.
would all men to be as my self, but every one has a proper gift of God, one
so, and another so. Ver. 37.7.
He that has determined in his heart, being settled, not having necessity, but
having power of his own will etc. to keep his Virgin, does well. Answer.
Some guiftes of God are given to man without his own cooperation, as health,
beauty, prophecy, working of miracles, and the like, and these are not in our
power, neither can every man have them that will, and so cannot be vowed.
Others depend of Gods grace and assistance, and withal of man's freewill and
Election, as to believe, hope, love, resist temptations etc. and these are also
most truly Gods gifts, because if God by his Grace should not prevent, move,
and help us, we were not able to do any of them; and yet withal they do
depend of man's choice, and are in his power, because though God does help, yet
he does not compel, or necessitate him thereto, and in these things man is said
to have ability to do good; of which sort of gifts is Continency, and
therefore in our Power. And as they only have the gift of faith, who indeed
truly believe, which as we see, all do not, according to that, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
All men have not faith, and yet all may believe if they will when they hear
the word preached, otherwise their Infidelity were no sin: so likewise of
Continency it is said, All take not this word, but to whom it is given, and
yet all may contain, if they will, because sufficient Grace thereto is denied
to none. And as it were Childish and ridiculous to conclude, that because
faith, hope, charity, resisting of temptations etc. are the gifts of God,
therefore we ought not to believe, hope, love, or resist temptations; so though
Continency be the gift of God, yet it is absurd thereupon to infer, that
therefore it is unlawful to live a single life. And the same Exposition is
given by De bono viduit. c. 17.
S. Austine. But S. Chrysostom directly answers this, saying, I de virginit.
c. 36.
which things I have spoken, that when thou shall take that from him, 1. Cor.
7.7.
Every one has his proper gift, thou should not faint in mind, nor reason
thus with thy self; for this matter there is no need of my labor and study,
for Paul has called it a gift; for he said not so, because he would rank
Continency amongst the number of heavenly gifts, but he called it a gift for
modesty, for he would not have so differed from himself and from Christ, whose
that is, There are Eunuchs who have gelded themselves for the kingdom of
heaven; and that, He that can take, let him take. He should less agree with
himself, condemning them who when they had chosen widdowhood, remained not in
that mind, for if it be a gift, why do thou threaten them? Having damnation,
Math. 19.12.
because they have made void their first faith. For Christ never punishes
those who have not had gifts, but he always punishes those who live
dishonestly. So many ways is this great Objection easily answered.

These things observed; that the gift of Continency (Gods Grace supposed) is
ever in our power, may be proved first by such places as plainly teach, that
the same is in man's freewill. 1. Cor. 7.36.
Let him do what he will: she sins not if she marry. Mat. 19.12.
There are Eunuchs who have gelded themselves. 1. Cor. 7.25.
Concerning Virgins a Commandment etc. I have not, but I give Counsel. Mat.
19.12.
He that can take, let him take: the two first places expressly teach, that it
is in man's will, and power to be Continent; the two later contain an
exhortation to the same. Now who of wisdom will exhort men to that which is
impossible? And in this sense are these places expounded by many Tertul. de
Monog. prope fin. Orig. and Hieron. in illud, Non omnes capiunt. Nazianz. orat.
31. Ambr. l. 3. de virg. and l. de viduts. Aug. in Ps. 137.
Fathers: neither does Peter Martyr satisfy, by answering that these
exhortations are directed to those only, who have the gift of God, for such
(according to In Math. 19.
Bucer) cannot but contain: if therefore those who have not the gift, cannot
contain, and those who have it, cannot but contain, to whom does Christ, and
the Apostle direct their Exhortations?

Secondly, if all cannot contain that will, then many may lawfully commit
fornication; for if the husband or wife be long languishing, of if he be long
detayned, by reason of Captivity, bannishment, or tedious iourneys upon
traffic or merchandise, then the party tempted, not being in their power
(according to Prot.) to contain, might lawfully commit Adultery.

But in these Cases Synop. Controu. 6. 9. 4. p. 250. Calu. Harm. in Mat. 19.9.
Luther sermon. de Matrimonio.
Willet confesses, that God does give possibility and grace to contain,
because (as Cont. Duraeum l. 4. p. 341. 342.
Whitaker answers) these things are necessarily imposed upon us, and not
voluntarily, or by our own default; but the merchants absence upon adventure
is not enforced, but voluntary, as also the adulterous wife, who through her
own offense, is by her husband lawfully dismissed, and yet she may not marry
again, Mat. 5.33.
for he that marryeth her (so) dismissed, commits Adultery: as also the
offendour against the state, who is many years detained in prison, and his
wife not suffered to converse with him; in these cases the parties voluntary
offenses, are the very causes of the Necessity imposed upon them. And so Willet
and Whitaker have said nothing to the purpose.

To Conclude then this answer, where it is said, All take not this word, it is
not meant, that all are not capable thereof, or have it not in their power, for
then in vain should our Savior have exhorted all hereunto, saying, he that
can take, let him take; but as when it is said, Mat. 1^.9.
He that has ears to hear, let him hear, it is not meant, that all have not
ears, but all are admonished thereby, to use that faculty of hearing, which
they have. In the last place objected, Necessity, does not signify necessity of
Marriage, for want of the gift of Continency, but only extrinsecall necessity
of the Father, either because his daughter will not live single, or because
himself being a Bondsman, is compelled by his master to marry her away.

Fifthly, many object, that if all should contain, the world would perish. But
S. Hierome L. 1. in Iouin. Aug. de bono Coniugali. c. 10.
and S. Austine answer, that there is no danger thereof, seeing there will
always be more imperfect, then perfect. Yea S. Austine thinks, that though
the world should perish thereby, yet it were good for all to contain. His
words are these Ib. and l. de bono viduit. c. 2^.
I have known some who murmur (doubtless our Prot. Predecessors) what, say
they, if all would abstain from generation, how should mankind subsist? I
would to God all would this only in Chastity from a pure heart, and good
Conscience, and faith unfeigned; much sooner would the City of God be filled,
and the end of the world would be haestened. What else does it appear that the
Apostle does exhort, where he says, when he spoke thereof, I would have all to
be as my self? or in another place, 1. Cor. 7.29.
This therefore I say Brethren, the time is short, it remains that they also
which have wives, be as though they had not etc. For the figure of this world
passes away: But I would have you to be without carefulnes. So clearly Saint
Austine answers this Objection. But if in that extremity of the worlds
perishing, men were bound to return to marriage, the former vow were no let,
seeing that vows bynd not, when Gods law prescribes otherwise, as in this
Case it would.

Sixthly, Propension to Generation is natural and good, as being when nature
was perfect and continuing in all living Creatures, wherefore to hinder the same
altogether by vow of single life, is sinful, seeing this is to resist nature,
and God himself who ordained nature. Answ. The natural inclination of man is
twofold; one, to a thing absolutely, and as it is considered in it self;
another, as it is considered with all Circumstances. If we consider death,
sickness, and the like, as they are in themselves, we dislike and abhor them;
but if we consider them as matter of patience, the way to heaven, and occasion
to glorify God, we love and desire them. Now because this later propension only
is truly and properly humane, as being according to true judgment and reason,
therefore to do against this, is sin: But single life is only against the
former propension, and agreeable with the latter, and therefore there is no
offense to do against the former.

Many Prot. object those words of S. Paul, Heb. 13.4.
Marriage honorable in all; therefore the vow of single life is unlawful. Answ.
It is honorable in all such as may lawfully marry, and are lawfully married;
not in brother and sister, nor in persons, that have vowed the contrary, to
whom the same Apostle says, 1. Tim. 5.11.
it is damnable. Hereof also says very well an ancient writer, De fide ad
Petrum. c. 3. apud Aug. in fine.
The Apostle says, Marriage honorable in all, and the bed undefiled; And
therefore the servants of God, in that they are not married, think not the good
of Marriage to be a fault, but yet they doubt not perpetual Continency to be
better then good Marriage, specially in this time, when it is said of
Continency, He that can take, let him take. But to see how Prot. corrupt this
place, first, they insert the verb, is, which is not in the Original.
Secondly they make it of the Indicative Mood, where it ought rather to be the
Imperative, Let Marriage be honorable, that so the speech may be an
Exhortation, or Commandment to those that be, or will be married, to use
themselves in that state in all fidelity, and conjugal Continency. And this is
evident by other parts and circumstances of the place, both before and after,
all which are Exhortations according to the Protestant Translations: this only
being in the mids, and as indifferent to be an Exhortation, as the rest (by
their own Confession) they restrain of purpose. Thirdly, they Engl. Bible of
1577.
translate, in all, among all men, whereas they cannot tell either by the Greek
or Latin, that in omnibus, in all, should be the Masculine gender, rather then
the Newter (as not only Erasmus, but the Greek Doctors See S. Chrysostom. and
Theophilact. in hunc locum. Oecum^nius in Collect.
also take it) to signi^y that Marriage should be honorably kept in all
respects, for there may be many abuses in Wedlock. Fourthly, Beza In Nouo
Testam. Graeco. Lat. an. 1565.
instead of, in omnibus, in all, shameth not to translate, inter quosuis,
amongst every one, with a Marginall interpretation to signify all Orders,
Conditions, States, and qualities of men. This shamles and impious corrupting
of the word of God, does evidently convince, that the Textes of Scripture taken
and understood in that true sense, which the words of themselves do import, do
directly make against all such Errors, as these Prot. Corrupters do obstinatly
maintain.

CHAP. XIII. The true State of the Question, Concerning the Marriage of
Priests.
Whether the Vow of Chastity be so annexed to holy Orders, that after
Ordination, they who are consecrated, can neither marry, nor use their wives
formerly married. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
I DO not here dispute of Prot. Bishops and Ministers, who being merely lay
men, and deuoyd of all sacred Ordination, no man doubts but that they may
lawfully marry, and enjoy their wives, and all their Neighbors will profess
it to be expedient: But the Question here is, only of Catholic Bishops and
Priests duly consecrated. Concerning whom, in the first Council of Nice, is
was decreed that, Can. 4: Arab.
Bishops do not dwell with women etc. And, the same is decreed of every single
Priest, and of Deacons unmarried: only after there are excepted, old women, the
Mother, Sister, Aunt, and Grandmother.

But there is no mention or allowance for a wife, which would have been in the
first place, if it had been approved. In the Council of Neocaesarea it is
defined, that, Can. 1.
If a Priest shall marry, he shall be deposed from Order: but if he shall commit
fornication or Adultery, let him be cast out of the Church, and do Penance
amongst the Laity. In the second Council of Carthage, Cap. ^.
By all the Bishops it is said, It pleases all, that Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, or such as touch the Sacraments, keepers of Chastity, shall abstain
even from wives. And it gives this good reason thereof, that what the Apostles
have taught, and Antiquity it self has observed, we also may keep. And the
same is defined by sundry other Conc. Elibertin. c. 33. Conc. Arelat. 2. c. 2.
Conc. Latera. Sess. 9. Reformationes Curiae etc.
Councels: and is the Bellar. de Clericis. l. 1. c. 19. Rhem. Test. in 8 14.
general Doctrine and practice of the present Catholic Church.

Points Disputable.
Some Mayor in 4. Did. 24. q. ^.
think that the vow of Chastity made by Priests, is ordained by Gods Law, and
therefore indispensable: but S. Tho. in 1. 2. q. 88 art. 11.
others more truly teach, that it is commanded only by Decree of the Church,
and therefore is dispensable.

Protestants untruths.
Melancthon In Confess. August. art. 23.
auerreth that the first law imposed upon Clergy men for single life, was in
Germany, some 400. years ago: And that no such law is to be found in any
Council, but was only brought in by the Pope, against the mind of the
Counsels. But all this is disproued by the Counsels here before cyted.

Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 12.. 51.
avouches that all the Ancient Fathers allowed Marriage in Bishops: But this to
be false, will be yet further showed in the next 3. Section following. Rogers
falsely affirms us to teach that, Def. of the Articl. art. 28 p. 187.
None may be a Priest though he will vow a single life, if he have been a
married man: for this he cites the Rhemists in 1. Tim. 3.2. But there is not
any such thing to be found: and the falsehood hereof is convinced, by the
frequent practice to the contrary, in the Catholic Church.

The English Church decrees that, Article 32.
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are not commanded by Gods Law, either to vow
the state of single life, or to abstain from Marriage. Therefore it is lawful
also for them, as for all other Christian men, to marry at their own
discretion, as they shall Judge the same to serve better for Godliness. And the
same is taught See the Harm. of Conf. p. 348. etc.
generally by all Protestants.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
S. Hierome writing against Vigilantius for his impugning the single life of
Priests, relates the general practice of the Church of those times, saying,
Cont. Vigilant. c. 1.
What do the Churches of the East, of Egypt, and of the Sea Apostolic who
take Clergy men either such as are Virgins, or Continent, or if they have wives
yet cease to be as husbands? D. Fulke grants that Iouinian was condemned for,
that, Answ. to a Counterf. Cath. p. 4^. See Hier. l. 1. Cont. Iouin. c 14. and
19. and Apol. ad Pamach. c. 8. Epiph. haer. 59.
He taught that such as could not contain, though they had vowed virginity,
should nevertheless be married. And Prot. Appeal. p. 604.
D. Morton acknowledges that Vigilantius and Iouinian are condemned by S.
Hierome for impugning the unmarried life of Priests. And so also was Simon Magus
by S. Irenaeus. L. 1. c. 20.
And whereas Bellarmine affirmed, that Vigilantius taught, that Ecclesiastical
persons ought to be married, Whitaker answers, Controu. 2. q. 5 c. 7. p. 516.
If Vigilantius meant the lawful marriage of Pastors, in that he thought
rightly. So that the Ancient heretics Vigilantius and Iouinian, condemned by
S. Hierome and S. Austine, are here defended, and followed by our Carnal
Ministers.

Protestants Errors.
Luther thinks, Tom. 2. de votis fol. 271.
it is impossible, that God approve the vow of Continency, and not rather
detest it. Tom. 5. sermon de matrim. fol. 119.
Increase and mult^ply is not a Precept, but more then a Precept. Swinglius
avouches that, Tom. 1. in Paraenesi ad Heluetos. fol. 114.
The sacred Scripture is so far from prohibiting the Ministers of the Church
the use of holy Marriage, as that it does often command the same. Yea says
Bullinger, In. 1. Tim. 3. page 438.
A Bishop is the Minister of Gods word: but this man ought to be the husband of
one wife, even because he is a Bishop. So that such Prot. Bishops and
Ministers, as do not marry, do contrary to the command given by the Scripture,
as these Prot. dream.

SECT. II. It is gathered from the Scriptures, that the vow of Chastity is
rightly annexed to holy Orders.
THe vow of Chastity in Priests not being a Divine Precept expressed in
Scripture, but an Apostolical Tradition and law of the Church, it cannot be
expected, that clear Texts of Scripture should be produced for it, yet from
thence may be deduced many strong probabilities: as first that, in the time of
the Old Testament, Continency from wives was required, when the husbands were
to be busied in any holy Office. Those that were to eat the Paschall lamb,
were commanded to do the same with their Exodus 12.11.
loins girded, that is, according to S. Gregory, Greg. bo. 22. super Euang.
observing Continency. When the People of Israel were to receive the law from
God, Moses commanded, that they should, Exo. 19.15.
be ready against the third day, and not come near (their) Wives. Achimelech
the Priest, 1. Reg. 21.4.5.
would not give the holy bread to David, and his company, except they had
contained some time from women; much more then ought Priests now to contain
from wives, seeing they consecrate, receive, and give to others, the body of
Christ, which was prefigured in that holy bread.

To these and sundry other such places, Calu. Instit. l. 4 c. 12.. 25.
Calvin answers, that the Leuiticall Priests, being types and figures of
Christ, were to represent his Excellency with what purity and sanctity they
could, but now by Christ's coming, those figures and shadows are ceased. But
this helps nothing, for as those Priests did bear the figure of Christ to
come, so Christian Priests represent him as comen, and therefore the like and
greater purity is required in them. But indeed the chief reason why the
Leuitical Priests were to abstain from their wives, was not because they were
the figure of Christ, but because they ministered unto God, for it is said, Ex.
19.21.
The Priests that come to the Lord, let them be sanctified, least he strike
them. David also was always the figure of Christ, and yet he was only
commanded to abstain from his wife, when he was to eat the hallowed bread.

In the New Testament S. Paul teaches, that a Bishop must be given Ep. ad Tit.
c 1. 8.
to Hospitality, gentle, sober, just, holy, Continent: he says to S. Timothy,
2. Ep. 2.3.4.
Labor thou as a good soldiar of Christ Jesus: no man being a soldiar to God,
in tangleth himself with secular businesses, but the state of marriage
necessarily causes many secular businesses and cares. He counsayleth the
married, 1. Cor. 7.^.
by consent to contain for a time, that they may give themselves to prayer.
Wherefore Clergy men ought still to contain, seeing daily they ought to
persist in prayer.

SECT. III. The Fathers do gather from the Scriptures, that the Vow of Chastity
is rightly annexed to holy Orders.
IN the second Carthage Council it is thus decreed, Can. 2.
It pleases us all, that Bishops, Priests, Deacons, or those who handle the
Sacraments, keepers of Chastity, shall abstain themselves even from wives,
that what the Apostles have taught, and antiquity it self has observed, we
also may keep. In Numer. ho. 23. Epiph. haer. 59. Ambr. in. 1. Tim. c. 3.
If the prayer of the just (says Origin) be offered as incense in the sight of
our Lord etc. And the Apostle says to them who are married, 1. Cor. 7.5.
Defraud not one another, except perhaps by consent for a time, that you may
give your self to prayer; it is certain that the daily Sacrifice is hindered
by them who serve the necessities of marriage; whereupon it seems to me, that
he only is to offer the daily Sacrifice, who has vowed himself to daily and
perpetual Chastity.

Agreably heerto says S. Hierome, L. 1. cont. Iouin. c. 19.
If a lay man etc. cannot pray unless he want the duty of marriage; a Priest
must always pray, who always must offer sacrifice for the people. If he must
always pray therefore he must always want marriage: for in the Old law they who
offered hosts for the people, not only were not in their own howses, but were
purified for a time, separated from their wives, and they did not drink wine
and sicer, which provoke lust. Married men are chosen to be Priests, because
there are not so many Virgins, as are necessary to be Priests. Again, Apol.
ad Pamach. c. 3.
If married men take it ill, let them not be angry at me, but at the holy
Scriptures, yea at Bishopes, Priests, and Deacons, and at all the Priestly and
Leuiticall Quyre, who know they cannot offer Sacrifice, if they serve the act
of Marriage. And, Ad. c. 11 ad Titum.
If the Laity be commanded, that for prayer they abstain from the company of
their wives, what is to be thought of a Bishop, who daily is to offer unspotted
Sacrifices to God for his own, and the peoples sins? Let us read the books
of kings, and we shall find, that the Priest Achimelech would not give to
David and his servants the bread of Proposition, until he had demanded whether
they were pure from women, not only strangers, but their own wives. And
unless he had heard, that for two days they had forborne the act of Marriage,
he would not have given them the bread, which formerly he had denied. There is
so great difference between the bread of Proposition, and the body of Christ,
as between a shadow and a body, between an Image and the truth, between the
patterns of things to come, and the things themselves which are prefigured by
those Patterns. And L. 1. cont. Iouin. c. 14.
he proves, that the Apostles after they were called to follow Christ, had no
more carnal company of their wives, by those words of our Savior, Mat. 19.29.
He that has left wife etc. But the Fathers Doctrine and practice, were so
clear in behalf of the unmarried life of Priests, that Jewel says, Defense
of the Apology. p. 195.
Here I grant M. Harding is like to find some good advantage, as having
undoubtedly a great number of holy Fathers on his side. And Bucer acknowledges
that, Gratulatio ad Angl. p. 35.
The Church of the East, Egypt, and the Sea Apostolic were accustomed in S.
Hieromes time, not to take for Priests, but either such as were not married, or
ceased to be, by abstayning from their wives. The Council of Nice, which
Whitguift calls, that notable and famous Council of Nice, and which is of
all learned and wise men reverenced, esteemed, and embraced next unto the
Scriptures themselves, did (as Cartwright acknowledges) teach that, In his
second Reply. part. 1. p. 483.
Unto those that were chosen to the Ministry unmarried, it was not lawful to
take any wife afterward etc. And, Paphnutius shows, that not only this was
before the Council, but was an ancient Tradition of the Church, in which both
himself, and the rest of the Council rested. So confessedly are the Ancient
Councils and Fathers, against the Marriage of Priests.

SECT. IV. That Protestants teach the Vow of Chastity to be righly annexed to
holy Orders.
THe allowance of wives to the Clergy, is a Doctrine so pleasing and agreeable
to the Prot. Ministry, as that little can be expected to be said by any of them
against the use thereof. I find that the Church in The book of the 6.
Articles, set forth in the time of K. Henry the eight.
K. Henry the eight his time (which Fulke against Heskins. p. 564. sec. 80. 82.
Protestants acknowledge for a true Church) and also the now Waldenses do both
of them mantaine, and defend the unmarried life of Priests: the Waldenses
(says De Ecclesia. p. 150. 224. 226.
Morge^sterne) do enforce their Ministers of the word to single life: They deny
(says Confil. Theol. part. 2. p. 152.
Melancthon) marriage to their Priests.

It is likewise confessed that, Harmony of Conf. and the observation thereto
annexed upon the Confess. of Behemia* obseru. 4.
For the most part it is used in the Churches of Bohemia, that a single man
should be taken into the Ecclesiastical Ministry; whereof also says
Lascitius, De Russorum etc Relig. pa. 157.
All the Ministers for the most part in Bohemia and Morauia do live unmarried
most holily.

John Husse teaches that, In. 1. Cor. c. 7.
Order is the seventh impediment of Marriage, because a Clergy man in greater
Orders, ought not to marry, because he has made a vow. Again, Sermon. de pace.
Clergy men are greatly bound above the Common people to keep Chastity, both by
reason of Divine Precept, and by reason of their proper Vow, and by reason of
the most holy Ministry, and by reason of the profitable Example. All these
reasons notwithstanding, I do not find amongst all the brood that are come from
Luther, any one to allow the Vow of Chastity, to be annexed to the Clergy. Yea
that which deserves our observation is, that whereas through this whole book I
do confirm every Point of our Catholic Doctrine, even by the Testimonies and
Grants of the learned Prot. themselves, yet in this of obliging the Clergy to
a single Chaste life, they especially here of England do all forsake me. So
pleasant is Wedlock to our fleshly Ministers.

SECT. V. Objections from Scriptures against the Vow of Chastity in Priests,
answered.
MOst Prot. do urge that S. Paul foretells 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3.
that in ^he last times, certain shall depart from the faith, attending to
spiri^s of Error, and doctrines of Devils etc. forbidding to marry etc. Answ.
L. 1. in Iouin. Aug. l. 30. cont. Faust. c. 4. 6. Ambr. and Chrysostom. in hunc
locum. Fulgent. de fide. c. 3.
S. Hierome, S. Austine, S. Ambrose, and other Fathers, do understand this of
those who absolutely forbid Marriage in all men, as being of its own nature
evil; of which sort were Tacianus, Marcion, and Manichaeus. He forbids
(says S. Austine) L. 30. cont. Faust. c. 6.
to marry, who says that it is evil, not he who prefers before this good,
another thing better. Whereas Catholics think Marriage to be a holy
Sacrament, and compel none absolutely to Continency, but only for just
respects require that Condition in them, who of their own accords desire to
take holy Orders: even as the Church does not prohibit temporal Judges, or the
office of a tormenter or Executioner, and yet those Offices she will not suffer
Ecclesiastical men to execute. Some reply, that the foresaid Heretics are to
come in the last times, and therefore it cannot be verifyed in Tatian, Marcion,
and Manichaeu: but by last times is understood the last whole age, from Christ
until the end of the world; for the Apostle speaking of himself, and others
of his time says, that upon them 1. Cor. 10.10.
the ends of the world are come: and S. John speaking of his own time, says,
1. Ep. 2.18.
Little Children it is the last hour: And though amongst the Manichees many did
marry, yet (as L. 30. cont. Faust. c. 6.
S. Austine testifyeth) this was not because they thougt it lawful, but
because they would not be debarred thereof.

Secondly it is objected by M. Rogers, Rogers Def. of the Art. art. 32. p. 186.
that S. Paul requires in a Bishop, that he be 1. Tim. 3.2.
the husband of one wife. Answer. If this proves any thing for Protestants,
it proves that every Bishop ought to have a wife, and consequently if they
have not (as many of their own Superintendants are wanting) they do not as
Saint Paul prescribes. Besides in the same verse he teaches, that a Bishop
must be chaste, the true meaning then is, that he ought not to have been twice
married; even as in the like phrase, and in the same Epistle, he says, 1. Tim.
5.9.
Let a widow be chosen etc. which has been the wife of one husband: Whereby it
is plain, that the former place cannot be understood, as Calvin In. 1. Tim. c.
3. and in c. 1. ad Tit. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. Col. 451.
and others would enforce, to wit, that S. Paul only counsaileth or commands,
that a Bishop shall not have many wives at once, for there was no reason that
he should command, that a Widow should be chosen who had but one husband at
once, seeing in no time or place was it ever used, that one woman at the same
time should be wife to many husbands. Besides in the time of S. Paul, it was
not usual amongst the Gentiles or Jews, and much less amongst Christians,
for one man to have many wives at once, therefore needless had it been to have
prohibited holy Bishops the same. As for the Gentiles in the Roman Empire,
wherewith the whole world was as then governed, Polygamy was infamous, and
prohibited by many laws, ff. de his qui nota. infam. l. 1. and e. de incest.
nup. L. neminem. and ad L. Iuliam. de Aduet. L. Eum qui.
which though they were enacted after the Apostles time, yet do they show the
prohibition thereof, to have been much more Ancient. And as for the Jews and
Christians, we see that when mention is made upon any occasion in the New
Testament Mat. 5.33. and 19.3.29. Luc. 14.26. 1. Cor. 7.2.27. Ephesians. 5.28.31.33.
of wife, the same is done in the singular number: and we may well think, that
if as then it had been lawful, that Zacharias, and others who had their wives
barraine, would have married others, which yet neither he, nor other private man
did; though K. Herod peradventure and some other great Princes would sometimes
be careless thereof. This understanding of this place, to wit, that he should not
be chosen Bishop who had been twice married is given by S. Austine, Aug. l. de
bono Coniug. c. 28. Hieron. in c. 1. ad Titu^m. Ambr. l. 10. op. 82. Tertul. l.
1. ad vxorem. Epiphan. haer. 39. Chrysostom. ho. 2. in Ep. ad Tit.
S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, and sundry other Fathers.

But S. Chrysostom answers directly to this place, saying, Hom. 2. in Job.
Paul the Apostle when he went to the Gentiles, did not impose upon them the
greatest weight of virtue; but willing to place Pastors in the world which was
replenished with Adulteries and fornications: and because virtues were rarely
found, ordaining Bishops he said to Titus Ordain Tit. 1.5.
Bishopes, as I have also appointed thee etc. the husband of one wife not so,
that now this be observed in the Church, for a Priest ought to be adorned with
all Chastity; but because that to those who lived in fornication, it was a
great thing, therefore he sa^d, Ordain Bishops etc. the husband of one wife not
that he made this a law but that he pardoned their Error or infirmity.

Thirdly it is objected that, Instit. l. 4 c. 19.. 27. Rogers Def. of the Art.
art. 32. p. 188.
Marriage is honorable in all. Ergo in Priests. Answer. By the like reason
might be proved, that marriages of kinsfolks in the first and second degree,
and of Children without consent or their Parents, is honorable and lawful,
which yet Calvin denies. The meaning therefore is, that it is honorable in all
lawfully joined together, whether they be old or young, noble or base, Greeks
or Hebrews etc. And thus is it expounded by In hunc locum.
Theophilact. Also it is honorable in all things which belong to Marriage, as
in that it is a Sacrament, in that thereby they mutually give their faith, in
regard of their issue.

Lastly, this place makes as much against those who have the gift of
Continency, as against Priests, seeing such, according to Protestants, are
bound to contain. But S. Austines answer will peradventure better satisfy, who
says, Quaestionibus vet. ac. Nou. Test. q. 127. fin.
But perhaps it will be said, if it be lawful and good to marry, why it is not
lawful for Priests to have wives? To this he presently answers, who knows
not that every thing has its order; for there is something which is not
altogether generally lawful, to all, and there is something which is lawful
to some, and not to others: and which is sometimes lawful, and sometimes not.
It is never lawful for any man to commit fornication; but it is lawful to
bargayne somtymes and sometimes not; for before a man be of the Clergy, he may
lawfully bargain, but after not. It is lawful sometimes for a Christian to
company with his wife, sometimes not. Upon days of Procession sometimes it is
not lawful, because abstinence must be even from lawful things, that what is
desired may more easily be obtained etc. Is every thing Lawful before an
Emperor, which is lawful before others? how much more in matters concerning
God? Hereby it is, that the Bishop ought to be purer then others, for he
seems to bear his person, for he is his Vicar, that what is lawful for
others, may not be lawful for him; because he must daily supply the place of
Christ, either praying for the people, or offering, or baptizing. And
generation is not only unlawful to him, but also to his Ministry, because he
ought to be purer, seeing the things which he ministers are holy. So plainly
is this Objection answered by S. Austine.

Fourthly, is Rogers Def. of the Art. art. 32. p. 186.
objected that the Apostles themselves had wives, and that they carried them
about with them when they peached, 1. Cor. 9.5.
Have we not power (says S. Paul) to lead about a woman a Sister, as also the
rest of the Apostles? etc. And, Philip. 4.3.
I beseech thee my sincere companion: in both which places Prot. dream of
wives. Answ. But I will refer them to L. 1. cont. Iouin. c. 14.
S. Hierome, answering herein their forefather Iouinian in these words: Peter,
and the rest of the Apostles, that I may grant him for the present, out of our
abundance, had wives; but such as they took when they knew not the Gospel:
who afterward taken to be Apostles, they relinquish the Office of Marriage.
For when Peter in the person of the Apostles, said to our Lord, Behold we have
left all, and followed thee? Our Lord answers him: Amen, I say to you, that
there is no man who shall leave house, or Parents, or Brethren, or wife, for
the kingdom of heaven, who shall not receive much more in this world, and in
the world to come life everlasting. But if he shall object that unto us (as
Prot. do) to prove that all the Apostles had wives, Have we not power to carry
about women or wives (because (...) with the Grecians signifies both) as the
rest of the Apostles and Peter? let him join that which is in the Greek
books. Have we not power to carry about sisters, women, or wives? Whereby it
appears that he speaks of other holy women, who according to the custom of
the Jews, did minister to their Masters of their own substance, as we read,
they did to our Lord himself. And the order of the words does signify this.
Have we not power to eat and drink; or to carry about sisters women? where
etc. it is plain, wives ought not to be understood etc. or if we will by
(...), understand wives, not women, that which is added, sisters, takes away
wives, and shows that they were allied in spirit, not wives. Although,
excepting Peter the Apostle, it is not plainly recorded of the other Apostles
that they had wives. And seeing it is written of one, and nothing said of the
other, we ought to understand that they were without wives, of whom the
Scripture signifies no such thing. Thus far S. Hierome.

Add yet heerunto, that in the word (...) (as De opere Monachorum. c. 4.
S. Austine notes) according as the Apostle has put it down with all
circumstances, there it no ambiguity, for that Saint Paul had no wife, himself
witnesses, saying, 1. Cor. 7.8.
I say to the unmarried and widows, it is good for them if they so abide,
even as I also; but if they do not contain, let them marry. And the same is
the consent of Chrysostom. de virgin. c. 34 Hieron. Ep. 22. ad Eustoch. c. 8.
Hilar. in Psalm. 127. Aug. l. de Gra. and lib. Arb. c. 4. cir. med. Epiph. baer.
58. Valefiorum. Ambro. in 1. Cor. c. 7. Tertul. l. ad vxorem. Chrysostom. and
Theodor. in c. 4. ad Philip.
Antiquity. Besides the word (...) of it self, (as Annot. in Mat. 5.28. and 1.
Cor. 7.1.
Beza confesses) does rather signify a woman, then a wife, and therefore he
reprehendeh Erasmus for translating, It is good for a man not to touch a wife,
because (says Beza) there is no circumstance annexed, why it should so
signify; Wherefore much more when the circumstance (as S. Austine says) makes
it certain, that so it does not signify. But let us hear S. Austines own
words, Lib. de opere Monachorum. c. 4.
Faithful women having earthly substance, went with them, and ministered of
their goods, that they might not be in neeed of any thing which belongs to
the necessities of this life; which blessed Paul shows was lawful to him,
even as the other Apostles did; but afterward he relates that he would not
use that power. Some not understanding this (let our Protestant Translatours
and Interpreters attend) do interpret not a woman a Sister, but a wife, whereas
he said, 1. Cor. 9.5.
Have not we power to carry about a woman a Sister; The ambiguity of the Greek
word (...) deceived the^, in that, wife and woman by the same word in greek is
signified, although the Apostle has so placed it, that they ought not to have
been deceived: for he neither speaks only of a woman, but a woman Sister, nor
of marrying, but of carrying about. But this ambiguity has not deceived other
Interpreters, expounding a woman, not a wife: so particularly does S. Austine
satisfy this common Objection.

Lastly, note, that whereas amongst all the Fathers, only Lib. 3. Strom.
Clemens Alexandrinus understands the forsaid places of wives, yet he adds,
that the Apostles lived not with them, as with wives in the state of Marriage:
yea Lib. ^. c. 24.
Eusebius thinks, that he wrote the same (...), by way of Contention or
disputation, whilst he wrote against them that impugned marriage: so that in
the true sense, it is spoken of holy women, who followed the Apostles, and
ministered unto them of their goods.

In like sort, whereas in the later place, Protestants translate for a
faithful Companion, a faithful yoak-fellow, that thereby cannot be understood
S. Paul's wife, besides what has been said it is plain, in that faithful,
germane, (...), is the Masculine gender, and so translated by Calvin and Beza:
thereby therefore is meant, some man who was fellow with S. Paul in preaching of
the Gospel. Lastly, it is so certain, that S. Paul was not married, that
Calvin commenting upon these words, I say to the unmarried and Widows, it is
good for them, if they so abide, even as I also, affirms thus plainly, In. 1.
Cor. 7.8.
This place shows the Apostle then to have been single. For whereas Erasmus
argues that he was married, because amongst married men he makes mention of
himself, it is tryfling and weak, because it might by the same reason be
gathered, that he was a widdower, because amongst widdowers he speaks of
himself. But the words sound, that then he was not married. Neither do I
admit that Conjecture, that he left his wife somewhere, and of his own accord
debarred himself of the use of the Marrriage-bed. So tryfling and weak are
these Objections, and so clearly answered by Scriptures, Fathers, and
Protestants.

CHAP. XIV. The true State of the Question, Concerning Christ his descending
into Hell.
Whether Christ our Savior truly descended in soul into Hell; And there
redeemed those who were in Abraham's bosom, or Limbus; Or that by Hell, should
only be understood his Grave; Or his suffering, the pains of Hell. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
WHAT the Church of Christ belieueth concerning this Article of our faith, will
clearly appear by her holy Decrees, amongst which that of the ancient Council
of Ariminum was this. Apud Athanasium de Synodo Arimin.
We believe the son of God according to the will of his Father, to have been
Crucified and dyed, and to have descended to hell, and there to have performed
what belonged to his charge whom the Porters of Hell beholding were afraid, and
that the third day he rose from hell, and conuersed with his Disciples. The
Council of Toledo further defyneth, that, Conc. Tolet. 4. c. 1.
He descended to hell that he might take out from thence the Saints that there
were kept, and the power of death overcome, he rise again. This it the faith
of the Catholic Church, this Confession we keep and hold. According to the
Council of Laterane, Cap. 1.
The only begotten son of God etc. suffered upon the wood of the Cross and
dyed, he descended to hell, etc But he descended in Soul, he rose in flesh,
ascended alike in both. And it is the constant faith of all Bellar. de Christi
anima. l. 4. c. 12. etc. Rhem. Test. in Luc. 16, 22. and in. 1. Pet. 3.19.
Catholics, that Christ in soul truly descended into hell, and delivered the
holy Fathers that were in Limbus, or Abraham's bosom; and that by Hell is not
understood his grave, or his suffering any pains of Hell, which were most
impious to imagine; but a place under the ground, where the said Fathers were
reserved until Christ's Coming.

Points Disputable.
Some S. Tho. 3. part. q. 52. art. 2.
teach that Christ descended by real presence only to Limbus Patrum, and by
effect to all places of hell. Others Bellar. de Christo. l. 4. c. 16.
think that his soul truly descended to all places of Hell.

Some Caiet. in Act c. 2. S. Tho. 3. part. q. 52. art. 13.
affirm, the dolours of death to have continued with Christ until his
resurrection, by reason of the penalties, which by death were left, as the
separation of the soul, the being thereof in a place unworthy of it, and the
being of the body in the Grave. Others Bonau. 3. Did. 22. q. 4.
better teach, that Christ's soul, whilst it was in hell, was without all
pain, the same ceasing with his death. Some S. Tho. 3. p. q. 52. art. 8.
teach that Christ descending, delivered only such souls out of Purgatory, as
had made due satisfaction, or that had peculiar Devotion to the future Passion
of Christ. Others S. Bonau. 3. Did. 22. q. 5. Tho. Argent. eadem. Did. q.
vnica art. 4. Gab. eadem Did. q. vnica art. 3. dub. 3.
affirm that he delivered from pain all the just and Elect of God, and
consequently those that were in Purgatory.

Protestant Doctrine.
Protestants in this Article of faith are much divided amongst themselves. For
some Bucer in c. 27. Mat. Beza in ^. 2. Act.
teach, that Christ only descended to his grave, and that by hell is understood
his Grave. Others by Hell understand, that he suffered the pains of the
Damned. thus Calvin: Instit. l. 2. c. 16.. ^. and ad. c. 30. Job. and in
Catech. edit. 1562.
Teaching further, that to use his words, This fable of Limbus Patrum, for the
delivery of whom they say Christ descended, although it have great authors, yet
it is nothing but a fable. Whitakers faith concerning this Article of our Creed
is this, Cont. Dur. l. 9. sec. 27.
I do believe that the soul of Christ loosed from the body, not only not to
have descended to Hell, but forthwith to have been taken into heaven. And the
like is taught by sundry other Prot. Perkins in his Exposition of the Creed.
To. 1. Col. 678. Polanus in Disput. periodo 2. disp. 236
some whereof Apud Aret. in loc. part. 1. fol. 72.
do plainly say, that this sentence, or (Article) is to be taken out of the
Creed. D. Hill a Prot. wrote a book in defense of this Article according to
our Catholic understanding thereof, in which he cites for his opinion
Aretius, Apinus, M. Nowel, and Melancthon. M. Carlisle wrote another book
directly to the contrary, cyting sundry Prot. in his behalf. So that the
Reformed Church is yet to determine what is to be believed concerning this
Article.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
Origin Hieron. Ep. ad Auitum.
taught that Hell was nothing but the horror of Conscience. And the same is
taught by Just. l. 3. c. vlt.
Calvin.

Protestant Errors.
Brentius In Catechismo Anni 1551.
understands, by descending into hell, to be utterly Destroyed. Calvin, Inst.
l. 2. c. 16.. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. in Ha^mon. Euang. ad c. 27. Math.
that Christ suffered the pains of the damned souls. And others profess,
that, L. Concordiae. p. 750.
they simply believe, that the whole person God and Man after Burial descended
into Hell. But if Christ Man descended into Hell, then he descended alive not
dead, for he that is dead is not man, seeing every man by death cease to be
man. And if a living man he descended, then not only his soul, but likewise
his flesh descended, for the soul alone cannot be said to be man. Now if the
soul and flesh descended, what remained in the Grave?

M. Rogers acknowledges certain Prot. to teach, that, Def of the Art. art. 3.
p. 16.
Christ alive upon the Cross humbled himself vsque ad Inferni tremenda
tormenta even unto the dreadful torments of Hell: endured for a time those
torments which the Reprobate shall everlastingly suffer in hell: even despayred
of Gods mercy, fynding God at this time, non Patrem sed Tyrannum, not a Father,
but a Tyrant: and overcame despair by despair, death by death, hell by hell,
and Satan by Satan: suffered actually all the torments of Hell for our
Redemption: and descended into the heauiest torments that Hell could yield:
suffered the torments of Hell, the second death, Abiection from God, and was
made a Curse, that is, had the bitter anguish of Gods wrath in his soul and
body, which is the fire that shall never be quenched. And in like sort, Parkes
affirms, that, Against Willet p. 114.
Luther, Illyricus, Latimer, did teach Christ to have descended into hell in
soul and body, and there suffered torments after Death. But these Blasphemies
are to be abhorred, and yet they are uttered by Luther, Calvin, and other
principal Protestants.

Neither do they stay here, but even proceed to the taking away both of Heaven
and Hell, and to sundry other such Errors tending to Atheism. Luther says,
Tom. 6. in Genesis c. 25. fol. 321.
I cannot affirm whether the souls of the wicked be tormented presently after
death. I am Tom. 4. in c. 2. Ionae. fol. 418.
not very certain what Hell is before the last day. Schultetus, Medul. in
Tertul. part. 1 c. 42.
That assertion of his as it is new, so false; the souls to suffer in hell
before the bodies. Schlusselburge, Theol. Caluinist. lib. 1. art. 27. fol. 145.
The Catechism of the Heidelbergians, makes it doubtful, whether indeed
there be any Hell, and place ordained, in which the wicked and the damned after
this life, together with the Devils, must be afflicted with Eternal
punishments. Apud Hospin. part. 2. Hist. anno 1562. fol. 308.
Brentius, I laugh at your Old wives fooleryes, of that your corporal and
local Heaven and Hell. Ib. p. 331.
Local Hell is feigned. Perkins, Tom. 2. in Apoc. 2. Col. 90.
We must not faigne Hell to be some certain determined and corporal place.
Calvin, Instit. l. 2 c. 16.. 9.
It is childish to enclose souls in the Prison of the Dead. And, In Mat. 3.12.
and in Mat. 25.39. and in. c. 30. Isaiae.
Concerning fire eternal we may gather, that it is a Metaphorical speech.
Danaeus, Controu. 6. p. 1^81.
It is a thing impossible that the souls of men, separated from their bodies,
can be tormented and afflicted with any Corporal fire. Ibid.
That the sacred Scripture treating of the Punishment of damned men, even in
their souls, does call it fire, those speeches are not natural, but
Metaphorical, neither there is it treated of material fire. Perkins, Tom. 2.
in Apoc. 2. Col. 90. Vorstius in Antibel. p. 269. Tilenus in syntag c. 68
Lobech. disput. 6. p. 1^3. and Disp. ^9. p. 459. Polanus in syllog. These. part.
^. p. 508.
We must not faigne the Torments (of Hell) to be corporal, but rather
spiritual, seeing it is the apprehension of Gods wrath and revenge. B^ D.
Bilson confesses that, In his Survey p. 44.
S. Austine long since has plainly resolved that the fire of Hell is not only
a true fire, but a corporal fire, that shall punish both men and Devils. Yea
S. Hierome condemns Origin, for teaching that, Ad Au^tum. An^ see Bilsons
Survey p. 51.
The fire of Hell etc. does not torment, but the Conscience of sinners. And it
is undoubted, that these broachers of such impiou^ Doctrines do presently after
their deaths see and feel their errors, fynding a local Hell, and corporal
Fire, tormenting their souls for all Eternity.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that Christ our Savior truly descended
in soul into Hell; And there redeemed those who were in Abraham's bosom, or
Limbus.
THe truth of this Article of our Creed is proved by such Scriptures as teach,
that Christ was the first that ascended into heaven: for hence it follows,
that the souls of the just departed before his time, were detayned somewhere
else To this purpose says S. Paul, 1. Cor. 15.20.
Now Christ is risen again from the dead, the first fruits of them that
sleep. And in this respect Christ is called, Col. 1.18. Ap. 1.5.
the first borne of the dead: And we are further taught, that, Heb. 7.19.
The law brought nothing to Perfection, but an Introduction of a better hope.
And therefore that, Heb. 9.8.
the way of holyes (by which is meant Heb. 9.24 and 10.19.
heaven) was not yet manifested, the former Tabernacle (by which is understood
the Heb. 9.1, 2.
Old Testament) as yet standing. And this way of holyes is called, Heb. 10.19.
A new and living way, which (Christ) has dedicated (or begun, (...)) to us.
And in reguard hereof the Fathers of the Old Testament, are said to have Heb.
11.13.
dyed according to faith, not having received the Promises: Heb. 11.40.
God for us providing some better thing, that they without us should not be
Consummate. All these Textes show, that the way to Heaven was not opened before
Christ's Resurrection, and that himself was the first that did dedicate, or
begin this way unto us.

The same truth is confirmed by such places, as show that the forsaid souls of
the just before Christ's Coming were in hell. Jacob bewayling his son
Joseph's supposed death, says, Genesis 37.35.
I will descend to my son in Hell. Jacob and Joseph were both just, and yet
here it is said, that they descended into Hell. Dives being in Hell, saw
Abraham Luc. 16.23.
a far of, and Lazarus in his bosom: which argues that both souls were in
the same gulf, though far distant amongst themselves. Neither will it suffice
to answer that, this of Lazarus is only a Parable, and therefore not strong in
proof: for in the Judgments of S. Ambrose, In c. 16. Luc. Hier. l. 2. in
Iouin. Aug. de cura pro mort c. 14. Greg. l. 4. Dial. c. 29.
S. Hierome, S. Austine, and S. Gregory (the 4. great Doctors of the
Catholic Church) it is a true History, their proper names being set down.
And though it were a Parable, yet it makes fully for the present purpose, as
every Circumstance thereof does clearly show.

In like sort that it was Samuels soul that ascended from the Earth, and
appeared to Saul, it is plain by these words, 1. Reg. 28.11.
When the woman had seen Samuel, she cried out with a loud voice etc. And Saul
understood that it was Samuel, etc. And Samuel said to Saul, why have thou
disquieted me, that I should be raised up? And it is placed among the praises
of Samuel, that, Eccl. 46.23.
After this he slept, and he notified to the king, and showed him the end of
his life, and he exalted his voice out of the Earth in Prophecy etc. This place
shows that Samuels Soul was raised out of the Earth. Neither was the Soul
of so great a Prophet subject to the enchantment of a Witch, but prevented the
same, whereat the woman 1. Reg. 28.12.13.
was much troubled.

The same is confirmed by such Textes as show, that Christ delivered the
Captive out of Prison, so the Prophet Zachary says, Zach 9.11.
Thou also in the blood of the Testament, have let forth thy Prisoners out of
the lake, wherein is no water. This to be spoken of Christ, is evident by the
9.10.
precedent verses: And S. Peter says of Christ, In 1. Pet. 3.19.
the which spirit coming he preached to them also that were in Prison, which
all understand of the Prison of Hell.

All such places prove the same, as teach, that before the Ascension of Christ,
the souls of sundry dead persons returned, and were reunited again to their
bodies: whereof we may find examples of Io. 11.43.
Lazarus, the Luc. 8.55.
Maid, and of Mat. 27.52.
many bodies of the Saints that had slept (and) rose. Now that these reuturned
from heaven, or the Hell of the damned, none do imagine.

This also is yet further convinced by all such places as teach, that Christ
himself was in Hell, or the lower parts of the Earth, Mat. 12.40.
As Jonas was in the whales belly, three days and three nights: so shall the
son of man be in the heart of the Earth 3. days, and 3. nights. Now by the
heart of the Earth is understood Hell, which is in the depth of the Earth, as
the heart is in the depth of a body: whereas the Grave is in the superficies of
the Earth, and Christ's sepulcher was peradventure above the Earth: besides in
the sepulcher was only Christ's dead body, whereas Jonas was alive in the body
of the whale. In like sort it is said, Act. 2.27.
Thou will not leave my soul in Hell; this being plainly spoken of Christ, is
so conuincing that Beza to avoid the same, does translate most absurdly, Thou
shall not leave my carcass in the Grave, or, my soul in the Grave, as shall be
showed next hereafter.

S. Paul's words also are most pregna^t Ephesians. 4.8.
Ascending on high, he led Captivity captive etc. And that he ascended, what it
is, but because he descended also first, into the inferior parts of the Earth.
These words literally taken, do convince Christ to have descended into Hell,
and to have delivered the just that were Captives.

But now to observe how Prot. corrupt the Texts of Scripture in favor of their
heresy: because these words, Act. 2.27.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell, do prove Christ's soul to have descended
to hell, Beza in his Anno 1557.
Translation cha^geth it thus, Thou will not leave my carcass in the Grave;
which he defends in these words, Ad defens. Castal. p. 460.
My soul, in the Text, I Interpreted, my Carcass, but in the Annotation, my
Life. And we may take my soul, instead of the Pronowne (me) which exposition
is most simple. And whereas he adds, he observes Error to have risen by the
Old Translation, animam meam, my soul, he says, I did it not rashly seeing we
see this place principally to be wrested by the Papists, for the establishing
of their Limbus, and the Ancient (Fathers) also from thence have found out that
descending of Christ's soul into hell. In like sort where it is said, Act. 2.31.
forseeing he spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, for neither was he left in
hell; the Anno 1562. 1567. 1568. 1605.
Prot. of Geneua, in their Bibles instead of Hell, do make Grave. And Anno 1603.
Tremelius follows them therein in his latin Bible. And the like corruption
is frequently See the Engl. Bib. of 1578. Ose. 13.14. Ps. 85.13. Genesis ^7.35.
to be found in our English Translations. In like sort, where S. Paul says,
that Heb. 10.20.
Christ has dedicated to us a new and living way, to wit, the way into Heaven,
Eng. Bib. of 1578. Fulk. in Heb. 10.20.
Prot. translate, he prepared: whereas the Greek word, (...), intrauit,
signifies to make new, to begin a thing, to dedicate.

SECT. III. That the Anciet Fathers do agreably expound the Scriptures in
proof of Christ's descending into Hell, and his delivering of the just in
Captivity.
SAint Irenaeus expounds many Texts of Scripture for Christ's descending into
Hell, saying, L. 5 fine.
During the 3. days he conuersed where the Dead were, Jonas. 2.2.
as the Prophecy says of him he remembered his Holy Ones that were dead, those
that before slept in the land of Promise, he descended to them to fetch them
out, and save them. And our Lord himself, Mat. 12.40.
As Jonas was in the Whales belly etc. The Apostle also, Ephesians. 4.9.
He ascended, what is it, but because be descended first into the inferior
parts of the Earth. David also prophesying of him, says, Ps. 86.13.
Thou have delivered my soul from the lower Hell: so fully S. Irenaeus.

Origin teaches that, Ho. 15. in Genesis
Toward the end of the world, the only begottten son for the salvation of
the world, descended even to hell, and from thence recalled (Adam) the first
framed: for that which he said to the Thief, Luc. 23.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, do not understand as said to him
alone, but also to all the Holy Ones, for whom he descended to hell.

S. Basil Ho. in Ps. 48.16.
upon these words, God will redeem my soul out of the hand of Hell, affirms
that, he plainly prophesies the descending of Christ to Hell, who was to
deliver together with others the soul of the Prophet himself, that he should
not remain there.

S. Chrysostom avouches that, Ser. 5. de resurrect.
Christ the sun of Justice this day ascended, having preached to the souls
of the Just, lifting up with him from Hell their bodies, as it were the Quyres
of spiritual stars. Jerusalem shyned, wherein those who rose are seen etc.
And it is truly called the day of light, in which the darkness of blyndnes fell
away; they shouted out Isa. 9.2.
who were in darkness, because they saw great light, and to those who dwelt in
the Country of the shadow of death, light is risen. Again, alleging these
plainest words of the Prophet Isay, C. 45.2.
I will break the brazen gates, and will burst the iron bars, And, I will
give the hidden treasures etc. he says, Demonstrat aduers. Gentiles, quod
Christus fuit Deus.
Thus he calls Hell, for though it were Hell, yet it kept the holy souls and
precious vessels, Abraham, Isac, and Jacob: for which cause he calls them
treasures, but hidden ones, because as yet the sun of Justice has not shined
there.

Lastly, Ho. 4. in Mar.
Before the coming of the Savior, before Christ with the Thief opened the
gates of Paradise, all the souls of the just were carried to Hell. Finally,
Jacob says, Genesis 37.35.
Mourning and groaning I will descend to Hell; Therefore our Lord dyed,
therefore he descended to Hell, that the souls which were there bound, might
be loosed. What more plain for Christ's descending into Hell?

And yet in no less plain terms speaks S. Hierome, Ep. 25. c. 3.
Jacob bewailed his son whom he thought was slain, to whom himself also was
about to descend into Hell, saying, Genesis 37.35.
Mourning I will descend to my son in Hell; because Christ as yet had not
broken open the gate of Paradise; as yet his blood had not quenched the fiery
sword etc. of the Cherubims that had charge: Whereupon Abraham also, though he
was in a place of rest, yet it is written, Luc. 16.23.
that he was with Lazarus in Hell. Again, Ad. c. 3. Ecclesiastici.
Before the Coming of Christ, all things were carried together to Hell,
whereupon Jacob said, that he was to descend to Hell. And Job complained that
both the Godly, and the wicked were detayned in Hell. And the Gospel
testifyeth, that there is a great Chaos in Hell, placed between, and that
Abraham is with Lazarus, and that the rich man is in punishment. And indeed
before Christ with the Thief had at the gates of Paradise laid open the
flaming wheel, and burning sword, the heavens were shut. So manifest it is,
that before Christ's coming none ascended into heaven.

But no man explayneth the Scriptures more plainly in this behalf then S.
Austine, who alleging these words of our Savior, This day shall thou be
with me in Paradise, affirms that, Ep. 57. ad Dard.
Christ Jesus Man was not to be that day in heaven, but according to his soul
in Hell and according to his flesh in the grave: and of the flesh, that it was
laid that day in the grave, the Gospel is most manifest. And that the soul
descended into Hell, the Apostolical Doctrine teaches, Act. 2.27.
Because thou will not leave my soul in Hell, nor give thy Holy One to see
corruption. Again, Ep. 99. ad Euod.
that our Lord dead in flesh, came to Hell, it is plain enough, for the
Prophecy cannot be gainsaid which says, Because thou will not leave my soul
in hell, which least any should presume to understand otherwise, Peter
expounds the same in the Acts of the Apostles, even in those his words in
which he affirms, that, Act. 2.24.
he loosed the sorrows of Hell, according as it was impossible that he should
be holden of it. Who therefore but an Infidel, will deny that Christ was in
hell etc. That according to his soul he was in hell, the Scripture plainly
declares etc. And in another place, In Psalm. 85. And see Tract. 111. in Joan.
Our Lord was not yet come to Hell, that he might deliver from thence the
souls of all the Just that went before him, and yet Abraham was in rest; and
Dives tormented in Hell, when he saw Abraham, he lifted up his eyes, for he
could not see him with eyes lifted up, unless Abraham were above, and himself
below. This was so clearly his Doctrine, that Survey of Christ's suffer. p.
626. 598. 599. Aret. loc. com p. 33.
D. Bilson and Aretius do allege S. Austine for Christ's descending into
Hell. So that in S. Austines Judgment they are Infidels, who deny this Article
of our faith, He descended into Hell.

That it was truly the soul of Samuel that was raised up, and appeared unto K.
Saul, it is constantly taught by S. Austine, De cura pro mort. c. 15. Ambr. in
Luc. 1. Bas. Ep. 80. Hier. in Isa. 7.
S. Ambrose, S. Basil, and S. Hierome.

Lastly S. Thaddaeus, one of Christ's Disciples in his Doctrine published by
Eusebius, and by him Eusebius. Hist l. 1. c. vlt.
Collected from Ancient Chronicles, and public tables thereof reserved in the
City of Edessa, where the said Doctrine was by Thaddaeus delivered, says of
our Savior, Ibid. fin.
He descended into Hell, and broke in sunder the wall, which during the worlds
space remained whole and unmoved. After he rose the third day, he raised the
dead, who had slept for many years; and although he descended alone, yet he
ascended to his Father with great multitude. This was so certainly the saying
of S. Thaddaens, that Frigiuilleus Gaunius a Prot. makes mention hereof from
Eusebius, and concludes that, Palma Christiana p. 74.
Those things which Eusebius delivers of the Preaching of Thaddaeus at
Edessa, and the Conversion of Agbarus to Christ, no man of mature Judgment will
impugn. And D. Hill alleges sundry times this Testimony and saying of
Thaddaeus in his book of the Defense of the Article, that Christ descended
into Hell.

This the Fathers so plainly taught, that M. Jacob confesses that, In Bilsons
full Redemption p. 188.
All the Fathers with one consent do affirm, that Christ delivered the souls
of the Patriarchs and Prophets out of Hell at this coming thither, and so
spoiled Satan of those that were then in his present possession. D. Barlow
says, Def. of the Articles of the Prot. Rel. p. 173.
This passes most ryfe among the Fathers, who taking Inferi, for Abraham's
bosom, expound it that Christ went thither, ad liberandum liberandos, to
conney the fathers deceased before his Resurrection, into the place where now
they are.

Duraeus alleging many testimonis of the Fathers for Limbus Patrum, Whitaker
his best answer is this, Cont. Duraeum. l. 8. p. 567.
That I may freely and briefly answer thee what I think, one little word of
Scripture uttered, has more wayght then a thousand Fathers without Scripture;
therefore do not expect whilst I particularly do wash away these errors of
the Fathers. But Whitaker, and all Heretics must know, that the Fathers not
opposing, but grounding themselves upon Scripture, as this Section conuinceth,
do thus unanimously teach, Christ his descending into Hell.

SECT. IV. That Protestant writers do teach the Descending of Christ into Hell,
and the delivery from thence of the just that were in Captivity.
LAscitius a famous Protestant affirms, that, De Rustorum, Muscouit. etc.
Relig. p. 122.
Abraham's bosom was not in heaven, And in proof that the Fathers of the Old
Testament were not in heaven before Christ's coming, he alleges as well the
Ib. p. 123.
Scriptures before cited, and the foresaid Testimony of Thaddaeus, and another
of Ignatius, as also the like answerable opinion and Doctrine of the Hebrews,
Ibid.
and of the remote Christians both in Syria and Aethiopia: and the like plain
testimonies for this Doctrine may be seen in Common plac. in Engl. part. 2. c.
18. p. 621. and part. 3. c. 16 p. 377. 378. Oecol. in l. Epist. Oecolamp. and
Swing. l. 1. p. 19. Swingl. ib. l. 3. p 560. 561.
Peter Martyr, Oecolampadius, and Swinglius.

Our English Prot. Church teaches that, Art. of Relig art. 3.
As Christ dyed for us and was buried, so also it is to be believed, that he
went down into Hell. And in the Apostles Creed in English meeter they sing
lowdly and Iustily in the Churches, His spirit did after this, descend into the
lower parts, to them that long in darkness were, the true light of their
hearts. A saying so evident, that Def. of the Engl. Transl. c. 7. p. 204.
Whitak. cont. Dur. l. 9. p. 773.
D. Fulke and D. Whitaker, do therefore greatly dislike it.

Schlusselburge in proof of Christ's Descending, Theol. Calu. l. 1. f. 146.
alleges the authority of the Ancient Fathers; and says thus fully: Ib. l.
1. c. 27.
The Catholic and Orthodoxall Church of Christ has ever believed from the
beginning to these very times the Descending of Christ, and has always
numbered it amongst the Articles of Faith, and has always proved it by the
Testimonies of Scripture: Therefore it is not to be suffered that, that Article,
as added, should be confounded with the rest, or be wholly taken away by
obstinate Swinglians, deserving Hell.

Calvin affirms that, In 1. Pet. c. 3.
The souls of the faithful gone out of the bodies, were detayned in Prison,
where they were bound with a burning desire of Christ's coming; because as yet
they were not fully enriched with the spirit of liberty. But what other Prison
this was then Abraham's Bosom, no man can imagine. This doctrine of Christ's
descending in soul into Hell, is taught by D. Hill in his Defense of the
Articles that Christ descended into Hell, throughout that Book: Also by D.
Bilson Page 650. etc.
in his Survey of Christ's sufferings etc. And of his descent into Hell: by the
Author Page 112.
of Catholic Traditions: By Luther, Aretius, Apinus, Nowel, and Melancthon,
alleged in P. 23. 44. See. 33. 34.
Hill his forsaid book; by the Lutherans generally, and many Caluinistes.

Add herunto that some Prot. teach, that the souls of the Just shall not
before the day of Judgment enjoy heaven and the sight of God: so Luther
Praelect. in Genesis And see in c. 9. Ecclesiastic. and in Ionam. and in c. 5. Genesis
, so the Protestants See Lascitius de Russ. etc. Relig. p. 123.
of Bohemia, and thereto does Calvin Inst. l. 3. c. 20. sect. 20. etc. 25. sect.
6.
most dangerously incline. Yea In Psalm. 16.
Appinus, In Fulke Def. of the Engl. Transl. c. 7 p. 204.
Latimer, and some See Melanct. in Consil Theol. part. 2. p. 131. and in l. 1.
Ep. p 376. And Beza in Act. 2.
other Prot. trembled not to maintain, that Christ did after his bodily death,
descend into Hell in his soul, therein to suffer torments of the damned. In so
much as Melancthon testifyeth the dissension had among Prot. concerning this
Doctrine. Into such Blasphemies and absurdities do Heretics fall, when they
forsake the sure Rule of the Catholic Church in the understanding of
Scriptures.

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture against Christ's descending into Hell,
answered.
FVlke demands, Confut. of Purgat. p. 57.
To what end was Christ called the Lamb Apoc. 13.8.
that was slain from the beginning of the world, but that the benefit of his
Passion extends unto the Godly of all ages alike? Answer. Protestants
themselves do understand Marg. note of the Engl. Bible of 1576. in Revel. 13.8.
only by those words, that his death was so long before preordayned of God, and
prefigured, and that in the faith of Christ, the Just from the beginning of the
world, were to be saved.

Others object, that before Christ's Ascension, the Thief was in heaven, to
whom our Savior said, Luc. 23.43.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Answ. D. Hill proves Def. of
Christ's Desc. into Hell. f. 19. 20.
that, This day may signify, for ever, comparing it with this other Text, Ps.
2.7.
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee: and so it imports only the
perpetuity of the Joys promised him. Secondly though the words should concern
the only natural day then present, in which Christ descended into Hell, or
Limbus Patrum; yet I answer with S. Austine Ep. 57. ad Dardan. solut. 1.
quaest. Orig. ho. 15. in Genesis
and Origin, that the foresaid Hell, or Limbus Patrum, was then to the Thief
made a Paradise, or a place of blessedness by reason of the Essential
Beatitude, which as then there accompanied the soul of Christ. Thirdly I say
again with S. Austine, Ep. 99. ad Euod.
that even before Christ's descending into that place, it was a place of rest
freed from sensible pain, and of great blessedness in regard of the great
Comfort and Expectation of those that were therein, and was therefore called Luc.
16.12.
Abraham's Bosom.

CHAP. XV. The true State of the Question, Concerning Purgatory, and Prayer for
the dead.
Whether besides Heaven and Hell, after this life there be a place of
Purgatory, wherein the souls of the Faithful are temporally punished for
their sins committed in their life time: and whether they may be relieved by
the Sacrifices, prayers, and alms of their living friends. Or otherwise, that
instantly after death, every soul either immediately ascends into Heaven, or
descends into Hell. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
WHAT the Church of Christ universally teaches concerning Purgatory, and
Prayer for the dead, her irrefragable Decrees will presently tell us. For in
the Counsel of Trent it is defined that, Council. Trident. Sess. 25. Decret. de
Purgatorio.
Seeing the Catholic Church instruted by the holy Ghost, hauh taught in Sacred
Councels etc. from the holy Scriptures, and ancient Tradition of Fathers, that
there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls there detayned are helped by the
suffrages of the faithful, but especially by the acceptable Sacrifice of the
Altar: The holy Synod commands Bishops, that they diligently take care, that
the wholesome Doctrine of Purgatory, delivered by holy Fathers, and sacred
Councels, be believed, houlden, taught, and every where preached by faithful
Christians.

By the first Nicene Council it was appointed that, Cap. 65. Arab.
When a Bishop dies etc. notice of his death be given to all Churches and
Monasteries in the Parish, that Prayer may be made for him. And the like is
taught in sundry Conc. Cath 3. c. 20. C^n. Carth. 4. c. 79. Conc. Florent Sess
1 Quaest. de Purgatorio.
other Counsels. In the second Council Cabilonense, it is thus decreed. Cap.
39.
It further seems good to us, that in all the solemnities of Masses, our Lord
be prayed in due place for the souls of the dead: for as no day is excepted
wherein our Lord is not beseeched for all Necessities, so no day ought to be
excepted, but that prayers be powered to our Lord in the solemnities of Masses,
for the souls of the faithful. Therefore the holy Church keeps anciently
this custom, that in the solemnities of Masses, and other prayers, she may
commend to our Lord the Souls of the departed etc. What these Councels have
defined, the Catholic Church Bellar. de Purg. l. 1. c. 3. etc. and l. 2. c.
15. Rhem. Test. in Mat. 12.31.
still belieueth, to wit, that after this life, for such as dye in the Grace of
God, and have not done due Penance, for their sins, there is a place of
Purgatory or satisfaction, wherein they are temporally punished, and may be
relieved by the Prayers, Sacrifices, and other good works done for them by
their living friends.

Points Disputable.
Some Catholic S. Tho. in 4. Did. 10. q. 1. art. 2.
writers affirm, that Poena damni, the punishment of loss, is the greatest
punishment either in Purgatory or this life. And that the least pain in
Purgatory, is greater then the greatest in this life. But S. Bonauent. in 4.
Did. 20. q. 2.
others teach, that the foresaid punishment of loss in Purgatory, is not
greater then all the other punishments in Purgatory, or this life. And that the
greatest punishment in Purgatory is greater then the greatest Punishment in
this life, though some punishment in Purgatory, is less then some punishment
in this life. M. Rogers Def. of the Art art. 21. p. 121.
obiecteth that Catholics differ amongst themselves in assigning the place of
Purgatory, as whether it be in the center of the Earth, the bottom of the Sea,
or in Hell. As also in the Tormentors, whether they be holy Angels, or devils;
in the Torments, whether they be only by fire, or fire and water, and sundry
such like. All this is true, but impertinent, for none of these Points are
defyned by the Church.

Protestants untruths.
Rogers avouches that according to Catholics, Def. of the Art. art. 22. p.
122.
the Pope is God, in that he can at his pleasure discharge guilty souls, both
from the guilt of sin, and from the punishments due for the same. And Ib. p.
12^.
Purgatory in another world, both denied has always been by the Greek
Churches etc. But this appears to be most false, by S. Epiphanius, a Greek
Father, immediately hereafter cyted, condemning for the same Aerius, and in him
M. Rogers for heretics. And I must also needs condemn M. Rogers for an
egregious Liar, in auouching, that Catholics affirm the Pope to be God, and
that at his pleasure he can discharge guilty souls both from fault and
punishment: both which all Catholics disclaim, as mere untruths.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Protestant Church has Decreed, that Article 22.
The Romish Doctrine concerning Purgatory etc. is a fond thing, vainly
invented, and grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but rather repugnant to
the word of God. According to D. Jewel, In Art. 18 sect. 3. p. 158.
This kind of praying for the Dead is plainly superstitious, and wants all
authority of Gods word. And so most Prot. profess Harm. of Conf. p. 483.
to believe that the faithful after the bodily death, go directly unto Christ,
and therefore do not stand in need of the help or prayers for the Dead, or any
such duty of them which are alive. In like manner we believe that the
unbelievers be cast headlong directly into Hell etc. This is the ordinary
Doctrine of Protestants.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
Aerius was condemned by S. Austine Haer. 53.
and S. Epiphanius, Haer. 75.
for denying prayer for the Dead. Answer to a Counterf. Cath. p. 44. 45.
I will not dissemble (says D. Fulke) that which you think the greatest
matter: Aerius taught that prayer for the dead was unprofitable, as witness
both Epiphanius and Austine, which they count for an error. And the like of
Aerius is acknowledged by Of the Church. l. 3. p. 138. Osiander. cent. 4. p.
434.
D. Field, and sundry other Protestant writers: the same heresy is also
condemned in the Guido de Armenijs.
Armenians, and Casarius l. 5 c. 21.
Albigenses.

Protestant Errors.
If it were not that men were drunk with heresy, they would never broach such
absurd and contrary positions, as these that follow. And first that of Brentius
In Dominic. 12. post Trinit.
Although it be lawful to wish all things happy to the dead, yet prayer for
the dead is vain: here is a mystical difference between wishing and praying.
And yet the like makes Calvin, Ep. 366.
The form of prayer that God may give to the dead a good and happy
resurrection, because it does not square with the Rule of Praying well, let it
be rejected: I do not urge, but that it is lawful to conceive such a desire,
Here a man may lawfully conceive a Desire of a thing, and yet must not pray for
it.

Calvin affirms that, In Explicat Perfidiae Gentilis. p. 677.
A certain Prot. said often, there was no better short way to take away the
Patronages of Saints, superstitions Prayers for the dead, the fiction of
Purgatory, and the like, then if we should believe death to be the destruction
of souls. And certainly that man said very wisely, supposing that he could
make that belief good of the mortality of the soul. But who does not heerby
well discern, the desperate case of them, who think it the best and shortest
way to impugn the truth, to fall into Atheism, and so at once to pull up all
Religion by the root?

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that after this life there is a place of
Purgatory: and that therein the souls of the faithful may be relieved by the
Sacrifices Prayers; and other spiritual helps of their living friends.
THis truth is manifestly taught in the Books of Machabees, by the Charitable
fact of Judas Machabaeus, 2. Machab. 12.43.44.45.
who making a gathering he sent 12000. drachmes of silver to Jerusalem, for
sacrifice to be offered for sins, well and religiously thinking of the
Resurrection, (For unless he hoped that they that were slain should rise
again, it should seem superfluous, and vain to pray for the dead.) And
because he considered, that they which had taken their sleep with Godliness,
had very good Grace laid up for them. It is therefore a holy and healthful
Cogitation, to pray for the dead, that they may be loosed from their sins.
This place is so conuincing for Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, that for
want of all other answer, Prot. pressed herewith, are forced to betake
themselves to that shamfull, last, and desperate refuge, of denying the Books
of Machabees to be Canonical Scripture. The wickedness and falsehood of which
answer is See before Chap. 5. etc.
heretofore most evidently discovered.

This also may be confirmed by the Example of David, and the whole people of
God, and more particularly by the singular seven days fast of the men of
Iabes Galaad, for the death of their K. and master Saul. And first as the
Princely Prophet 2. Reg. 12.21.
Fasted and wept for his sick Child whiles it was alive, as thinking thereby to
obtain that the Child might live: But when the chield was dead, be did rise up
and eat, and so gave over fasting. (for Infants who dye freed from original
sin stand not in need of any further prayer or suffrage, because they never
committed any actual sin, thereby to deserve punishment.) So also after the
death of Saul and Ionathas, it is said, that he then king with all his Court
and people, in like manner mourned 2. Reg. 1.12.
wept, and fasted for them. Neither could this fasting so generally made be
only in sign of sorrow for the loss or death of a friend, whereas the fast was
extended by the men of Iabes Galaad to seven 1. Reg. 31.13.
days, which to do only for sorrow, were unlawful, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
immoderate, unreasonable, unworthy the people of God, and the approbation of
so great a Prophet, and incomparably more then he either did, or permitted to
be done, upon the death of his own Child: Therefore the probable Collection
hence to be made is this, that as he wept and fasted for his sick Child being
yet alive, not altogether for sorrow, but especially that God would have mercy
upon the Child, that it might live: so in like manner he wept and fasted,
blessed the men of Iabes Galaad, for showing mercy unto their Lord and King,
all which he did and approved to be done for Saul and Ionathas, being dead, not
only in sign of sorrow, but chiefly to obtain mercy for them, as hoping of
their Repentance before their death, and that they were capable of relief, by
this mercy, of the living showed to them.

But to come now to the Scriptures of the New Testament, which do strongly
confirm the same: first, these words of our Savior seem very express, Mat.
12.32.
And whosoever shall speak a word against the son of Man, it shall be forgiven
him; but he that shall speak against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. The conclusion hence
deduced is, therefore at least some other sins may be forgiven in the world to
come; but in Hell there is no remission, since out of Hell there is no
redemption, and in Heaven there needed no remission, since none polluted with
sin can enter thither, therefore a third place must be admitted, where those
sins may be forgiven.

Some reply that Christ compares here some sins with others, to wit, sin
against the Father and the son, with sin against the holy Ghost, therefore
if he mean, that any sins may be remitted in the world to come, chiefly
those which he compares with the sin against the holy Ghost, but not these,
seeing only venial sins are there remitted. But the answer is easy, for
Christ speaks of a full and perfect Remission, including remission both of
fault and Punishment, and so not only venial, but also mortal sins, are
pardoned in the next world, because the guilt or fault of Mortal sin being
in this world pardoned, but the punishment not always here satisfied, but
afterward discharged in Purgatory, the remission therefore even of mortal
sins is there perfected.

Others yet would euade by affirming, that of a negatio^ does not necessarily
follow an affirmation, as for example (say they) king John is not king of the
Venetians, therefore some other is their king: or, final impenitence shall not
be forgiven in this world, nor in hell, therefore some sins may be forgiven in
hell. But this forces nothing, for although the Rule be not so general, that
every negation does enforce an affirmation to follow upon it: yet in our
present case, it must needs follow, since it were impertinent to say, this
sin shall not be forgiven in this world, nor in the next, if none could be
forgiven in the next; even as it were impertinent to say, King Charles will
neither pardon thee in England, nor in Spain, since in Spain he has no
authority to pardon. And therefore as it is well said, king Charles will neither
pardon thee in England, nor in Ireland, nor in Scotland, because he has equal
power of pardoning in those places; even so proportionably it is fitly said by
our Savior, that Blasphemy against the holy Ghost, shall neither be forgiven
in this world, nor in the world to come, partly for that our Savior has
equal power to pardon in both places, and partly for that this double
Distribution of time and place, I mean this world and the next, equally
belongs to Gods Judgment seat; and lastly for that this World, signifying a
time, and Hell a place, are not opposite members in the division used by our
Savior, as this world and the next be. And most certain it is, and granted by
all, that by the next world cannot be meant hell, since out of Hell there is no
redemption, as in hell there is no remission.

Lastly, it is objected against this place, that whereas S. Matthew says,
neither in this world, nor in the world to come, S. Mark (a sure Interpreter
of these words (says Against Rhem. Test. in Mat. 12.32.
D. Fulke) explicateth the same, saying, C. 3.29.
he has not forgiveness for forever. This evasion being a mere illusion of the
text, will not serve D. Fulkes turn, for every one who explicateth ought to be
larger, then he whom he explicateth; now S. Mark is not larger then S.
Matthew, but contrariwise S. Matthew is larger then S. Mark, and therefore S.
Marks briefly touched neuer-forgiuenes, is dilated and explicated by Saint
Matthew his distribution, neither in this world, nor in the world to come:
since it is evident, that neuer-forgiuenes imports both times of this world
and the next, where sins may be forgiven. Besides this manner of obiecting, is
of set purpose a wilful mistaking of the point urged, for without all
Conference or explication falsely by D. Fulke supposed to be used by S. Mark,
it is manifest of it self, that he who is not forgiven neither in this world,
not in the world to come, shall never be forgiven; what needs then any
Explication to be added by S. Mark in a point so clear.

A second place for Purgatory, is that Exhortation of our Savior concerning
reconciliation, Mat. 5.26.27.
Be at agreement with thy adversary betymes, whilst thou art in the way with
him: least perhaps the adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into Prison. Amen. I say unto
thee, thou shall not go out from thence, till thou repay the last farthing:
Here by the way, is understood this present life, by prison (out of which there
is no coming, until the uttermost farthing be paid) hell, in which there are
many mansions, some for the damned, and others for those that are to be purged:
by the Adversary, Orig ho. 35. in Luc. Ambr. in c. 12. Lucae. Hieron ep 8. ad
Demet.
some understand the Devil, Hilar. and Hieron. in Mat. 5.
others, some other man, but Ambr. in Luc. 12. Aug. in Mat. 5 and ho. 1. de
verbis Dom. Greg. ho. 39.
most, the Law of God, or God himself, as he commands things contrary to the
flesh; or the Conscience, which obiecteth to a sinner the breach of Gods law;
all may be true, as meant by that all-seeing spirit: but howsoever it be taken
it little imports, as not hindering the maine point hence to be inferred. The
Io. 5.22. The Father has given all judgment to the son.
Judge, all agree to be Christ, the officer, the good Ambr. in Luc. c. 4. Aug.
l. 1 de ser. Dom. in Monte. c 21.
Angel or the Greg. ho. 39. Theophil. in Luc. 12.
Devils, either is probable: by the last farthing little sins are
understood. Now of this it follows, that there is a place of imprisonment,
after this life, forth of which there is an out-coming, when the uttermost
farthing is discharged.

Now whereas some object that, until, does not signify a certain determined
time, but Eternity, accordingly as where it is said of the B. Virgin Mary, Mat.
1.25.
He knew her not till she brought forth her first borne son, as much as to
say, he had never knowledge of her: the answer is, that this is a wilful
dissembling of the point urged, for the word, until, or before, though it
signify a determined time, yet it refers the accomplishment of that time,
not to that which goes before the said word, but only to that which follows
the same: and so, for so much as it is said, he knew her not until (or before)
she brought forth her son; the argument hence is good, that therefore she
brought forth a son, and that before his birth Joseph did not know her: but
it neither infers this knowledge, or not knowledge of her, after the birth
of that son. And so likewise in our present case, where it is said, Thou
shall not go out from thence, until thou repay the last farthing, proves,
that the uttermost farthing may be paid, and so the prisoner discharged. Which
truth yet appears more plainly by the end and scope of the Parable, for the
similitude is not taken from a murderer, thief, or traitor, who are
ordinarily condemned to death, or perpetual imprisonment; but from a deptour,
who not for any crime, but for debt, is cast into prison, until he pay the
same, the which ordinarily after some time he does, and so is freed.

The third place for proof of this Doctrine, is that of the Apostle S. Paul, 1
Cor. 3.12.13.14.15.
And if any man build upon this foundation, gould, silver, or precious stones,
wood, hay, stubble, the work of every one shall be manifest; for the day of our
Lord will declare, because it shall be reueyled in fire; and the work of every
one of what kind it is, the fire shall try: if any man's work abide, which he
built thereupon, he shall receive reward; if any man's work burn, he shall
suffer detriment: but himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire. The Apostle
here uses the similitude of two workmen, the one building his house upon a
stony and solid foundation of precious matter, which fears not fire, as
gould, silver, and precious stones: the other building upon the the like solid
foundation, but after the manner of poor men, of wood, clay, covering the same
with hay or straw. Now supposing fire were put to these two houses, and the
workme^ with in them, the first would receive no hurt, but the other would
shortly be consumed with fire, and if the workman within will escape, he must
pass through the fire: In which passage though he dye not, yet shall he
receive some hurt or pain. In this similitude, by the builders, Aug. l. de
fide and oper. c. 16. and in Enchyr. c. 68.
some understand all Christians; Others Ambr. and Sedulius in hunc loc.
Pastors and Preachers, which sense is more literal, as may be gathered by
the words precedent and subsequent. By the foundation is understood Christ
preached, and made known by the Apostles. By gould, silver, and precious
stones, is understood the profitable, and wholesome doctrine of other preachers,
who instruct them that already believe, by word and example. By wood, hay, and
stubble, is understood doctrine not heretical or false, but curious, vain,
and unprofitable, which some preach to Catholic people, but not with that
fruit, which God requires, but rather with venial sins in themselves; a
fault whereunto the Corinthians were addicted. By the day of our Lord, is
understood the day of Judgment, partly for that the word, day, is so taken in
2. Tim 1.12.18. 2. Tim. 4.8. Hebr. 10.25. Romans 2.16.
other places of Scripture; partly for that here in this life every ones work
is not tried, tribulations being common both to the good and evil; partly for
that the Greek Article going before the word in the original, (...).
has an Emphasis in it, importing as much as, 1. Cor. 5.5. 2. Cor. 1.14.
Philip. 16.10. 1 Thessalonians 5.2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.1.
dies illa, or dies Domini; and lastly for that dies Domini does usually 2.
Pet. 3.10. Luc. 17.24.26.
signify the day of Judgment. By the fire which shall try the work of every
one, cannot be understood the fire of Hell or Purgatory, or of that fire which
shall consume the world at the day of Judgment, for all these being fyres for
punishments, cannot try those who have built gould, silver, and precious
stones, upon the foundation Christ; therefore the fire here meant, is the fire
of Gods Judgment, which shall not purge or torment, but try and examine every
man's work. By fire in the last place where it is said, he shall be saved, yet so
as by fire, must needs be understood some temporal and Purgative punishment,
to which such are judged after death, as in their particular Judgment are found
to have builded wood, hay etc. and that thereby cannot be meant Hell-fyre, is
plain, in that it is said, they shall be saved, nor the fire which shall burn
the world at Doomsday, for then those who committed venial sins could not
enter into heaven before the day of Judgment: nor yet, as Calvin and other
Prot. would, by fire, understand the Judgment of God approving sound Doctrine
and confuting false, which happens (say they) when a man is converted, and
chiefly in the hour of death, at which time many are enlightened, and so
perceive themselves to have been deceived, at which they are ashamed, and so
are saved as by fire. But this Explication is false: for first, many who have
builded stubble etc. dye so suddenly, as that they have no time for repentance
and amendment of their Errors, and yet they shall not be damned, because they
had Christ for their foundation; and the Apostle avouches of all such, that
they are saved; neither can they be saved, unless Purgatory be admitted,
because seeing they dyed in the stubble, hay, and straw of their venial
sins, they cannot be saved, but as by fire. Secondly, he that shall be saved,
yet as by fire, shall suffer detriment, or as the original has it, (...),
shall be punished; whereas he that is enlightened to see and follow the truth,
thereby receives gain, comfort, and reward: even as he would not think
himself to suffer less, who having found a counterfeit Diamond, at first
thinking it good, perceiving afterward his error, should have a true one
given him instead thereof.

Some reply that S. Paul in the same sentence would not use the word, fire, so
diversely, as for the Judgment of God, and Purgatory fire. But besides the
former reasons proving the different acception of the word, fire, to be
necessary, S. Paul uses one and the self same word of, sin, in other places
in a double signification: for example, 2. Cor. 5.21.
him that knew no sin, he made sin for us, and in another place Rom 8.3.
even of sin, damned sin; where in both places, sin, signifies a
Sacrifice for sin, as also the transgression of the law.

Others reply, that as the other words, gold, silver, building etc. are taken
Metaphorically, so also may the word, fire, be taken, and the rather, for that
it is not said, they shall be saved by fire, as though it were a true fire, but,
as by fire, to insinuate thereby unto us, a similitudinary, or metaphorical
fire only. By the like reason the words, work, saved, Christ, and the like
being in the same sentence, should be taken metaphorically, which is absurd.
And as for the word, as, or, quasi, it does not signify a similitude with fire,
but with one passing through the fire, so that the sense is, he that builds
hay etc. shall be saved, but after the manner of him, who to come to some place,
passes through the fire: yea the word, quasi, does not always extenuate the
truth of the thing, but does sometimes much strengthen and confirm the same,
as where it is said Io. 1.14.
We saw the glory of him, glory as it were (quasi) of the only begotten of the
Father, that is, we saw him glorious, as became the only begotten son of God.

Thirdly, it is pretended that this place is obscure, and admits great
variety of Interpretations, both by the Fathers, and others, wherefore it cannot
be of force to prove any point of Faith. By the same reason many other places
of Scriptures, especially the Epistles of S. Paul, (which in the Judgment of S.
Peter are hard) might not be used in argument against Heretics. Again, are
the Scriptures hard and obscure, and so granted to be by Prot. here being
pressed with this place for proof of Purgatory, as indeed they be, both of
themselves, or notwithstanding any Conference of other places; how then
stands this with their pretended facility of Scripture at other times?
Lastly, as for variety of Interpretation, it is no let for proof of doctrine,
when one place (as I have formerly See heretofore Preparatiue. sect. 7.
proved) may admit many true literal senses, so long as the same are not
repugnant to themselves, to other places, or points of faith: yea what one
place almost is not diversely interpreted, by ancient Fathers, and yet all
senses may be meant by the holy Ghost, who indicted the Scriptures. And do not
Prot. themselves bring diverse Interpretations of one and the same Scripture?

Fourthly, S. Paul 1. Cor. 15.29.
proving the Resurrection, amongst other arguments, uses this for one,
proposed by way of Interrogation, intimating this great absurdity, following
upon the denial of the Resurrection, What shall they do that are baptized for
the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why then are they baptized for the dead?
Here whether we take it, that the Apostle (in proof of the resurrection of the
dead) does reason from the Error of those, who knowing the great force of
Baptism, and thinking the dead were in case to be relieved, did, upon these
true grounds, erroneously practice to be baptized for, and in the name of their
dead friends, (an Error reported of those beginning times by S. Haer. 28.
Epiphanius) or that in this place by Baptism he understand the Baptism of
Tears and Penance, undertaken for the dead by Alms, fasting, and prayer, in
which like sense of voluntary affliction, the word, Baptism, is often used in
the Scriptures Mat. 20.22.23. Mar. 10.38.39. Luc. 12.50. And Marc. 1.4. Luc.
3.3. Act. 13.24. and 19.4.
and Cypr. de caena Dom. Nazianz. Orat. de Epiphania.
Fathers. Now this place taken in either sense, proves, that in the Common
opinion of those times, the dead were in case to be relieved. This argument is
so conuincing, that the Protestant Danaeus Cont. Bellar. 1 part. alt. part. p.
1174.
does therefore in answer hereto understand in this place by the Dead, not
(says he) those who are naturally dead, but such as are living upon Earth, and
dead in sin, directly against the forsaid words and circumstances of the
place, which do most manifestly concern the Resurrection of the dead.

S. John directs and limiteth our Prayer for the dead, saying, Ep. 5.16.
He that knows his brother to sin, a sin not to death, let him ask, and
life shall be given him, sinning not to death. There is a sin to death; for
that I say not, that any man ask. Hence Purgatory is proved two ways, for
first by a sin to death, all understand final impenitence, and for such
dying impenitently in mortal sin, we are forbidden to pray, whereby it is
insinuated, and we admonished, that for such as dye in sins repented, or
which are not mortal, we may lawfully pray.

Secondly, whereas we are forbidden here to pray for certain sinners, and
allowed to pray for certain others, to wit, for such as sin not to death,
this place must be understood either of prayer for the living, or for the dead;
if of prayer for the dead, then it proves the thing in question, namely that
as we are forbidden to pray for some dead, so also we are admonished to pray
for others. And that it cannot be meant of prayer for the living, is proved by
the foresaid sin unto death, for which we are forbidden to pray, and whereof
S. Austine says accordingly, De ciu. l. 21. c. 24. And see Conc. Brachar. 1.
c. 34.
If any unto death have an impenitent heart etc. does the Church pray for them,
that is, for the souls of such departed? And this cannot be meant of any sin
of the living, because there is no sin so great and heinous, but we may
(without particular Revelation to the contrary) lawfully pray for the remission
thereof, and for the amendment and conversion of the Committer thereof, whylest
he is yet living. And though there were a degree of sin so grievous in this
life, as were irremissible, (the contrary whereof the learned of the Prot.
Vrbanus Regius loc. com. c. de pec. fol. 20. 21. Wigandus. Syntag. Col. 380.
581. 584. Chem. in Enchyr. p. 269. 273. Smyth in his Treatise of prayer in
general for all men etc.
writers affirm) yet were the committing thereof in others, known to God
only, for we are not able to discern the secrets of the heart, much less to
know, if the party have proceeded to that height of iniquity, and therefore
this sin (though admitting there were any such) cannot be the sin meant in
this place, for the remission whereof, we are forbidden to pray.

Now whereas some object, that the Prophet Hieremy was forbidden to pray for the
Jews then living, C. 11.14.
Thou therefore pray not for this people, and take not to thee praise and prayer
for them: therefore we may not pray for all sinners during life. To this the
answer is first, that the Prophet had a special Revelation to the contrary,
and therefore might not do it. Secondly, this objection is impertinent, for he
was not forbidden to pray for the Remission of their sins, but for remission
only of the Hier. 11.11 12.23.
plague, or temporal punishment which they should not escape by Gods Decree:
which is nothing to this present purpose, where we speak of praying for the
Remission of sin.

SECT. III. The ancient Fathers expound the foresaid Scriptures agreably with
Catholics in proof of Purgatory, and Prayer for the Dead.
BEcause Against Rhem. Test. in Mat 12.32.
D. Fulke thinks, It is sufficient, for (Prot.) that, neither the Scripture
teaches Purgatory, neither the Primitive Church did admit of it for many
hundred years after Christ etc. and that, S. Austine does not affirm any
thing certain of it; as I have next before proved our Doctrine of Purgatory
from sundry cleerest Textes of Scripture, so now I intend the like by the
Ancient Fathers, and particularly by S. Austine. S. Austine then having taught
that some depart this life so bad, that they are incapable of any relief by
their living friends, and others so good, that they need not the same; does yet
notwithstanding in proof of the practice of the Catholic Church praying for
such departed, as in their life time merited the same, further confirm the
same out of the Book of the Machabees in these words following, L. de cura
pro mort. c. 1.
We read in the Book of the Machabees Sacrifice offered for the dead, but
although it were nowhere at all read in the Old Testament, yet notwithstanding
not small is the authority of the universal Church, which shyneth with this
Custom; where the Commendation of the Dead has its place in the prayers of
the Priest, which are powered to our Lord God at his Altar.

Here S. Austine teaches first, that the books of Machabees are part of the
Old Testament; Secondly that the said books do teach Sacrifice offered for the
dead; Thirdly that though it were not taught in the old Testament, or the
Scriptures, yet the authority of the universal Church, which shyneth with this
Custom, would suffice; Fourthly, that Priests at the Altar, did power out
their prayers to God for the dead. And lastly as Prot. reject the books of
Machabees, because they teach Sacrifice, and prayer for the dead: so S. Austine
belieueth, and approves Sacrifice, and prayer for the dead, because (amongst
other reasons) they are taught in the said books.

The same S. Austine likewise in proof of the same Doctrine, expounds the
forsaid place of S. Matthew thus, De Ciu. Dei. l. 21. c. 13.
for neither cold it be truly said of certain, that they should not be
forgiven neither in this world, nor in the world to come; unless there were
some who though they were not forgiven in this world, yet should be in the
world to come. Conform to S. Austine says S. Gregory, Lib. 4. Dial c. 39.
So as a man departs hence, so is he to be presented in Judgment; but yet
purging fire of certain light sins, before the general Judgment, is to be
believed to be, in that Truth says: Because, if any shall blaspheme against
the holy Ghost, he shall neither be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to
come: In which sentence there is given us to understand, that certain sins
may be forgiven us in this world, and that certain may be released in the
world to come; for that which is denied of one, in true consequence is granted
of some. With these accords S. Isidore, saying, De Officijs Ecclesiasticis.
c. 8. q. 818.
When our Lord says, He that sins against the holy Ghost, shall not be
forgiven neither in this world, nor in the world to come, he does demonstrate,
that unto some, sins are there to be forgiven, and to be purged with a
certain Purgatory fire. So express are the Fathers expositions of those
words of our Savior in behalf of Purgatory.

Now touching the fathers interpreting those other words of our Savior, Agree
with thy Adversary etc. Origin writes thus, In Ep. ad Romans and ho. 35. in
Lucam ho. 14. in Leuit. ho. 25. in Number ho. 2. in Ps. 38. bo 12. in Hieremiam.
and l. 8. in Romans c. 11.
Although a releasment out of Prison be somtymes promised, yet it is designed,
that none can get forth thence, but he which pays the uttermost farthing.
With Origin agrees S. Cyprian speaking of the same Text thus: Epist. 52. ad
Antonianum post med See also S. Cyprian in his 66. Epistle. and. l. 3. ad
Quirinum. c. 57.
It is one thing to stand ^wayting for pardon, another thing ^o come to glory:
one thing for one to be cast into Prison, and not to come forth until he have
paid the uttermost farthing, another thing immediately to receive the reward of
faith and virtue: one thing, that one tormented a long time for sins, be
amended and purged long by fire, another to have purged all sins by
suffering, or Martyrdom. With Origin and S. Cyprian agrees Eusebius
Emissenus, his words are these: Ho. 3. de Epiphania.
But these who have done things worthy of temporary punishment, shall pass
through a flood of fire, to whom the word of God is directed, that they do not
go out thence, till they pay the utmost farthing. Which utmost farthing S.
Hierome expounds to be little sins, saying, In c. 5. Mat. And see S. Ambr.
in Luc. c. 12. Tertul. l. de anima c. 35.
This is that which he says, Thou shall not go out of Prison, until thou
shall pay even to thy little sins. Lastly S. Bernard, De obitu Huberti.
Know ye this, that after this life in purging places, those things which are
here neglected, are to be paid a hundred fould, even unto the last farthing. So
certainly are these words of our Savior, understood of Purgatory by the
Ancient Fathers.

But to Examine now, what the Fathers thought of that hard place of S. Paul. 1
Cor. 3. etc. S. Ambrose expounds it thus, Ser. 20. in Ps. 118. and S. Hier.
in c. 4. Amos. and l. 2. in Iouin. post med. and in fine Comment. in Isaiam.
But whereas S. Paul says, yet so as by fire, he shows indeed that he shall be
saved, but yet shall suffer the punishment of fire, that being purged by fire
he may be saved, and not be tormented for ever, as the Infidels are, with
Everlasting fire.

With S. Ambrose agrees S. Austine, writing thus, In psalm. 37. and l. 2. de
Genesis cont. Manichaeos. c. 2 and l. 21. de Ciu. c 13.
Purge me in this life, and make me such a one, as shall not further need the
amending fire, being for them which shall be saved yet so as by fire: wherefore,
but because here they build upon the foundation wood, hay, and stubble: but if
they should build gold, and silver, and precious stones, they should be secure
from both fyres, not only from that everlasting, which shall torment the wicked
for ever, but also from that which shall amend such as shall be saved by fire.
For it is said, he shall be saved, yet so, as it were by fire. And because it is
said, he shall be saved, this fire is contemned: yea verily although they are
saved by fire, yet notwithstanding that fire is more grievous then whatsoever a
man may suffer in this life. Again, Sermon. 41. de Sanct. prope init.
There are many, who not rightly understanding this reading, are deceived with
false security, whilst they believe, that if they build Capital sins upon
the foundation of Christ, those sins may be purged by transitory fire, and
they afterward come to life everlasting. This understanding etc. is to be
corrected, because they deceive themselves, who so flater themselves; for with
that transitory fire, whereof the Apostle said, He shall be saved, yet so as by
fire, not Capital (or deadly) but little sins are purged. So clear is S.
Austine for the difference of little and great sins, and of temporal and
eternal fire in the next life,

S. Gregory expounds the same words to the same sense, making the like
difference of little and great sins, saying, Lib. 4: Dial. c. 39. See the
like in Ps. 1. Poenit. prope init and Ps. 3. Poenit. init.
Seeing Paul affi^meth Christ to be the foundation, he adds. If any shall
build upon this foundation, gould, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble,
the work of every one what kind it is, fire shall try: if any man's work abide
which he built thereupon, he shall receive reward. If any man's work burn, he
shall suffer detriment, but himself shall be saved, yet so, as by fire. Although
this may be understood, of the fire of Tribulation given us in this life; yet
if any shall understand it of the fire of future purging, it is diligently to
be considered that he says, he may be saved by fire, not he who builds upon
this foundation, Iron, brass, or lead, that is, greater sins, and therefore
harder, and then vnsatifysable: but wood, hay, stubble, that is, little sins,
and the lightest, which fire may easily consume.

S. Chrysostom proves Sacrifice for the dead, by the fact of Job, saying, Ho.
41. in. 1. Cor. See ho. 3. in Ep. ad Philip.
If the Sacrifice of the Father did satisfy for the sons Job. 1.5.
of Job, why do thou doubt, whether we sacrificing for them, who have
departed, they have any comfort thereby? for God is accustomed to bestow his
benefits upon some, for others.

To conclude, the Fathers are so clear in this, that D. Fulke (directly
contrary to what he said before) acknowledges that, Confut. of Purg. p. 110.
Austine de ciu. Dei. l. 21. c. 13. concludes very clearly, that some suffer
temporal pains after this life, this may not be denied. And, Ibid. p. 78.
Austine speaks indeed of the amending fire, etc. but had no ground of that
fire, but in the common error of his time. Again, Ibid. p. 319. See Cent. 4.
c. 6.
In the buryall of Constantine is mention of prayer for his soul, according to
the error of the time. Ib. p. 320. 326.
Ambrose indeed allows prayer for the dead: it was a common error of his
time. M. Gifford affirms, that, Demonstration. ag. Brownistes. pa. 38.
This corruption of prayer for the dead was general in the Church, long before
the days of Austine etc. It was the practice of the Church in general, and
the Corruption so ancient, that Tertullian says, It was observed by Tradition
from the Apostles etc. The Doctrine of Purgatory was crept in also. So ancient
and general was the Doctrine of Purgatory, and Prayer, and Sacrifice for the
dead.

SECT. IV. Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead taught, and believed by
Protestants themselves.
John Husse expressly teaches that, In fidei suae elucidatione and sermon. de
Exequijs and suffragiis defunctorum. and adc. 3. in. 1. Joan.
The universal Church is divided into three parts, the Church militant,
triumphant, and dormitant etc. The Church dormitant is the number of the
Predestinate suffering in Purgatory etc. The blessed in this life do help with
their prayers, fastinges and Alms, and other holy works, the holy dormitants
of the Church, that they may go out of the pains of Purgatory, and be sooner
placed in the Country of the blessed. By the University of Prage it was thus
decreed, Tom. 1. operum Hussi. f. 82.
We confess even with believing 3. receptacles of souls loosed from the
flesh, to wit, Heaven, Purgatory, and Hell. Perzibran doubts not to say, In
professione fidei. c. 23.
I profess and firmly believe, that a place of Purgatory fire after this life
of souls departed from the body, and to be saved, not here fully purged by
the remedy of satisfaction, is to be placed: and that the faithful here in the
way, for the band of Charity and spirit, may and ought piously help them, by
fasting, prayers, alms* and other holy Oblations. Almost all Doctors do
ground this opinion upon the words of Christ, saying: Some sin, not to be
forgiven neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

D. Martin Luthers Confession of faith, is this, In assert. art. 37.
I do believe there is a Purgatory; And again, Tom. 2. Wittemberg. 1545. in
resolutionibus de Indulg. conclusione 15 fol. 112. prope fin. and concl. 16.
17. 19.
I am sure that there is a Purgatory: which Doctrine he does there more at
large defend, calling it, Ibid. fol. 112. b. initio.
Fidem tot saeculorum, the belief of so many ages. Yea, Aduersus Bullam. Tom.
7. fol. 132.
I never denied Purgatory. And, I yet believe it, as I have often written and
confessed. And, Disp. Lips. c. de Purg.
I know nothing of Purgatory, but that souls there suffer to be helped by our
Prayers and works. It suffices that we know them to suffer, and that we ought
to help them etc. Lastly the said D. Luther in another place is so confident
of this Doctrine, that he concludes thus, In Disput. Lypsic. cum Ecchio c. de
Purgat.
I do strongly believe, yea I dare avouch I know, that there is a Purgatory,
for I am easily induced that there is mention made thereof in Scriptures; as
Gregory in his dialogue induces that of Matt. 12. This sin shall not be
forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. And I admit that of
2. Machab. 12. It is a holy and wholesome thought to pray for the dead. So fully
does Luther believe, and teach Purgatory, even from Scriptures themselves.

Vrbanus 1. Part. operum ^n formula caute loquendi. fol. 86. and loc. com. c.
19.
Regius, fellow laborer with Luther, allows prayer for the sins of the
dead; and in proof thereof alleges the practice of the Ancient Church, Loc.
com. c. 18. de Purg. and part. 1. de Missae negotio fol. 72.
and testimonies of Nazianzen, Nyssen, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Austine, Damascene
etc. He also thinks that, Baruch Loc. com. impress. 1545. de Sanctis n. 16.
f. 124.
prayed for the dead: and yet further alleges his own Judgment and Luthers,
saying, In 1 part. operum in formula caute loquendi. c. de Sanctorum cultu.
The man of God Martin Luther, our for ever reverend master, thinks it
agreeable with Christian piety, that of our free devotion we should pray for our
deceased friends.

M. Fox acknowledges, that M. Latimer Act. mon. p. 1313. and p. 1315.
acknowledged Purgatory. And William Thorpe a constant Professor, prayed for
his Fathers Act. mon. p. 149.
and mothers souls. Melancthon confesses, that, Apol. Confess. Augustanae in
Disput. de vocabulis Missae.
Epiphanius testifyeth, Aerius to have thought that prayers for the dead are
unprofitable: that he reprehendeth, neither do we defend Aerius.

Sundry Prot. through evidence of truth, not daring absolutely to deny
Purgatory and prayer for the dead, do yet speak thus doubtfully and
inconsequently thereof: Confess. Wittemberg.
It is lawful to wish for the dead all quiet and happiness in Christ, but it is
not lawful to pray for them. Luther thinks, Postil. in Dom. 2. post Trin.
fol. 286. and in die omnium Sanctorum. fol. 441.
that it is lawful sometimes to pray for the dead, but not often: also to pray
for them at home, and in our Chamber, but not in the Church. And the same is
taught by Vrbanus Regius In. form. caute loquendi. tom. 1. fol. 86.
. D. Field Of the Church. l. 3. c. 17.
is of opinion, that it is lawful to pray for the dead presently after death,
but not afterward. Zwinglius says of himself, In Art. 60.
If one careful for the dead, does implore or beseech favor for them from
God, I do not condemn him: but it is Diabolical to determine the time for
this. M. Ant. de Dominis thinks that, De R^pub. l. 5. c. 8. n. 132.
At the Intercession of the Church, God does remit lesser sins a little after
death, but not long after death. But these are capriches reigning in the
brains of men distracted, unworthy of Confutation. And we have here seen,
that other Prot. without all exceptions, have taught the Doctrine of Purgatory
and prayer for the dead, even from the Scriptures and practice of the Primitive
Church.

SECT. V. Objections from Scriptures against Purgatory and Prayer for the Dead,
answered.
THe first Objection is taken from those words of the Psalmist, Ps. 126.3.
When he shall give sleep to his beloved, behold the Inheritance of our Lord.
Hence our Adversaries would prove, that immediately after death the inheritance
of Heaven follows. To this I answer with S. Austine, In Ps. 126. circa med.
this place is meant of the general Resurrection, Dat ergo dans etc. says he,
God therefore bestows this when his beloved shall sleep: then his beloved, to
wit, of Christ shall arise for all shall arise, but not as his beloved, for
there is Resurrection of all. And then citing that place of the Apostle, (we
shall all indeed arise, but we shall not all be changed) he adds, they do
arise to torment, we arise as our Savior arose, that we may follow our Head,
if we be his Members. So that this place is meant, in S. Austine his Judgment,
of the General Resurrection, after which the Elect go presently to heaven, and
are to expect no Purgatory. Besides where Protestants Engl. Bible of Anno 1592.
translate the same words thus, behold Children are the Inheritance of the
Lord, and the fruit of the womb his reward: this place is altogether
impertinent, and making nothing at all against Purgatory.

Secondly, that of Ecclesiasticus is objected, C. 9. 10.
Whatsoever thy hand is able to do, work it instantly: for neither work, nor
reason, nor wisdom, nor knowledge, shall be in Hell. Answer. S. Hierome In
Comment. huius loci,
affirms Solomon to speak this, in the person of the wicked, who take away
both Purgatory and Hell, thinking no life to remain after this: his words
are, Now he (meaning the Preacher) induces as it were the humane Error and
Custom, whereby they exhort each other to enjoy the goods of this life, and
making a Prosopopeia, after the manner of Poets and Rhetoricians, say: O man
because then after death thou art nothing, and death it self is nothing, hear
my Counsel; and whilst thou live in this short life, enjoy thy pleasure
etc. Secondly the same S. Hierome thinks, that Solomon may speak this to
those, who living wickedly, went directly to Hell, where it is most true, that
there is no Comfort for them, and therefore concludes thus of them. As Ibid.
fishes are taken with the hook and nets, and birds flying at liberty through
the air, are ensnared at unawares, so also men according to their desert,
shall be brought to Eternal torments etc. Thirdly, this Text may also be applied
to those in Purgatory, for such only are helped by the Prayers of their living
friends, who by their good works in their life time, deserved the same, and
therefore every one had need to work instantly in this life. And thus it is
expounded also by S. Gregory L. 4. Dial. c. 39.
.

Thirdly, some object that of Ecclesiastes, 11. 3.
If the tree shall fall to the South, or to the North, in what place soever it
shall fall, there shall it be: therefore there is no Purgatory out of which it
may be taken. Answer. Literally this is spoken of Corporal death, that men
are necessarily to dye, and being dead, they can no more rise by themselves,
then the tree that falls: But if we will apply this to the Condition of the
Soul, then the meaning only is that, in what state or condition soever, be it
of Salvation or Damnation, that a man departs out of this life, in the same
State shall he ever remain, fall the wood to the South, that is, die the man in
state of Salvation, or fall it to the North, that is, dye he in state of
damnation: In what place it falls, there it shall be, that is, his Condition
shall never be changed: for neither if he depart in grace, shall he be able any
more to loose it, neither if he dye out of the state of Grace shall he be ever
able hereafter to recover it, or to raise himself unto it, as the tree being
fallen, cannot arise up it self. Now he who is in Purgatory, is fallen to the
South, because he dyed in state of Salvation, and therefore after due purging
shall go to Heaven. Nothing therefore can be enforced out of this place against
Purgatory, since it belongs to the South. Lastly this place of Ecclesiastes,
makes no more against Purgatory, then against Limbus Patrum, which was the
place where the Fathers were before Christ's Incarnation and death.

Fourthly, others do urge those words of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 5.10.
For we must all be manifested before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the proper things of the body, according as he has done,
either good or evil, by which it may seem that Purgatory is quite taken away.
S. Austine gives the answer unto this Text, thus, In Enchyr. ad Laurentium.
c. 110. and l. de Cura p o Mort. c 1. Dionysius de Eccles. Hier. c. vlt. Greg.
l. 4. Dial. c. 39.
But the time interposed betwixt man's death, and the last Resurrection, does
keep the souls in secret Receptacles, as every soul is worthy either of ease
or misery, according as the soul has wrought living in flesh: neither is it
to be denied, that the souls of the Dead are relieved with the piety of their
living friends, when the Sacrifice of the Mediator is offered for them, or
Alms given in the Church. But these things avail them, who living merited,
that these things might afterward profit them: for there is a certain manner
of living, neither altogether so good; that it may not require these helps
after death, nor altogether so bad, that these things may not help it after
death. But some kind of living is so good, that it needs not these helps,
and again, another so evil, that it cannot be helped with these after this
life; wherefore here all the merit is to be got, whereby any may be relieved, or
payned after this life etc. These things therefore which the Church frequenteth
for the Commending of the Dead, are not against that saying of the Apostle, We
shall all stand etc. Because each indeed merited this for himself whilst he
lived, that these things might avail him, for these things do not profit all,
and why do they not profit all? but for the difference of life which every one
held in flesh, therefore when Sacrifices either of the Altar, or of what Alms
soever are offered for all the dead baptized; for those who are very good, they
are thanks-giuings, for those which are not very evil they are propitiations,
for those which are very evil, although they are no release of such dead, yet
are they some Consolations to the living. So far S. Austine, both in proof of
Purgatory, and Sacrifice and prayer for the dead, and for full answer to this
Objection.

Fifthly those words of S. John are commonly objected, Apoc. 14.13.
Blessed are the dead which dye in our Lord, from henceforth now, says the
spirit, that they rest from their labors, for their works follow them, But
all the Godly dye in our Lord, therefore there is no Purgatory for them.
Answer. S. Anselme, In Comment. huius loci.
by these words, from henceforth, understands the day of Judgment, whereof S.
John speaks in all that Chapter, and so it makes nothing against Purgatory,
which then shall cease. Victor In hunc locum.
and Haymo expound this place to be mea^t of very perfect men, and especially
of holy Martyrs, whom S. John in this place is willed to comfort, and who are
said absolutely to dye in our Lord, not having any thing after death to be
purged: whereas those who dye in venial sin, or with punishment to be paid
for mortal, dye not absolutely in our Lord, but partly so, by reason of their
Charity, and partly otherwise, by reason of their sin, and so they are called
by S. Austine, L. 3. contr. duas Ep. Pelag. c. 3.
partly the sons of God, and partly the sons of the world.

A sixth Objection is taken from that Promise Christ made to the Thief
converted at his death; S. Luke records it thus, C. 25. 43.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise: therefore no Purgatory remains,
no not for those who have done no Penance. The answer is: A death so cruel,
suffered so patiently, and a Confession of Christ so admirable, even then, when
the Apostles themselves denied him, might well be taken for a full
satisfaction: neither do the Privileges of a few, make a Law; but besides,
seeing the good Thief ready to dye, desired our Lord that he would remember
him when he came into his kingdom; it strongly argues that the Thief
thought, that immediately after death, he was not to go to heaven, otherwise he
would have prayed him to have taken him with him to his kingdom, and yet
withal, he hoped not to be damned; whereupon it follows, that he thought
there was some other place besides heaven, and hell, where he was to remain
for a time, until Christ, coming to his kingdom, should remember to take him
thence, which was the uttermost which the good Thief could hope for.

Brentius obiecteth, that all are included within these words, Come ye blessed
etc. and go ye accursed etc. Answer. The words precedent and subsequent, do
manifestly show, that this is spoken of the day of Judgment, when Purgatory
shall cease.

Some argue thus: In Purgatory a man cannot merit, therefore neither satisfy.
But for answer, I may truly say that the Consequence is false, for to merit,
besides Grace is required liberty, and the state of this life, whereas a man may
truly satisfy, though he be compelled thereunto by the Judge.

Lastly M. Rogers thinks that, Def. of the Art art. 11. p. 119.
In the sacred Scripture there is mention but only of two ways, one leading
unto destruction the other bringing unto life; of two sorts of men, whereof
some believe, and they are saved, some believe not, and they are damned: And of
two states, one blessed, where Lazarus is, the other cursed, where Dives does
abide. A third way, or sort, or state, cannot be found in the word of God.
Answ. It is rrue, that ways, states, and sorts of men, in regard of Eternity,
are but two, but this nothing hinders but that temporally, and before the day
of Judgment come, there may be more, as has been proved formerly from the
Scriptures themselves, the Ancient Fathers, and sundry Protestant writers.

CHAP. XVI. The true state of the Question, concerning the Intercession, and
Invocation of Angels, and Saints.
Whether the Angels and Saints in Heaven, do pray for men upon Earth; And
whether we may lawfully pray to them as Intercessors to God for us: Or whether
the said Angels and Saints do hear our Prayers, or know things done upon
Earth: and their Intercession be not a derogation from Christ's Mediation.
SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
ALTHOUGH it be the ordinary practice of Prot. to endeavor the privation of
all honor to Angels and Saints from men upon Earth, and to hinder men from
the help of their suffrages; yet the Church of Christ to the contrary has ever
exhibited unto them their due honor, and has made use of their holy prayers.
So the Church of Christ commands, Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. Decret. de
intercessione Sanctorum.
all Bishops and others sustayning the Office and charge of teaching, that
according to the use of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, received from
the very first time of Christian Religion, and according to the consent of holy
Fathers, and the Decrees of sacred Councels, they first of all diligently teach
the faithful concerning the intercession and invocation of Saints etc.
teaching them that the Saints reigning together with Christ* do offer their
prayers to God for men; that it is good and profitable humbly to invoke them,
and to fly to their prayers, help, and aid for the obtaining of benefits from
God by his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who is our only Redeemer and Savior:
And that those who deny, that Saints enjoying eternal felicity in heaven are
to be inuocated, or such as do affirm, either that they do not pray for men,
or that by Invocation of them, they pray not for us in particular, is Idolatry
or against Gods word, or opposite to the honor of one Mediator of God and
man, Jesus Christ; or that it is foolish either by word or thought to
supplicate the Saints reigning in heaven, are of wicked opinion. Thus the
Council of Trent.

The Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon pray thus, Act 11.
Flauian lives after death, the Martyr pray for us. The Council of
Constantinople decrees, Conc. 6. Constantinop. c. 7. See Conc Gangrense can.
20.
that a Christian adoring only God his Creator, may invoke Saints, that they
would vouchsafe to pray for him to the divine Majesty. And the Bishops in the
Council of Cabilonense make this prayer to S. Vincent, Cap. 1.
Being assembled together in the Church of S. Vincent, asking the Intercession
of this holy Martyr, that we may deserve by his suffrage the long life of the
forsaid Prince. The second Council of Nice advises thus Act. 6. and Act. 3.
Let us do all things with the fear of God, asking the intercessions of the
unspotted Mother of God, and always Virgin Mary, also of the Angels, and all
Saints.

Agreably to these Councels the present Church Bellar. de Sanct. l 1. c. 17
etc. Rhem Test. in Luc. 16 9. and in 2. Pet. 1.15.
of Christ teaches, that although it be not lawful to pray to Angels or
Saints, as the authors and giuers either of Grace or glory, or of any thing
requisite to salvation; or as though they were our so immediate intercessors to
God, as to ask any thing without Christ's mediation, and his merits; yet that
they do pray for us both in general and particular, and that we may pray to
them, all Catholics believe.

Points Disputable.
Some August. l. de cura pro mort. c. 15.
Catholic writers teach that the Saints in heaven do know things upon earth
by the relation of Angels. S. Hieron. cont. Vigil.
Others, that by the celerity of their nature, they are as it were, every
where, and do hear by themselves the prayers of their suppliants. Aug. l. de
cura pro mort. cap 15.
Others yet, that our prayers when we make them, are revealed to them by God.
But S. Greg. l. 12. Moral. c. 13. S. Tho. 3. part q. 10. art. 2.
others most probably, that from the very beginning of their beatitude, they do
see all things in God, which in any respect do belong unto them, and therefore
our prayers, directed unto them.

Protestant Untruths.
Luther affirms, that, Ad Euangelium de festo Annuntiationis.
The Papists make the Virgin Mary a God, they attribute unto her omnipotency
in heaven and in earth etc. In the Papacy all have betaken themselves to Mary,
and have expected more favor and grace from her, then from Christ himself.
According to Calvin, De necessitate reformandae Ecclesiae.
We do not only adore Saints instead of Christ, but also their bones,
garments, shoes and pictures. And, Instit. l. 3. c. 10.. 22.
every one takes to themselves peculiar Saints, into whose custody they give
themselves, no otherwise then if they were guardian Gods. Yea he avouches, Ib.
l. 1. c. 20.. 21.
that in our Hymns and Lytanies we make no mention of Christ. Other Prot.
avouch, that, Confessio Mansfieldenfium cap. de erroribus Iesuitarum.
The error of the Jesuitical sect is, that Christ although he was our
Mediator, and intercessor, yet now he is not any more but Saints only are our
Intercessours, and mediators. D. White speaking of Catholic Pastors says,
Way to the Church, Pref. to the Read. n. 14.
In their open service and printed books (they) serve the Saints and worship
them, with the same service that they give to Christ. Again, The same titles
are given to the Saints, and the same things, by the same merits asked of them,
that appertain to Christ alone. And, they join the Virgin Mary with Christ in
the very work of our Redemption, and ascribe to her no less then to him, the
execution of all Gods mercyes toward us.

Rogers affirms that, Def. of the Art. art. 22. p. 128.
All Gods people in the purer and former times have etc utterly condemned the
inuocating or paying unto creatures whatsoever. But these and sundry such like
untruths broached by Prot. deserve no other answer, but truly to say, that
they are lies uttered by the legitimate children of the father of lies, the
Devil.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Prot. Church decrees that, Article 22.
The Remish doctrine touching invocation of Saints etc. is a fond thing, vainly
invented, and grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but rather repugnant to
the word of God. The French Huguenots say, Confess. Gal. art. 24.
We believe that whatsoever men do imagine concerning the Intercession of
Saints departed, is nothing else then fraud and fallacies of Satan. Whitaker
says of himself and other Prot. Ad rat. 4. Camp. p. 19. See Perkins tom. 1.
c. 21. in serie causarum. col. 31. Reinolds in his Conference. c. 1. sect. 2.
We do not know whether Martyrs and Saints may pray to Christ for us: But Ad
rat. 4. Camp.
It is certain, that they are ignorant what we do.

Daneus proceeds yet further, affirming that Controu. 7. p. 1310.
It is a false proposition, that the Saints who are already received into
heaven, do pray God in general for us who live here. And again, Ib. p. 1315.
Polanus Disp. 25. Call. Instit. l. 3. c. 20.. 21.
They do not ask any thing of God either in general or particular for the
necessities of men living upon Earth. And the like is taught by sundry other
Protestants. Sundry Prot. likewise teach, that the Saints in Heaven do not take
any care of us upon Earth, neither do know our Prayers, or other things here
done. Calvin teaches, that, In Zachar. 1.12.
We know the of offices of Charity are restrained to the course of this present
life. And, In Luc. 16.29.
The Papists are here foolish subtle, whilst they will prove that the dead
have care of the living, then which cavil nothing is more unsavory. Beza
admireth, In Luc. 15.10.
Who shall rightly persuade himself or others, that the souls of Saints
received into Heaven, do take care of these things which are done upon Earth,
or that they are known; much less that they ought to be inuocated. But how
rightly these Prot. agree with ancient Heretics, observe.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
D. Fulke confesses, that Answer to a Counterf. Cath. p. 46. Hieron. cont.
Vigil. c. 3.
Vigilantius writ against Invocation of Saints etc. him Hierome reproves. And
the same is confessed of Vigilantius by other Parker ag. Symboliz. part. 1. p.
74. 83. Crispinus estate of the Church. p. 131.
Prot. D. Humfrey says, Ad rat. 3. Camp. p. 26.
Vigilantius ordained, that Saints were not to be worshipped etc. we ordain
the same. And so you rank your self M. Humfrey to be an heretic with
Vigilantius.

In like sort, Sarauia and others acknowledge, that Aerius was also condemned
by the Fathers for his then teaching that, Defens. Tract. de diuersis. p. 349.
346. Bucanus loc. com. p. 514.
The Saints departed are not to be prayed unto. And the same heresy is taught
by Azoara 49.
Mahomet.

Vigilantius (22) and the Waldenses Guido de Waldensibus.
denied that Saints could hear us: and so did D. Whitakers and others next
before; but they are all censured by S. Hierome, and Guido, of Heresy.

Hier. cont. Vigil. c. 3.
Protestant Errors.
Calvin thinks, it Instit. l. 4. c. 25.. 6.
foolish and temerarious to seek in what place the souls of the Just are,
whether they enjoy glory or not. In the mean time seeing the Scripture every
where commands to depend of the expectation of Christ's coming, and
differreth the glory and Crown till then, let us be content with these limits
prescribed by God, the souls of the godly having performed the labor of
warfare to fit together in blessed rest where with happy joy they expect the
fruition of promised glory: here Calvin contradicts himself, first censuring
it for foolish, to enquire after the state of the souls of the just departed,
and yet himself afterward determines the matter, and that most wickedly, by
denying present glory to the souls of Saints. Perkins acknowledged that,
Reform. Cath. controu. 14. c 2.
when Angels did appear, they were lawfully honored, but not now.

Whereas Catholics do call the blessed Virgin Mary, our B. Lady, M. Rogers
affirms Def. of the Art. art. 20. p 106.
that we falsely call her so: It seems he would have no greater title given
unto her, then Mistres Mary, which any Minister expects to be given to his
wife. Calvin affirmed (as before) that In Zachar. 1 12.
we know the office of Charity to be restrained to the course of this present
life So that according to him, there is no exercise of Charity in heaven.

Tindall demands, In Fox Act. Mon. p. 1237.
To what end do thou erect Churches in honor of Saints that thou should
make them thy friends? they need it not, yea they are not thy friends. Most
agreeable with that of Luther, Postil. in Dom. 9. post Trin. fol. 309.
Neither are they thy friends, but the friends of them from whom in their time
they received benefit. We must not according to Luther imitate Saints, Postil.
in fest. Sancti Ioannis. fol. 378.
These trifles ought not to be preached to men, that they imitate Saints and
tread in their steps. In ferijs eiusdem fol. 91. Calu. in Io. 4.20.
A long error has possessed and prevailed, that we should all consider the
works and conversation of Saints, and study to follow them, we fools thinking
this to be greatest piety. And the like is taught by Calvin. And their
counsel is diligently observed by all their followers.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that the Angels, and Saints in Heaven do
know our prayers upon Earth, and that they pray for us, and we may lawfully
pray unto them, as Intercessours for us.
SEeing nothing is more frequent in the mouths of late Sectaries, then that
praying to Saints is no where taught in the Seriptures; I will therefore
endeavor to prove from thence three points, all necessarily belonging to this
Question, The first is, that Angels and Saints do hear our Prayers and know
things that are done upon Earth; the second, that they pray for us not only in
general, but also in particular. And the third is, that we may lawfully pray
to them. The first shall be proved from the Prophecy of holy Daniel, where it is
said, C. 10.11.
And he (to wit the Angel) said to me, fear not Daniel; Because from the
first day that thou did set thy heart to understand, to afflict thy self in
the sight of God, thy words have been heard, and I am come for thy words. Now
by the words of Daniel, no man doubts but are understood his prayers, which
were both heard and known by the Angel, since the Angel gives the hearing
of his prayers to be a cause of his coming unto him. So that Daniel praying
upon Earth, was heard by the Angel in heaven.

Secondly this point is proved by these words of Saint Paul, 1. Cor.
13.8.9.10.12.
Whether Prophecyes shall be made void, or tongues shall cease, or knowledge
shall be destroyed: for in part we know, and in part we prophesy; but when that
shall come that is perfect, that shall be made void, that is in part: we see now
by a glass in a dark sort; but then face to face: now I know in part; but
then I shall know, as also I am known. The necessary deduction out of this
place is this, that the knowledge of the Blessed, far exceeds any
supernatural knowledge, whether of Faith or Prophecy given to man in this
life, in so much, as whatsoever is known by any knowledge of this life, is
much more perfectly known by that knowledge of the blessed. Now it is most
certain that many Prophets and holy men upon Earth, knew the thoughts of other
men's hearts, and things far distant from them, as is made manifest by the
Prophet Eliseus, when he demanded Giezi 4. Reg. 5.26.
Was not my heart present, when the man returned out of his Chariot to meet
thee? Yea he discovered unto him further, all the particulers of his brybery,
together with the end, and cause which moved him, which must needs argue, that
he was privy to his very inward and secretest thoughts: again, was not the
same Prophet privy to all the ambushments that the King of Syria laid to entrap
the King of Israel? and did he not by Prophetical forsight, premonish the King
of Israel thereof, saying, 4. Reg. 6.9. See the like Act. 5.3.9.
Beware thou pass not into such a place, because the Syrians are there in
ambushments. And the King of Israel following the counsel of the Prophet,
prevented him of the ambush: and when the King of Syria suspected some of his
own to betray his Counsel unto the King of Israel, did not one of his
Counsaylors reply? Ibid. verse. 12. And see Act 5.1.2. etc. S. Peter's knowing
the fraudulent dealing of Ananias and Saphira.
Not so my Lord King, but Elizeus the Prophet, which is in Israel, tells the
King of Israel all words, whatsoever thou shall speak in thy privy Chamber.
Which point of living Prophets knowing men's thoughts and words, though never
so secret, and distant, was so evident, that the very Infidels themselves
acknowledged it; and yet our Adversaries pretending themselves to be Christian,
and Reformers, will not grant this Privilege to the Angels, and Saints
triumphing, and reigning in heaven.

Thirdly, it is generally houlden that the damned Spirits in hell do know
things done upon Earth; and shall we deny the like knowledge to the Saints in
heaven? Daneus says, Christian. Isagog. part. 2. c. 33. p. 83.
The devils do excel with admirable knowledge of these temporal and earthly
things. And experience is strong herein, as appears by many Examples, namely
of the spirit Orthen mentioned by Froyzard, and of possessed children, which in
their fits, tell of things done in their absence: In so much as that the Devils
from this their knowledge of things done, did probably conjecture such things
to come as were thereupon depending, as appears by their so many Oracles. Yea
this point is so true, that Aretius Loc. com. p. 546. 548.
proves the same by sundry Examples of the Scriptures. Did not Abraham after
his death, and yet not in heaven, know that Moses and the Prophets were
teaching upon Earth, when he said, Luc. 16.29.
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. Yea the damned Dives
Ibid. ver. 27.28.
was not ignorant that he had five Brethren alive. Now then if wicked spirits
and damned Devils are not ignorant of things done upon Earth, shall not the
blessed Angels and glorified Saints, who are nor inferior in knowledge, much
the rather understand and know the same?

Thirdly this point is proved by those words of our Savior mentioned by S.
Luke, 15.10.
there shall be joy before the Angels of God upon one sinner that does pennace.
Now none can rejoice, but such as know, what the thing is at which they
rejoice: but the Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner upon Earth;
therefore it follows evidently, that they know of the Conversion of sinners
upon earth, that being the cause of their Joy.

Fourthly the same may be proved from such places as show that we have Angels
to guard us, as that of S. Matthew, 18.10.
See that you despise not one of these litles ones, for I say to you, that
their Angels in heaven, always do see the face of my Father Here amongst other
reasons, it is urged, that we should take heed of despising or scandalizing
others, because their Angels seeing God, see the same. And when S. Peter Act.
12.14.15.16.
delivered out of Prison, knocked at the door where many of the faithful were
assembled, it is said, at the first they would not believe, that it was he, but
his Angel. The like knowledge of Angels might be proved from K. David, saying,
Ps. 137.2.
In the sight of Angels I will sing to thee. And from S. Paul, 1. Cor. 4.9.
we are made a spectacle to the world, and to Angels, and to men. Which Words
plainly import that Angels do look upon us.

But some do reply and say, though it be granted, that Angels do know things
upon earth, yet it follows not that the blessed souls do the like. But this
forces nothing: for first, that granted to Angels that they know things upon
Earth, then it evidently follows, that they knowing our necessities, do in
their Charity pray for us, and that we may lawfully pray to them. Secondly of
Saints it is said, that Mat. 22.30.
they are as heavenly Angels, and in another place, Luc. 20.36.
equal to Angels, and yet in a third place, there is said to be in heaven,
Apoc. 21.17.
The measare of a man, which is of an Angel. All which argues, that the
Saints in heaven may enjoy equal glory with the Angels. Besides they are
endued with their understanding, glorified, and elevated with the light of
glory, and with the presence and true sight of God, as the Angels are, and
therefore nothing is wanting to them herein, which is granted to the Angels. And
they have this more then Angels, that they are members of the body of the
Church, more conjoined with us, then the Angels, and have experienced our
miseries and dangers.

Calvin confesses this argument to convince, if we can prove, that as the
Angels have charge of men, and do guard them, and are present at their
affairs, so the blessed souls of men do the like. But this is easily proved
by these texts following, Apoc. 2.26.27.
He that shall overcome, and keep my works unto the end, I will give him
power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, and as the
vessel of a Potter shall they be broken, as I also have received of my Father.
Apoc. 3.12.
He that shall overcome, I will make him a Pillar in the temple of my God. Mat.
24.46.47.
Blessed is that servant, whom when his Lord comes, he shall find so doing:
Amen. I say to you, that over all his goods he shall appoint him. Here we have
that the souls of Blessed men after their death, and before the Resurrection,
receive power over Countries, to govern and feed them, and to be pillars to
support the Church, and to have care over Gods goods, which S. Hilary says, is
his Church: all which show, that they have to do with our affairs in this
world. The guardes of Saints (says In psalm. 124.
S. Hilary) and the defense of Angels, are not wanting to those that will
stand. S. Ambrose also teaches, that L. 8. in Lucam fine.
As the Angels have charge, so also these who have deserved the life of Angels.
And S. Leo avouches, that S. Peter Sermon. 2. de Anniuersario suae Assumpt.
now more fully and powerfully performs those things which are committed unto
him, and executes all the parts of offices and cares, in him by whom he is
glorified. So clear it is that the B. Souls, do take care, and help our
affairs in this world.

The same is proved from the very state of their beatitude, for their appetite
is so fully satisfied, as that nothing is wanting unto them, which otherwise
naturally they could desire, agreeing with that of the Psalmist, Ps. 16.15.
I shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear; as also with that of S. John,
C. 16.25.
Ask and you shall receive, that your joy may be full. But it is undoubted,
that they naturally desire to know the state of their brethren, friends,
benefactours, wife, or Children, and the like left behind them upon Earth,
therefore the Saints in heaven know the affairs, much more the prayers of
their friends upon Earth, otherwise they could not be satisfied in their glory,
and their joy made full.

Now follows the second part of this Section, viz. That Angels and Saints
pray for us. And first we read in the Prophet Zachary, that the Angel prayed
for the people, C. 1.12.
And the Angel of our Lord answered and said: O Lord of Hosts how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, with which thou
have been angry? This is now the 70. year. Here the Angel prays in
particular for Jerusalem, and the Cities of Judah.

Secondly, we read in the Book of Tobias, that the Angel Raphaell said to
Tobias, C. 12.12.
When thou did pray with tears, and did bury the dead etc. I offered thy
prayers to our Lord. And again, C. 12.15.
I am Raphael an Angel one of the seven which assist before our Lord. This
place is so plain for the Intercession of Angels, that in want of better
answer, Whitaker says, Ad rat. Camp. rat. 2. p. 15.
Little do we regard the example of Raphael the Angel mentioned in Toby,
neither do we acknowledge those seven Angels whereof he speaks: all this is
different from the Canonical Scripture, and sauoureth I know not of what
superstition. But it seems Whitaker did not well remember, that mention is
made of those 7. Angels, Apoc. 1.4. and 5.6. And that the book of Toby is
Canonical Scripture, I have proved before.

Thirdly, it is recorded in the 2. book of 15.12.14.
Machahees, how Judas Machabeus saw in vision Onias stretching forth his hands,
praying for all the people of the Jews; and that Onias said of Hieremy, This
is a lover of his brethren, who prays much for the people, and for all the
holy City. To this Whitaker only answers, Ad rat. Camp. p. 16.
I let pass that dream of Judas concerning Onias, whereof we read 2. Match.
15. But it little skilleth whether thou understand intercession of the dead, or
Sacrifice: both is false. So that no other answer is left to these places, but
only the denial of the said books to be Canonical Scripture, whereas the
contrary is already proved at large.

Fourthly, Almighty God said unto Hieremy, Cap. 15.1.
If Moses and Samuel shall stand before me, my soul is not toward this
people; which argues, that they were wont to stand before God, praying for
others. Calvin answers, that from this place rather the contrary is to be
gathered, for seeing it is said, if they shall stand, to wit, to pray, it
imports that they neither stood, nor prayed. But though peradventure it be
signified, that as then they did not pray, because they understood the matter
then to be desperate, yet it is signified that at other times they were
accustomed to pray, when they thought they might obtain: for otherwise Gods
speech had not been apt and congruous. For if a man should say, If my horse
should pray for thee, I will not grant it, he should speak foolish, because
horses cannot pray: and in like sort, if one should say, if Demosthenes shall
come, he shall not persuade me, this speech also were foolish, because dead men
do not use to come. And the same, which God forbid, might be said of those
words, If Moses and Samuel shall stand before me, if they neither could, nor
were accustomed to pray. And it is to be noted, that it is not said, If they
should stand, that is, if by impossibility they should now live and pray, but,
if they shall stand, which signifies what they might do, to wit, pray.

Fifthly, S. John relates that, Apoc. 5.8.
The 24. Elders feldown before the Lamb having every one of them harpes, and
golden violls full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints. These words
clearly teach, that the Saints in heaven offer up the prayers of holy persons
in Earth, (called here, and in other places Saints) to Christ: and that these
odours were prayers.

Sixthly, the Martyrs in heaven cry with a loud voice, saying, Apoc. 6.10.
How long Lord, holy and true, iudgest thou not, and reuengest not our blood of
them that dwell upon the Earth? Now if they pray for revenge of their enemies,
much more for mercy and grace for their friends. This place is so conuincing,
that Prot. understand the sa^e of such prayers as the Saints made when they
were upon Earth, not as they are in heaven. Confess. Wittemberg. c. de
inuocatione Sanctorum.
In the Apocalypse (say they) the souls of the Saints slain, do cry out that
their blood may be revenged, not that now resting in the Lord, they are
desirous of revenge, according to the manner of men, but that the Lord even
after their death, is myndfull of the prayers, which whilst they lived upon
Earth, they powered out for the delivery of themselves and the whole Church. But
this is directly contrary to the words of the Text, which affirm, that they
then in heaven did actually pray for revenge. Besides, it is false and
injurious to Martyrs, to say, that whilst they were living, they desired
revenge of their Persecutors, for they rather with Christ our Savior, and S.
Steven, prayed for their pardon: whilst they were living, they were subject to
sin, and so might have been in danger if they had asked revenge, to have done
it upon anger, hatred, and malice: Whereas now in heaven, according to S. Bedes
exposition, they do it in regard, and love of Justice.

S. Peter promises to pray for his flock after his death, saying, 2. Ep. c.
1.13.14.15.
I think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up by
admonition, being certain that the laying away of my Tabernacle is at hand,
according as our Lord Jesus Christ also signified unto me: and I will do my
diligence, you to have often, after my decease also, that you may keep a
memory of these things. Now it is evident, that by the laying down of his
Tabernacle, he means his death, as by being in his Tabernacle he
understands the term of his life: and where he says, that after the
Deposition of his Tabernacle or decease, he will do his diligence to have them
often, what else can be meant, but that after his death, when he is in heaven,
he will often have them in mind, and pray unto God for them: signifying plainly
that his care over them, should not cease by death, and that by his
Intercession before God, after his departure, he would do the same thing for
them, that he did before in his life by teaching and preaching. And agreably to
this, it was a common practice among ancient See Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 4. Cypr.
Ep. 57. fin. and de Discipl. and habitu virginum Hier. Ep. 1. ad Heliod. c. 2.
Christians of the Primitive Church, and always since among Catholics, to
make covenant in their life time, that whether of them went to heaven before
the other, he should pray for his friend yet living.

D. Fulke for his best evasion corrupts the Text, for where it is said, I
will do my diligence, you to have often, after my decease also, that you may
keep a memory of these things, he translateth it thus, Against Rhem. Test. in
2. Pet. 1.15.
I will ever also give my diligence, that ye may have wherewith to stir up the
remembrance of these things after my departing; which says he, Ibid. p. 443.
he performs in writing this Epistle: So making the Epistle to be that, which
must stir up the remembrance of those things after his departing, whereas S.
Peter speaks of himself, that he will do his diligence, them to have often
after his decease also.

Lastly, the Scriptures plainly teach the Communion of the Church Triumphant,
with the Milirant, for so the Apostle says, Heb. 12.22.23.
We are come etc. to the Church of the first borne, which are written in the
heavens, and so are Citizens thereof. Gal. 4.26.
And Jerusalem which is above etc is our Mother. And, Col. 1.18. Ephesians. 4.15.
Christ is the head of the body, the Church. Now this Communion does
necessarily require, that, all the Members of this body be careful and
helpful one to another, this being the nature of members living under one
Head, as the same Romans 12.4. 1. Cor. 12.12.
Apostle teaches. And so S. Austine expressly teaches that, De Ciuit. Dei. l.
20. c. 9.
Neither are the souls of the godly deputed separated from the Church, which
also now is the kingdom of Christ, for otherwise there should not be
Commemoration made of them at the Altar of God, in the Communication of the
body of Christ: So certain it is that there is a holy Communion between the
Saints in Heaven, and the faithful upon Earth.

Having thus declared already, that the Angels and Saints know and hear our
prayers, and further that they pray for us; because D. Fulke thinks that,
Against Rhem. Test. in 2 Pet. 1.15. p. 443.
if it were proved, that the Saints departed do pray for us, yet have we no
warrant out of Scriptures to pray to them: I will now in the residue of this
Section, endeavor to prove from the Scriptures, that we may lawfully pray to
them; which indeed necessarily follows by force of Argument drawn from the
premises, thus. We may lawfully and profitably pray unto them, who are able in
respect of their power with God, fit for their knowledge of our Estates, and
lastly willing to pray for us, in regard of their great and excessive Charity:
But the Saints and Angels have power with God, and so are able, have knowledge
of our affairs, and therefore fit, are full of Charity, and therefore willing
to pray for us; Therefore we may, and do lawfully and profitably pray unto them.

But this is proved further by warrant of Scripture and manyfold examples
therein contained: for fitst the Patriarch Jacob coming to bless the children
of his son Joseph, Ephraim, and Manasses, inuocated the Angel thus, Genesis
48.16.
The Angel who has delivered me from all evil, bless these Children. To
this some See the Marg. notes of the Engl. Bible of 1578.
Prot. answer, that by Angel, is understood Christ: which is impossible,
seeing he was not incarnated for some thousands of years after. The Prophet
Osee also says of Jacob, Cap. 12.4.
He prevailed against the Angel and was strengthened, he wept, and besought
him. Here the Prophet expressly affirms, that Jacob besought the Angel,
The English Bible of 1578.
or as some Prot. translate, he wept, and prayed unto him: so clear it is,
that Jacob prayed to the Angel. Moses desiring to auert Gods heavy wrath
greatly kindled against the Israelites, for their Idolatry of the goulden
Calfe, cold light upon no more effectual means to stay Gods hand from
destroying them at once, then thus to pray, Exodus 32.13.
Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy servants etc. which place does
virtually imply both invocation of Saints, as also invocation of God by the
merits of his Saints, as we shall see when we come to the exposition of the
Fathers upon these places. In the mean time observe that, the Just who dyed
before the coming of Christ, did not enter into heaven, or see God, neither
could they ordinarily know the prayer of the living; and therefore it was not
usual in the Old Testament to say, Holy Abraham pray for me, but men of those
times only prayed to God, and alleged the merits of Saints, who then were
dead, that by them their prayers might be helped.

Caluins reply to this place is, that God is not here inuocated by the merits
of his Saints, nor elsewhere, but only that there is a rehearsal made of the
Covenant, which God made with the Patriarchs, concerning the helping and
protecting of their posterity. But this evasion being a mere collusion of
Calvin, will not serve his turn; for in these kind of prayers, not only mention
is made of Gods Covenant, but further, the righteousness and merits of Gods
Saints are co^memorated. And so you shall read in the Psalms, that Solomon
inuocating God, prayed thus, Ps. 131.1.
Lord remember David, and all his meeknes: and a little after, Ibid. 10.
For thy servant David's sake turn not away the face of thine anointed Christ.
These are the words of Solomon, inuocating God by the merits of his Father
David deceased, as 2. Paral. 6.42.
appears elsewhere. Again 3. Reg. 15.4 5.
For David's sake our Lord his God gave him a lamp in Jerusalem, that he might
raise up his son after him, and establish Jerusalem because David had done
right in the eyes of our Lord etc. And there would be no end, if I should cite
all those places, where God is inuocated by the merits of his Saints, all which
make against Caluins imposture: and therefore see Daniel 3. Exodus 34. and
Hieremie 32.

Job is sent by his friend Eliphas to the Angels, to invoke them, Job. 5.1.
Call therefore if there be any to answer thee, and turn thee to some of the
Saints. And Job himself in another place inuocateth the Angels thus, C. 19.
21.
Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, O you my friends, for the hand of God
has touched me. S. Austine In annot. in Job. c. 19.
by Saints in the first place, and friends in this last, thinks the holy
Angels to be understood: Which supposed, it is evident, that it was then a
custom of the Church to invoke the holy Angels.

S. John the Evangelist himself inuocated the 7 Spirits for grace and peace to
the Churches of Asia, praying thus, Apoc. 1.4. and see c. 5.6.
Grace to you and peace from him that is, and that was, and that shall come,
and from the 7. spirits which are in the sight of his Throne, and from Jesus
Christ etc. where we are to note, that S. John thought it no Idolatry to
invoke the 7. Spirits, in the same place, where he inuocated two persons of
the B. Trinity; but the meaning is, that the 7. spirits should be Intercessors,
for obtaining at Gods hand, Grace and peace for the Churches of Asia. Now, that
by those 7. spirits, are meant 7. Angels, is confirmed by those words of
Raphael, saying, Tob. 12.15.
I am one of the 7 holy Angels, which present the prayers of the Saints. And
in the fifth Chapter of the Apocalypse, mention is made agreably to this, of C
5.6.
the 7. spirits of God sent into all the Earth: for which cause S. Paul calls
the Angels, Heb. 1.14.
Ministering spirits sent to minister for them which shall receive the
Inheritance of salvation: Yea this place is so strong for invocation of Angels,
that the Prot. Wygandus, though he will not acknowledge invocation of Angels
herby proved, yet says hereof, Syntagma Col. 396.
Praeter morem reliquarum Scripturarum etc. Contrary to other Scriptures, he
asks grace from the 7. spirits in the first Chapter. So that this Prot. best
answer, is to make this place of Scripture contrary to the rest.

And it is more then probable, that the Jews present at our Saviors death,
could not have been so easily persuaded to think and say, that our Savior
saying, Mat 17.46. Marc. 35.34.
Eli, Eli, Lammae Sabacthani, called Elias, if the Invocation of Saints had
not then been familiar and usual to them: which might be further proved by
several testimonies Flauius Josephus de bello Iudaico. l 3. c. 14. Josephus
Bengorion in Bello Iudai^o. c. 21. Symbolum fidei Iudaeorum fol 22. 28.
of the ancient Jews, and later Rabines.

Throughout the whole Scriptures you shall read, how the living called upon the
living, to pray for them; did not Abraham Genesis 20.
pray for Abimelech, and that by Gods appointment and promise to Abimelech? Did
not Job Job 42.8
by Gods appointment pray for his three friends, when God said unto them, Go to
my servant Job, be shall pray for you him will I accept etc.? Did not the
Israelites cry unto Samuel, 1 Reg. 7
Cease not to cry to the Lord our God for us, that he deliver us out of the
hands of the Philistines? Did not God Ezech. 22.30.
seek for a man that should stand before him in prayer for the Land, that he
should not destroy it? Did not the Israelites, when they had sinned, entreat
Moses to pray Numer. 21.7.
for them, which he did accordingly? Did not S. Paul say, Romans 15.30.
I beseech you brethren help me with your prayers, which elsewhere Ephesians. 6.1.
These. 5.2. These. 3. Coloss 4. Heb. 13.
he often beggeth? And does not S. James Jacob. 5.16.
give the reason, for the continual prayer of a just man avails much? And
are we not admonished to pray Iac. 5.16.
one for another? And although these Examples do concern the living only, yet
the reason which S. James renders, which is, because the prayer of the just
avails much, does much more extend to the Intercession of the Saints and
Angels in heaven, by how much they are more just, and also more gracious in
behoulding the face of God for us, for which cause they are called our Angels,
as it is said before Mat. 18.10. Act. 12 15.
Their Angels behold Gods face. The truth and sequel whereof is more certain,
in that no Texts of Scripture be alleged against our invocation of Angels and
Saints, but the same do as much impugn the intercession of the living.
Lastly, if there can be imagined any reason or impediment to hinder this our
Invocation of them, either it is because they will not help us, and this is
against their Charity, which is far greater, and much more increased, then it
was in this life, they being in the height of their Charity: or because they
cannot; and not this, for this were infirmity, and should much derogate from
their state of glory; and if they could help us by their prayers when they
were here with us, and absent from God, in regard of their Pilgrimage, much
more now can they aid us, being now present with God, and possessed of their
kingdom of heaven: or peradventure because they know not we ask, and this
were to charge them with greater ignorance, then is ascribed to the Devils, and
to deprive them of a knowledge necessarily belonging to their state of happiness
and content: Or lastly, for that it were derogatory to Gods honor, and
Christ's Mediation, if any other were inuocated, and made Advocate to God; and
not this, for first this makes more for Gods honor, since the more honorable
the Intercessors to God for us be, the more honor redoundeth to God: And if
our invocation of them for their Intercession to God for us, were derogatory to
Christ's mediation, then neither could we pray for one another without injury
to Christ, seeing we make one another now living, in the same sense, Mediators
and Advocates to God.

SECT. III. Scriptures expounded by most ancient Fathers in proof of the
Intercession of Angels and Saints, and that we may lawfully invoke them.
IN proof that Saints know things upon earth, S. Austine expounds some Texts
by me alleged saying, De Ciuit. Dei l. 22. c. 29
If the Prophet Elizeus absent in body saw his servant Giezi receiving rewards,
which Naaman Syrus had given him etc. how much more shall the Saints see all
things in that spiritual body, not only if they shut their eyes, but also
where they are absent in body? for then shallbe perfected that, whereof the
Apostle speaking, 1. Cor. 13.9.
In part, says he, we know, and in part we prophecy, but when that shall come
that is perfect, that shall be made void that is in part.

S. Hilary expounds several Texts of Scripture for the Intercession of
Angels, saying, In Comment. in Ps. 129.
There are according to S. John Angels deputed for the Churches of Asia and by
the Testimony of Moses the limits of the Nations were appointed ^o the sons
of Adam, according to the number of the Angels. And in the doctrine of our
Savior, the Angels of little ones do daily see God. There are according to
Raphael speaking to Tobias, Angels assisting the divine Majesty and Clarity,
and offering up unto God the prayers of such as invoke God etc. Therefore not
the nature of God needs the Intercession of these Angels, but our infirmity;
for they are sent for them who shall be heirs of salvation: God being ignorant
of nothing that we do, but our infirmity needing the ministry of spiritual
Intercession to entreat etc. In which passage of this glorious Confessor, two
things are worthy of observation; first, that three of the very same places of
Scripture cyted by me, are likewise cyted and urged by him, for proof of the
Patronage, Intercession, and Invocation of Angels, to which he adds a fourth
out of Genesis. Secondly, that the book of Tobias is esteemed by him for
Canonical Scripture, since it is ranked by him equally with the Apocalips, and
Genesis.

S. Hierome writing upon those words of the Angel to Daniel, Et ego ingressus
sum ad verba tua, says, In C. 10. Dan.
This is the meaning thereof, After thou did begin with good works, and
tears, and fasting, to invoke Gods mercy, and I took occasion that I might
enter into the sight of God, and pray for thee etc. And in the same place
Commenting upon these words of the Angel a little after, Et nemo est adiutor
meus in omnibus his, nisi Michael princeps vester. None is my helper in all
these, but Michael your prince, be concludes thus, speaking in the person of
the Angel; I am, says he, that Angel who offers thy prayers to God, and I
have no other helper to entreat God for you, but Michael the Archangell to
whose Patronage and protection, the people of the Jews is commended.

The same S. Hierome writing upon these words of S. Matthew, Their Angels in
heaven always do see etc. says In Mat. 18.10.
Great is the dignity of souls, in so much that every one has from his
Nativity, an Angel deputed by God for his Patronage. And immediately after in
further proof of guardian Angels, he cites both that of Apoc. 1.2. and
2.1.8.1^.18. and 3.1.7.
S. John unto the Angel of Ephesus, Thyatira, and the Angel of Philadelphia,
and to the Angels of the other 4. Churches: as also that of the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 11.10.
that women ought to have their heads covered for the Angels.

S. Austine writing upon those words of the Psalmist, Annunciabitur Domino
generatio ventura etc. he expounds it thus, Epist. 120. c. 29.
It is not so to be understood, that any thing should be told unto God, as
being ignorant of any thing, to the end that he may know it; but even as the
Angels do declare, not only Gods benefits unto us, but also our prayers unto
him etc. And then for warrant of this Exposition, he cites that place of Tob.
12.12.
Tobias by us formerly alleged, and so expounded by S. Hilary, as you have
heard. For it is written, where the Angel says unto men, I have offered up by
way of mentioning your prayers, not that God shall know what we will, or what
we stand in need of, for your heavenly Father, says our Lord, knows what you
stand in need of before you ask of him: but because etc. And in like sort
writes Eusebius. Caesar. l. 12. de Praepar. Euang. c. 1.
Eusebius 2. Match. 15.14.
In the book of Machabees, Hieremy the Prophet is said to be seen after his
death praying for the people, as having care of men yet living upon earth.

S. Austine expounding those words of Job, Miseremini mei etc. writes thus.
Annot. in c. 19. Job. Conc. 2. ad c. 19.
He seems to invoke the Angels, that they would supplicate for him, or
certainly the Saints, that they would pray for him penitent. And elsewhere, L.
1. de loquutionibus in Genes.
Jacob blessing his Nephews, the sons of Joseph, amongst other things says,
Genesis 48.16.
My name shallbe called upon them, and the name of my fathers; where it is to
be noted that not only hearing, but also invocation sometimes are affirmed, as
things not proper unto God, but to men, also.

Origin in proof that Saints do pray for us says, Ho. 3. in Cant.
All the Saints which are departed out of this life bearing yet Charity toward
the living in this world, it shall not be inconvenient, if they be said, to
have a care of their salvation, and to help them with their prayers, and
intercession with God for them: for it is written (says he) in the book of
Machabees thus, 2.15.
This is Hieremy the Prophet of God, who always prays for the people.

S. Chrysostom is of opinion, that it was an Angel whom I^cob inuocated, and
not Christ, as Prot. imagine, when he blessed Joseph's Children, his words are
plain, Tom. 3. ho 7 in laudibus Pauli.
For if Angels be designed by him that is Lord of all, to those who only
govern their own life and doing nothing for the common vtility, as one of the
just testifyeth, saying, The Angel which has delivered me from my youth: much
more present are those heavenly powers unto them, to whom the care of the whole
world is committed, and to such as carry the burdens of such guiftes.

S. Chrysostom building as it were upon the promises of the Apostles to pray
for the Church after their Martyrdomes, and especially upon that of S. Peter
before mentioned, inuocateth them thus, Tom. 5. in orat encom. in natali Apost.
seu Martyr. Pet. and Pauli prope finem.
Rejoice ever (you blessed Apostles) in our Lord, without intermission pray for
us, fulfill your promises: For o Blessed Peter, thou cryest out speaking thus,
2. Epist. 1.15.
I will do my diligence, after my Coming to make mention of you.

We are much bound (says S. Leo) Ser. 3. in Anniuers. Assumpt. ad Pontif.
to give thanks to our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ, that has given so
great power to him, whom he made the Prince of the whole Church, that if in our
time also any thing be done well, and be rightly ordered by us, it is to be
imputed to his works and his Government, to whom it was said, And thou being
Converted, confirm thy brethren: And to whom our Lord after his Resurrection
said thrice, feed my sheep: which now also without doubt the godly Pastor does
execute, confirming us with his Exhortations, and not ceasing to pray for us,
that we be overcome with no temptation. What more plain for S. Peter's praying
for us after his decease? But D. Fulke Against Rhem Test. in. ^ Pet. 1.15 p.
443.
himself confesses that, Leo indeed etc. ascribes much to the prayers of S.
Peter for him. Yea Tom. 1. Conc. Ep. 1.5. Clem. init.
S. Clement affirms, that S. Peter encouraging him to take after his decease
the charge of the Apostolic Roman Sea, promised that after his departure he
would not cease to pray for him and his flock, thereby to ease him of his
Pastoral burden. Thus then you see, as appears by these Fathers Exposition
of Scriptures, how clear the Scriptures are for Invocation of Angels and
Saints, if credit may be given to the ancient Blessed Fathers so expounding
them.

But the Fathers Doctrine is so clear for Invocation of Saints and Angels
that D. Fulke says, Reioinder to Bristow. pa. 5.
I Confess that Ambrose, Austine, and Hierome, held invocation of Saints to
be lawful: And, Against Rhem. Test. p. 443.
that many of the ancient Fathers held this opinion, that the Saints departed
do pray for us, we deny not etc. In Nazianzen, Basil, and Chrysostom, there is
some mention of the Invocation of Saints to help with their prayers etc.
Theodore also speaks of prayers unto Martyrs. Chemnitius having alleged S.
Austine praying to S. Cyprian martyred before, concludes this thereof, Exam.
part. 3. p. 211.
(34) Austine did this without the Scripture, yielding to the times and
custom. Ibid. p. 200.
And again, (35) Invocation of Saints began to be brought into the public
assemblies of the Church, about the year of our Lord 370. by Basil, Nyssen,
and Nazianzene. The Centuristes speaking of the times of Cyprian and Origin, do
confess, that they Cent. 3. c. 4. col. 83.
Contain manifest tokens of the Invocation of Saints. Now, whereas D. Morton
would euade all testimonies of Fathers in this behalf, by affirming that they
were but Appeal p. ^27.
Rhetorical Apostrophe's, Chemnitius shall give him a brotherly check for
this so simple and untrue Evasion, by not excusing with Rhetorical
Apostrophe's, but flatly accusing and rejecting Exam. part 3. p 211. See
Perkins vol. 2. p 592.
Most of the Fathers, as Nazianzen, Nyssen, Theodoret, Ambrose, Hierome etc.
who says he, did not dispute, but avouch the souls of Martyrs and Saints
etc. to hear the Petitions of those that prayed, and to carry them to God etc.
they went to the Monuments of Martyrs, and often inuocated the Martyrs by name.
This is confessedly more, M. Morton, then to make Rhetorical Apostrophe's.

But D. Whitguift, and D. Couell do both of them affirm, that, Def p. 472.
Couell against the Plea of the Innoc. c. 9. p. 120.
Almost all the Bishops and learned writers of the Greek Church, and Latin
also for the most part* were spotted with Doctrines etc. of Invocation of
Saints, and such like. So generally was this our Catholic doctrine of
Invocation of Saints taught by the ancient Fathers.

Now for the closure of this Section from Fathers, Bullinger laboring to
confute the distinction of Dulia and Latria, and falsely affirming, that
Catholics do attribute more by Dulia to Saints and Angels, then by Latria to
God, he adds that, Ser. 84. in Apoc. 19.
S. John (the Evangelist) was enwrapped in this Error. And that, he would
exhibit the worship of Dulia to the Angel: but God permitted so great a man
to sin. Yea, says he, Sermon. 97, in Apoc. 22.
forgetful of all the admonitions by the Angel, he fell again into the same
fault. So that S. John is here condemned with Catholics for worshipping of
Angels with Dulia. But now whether S. John did better understand what honor
was due, and to be given to Angels, then Prot. do, I leave to any ma^s
judgment. And though S. John erred in the person of the Angel, as thinking him
to be Christ himself, yet that he was ignorant in knowing what honor was due
to Christ, and what to Angels, no Christian will affirm.

SECT. IV. That Protestants do agreably teach with Catholics that the Angels
and Saints in heaven do hear our prayers, do pray for us in particular: and
that we may lawfully to them.
THat Angels and Saints do know things done upon Earth, and pray tor us,
Piscator and Bullinger confess of Angels, Vol. 1. These. p. 96. sec. 47. and p.
294. sec. 27. Bulling. in his Dec. in Engl. p. 739. and see Luc. 15.10.
That they rejoice at our repentance. Fulke, Ag. Rhem. Test. f. 115.
That they know our fruits and true effects thereof. Piscator, Pisc. vbi supra
p. 98.
That we should be ashamed to commit any unclean actions, seeing that they do
behold and observe all our actions. Fulke, and others, Fulke vbi sup. in Mat.
18. sect. 2. Bulling Dec. p. 741. Hippius metho. Theol. l. 2. p. 290.
That they do wait for our preservation.

Bullinger that, Ib. p. 665.
They offer the prayers of the faithful in Gods presence. Others Conf. of Sax.
in the Harm. p. 43.
that both Saints and Angels such as are in happiness do pray for the Church:
and that Ib p. 12.
we join in prayer with all Saints in heaven and Earth: Also that Oecolamp. ad
sermon. Chrysostom. de Iuuentio and Maximo. Brent. ad c. 10. Luc. Chytr. ad c. 25.
Mat. Cruciger in Conc. de Natiu. See Fox in Apoc. c. 8. p. 127.
The Saints in heaven, do not cease to make Intercession for us.

The Lutherans that write the Apology for the Confession of Augusta, do gather
from the forcyted place of Zachary, that Apol. Confess. August. de inuocat.
Sanctorum fol. 179.
Angels pray for us.

Oecolampadius Ad orat. Chrysostom. de Iuuent. and Max.
affirms that, The Saints in heaven burning yet with their Charity do not
cease to pray for us. And in another place, Ad c. 12. Danielis.
The blessed Spirits etc. are not without desire of our Salvation, which I
think to be their prayers: And so Peter and Paul do pray with us. Thy kingdom
come.

Melancthon is so confident herein, as that he says, In loc. com Manlij. fol.
151.
I will cite a manifest place out of the New Testament, proving that the dead
are careful of the Church and us, for so Matthew says Mat. 17.3.
Elias and Moses spoke with Christ of things to come. It is certain that the
Saints which are in heaven in care of us, are affected toward the Church of
those that live upon earth: Even as they there disputed with Christ of his
Passion, and the gathering of the Church through the whole world.

Brentius proposes this Question Ad. c. 10. Lucae.
Do the dead then pray for the living? And now he gives his answer, Surely it
cannot be denied, but these who live in Christ, do wish well to the Church and
her members: for if they Angels pray for us, as C 1.12.
Zachary witnesses, and if Christ himself pray for us to his Father, how then
are not the Saints affected toward us in Charity in Christ, and by Christ, and
with us all happiness of God.

Faber writes thus plainly. De statu defunctorum. c. 7.
I do not doubt but the souls of the dead remember their parents, brethren,
Sisters, and kinsfolks, which they have left here, and pray, to God that he
will also deliver them out of the vale of tears etc The example of the rich
man Luc. 16. confirms this doctrine: for if a damned soul remembers his
(friends) much more a blessed Soul is so affected toward Parents, Children,
Brethren, Sisters, and kinsfolks.

And whereas P^ot. to avoid the history of Lazarus and Dives, which plainly
shows that souls departed this life do yet know things done upon Earth, do
affirm, that it is only a Parable: Yet Calvin for his part thinks otherwise
with us, saying, Harm. in Luc. 16.19.
Although to some it seem only a single Parable, yet because the name of
Lazarus is expressed, I rather think, that a thing done is declared.

Concerning the Patronage of Angels, Calvin writes, Inst. l. 3. c. 20.. 23.
Edit. Gal. 1562. 1563. See. l. 1. c. 14.. 7.
They say, the prayers of Angels are often read of, and not this only, but the
prayers of the faithful are said to be carried by their hands into the sight
of God: I confess it. And a little after, It is assigned to the Angels that
they be ministering spirits, to whom the ministry is committed of the care of
our Salvation, to whom the Charge is given of keeping us in all our ways, who
may compass us about, who may admonish, and comfort, and may watch for us. And
again, Inst. l. 1. c. 14.. 7.
God appointed Angels over us, to take care of our safety: whereupon they
frequent the holy assemblyes, and the Church is to them a Theater in which they
admire the different and manifold wisdom of God. To conclude, I dare not
affirm for certain, whether to every one of the faithful several Angels be
appointed. Dan. 10.13.20. and 12.1.
Truly when Daniel brings in the Angel of the Persians, and the Grecians, he
signifies that certain Angels are deputed, as Governors over kingdoms and
Provinces. Christ also when he says, Mat. 18.10.
The Angels of Children do always see the face of the Father, does insinuate,
that there are certain Angels to whom their safety is committed. But I know
not whether from thence it may be gathered, that every one has his Angel to
have charge over him. And somewhat after, There is one place a little cleerer
then the rest, which seems to confirm it: for when Act. 12.15. It is his
Angel.
Peter brought out of Prison knocked at the gates of the house in which the
brethren were gathered together, seeing they could not suspect that it was he,
they said it was his Angel. It seems this came into their minds from the
common conceit, that Angels are assigned as Governors to every one of the
faithful. With Calvin agrees Luther saying, Ad. c. 2. Zachariae.
Every Emperor King Prince, yea every man has his Angel. And, Ad. c. 18.
Matthai.
The Scripture testifyeth every Christian to have his Angel.

Add yet heerunto the professed faith of sundry of our English Foxian Martyrs,
Lambert believed that, Act. Mon. p. 549. a. initio.
The Saints departed pray for us. The like also did Ibid p. 462. b. post. med.
Bilney. Latimer also acknowledged the same saying, Ibid. p. 1312. a. init
There be two manner of Mediators, the one by way of Redemption, the other by
way of Intercession. And again, Ibid p. 2315 a. paulo ante med.
Take worshipping of Saints for praying to them, I never denied but that they
might so be worshipped, and be our Mediators etc. by way of Intercession. Of
like belief was the Church in the time of K. Henry the Eight, and so also were
sundry other Prot. Martyrs in M. Fox his Monuments, whom we do not find
charged with the contrary Doctrine.

John Husse was accustomed to invoke the B. Virgin and other Saints, In
fidei suae Elucidatione.
I ask also (says he) for my very accusers the most chaste Virgin the Mother
of my Savior, the repayrer of mankind, the Queen of heaven, which by the
title of grace added to nature, excels the Angelical nature; who amongst
all the blessed excepting her son, is more blessed, by singular Privilege,
more glorious, by grace and the guiftes of glory, more fruitful. Of whose
fulness, says Bernard, all receive; the sick health, the sorrowful comfort,
the Angels joy, the son of God the substance of humane flesh, the whole
Trinity glory. And in another place, In 1. Io. c. 2.
We have an Advocate, to wit, in matters of Souls, not of possessions. And not
only an Advocate, but also an Aduocatresse: whereupon we sing, Eia ergo
Aduocata. And to other Saints he prays also, Ep. 22.
Peter and Paul glorious Martyrs, so joined to the K of glory, vouchsafe to
pray for us, that by their help we being made strong, by suffering humbly, may
be partakers of their glory. Again, he inuocateth S. John Baptist saying, Ep.
30.
Vouchsafe to pray for us unto our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

To try now what Martin Luther thinks, Resp. ad Louan. in Tom. Wittemb.
I never denied (says he) us to be helped by the merits and prayers of
Saints, though imperfect. And, In Ep. ad Georg. Spalatinum.
I never thought the Invocation of Saints to be offensive etc. this do our
heretical Picards and Bohemians know. And in another place he says, In Ep. ad
Erphordienses.
Suffer them to implore the Patronage of Saints, since they so will, yet with
that Condition, that they know they must take heed, least they put any trust
and presumption in any of the Saints, being induced thereto by a false
persuasion. And yet more fully; In purgatione quorundam Articulorum.
Concerning the Intercession of Saints, I agree with the whole Christian
Church, and judge that the Saints are to be inuocated and honored, for who
can contradict those things which God does wonderfully, and visibly work, even
to this present day at the Sepulchers of Saints? Yea his advise is this, De
praep. ad mort.
At the hour of death, let him not cease to invoke the B. Virgin, his
Apostle, and the rest of the Saints, whom he has served in his life, that
they may pray for him to our Lord. And now he teaches the manner how we may
lawfully pray to Saints saying, In fest. Joan Bapt.
Some man may here say, of what use, and in what steed shall Saints be to us?
Thou use them as thou use thy Neighbor, for as thou say to him, Pray to
God for me, so thou may say to them, S. Peter pray for me. Again, Super
Magnificat. Tom. 6. Germ. fol 21. and see de 1. Praecepte.
I said, Mary would not be a Goddess, she makes nothing: God works all
things. She ought to be inuocated, that God by her may give and work what we
ask, and in this sort all the rest of the Saints are to be inuocated etc. So
Catholickly Luther.

With Luther agrees Oecolampadius saying, Ad orat. Chrysostom. de Iuuentio and
Maxim^ Martyribus.
Neither will I affirm it to be Idolatry, to request the Patronage of Saints,
for the Saints in heaven burning yet with their Charity, do not cease to pray
for us, and what evil is it, if we request that to be, which we believe God
would, although he has not commanded any such thing etc. This do Chrysostom
and Nazianzene; and this also almost all the Churches of the East and West do
observe.

Bucer affirms, that In Defens. cont. Abrincensem Episcopum.
If any weighing the infinite Indulgence etc. of God toward his Saints etc.
And do entreat them to make intercession to God for them, although that be not
taught in the Scripture, yet if it be done, none of us condemn it. And in
another place he justifies our Catholic manner of praying to Saints saying,
In Disp. Ratisb. de publicis Ecclesiae precibus.
Seeing in these prayers whatsoever is ascribed to the Intercessions and merits
of Saints, all that is asked is not from the Saints themselves* but from the
mercy of God by our Lord Jesus Christ: heerby such as pray thus, confess and
testify themselves to acknowledge those things to be the free gifts of God,
which they beg of God by the intercession and merits of Saints.

Haffenrefferus Loci Theol. l. 3. stat 4. loco. 5. p. 463.
affirms, that the Deuines of Polonia in their late Synod, defended prayer to
Saints with this moderation, as namely, that they should be inuocated not as
granters, but as Intercessours.

And somewhat agreably heerunto say sundry Prot. Wittemberg. in the Harmony. p.
172.
If we will speak of the true and great Mediator, there is but one Mediator
between God and man, Jesus Christ: (but) If we will speak of the Mediator of
praying, every godly man is made a mediator each for other: according as it is
said, Romans 15.30.
Help me with your prayers: 1 Thessalonians. 5.25 and 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. and Col. 4.2.
Brethren pray for us And this kind of Intercession does not (as the Prot.
Viril confesses) Treatise concerning the principal grounds of Chr. Relig. p.
188.
take any thing away from the Intercession of Christ.

So evident it is both by Scriptures, Fathers, and Protestants, that every man
has his Angel guardian, that the Angels and Saints do hear our prayers, do
pray for us, and that we may pray to them.

SECT. V. Objections from Scriptures against Invocation of Angels and Saints,
answered.
SOme object, that none must be inuocated, but in whom we believe, according to
that of S. Paul to the Romans, 10.14.
How then shall they invoke, in whom they have not believed? Answer. This
is spoken of Gentiles, who not believing in Christ, nor having heard of him,
could not invoke him: and in like sort it may be said, that those who do not
believe that there are Saints, or do not hope in them as Patrones, cannot
invoke them. Besides the words, Invocation and Faith, are not always
attributed to God only, for Jacob says, Genesis 48.16.
Let my name be inuocated upon these Children, and the names of my Fathers,
Abraham, Isaac etc. Upon which words S. Austine commenteth thus, lib.
loquutionis de Genesis prope fin.
Whereupon it is to be observed not only that hearing, but also invocation
sometimes are affirmed as things not proper to God, but to men. In like sort
concerning Faith, S. Paul writes, Philem. v. 4.
I give thanks to my God etc. hearing thy Charity and faith which thou have in
our Lord Jesus, and toward all the Saints: upon which place S. Hierome
demands In Ep. ad ad Philem.
how any one can have the same faith in Christ Jesus, and toward his Saints?
To which himself answers, for the exposition of this place let us take
example from 14.31.
Exodus, The people believed God and Moses his servant: one and the same
belief is referred toward Moses, and toward God, that the people which
believed in our Lord, should a like be said to believe in his servant: but this
is not only toward Moses, but toward all his Saints, that whosoever has
believed in God, could not otherwise have had faith, unless he had believed
toward his Saints, for it is not perfect Charity, and faith toward God, which
is lessened toward his servants with hatred and Infidelity.

Secondly, in proof that Saints do not know our prayers, it is objected, that
3. Reg. 8.39.
God only knows the hearts of all the Children of men; and in the book of
Job, C. 14.21.
Whether his Children be noble or ignoble, he shall not understand. And yet in
a third place, Ecclesiastes 9.5.
For the living know that they shall dye, but the dead know nothing at all. And
that also of Esaias, C. 63.16.
For thou art our Father, and Abraham has known us, and Israel has been
ignorant of us. And lastly that of the Kings 4. Reg. 22.20.
I will gather thee to thy Fathers etc. that thy eyes may not see all the evil
which I will bring upon this place. From these and such other like places is
inferred, that it is vain to Invoke Saints, seeing they know not our
prayers. Answ. All grant, that only God knows naturally, and by his own
power, the thoughts of all men's hearts, but this hinders not, but that Saints
may know such thoughts as God manifests unto them, whether this be by clear
and perfect vision of God himself, or by particular revelation from his Deity,
or lastly by the ministry of other his servants, be they Saints or Angels. And
as for the words of Job, they only prove that naturally the dead do not know
the deeds of the living; and the very selfsame thing proves the place
following of Ecclesiastes: but what makes this against such as are enlightened
supernaturally with the presence of God, having their understandings to that
end elevated with the light of glory, or else that come to know of things
passing here by supernatural means. That of Abraham, Saint In Com. in Isaiae.
63.16.
Hierome expounds of the knowledge of approbation, or acknowlegement of them
for his, so that the meaning is, Abraham knew us not, that is, he took us not
for his Children, but despises us, because he knows, that we have departed
from thee our God. Abraham knows us not etc. says S. Hierome giving the
reason, because we have offended thee; neither do they acknowledge those for
their Children, whom they understand not to be beloved of their God. In which
very sense our B. Savior speaks unto the foolish Virgins Mat. 25.12.
, Amen I say unto you, I know you not. Which phrase of speech Christ also uses
unto those reprobate, who stood knocking at the door when Christ was entered,
Luc. 13.25.
I know you not whence you are. But if this knowledge whereof mention is here
made, be understood properly, it proves no more (as neither any of the places
objected do) but that the Fathers who were in Lymbus Patrum, or Abraham's
bosom, knew not as then naturally, or by any ordinary supernatural means,
what their posterity living did, seeing as then they were not blessed with the
clear sight of God, which I hope Prot. dare not affirm of the Saints
departed, since our Redemption by Christ.

In conclusion, for full satisfaction of these obiectio^s, let S. Austine
answer for me, who having moved diverse objections pro and con, both how the
dead should know and not know, did know and did not know, the affairs of their
living friends, at last resolves the point thus: L. de cura pro mort. agenda.
c. 14. and 15.
Therefore we must confess, that the dead indeed do not know what is done
here, but whilst any thing is here done, that afterward truly they hear of
them, who go hence to them by dying: not all things verily* but such things as
they are suffered to declare, who are suffered both to remember these things,
as also such things as is meet for them to hear, to whom they relate these
things. Moreover the dead may hear of the Angels who are present to things
done here something, which he, to whom all things are subject, judges co^uement
for every one of them to hear: for unless there were Angels, who might be
present at the places both of the living and dead, our Lord Jesus had never
said, It happened also that the poor man dyed, and was carried by Angels into
Abraham's bosom. Now therefore here, now there may they have been, who have
taken hence thither those whom God would. Moreover the spirits of the dead may
know somethings done here by the spirit of God reueyling, which it is necessary
that they should know, and not necessary that they should be ignorant of not
only things past or present, but also things to come: as not all men, but
Prophets did know, whilst they lived here; neither did they know all things
but such things as the Providence of God did judge meet to be reueyled unto
them. Hitherto S. Austine. The sum of all is but this, that Saints departed
know things done here three manner of ways, to wit, by Saints hence departing
to them, by Angels declaring, and Gods holy spirit reueyling: and this may
suffice for a full answer to all places brought in this second objection.

The third Objection is taken out of that place of S. Paul to Timothy, 1. Tim.
2.5.
For there is one God, one also Mediator of God and men, Jesus Christ, therefore
we must not make any Saints our Mediators. To make this the stronger, the
Prot. of Geneua in their Bible of Anno 1601. by Matthew Berion, do add the
word, solus, one only Mediator. Answer The word, solus, is neither in the
Greek, nor the vulgar latin, nor in those of Beza of 1589. 1590. nor others
of Geneua of 1555. 1563. 1564. 1570. and so the place is maliciously corrupted.
Secondly, this makes as much against the prayers of the living for us, as of
the dead: for when we desire our Neighbor to pray for us, therein we desire
him to be our mediator, in the same manner as we desire the Saints. Thirdly,
Christ is our Mediator, in that he gave Ibid. ver. 6.
himself a redemption for all, in that he satisfied the infinite Justice of
God for the sins of the world: which kind of Mediation is only proper to
Christ; Saints only are our Mediators, in that they pray for us: and so as
Christ is said to be our Epist. Io. 2.1.
Advocate with the Father; and yet in a secondary sense, we make just men
living, also our Advocates; so the same may be said of Mediator, and so Moses
said of himself Deuteronomy. 5.5.
I was an Arbiter, and Mediator betwixt our Lord and you at that time; to
which words S. Paul alluding, says Gal. 3.19.
of the old law, that it was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator,
viz. Moses.

S. Cyril L. 11. Thesaur. c. 10.
proves that Moses according to the Scriptures, and Jeremy, and the Apostles,
and others be mediators. And if the name of Savior and Redeemer be in the
Scriptures Iudic. 3.9.2. Esd. 9.27. Act. 7.35. 1. Tim. 4.16.
given to men without derogation to him, who is in a more excellent and
incomparable manner the only Savior and Redeemer of the world, why may not
there be many Mediators in an inferior degree, to the only and singular
Mediator? S. Bernard says, Ser. Signum magnum.
We have need of a mediator to Christ the Mediator, and there is none more
for our profit then Mary. S. Basil in the same In Conc. Nycen. 2. Act. 4.
sense desires the Mediation of our B. Lady, the Apostles, Prophets, and
Martyrs, for procuring of Gods mercy and remission of his Sins.

Lastly, M. Perkins Perkins in his Ref. Cath. p. 259.
grants that the Saints departed, pray generally for the whole Church:
wherefore by the like argument, they make themselves Mediators, and so offer
injury to Christ, which is most absurd to say, and blasphemous.

A fourth Objection is urged by reason of those words of the Apostle, Coloss.
2.18.
Let no man seduce you willing in the humility and Religion of Angels, walking
in the things which he has not seen. Answ. This place condemns the heresy
of See S. Chrysostom in hunc locum. Epiphan. haer. 21.
Simon Magus, who following the Platonists, taught, that certain Angels were
to be adored as lesser Gods, by whom he thought the world to be made, and by
whom the highest God who is invisible, was only to be pacifyed: which Error
the said Heretic had from Plato, who taught that Spirits (which he calls
Daemones) were to be honored as Mediators next to God. Against which De Ciuit.
l 8. 9. 10.
S. Austine disputes, and condemns L. 10. Confess. c. 22.
the same undue worship. S. Hierome Ep. Io. ad Algafiam
expounds this also of ill Spirits, or Devils, whom he proves (our of S.
Steuens sermon Act. 7.) that the Jews did worship. Theodoret In hunc locum.
declares, that the Jews defended their superstition toward Angels, by that
the law was given by them, deceiptfully inducing the Collossians both to keep
the law, and to honoring of the Angels, as the giuers of the same. Whereby
diverse of the faithful were so seduced, that they forsook Christ and his
Church, and committed Idolatry to the said Angels; against which abominations
the Council of Laodicea made a Cap. 35.
Decree. L. 5. cont. Marcion.
Tertullian expounds this place of false reachers, that feigned themselves to
have Revelation of Angels, that the law should be kept touching difference of
clean and unclean meats. Upon this place.
Haymo says further, that some Philosophers of the Jews and some of the
Gentiles taught, that there were 4. Angels Presidents of the 4. Elements of
man's body, and that in feigned hypocrisy (which the Apostle calls here
humility) they pretended to worship by Sacrifice the said Angels. So many ways
is this Objection satisfied.

Fifthly, some object Rogers Def of the Art. art. 22. p. 128.
that of S. Matthew, 11.28.
where God bids us to come to him: as also that of S. Luke, 11.9.
to ask and it shall be given us: and that of S. John, 16.23.
And if we ask the Father any thing in Christ his name, he will give it us,
and so directs us to pray, 6.9.
Our Father which art in heaven etc. Answ. These places as much forbid the
prayers of the living, as of the dead: and because prayer requires disposition
in the party praying, which yet he always has not, therefore God Almighty (the
former places notwithstanding) directs us to seek help by the prayers of
others, whereof see in Job 42.8.
and Genesis 20.17.
, and sundry other places. Besides, when we pray to Saints, we do thereby the
better (they being better able and more worthy by reason of their perfection,
to obtain any thing at Gods hands then we) come unto God himself, and more
effectually pray unto him. And as for the Pater noster, it does no more
prohibit praying to Saints, then to God the son, and God the holy Ghost.

Add yet in further satisfaction of this so frequently objected; He that gives
to one of the Kings Counsel or Chamber, his Petition directed to the king,
entreating him earnestly, that he will exhibit the same to his Majesty, and
further his suite, does not thereby defer the Kings honor to his Servant, nor
desire his suite to be granted by the servant, but by the king. The Gentiles
which came to Philip and asked him Io. 12.21.
saying, Sir, we are desirous to see Jesus, did not ascribe Christ's honor to
Philip, though they came unto him first, and with great humility called him,
Dominum, Sir, and made their desire known unto him: neither did Christ reprove
them, for not coming immediately unto him, as thereby injurious to him, but
rather taught that this did more illustrate his glory, seeing the Gentiles had
him in so great reverence, as that they durst not come into his presence, but
by the Mediation and Commendation of his beloved Apostles. And so Phillip
telling Andrew, and Andrew and Phillip telling Jesus; Jesus answered them
saying, The hour is come, that the son of man shall be glorified. The
Centurion Luc. 7.7.3.
also not thinking himself worthy to come to Christ, sent unto him the Ancient
of the Jews, desiring him to come and heal his Servant. And yet the holy
Ghost affirms by S. Matthew, Mat. 8.5.
That the Centurion came unto him etc. And Jesus said to him, I will come etc.
And the Centurion making answer, said, Lord I am not worthy etc. And yet it is
plain, that this Dialogue passed between Jesus and the Centurions Luc. 7.6.
friends, and not with the Centurion himself. And this practice of the
Centurion was so grateful to Christ, that he said, Amen, I say to you, neither
in Israel have I found so great faith. Yea God directed Jobs friends saying,
Job. c. 42 7.8.
My fury is wrath against thee, and against thy two friends etc. Take therefore
unto you 7. Oxen, and 7. Rams, and go to my Servant Job, and offer holocaust
for your selves, and my servant Job shall pray for you; his face I will
receive, that the folly be not imputed to you. So impertinent is this Objection
so often inculcated.

Sixthly it is objected, the Saints in heaven can merit or obtain nothing for
themselves, much less for others. Answer. Though as then they cannot merit,
yet through the merits of their life past, they may obtain what they ask,
either for themselves or others.

Calvin L 16. de ratione vera reformationis Ecclesiae, and Melancthon in Apol.
art. 21. Conf. August.
obiecteth that many are inuocated, who whether they be Saints, or whether any
such ever were, no certain history does confirm, as Christopher, George,
Catharine etc. I answer, though the histories of some Saints be Apocryphal
and uncertain, yet thereof it does not follow, that such Saints were not. Of
the calling of the Apostles we read in the Gospel, but of the life and death
of many of them, we find little or nothing; and many things which are related of
them out of Abdias and others, are not approved as altogether certain.
Besides though the histories of some three or four be doubtful, yet of the
rest they are most certain: and what Saints of all Sects Prot. have
registered into their Calendar, let Fox bear witness.

Some urge with Vigilantius, that Hier. cont Vigil. c. 3. init.
whilst we live, we may pray for one another, but after we are dead, the
prayer of none is to be heard for another, especially seeing Martyrs Apoc. 6.10.
expecting the revenge of their blood, cannot obtain it. But S. Hierome
answers hereto in these words, If the Apostles and Martyrs whilst they were
living, could pray for others, when yet they were careful for themselves; how
much more after their Crowns, victories, and triumphs? Moses alone obtained
of God pardon for six hundred thousand armed men: and Stephen etc. beggeth
pardon for his persecutors: and shall they be of less power, after they shall
begin to be with Christ? Paul the Apostle affirms 276. souls to have been
pardoned to him in the ship; and after being dissolved, shall begin to be with
Christ, shall he then shut his mouth and shall he not be able to mutter for
them, who all over the world have believed at his preaching? Shall Vigilantius
a living dog, be better then he a dead lion? And the very like is taught by S.
Ser. ^9. de Sanctis.
Austine. And as for that of the Martyrs, it is most false to say, that the
Martyrs here were not heard, nor their Petition granted, for it was granted to
be fulfilled in time appointed by God (whereunto they did and do always
conform themselves) for it was said to them next after, That they should rest
yet a little time, till etc. And Christ our Savior speaking of this very case,
says, Luc. 18.7.
And will not God revenge his Elect that cry to him day and night etc? I say to
you that he will quickly revenge them. But if God do not sometimes grant
requests of the Saints, yet it does not therefore follow, that they do not, or
may not pray for us, for Christ himself prayed to his Father to remove the
bitter Cup of death from him, and yet it was not granted.

CHAP. XVII. The true State of the Question, concerning the use and reverence
to be exhibited to Images of Christ, and his Saints.
Whether it be lawful to make the Images of Christ and his Saints, to place
them in Churches, and to exhibit any honor or reverence unto them: or that
all this is Superstition and Idolatry, contrary to the Commandment of God.
SECT. 1.
Catholic Doctrine.
WHAT the Church of Christ belieueth and practices concerning Images, these
General Counsels following will clearly discover. The Council of Trent
decrees that, Council. Trident. Sess. 25. Decret. de sacris Imag.
The Images of Christ, of the Virgin Mother of God, and of other Saints, are to
be had and retained especially in Churches, and that duehonour and worship is
to be imparted unto them: not for that any divinity is to be believed to be in
them, or virtue, for which they are to be worshipped; or that any thing is to
be begged of them, or that hope is to be put in them, as in times past the
Pagans did, who put their trust in Idols: but because the honor which is
exhibited to them is referred to the first pattern which they resemble. So
that by the ^mages which we kiss and before whom we uncover our heads and
kneel we adore Christ and his Saints, whose likeness they bear, we reverence
that which is ratifyed by the Decrees of Councels especially of the second of
Nice, against the Impugners of Images

In which second Nicene Council it is said Act. 7. See Conc. Senon. Decret. 14.
We defyne in all cer^^inty and diligence that as the figure of the precious
etc. Cross, so the vene^^ble and holy ^mages are to be set forth etc. in the
holy Churches of God in Sacred Vessels, garments walls tables, houses and
ways: as well the Image of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as of our
unspotted Lady, the holy Mother of God, and of the honorable Angels, and all
Saints and Holy Men; for the more often they are seen by Images the more
those that behold these are more cheerfully elevated to the memory and desire
of the Prototypon, and to give the kiss, and honorable worship unto them; but
not to give true Latria etc. which belongs only to the Divine nature.

Agreably herto the Catholic Church Bellar de Imag. c. 7. etc. Rhem. Test.
in. 1. Joan. 5.21.
now teaches, that Images of Christ and his Saints are not prohibited by the
Scriptures to be made, or to be placed in Churches, or howses, or to be
honored: but it likewise teaches that no Confidence is to be placed in them,
or any thing to be asked of them, but only that they be honored for those whom
they represent unto us.

Points Disputable.
Some Abulensis in. c. 4. Deutr. q 5. Durand. in 3. Did. q. 2. Peresius de
Tradit. part. 3 in Tract de Imagine.
Schoolmen teach, that the Images of God are not to be made, and that they are
rather permitted, then approved by the Church: But others Caiet. in 3 part q.
25. art. 3. Cathaerin. l de cult. Imag. Sanderus de cult. Im^g.
think it very probable, that the same is lawful.

Some Alex. 3. part. q. 30. art. 12. vlt. Durand. l. 3^ Ceut. Did. 9^ q. 2.
affirm, that an Image is not in any respect to be worshipped in it self, but
only relatiuely for the Exemplar: S. Th. 3. part. q 25 art. 3. S. bouau. and
others in 3 Did 9.
Others avouch that the same honor is due to the Image, and the Exemplar:
Peresius l. de Tradit. Tract. de Imag. Sander. l. 2. c. vlt. de Imag.
Others yet are of opinion that the very Images are to be honored in
themselves, and properly, but with lesser honor then the Exemplar it self.
None of these opinions are defyned by the Church.

Protestant Untruths.
Calvin Instit. l. 2. c. 11.. 13.
avouches that during the times of the first 500. years, there was not any
pictures placed in Churches. But L pro Imaginibus, qui habetur post 7. Synod.
circa fin.
Adrianus 1. proves at large the contrary from the testimonies and practice of
Siluester, Damasus, Celestinus, Sixtus, Leo and others, who all lived before
the year 500.

The Cent. 4. c. 13. Col. 1447.
Centuristes affirm that Christ's Picture was broken and cast down with a
thunderbolt for a testimony that such superstition, wherewith any virtue is
ascribed to Images, does not please God: But all histories testify that not
Christ's, but only Julian the Apostataes picture, was so cast down with a
Thunderbolt.

Calvin Instit. l. 1 c. 11.. 10.
also teaches that the Jews and Gentiles did not call their Idols, Gods: but
this is disproued by many express places of Exodus 32. Iudic. 18.3. Reg. 12.
Dan. 5. Sap. 13.
Scripture.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Prot. Church decrees that Article 22.
The worshipping and adoring of Images is a fond thing* vainly invented and
grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God.
Here all honor unto them is denied.

Other Prot. prohibit their placing in Churches. Luther says, In c. 7. Deuteronomy
tom. 3. fol. 41.
I do not much love Images and I would not have them placed in the Church.
Zwinglius; De vera and fall. Relig. c. de statuis. Peter Martyr in loc. tit. de
cult. Imag. 22. Calu. Instit. l. 1. c. 11.. 13.
Images ought to be abolished in Churches. Others yet proceed furth^^ teaching
that Images are not so much as to be made H^ffma^ says, Apud Zwing. tom. 2.
fol. 631. 630.
That Goodman thinks that Images many be kept and made, so that one do not
adore them or worship them. But this Opinion fights with testimonies of
Scripture, in which the Lord commands that we do not make them. So that
according to Prot. Images must not be honored, nor placed in Churches, nor so
much as made.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
Nicephorus writes, Hist. l. 16. c. 27.
Xenaias first (O audacious soul, and impudent mouth!) vomited forth that
speech, That the Images of Christ, and those who have pleased him, are not to
be worshipped. According to which the Prot. Euactius confesses, that Comment.
in praecedent. Chron. l. 7. Anno Christi. 494. See Cedrenus in compend. hist.
Xenaias first raised war in the Church against Images. Julian the Apostata
Sozom. l. 5. c. 20. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 14.
cast down the Image of Christ, which the woman Mat. 9.20.
mentioned in the Gospel had made. Alcoran. c. 15.17. Prateolus verb. Mahomet.
Mahomet also im^ugned Images and the Cross. And Probianus also Hist. tripart.
l. 2. c. 19.
denied veneration of the Cross. We have seen next before that the same is
taught by the Prot. Church.

Protestant Errors.
Nappier blusheth not to write, Upon the Revel. p. 89. 90. 214. 215. 219. and
Proposition 31. p. 72. 73. etc.
The sign, or Cross which appeared in vision to Constantine with these words
in hoc signo vinces, in this sign thou shall overcome, was the first public
and visible mark of Antichrist. So that the badge, or mark of Antichrist, who
is to be such a one as does directly oppose himself against Christ, must be
the sign or Cross which has always been holden the badge of Christ, in
regard of his dying upon the Cross.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that it is lawful to make the Images of
Christ, and his Saints, to place them in Churches, and to exhibit honor, or
reverence unto them.
FOr the progress, and fuller understanding of this Controversy, we are first
to observe, that the words Image and Idol, are taken in the Scriptures, and
with Ecclesiastical writers in different senses: an Image is a true
representation or likeness of a thing, as when we paint a man, a horse etc. An
Idol, is a false similitude which represents that which truly is not, as the
statues of Venus, of Minerua, which represent women-Gods who neither are, nor
can be Gods. The holy Coloss 1.15 Heb. 1.3. Sap. 7 16.
Scripture calls the son of God, the Image of his Father: Solomon is said
to make Images of Cherubims; 3. Reg. 8.7.8.
but never is the son of God called the Idol of God, or the Images of
Cherubims called Idols; whereas an Idol is said to be a Abac. 2.18. see S.
Hier. in hunc loc. and in c. 13. Zachar.
false Image, and S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 8.4.
We know that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that there is no God but
one: Yea through the whole Scriptures, 3. Reg. 7.16. Leuit. 19.4. Number. 23.^1.
Ose. 6.
the word Idol, as also in the Fathers, Synodus 7. Act. 5.7. Orig. ho. 8 in
Exodus Theodore quaest. 38. in Exodus
it is taken for a false God, and Idolatry for the worshipping of false Gods,
and so they are still taken in the worse part, and forbidden: Whereby is
discovered the falsehood of Stephanus In his Thesaurus. V. (...).
affirming the word (...), to be used by Ecclesiastical writers for any Image,
representing that which we may worship, including therein the Images of Christ,
and his Saints. In like manner the word Simulachrum, derived of simulo, to
dissemble, or lie, is used for Idol, for where the Latin Interpreter has
simulachrum, Ps. 113.12. Act. 15.29. 1. Io 5.21. S. Aug in Ps. 135. Hier. in c
7. Ose.
always in Greek it is (...).

But of these who confound Image and Idol, I would demand when the Scriptures
say, Genesis 1.26.27.
God said, Let us make man to our Image. And God created man to his Image: to
the Image of God he created him. Genesis 5.3.
Adam lived 130. years, and begat to his own Image and likeness, and called
his name Seth. 1. Cor. 11.7.
Man ought not to cover his head, because he is the Image and glory of God, and
the like; I demand whether in these places the words Image and Idol do signify
one and the same thing or no? if they affirm, then they must acknowledge of
necessity, not only Adam when he begat his Son Seth, to have made to himself
an Idol, but also that man is the Idol of God, and that God when he created man
framed to himself an Idol, and so nothing remains, but that they likewise
proclayme God to be an Idolater: if they deny, then their retractation of their
former assertion, is laudable, and we shall hereafter in this expect their
silence.

Secondly, all agree, that to m^ke or k^ep an Image, is not of it self
unlawful, the Arts of painting and caruing being allowable, and the same
practiced and permitted amongst Prot. themselves.

The first thing therefore in question is, whether it be lawful to make the
Image of God himself, or of the B. Trinity? To which I answer, that though
the same be not so certain a matter of faith, as the other of the making of
the Images of Christ and his Saints is, yet the lawfulnes thereof may sundry
ways be proved. First, God has been pleased to appear, and to have been
seen in corporal shape or figure, as appears in sundry places of Scripture,
as first, Genesis 3.8.
where it pleased him to be heard walking and seen of Adam, and Eve in
Paradise after their fall, and to hold a long Conference and Expostulation
with them touching their sin, and the occasion thereof, thereby to draw them to
repentance, and to save them, all which was not done without some form, or
shape by God assumed.

Secondly, Jacob flying from the face of his brother Esau, had a vision wherein
he saw Genesis 28.12.13.
A ladder standing upon Earth, and the top thereof touching heaven, and the
Angels of God ascending and descending by it, and God leaning upon the ladder,
speaking unto him saying, I am the God of Abraham thy Father, and the God of
Isaac, the land whereon thou sleep, will I give to thee, and thy seed; the
which sensible sight and hearing of God by Jacob, could not be had without some
shape assumed by God, whereby he might be seen and heard. And elsewhere Genesis
32.24.
it is recorded that a man wrestled with him until morning, which man was God,
as appears by these words, Ib. 28.
If thou have been strong against God etc. and himself confesses the same
afterward Ib. 30.
saying, I have seen God face to face, and am yet alive. Whence it is evident,
that God vouchsafed to appear in shape of man, when he wrestled with Jacob.
Thirdly, Genesis 18.1.2.3,
God appeared unto Abraham in the valey of Mambre, as he sat in the door of
his Tent, in the very heat of the day: and when he had lifted up his eyes,
there appeared to him three men standing near unto him etc. Here it evidently
appears by the contexte of the whole Chapter, that it was God that appeared
to Abraham in shape of man, as by his promising of a child to Sara, and by the
Communication passing between God and Abraham, touching the destroying of
Sodom.

Fourthly, you shall read in diverse other places Genesis 3.8. and 28.13. Exodus
33.23. Isaiae 6.1.3. Reg. 22.19. Amos. 9.1. and 7 7. Dan. 7 9.
of holy Scripture, where God has appeared and been seen by men, walking,
leaning, standing, sitting, with description of head, hair, and garments,
mentioning also his seat, throne, and footstool, which could not be done
without the assuming of some bodily shape. And God the holy Ghost assumed the
shape of a Dove ^at. 3.16.
when he descended from heaven, and lighted upon Christ at the time of his
Baptism in Jordan. Angels also being incorporeall, have appeared often in men's
Genesis 18.2.19 1. Isa. 6.6. Dan. 9.21. Math. vlt. 2. Luc. vlt. 4. Io. 20.12.
shapes. Now as God and Angels have appeared in these corporal shapes, so may
they in like manner be painted; there being no injury to draw them in those
forms and shapes, wherein they were pleased to appear to men.

The second question is, whether it be lawful to place Images in Churches, and
that alone without any history pertaining thereto. To this I answer, God
himself commanded Angels to be placed in the highest places of the Temple, for
so you shall read, where he speaks thus unto Moses, Exodus 25.18.19.20.21.22.
Two Cherubims also thou shall make of beaten gould, on both sides of the
Oracle, let one Cherub be on the one side, and the other on the other; let them
cover both sides of the Propitiato^y, spreading their wings, and covering the
Oracle, and let them look one toward the other, their faces turned unto the
Propitiatory, wherewith the Arc is to be covered, wherein thou shall put the
Testimony which I will give thee: thence will I command, and will speak to
thee over the Propitiatory, and from the midst of the two Cherubims which
shall be upon the Arc of the Testimony, all things which I Command the Children
of Israel by thee. Again concerning the renewing of these Cherubims, at the
building of the Temple by Solomon, you shall read thus of him, 3. Reg.
6.24.25.26.27.28.29.
And he made in the Oracle two Cherubs of Olive trees, of ten Cubits in height,
one wing of a Cherub of five Cubits, and the other wing of a Cherub five
Cubits, that is, having ten Cubits from the end of one wing to the end of the
other wing: of ten cubits also was the second Cherub, in like measure, and the
work was one in both Cherubs, that is to say, one Cherub had the height of ten
cubits, and in like manner the second Cherub: and he put the Cherubs in the
midst of the Inner Temple, and the Cherubs extended their wings, and the one
wing touched the wall and the wing of the second Cherub touched the other wall:
and the other wings in the middle part of the Temple touched each other. He
covered also the Cherubs with gold; and all the walls of the Temple round
about he graued with diverse engrauinges and caruing: and he made in them
Cherubs and Palme-trees, and diverse pictures as it were standing out of the
wall, and coming forth. Calvin cannot deny the forsaid placing of those
pictures in the Temple, and yet he affirms them to be made, Instit. l. 1. c.
2.. 3.
Who endeavor to defend the Images of God and Saints, by the example of
Cherubims. But if by the appointment of God, the two Cherubs were made, which
were the Images of Angels, and by God also commanded to be placed within the
Tabernacle, before the building of the Temple, and within the Temple after the
building thereof, and if both Tabernacle and Temple were then unto the Jews
places consecrated to Gods worship, as our Christian Churches are now; then
follows it necessarily, that it is as lawful now to make Images, and to
place them in the Churches, as it was then lawful to make Cherubs and other
pictures, and to place them in the Tabernacle and Temple, and that without all
history thereto, as these were; nay which is more, this was done in the time of
the old Testament, when the Jews were most prone to Idolatry. Neither may we
greatly fear any great inconvenience now a days to ensue, by placing Images
in Churches, seeing there is none so ignorant, who belieueth not in one only
God, and knows perfectly that Images and Pictures, are but the handy works
of men, and this the rather through the care and industry of their Pastors,
who are strictly charged Council. Trid Sess 25.
and commanded to inform the more ignorant, of the right and lawful use
thereof, and of that honor which is proper to God alone, not to be communicated
to his Creatures: Yea instead of hurt, many commodities arise thereby, as to
those who cannot read, and the more unlearned, Greg. Nyssen. orat. in Theod.
instruction and knowledge, to all a better Greg. Mag. l. 7. Ep. 109. and l. 9.
Ep. 9
and more frequent remembrance of Christ and his Saints, and of their singular
virtues and actions, and thereby a more fervent desire in us, Greg. l. 7 Ep. 53.
to love and imitate the same; and lastly an exhibition Synod 7. Act. 6. and
Basil. Orat. in 40. Martyrs.
of due honor to God and his Saints, it being undoubted, that to erect statues
and Images to great personages, was ever done for their greater honor: and
some Eusebius. Hist. l. 7. c. 14.
think this the chiefest cause, why Christians desired the Images of Saints.

The third, and greatest difficulty or question is, whether any worship or
reverence may be exhibited to Images? I answer, though they may not be
honored with Invocation, or by placing any confidence in them, yet otherwise
that they may be worshipped in reguard of them whom they represent unto us, is
proved first by the former places of Scripture concerning the Cherubims and the
brazen Serpent Number. 21.8.9.
, which was the Io. 3.14.15.
figure of Christ: for the Images of Cherubims placed upon the Arc, were
necessarily adored of them who adored the Arc. In so much that S. Hier. in Ep.
17. ad Marcellum.
Hierome says, The Jews in times past did worship the Holyes of Holies,
because there were the Cherubims, and Propitiatory, and the Arc of the
Testament, Manna, Aarons rod, and the golden Altar. And the Brazen serpent by
Gods Commandment placed on high could not but be worshipped of them, who by
looking thereon were immediately cured. In so much that Aug. l. 3. de Trinit. c.
10.
S. Austine speaking of certain Religious signs which deserve worship, gives
example in the Brazen serpent. And it is a certain Rule that, Aug. l. 3. de
doct. Christiana c. 9.
profitable signs ordained by God, (such as the Cherubims and brazen Serpent
were) are to be honored, seeing their honor passes to the first pattern or
exemplar, the Angels and Christ. Calvin confesses that, In Number. 21.8.
The brazen Serpent was a shadow, figure, and similitude of Christ. And that
it was a sign of spiritual grace. And that, In Psalm. 105.19.
the Arc was the Image of God. Now that the Jews did exhibit great honor to
these, the Ios. 7.6. 2. Reg. 6.12 etc. Number. 21.8.
Scriptures are manifest. And Calvin confesses that, In Number. 21.8.
The brazen serpent was laid up as a precious treasure, and diligently
preserved many ages in the Sanctuary of God: Whereby it appears that they were
greatly honored.

Secondly, the same may be proved by such places as teach that Creatures may be
honored for the relation they have to God, as Mat. 5.^^.
Swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God; neither by
the earth: ^here note that an Oath being an Act of Religion, whereby first God,
and then that whereby we swear is honored, God forbids Oaths by heaven or
Earth without due circumstance, least those creatures as they have relation to
him, should thereby be dishonored: so also it is said, Ps. 98.5.
Adore the footestoole of his feet, where by, footestoole, is understood the
Ark of God, according ^o that of King Daui^ 1. Paral. 28.1 and Psalm. 131
7.8.2. Reg. 6.2.
I prepared a house where the Arc of our Lord should rest, and the footestoole
of our God: which also might be further proved by sundry other places of
Scripture. Now if this Arc being but a Creature, was so highly had i^ Ios.
3.3.4.5 6. 1. Reg. 6.19. 2. Reg. 6. Hebr. 6.4.5.
reverence for the relation it had to God, why not Images who have a nearer and
more perfect relation?

Thirdly, the same is taught by such places as testify that Creatures are said
to be sacred, or holy, for the relation they have to holy things; so to Moses
it was said, Exodus 3.5.
Put thy shoes of thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand is holy
ground; which whether it be called holy for the presence of God, or of some
Angel, is all one. The day of the Exodus 12.14.
Passe-ouer was commanded to be kept an holy feast, for the signification it
had, and for the dedication thereof to God. The garments of the Priests were
called Exodus 28.4.
holy vestments, for that they were ordained for the service of God. The 2.
Tim. 3.15.
Scriptures are called holy Scriptures, in that they are signs of holy things.

Concerning the reverence due to the sacred name of Iesiu, though S. Paul says
thereof, Philip. 2.9.
For the which thing God also has exalted him, and has given him a Name which
is above all Names, that in the Name of Jesus every knee bow, of the
celestialls, terrestrialls, and infernals: and though the Ancient Conc. Lugdun.
2. cap. Decret. de immunit. Eccl. in Sexto Orig. ho. 1. in Iosue.
Fathers do from this place exhibit much reverence to the said Name, yet
Calvin trembles not to say, to use his own words, that, In Philip. 1.9.
The Sophisters of Sorbon are more then ridiculous, who gather from this
present place, that the knee is to be bowed, as often as the name of Jesus is
pronounced; as though it were a coniuring word, which had all it force included
in the sound. But by this more the ridiculous impudency and blaspemy, Calvin
ra^keth himself among the fals^ Prophets, whereof God complaine^h, saying,
Ierem. 23.27.
who will make my people to forget my Name, through their dreams, which every
one tells to his neighbor: as their Fathers forgot my name for Baal. And it
shows plainly that Calvin uttered these words by the suggestion of the
Devil, for as S. Paul observes, 1. Cor. 1^ 3.
No man speaking in the spirit of God, says Anathema to Jesus, and, no man can
say our Lord Jesus, but in the holy Ghost: whereas those who are guided by the
holy Ghost do bow and reverence at the name of Jesus, not for the sound or
sillables of the word, as Calvin foolishly pretends, but for the relation
which it has to Christ our Savior. And I verily think, that when due
reverence is given by hat and knee at the hearing of our Kings name, when it is
read in Proclamations, or otherwise, not one Caluinist in England durst censure
the Kings name, for a word magical, in regard of the honor done unto it. Now
it is evident, that in what respect a thing is said to be sacred, holy, or to
have any Excellency in it, in the same it may be worshipped and reverenced:
therefore Images having as perfect relation to holy things, as the earth,
days, garments, or words, may truly be said to be sacred or holy, and so also
may be worshipped.

Fourthly, the Images of Kings may be worshipped with Civil honor, therefore
the Images of Christ and his Saints with Religious honor, the things
represented being sacred, as the other are civil. And whereas the Cent. 8. c. 9.
Centuristes reply, that the Kings Image is therefore worshipped, by reason of
the Kings absence, who cannot at the same time be in all, or sundry parts of
the kingdom: this is most idle and false; Idle, because the question is not,
why, or for what cause the kings image is worshipped, but whether it be to be
worshipped: false, for as it were greater indignity to iniure the kings picture
in his own presence, then in his absence, so to honor it in his presence,
were most grateful.

Further, an Image is capable of injury Eusebius. hist. l. 9. c. 10. Chrysostom.
hom. 2. and 3. ad populum Antiochenum. Theodor. hist. l. 5. c. 10. See Calu.
inst. l. 4. c 17.. 33. Pet. Mart. in 1. Cor. 11.
and reproach, therefore also it is capable of honor and worship. And Idols or
Images of false Gods are therefore despised and detested, because they are the
Images of false Gods; therefore by the contrary, Images of Christ and his
Saints, signifying true and holy things, may therefore be honored.

But to proceed further concerning the use of sacred Images: if the use of them
were unlawful, either it must be, because the use thereof were of its own
nature dishonorable to God, or else for that it is forbidden by some
Commandment. Touching the first part, that it is not dishonorable to God, is
proved thus: Howsoever God alone is to be a^ored with divine honor, yet
withal a Religious worship is due to such things, as have relation to him, or
to his Saints, accordingly as M. Jewel confesses, saying, Reply against
Harding. p. 379.
We only adore Christ as very God, but we worship also and reverence the
Sacrament, we worship the word of God, we worship all other like things, in
such religious wise to Christ belonging. And Calvin confesses of the
Eucharist, as it is a figure of Christ's body and blood, Instit. l. 4 c. 17..
33. Edit. Gal.
dignam esse quae omni reuerentia exaltetur, worthy to be extolled with all
reverence. In this sense Saint John Baptist thought himself Luc. 3.16.
unworthy to unloose the lachet of Christ's shoes, a thing otherwise by him
not reguarded, but as having relation to Christ. Also it was commanded, that
the Arc or Mercy-seat should be adored, Ps. 98.5.
Adorate scabellum pedu^ eius, for so both Fathers and Prot. read, worship you
the footestoole of his feet. And this honor done and given to Creatures being
commanded by God to be given to creatures, neither is nor can be dishonorable
to God, for it rests not in the foresaid things themselves, but passes over
from them, as both In his Reply. p. 409.
Jewel and Hist. Sacram. l. 5. c 8. p 477.
Hospinian express, saying, The Sacraments be adored, but the whole honor
rests not in them, but is passed over from them to the things signified; and
heerunto Saint De Doctr. Christ l. 3. c. 9.
Austine agreably says, qui veneratur vtile signum etc. he that worshippeth a
profitable sign ordained by God, the force and signification whereof he well
understands, does not reverence that which he sees, but that rather unto
which such signs have relation. This point is so evident and free from all
danger of Idolatry, that Danaeus debating the same with Bellarmine, confesses
in plain terms concerning the worshipping of Images by him defended, Primae
partis altera part. p. 1383.
It consists upon so many observations and restrictions that the honor which
they exhibit to their Images, is (as he thinks) indeed none, as being only
cultus reductiuus, non proprius, that is, a worship reductiue or belonging to
the first pattern, not proper or abiding in the Image, as given to it for it
self.

This is yet made more plain by Example of that civil reverence which we do
exhibit before the Princes Image, or cloth of Estate: whereof S. Athanasius
says, Ser. 4. cont. Arrianos. and see the like in S. Ambr. ser. 10. in ps. 118.
He that worshippeth the kings Image, does therein worship the king himself.
And S. Basil Basil. de Spiritu sancto ad Amphilochium. c. 18.
thinks of the Honor done to the King, and his Image, that it is one, and
not many, or diverse, and that therefore the honor Basil. Ibid. vt supra.
done to the Image, is referred to the first Exemplar.

Upon this ground it is to be imagined that Antichrist (who will strive to be
2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
exalted above all that is called God) will yet in further satisfaction of his
proud humor, cause his Image Apoc. 13.5.
to be adored; which thing he would never do, if the honor done to his Image
were a dishonor to himself. By all which it is evident, that the use of
sacred Images, and the Religious worship done to them, by the Catholic
Church, is not of its own nature dishonorable to God.

Concerning the second point, namely, whether any law or precept be made
against the worshipping of Images: If any were, it were that of Exodus, 20.4.5.
Thou shall not make to thy self any Idol, or similitude: but this
Commandment urged so much by Prot. against the use of sacred Images, is
altogether impertinent; first, for that by Idol, and similitude here
mentioned in the Precept, is meant the false resemblance of that thing for God,
which indeed was not God, and which the Jews being prone to Idolatry, did
grossly worship as their God, according to the error of the Gentiles. And this is
proved by S. Paul, saying, 1. Cor. 8.4.
We know that an Idol is nothing in the world: and so likewise did the Fathers
Orig. bo. 8. in Exodus Theodor. q. 38. in Exodus Hieronymus in c. 2. Abacuc. and
in c. 13 Zach^r.
understand the word Idol. The Prophet Abacuc also calls it C. 2.18.
a false Image; or as the Prot. Engl. Bib. of 1578.
translate it, a teacher of lies, that is, a representation of that which is
not: wherefore this Commandment makes nothing against the use and worship of
sacred Images. And D. Whitguift confesses, that, In his Def. against.
Cartwright. p. 542. versus fin.
We cannot find in all the Scriptures, where God has made any law or
ordinance, against his own Commandment. And therefore had God almighty by his
Commandment forbidden the making of such Images as did signify a Truth, he
would not then, as afterward he did, Exodus 25 18. and Number. 21.8.
have commanded them to be made and erected.

And let our Prot. understand whatsoever they will, by Idol and similitude
here, yet is it manifest, that thereby is only forbidden the worshipping of them
for God, as appears by all words and circumstances of this place, as where
it is said there next before, Exodus 20.3.
Thou shall have no other Gods before me: and after, You Exodus 20.23.
shall not make with me Gods of silver and Gods of gold: and yet more plainly,
Leuit. 26.1.
You shall make none Idols, or graven Images, etc. to bow down thereto, for I
am the Lord, and my Isa. 42.8.
glory I will not give to another, neither my praise to graven Images. All
which argue, that thereby is forbidden that kind of honor which is only due to
God, and which of its own nature was forbidden and dishonorable before the
publishing of this Commandment.

But suppose that the Jews had been forbidden generally to make and worship
Images in any sort, yet had this Commandment been but temporal, and peculiar
unto them, in reguard of their danger and strong inclination to Idolatry: and
so accordingly Martin Luther, and Brentius affirm, as Beza witnesses of them,
Vide Resp Bezae ad acta Colloq. Montisb. part altera Praef. p. 12 post med.
That the second Commandment of the first Table concerning Images, pertayned
only to the Jews, as being part of the Ceremonial Law.

Upon all these Premises the Conclusion is. 1. That since by the Protestants
confession, the Image of Christ may be made: 2. since likewise for the
direction of our understanding, the Image of Christ is the same to our eye,
that the sound or name of Jesus is to our ear: 3. since also, a Religious kind
of reverence is to be exhibited at the name of Jesus, and as M. Jewel and
Hospinian have affirmed, to Sacraments, and to all other like things in such
religious wise to Christ belonging: since as M. Jewel In his Reply. p. 409.
and Hospinian In Hist. Sacram. l. 5. c. 8. p. 477.
further say as before, and the other premises argue, the forsaid honor
rests not in them, but is safely without all danger of Idolatry, or dishonor
passed over from them to the things signified; that therefore the Image of
Christ and of his Saints, as they may be lawfully made, so also upon the
forsaid ground they may be safely worshipped. The conclusion of all which is no
other, but that Christ and his Saints may be worshipped in their pictures, no
less then Christ is in his name and Sacraments, and no less then an Earthly
King is in his Image, or Cloth of Estate. As for the forsaid Commandment, it
is clear by the premises, that thereby is only forbidden, not such forsaid
worship, as not being of its own nature dishonorable, should then first
become unlawful by force of that Commandment, but such worship as was then
before of it own nature unlawful, in reguard whereof that Commandment was
published: this, as appears by the premises, was then only Idolatry, which
became not evil because it was then prohibited, but then was prohibited,
because it was before that, evil.

Lastly it is to be observed how impiously Prot. corrupt the sacred Scriptures
in hatred to holy Images: And heerin of very many to touch but some few; Whereas
S. Paul says, Ephesians. 5.5.
No covetous person, (which is the service of Idols) has inheritance etc.
Fulke translateth, nor covetous person, which is a worshiper of Images. etc.
And for Col. 3.5.
Avarice, which is the service of Idols, he says, Covetousness, which is
worshipping of Images. And yet in our common phrase of speaking, we say, such a
rich man makes his money his God, even as S. Paul said of others, Philip. 3.19.
whose God is the belly. And whereas S. John says 1. Io. 5.21.
Keep your selves from Idols, though Fulke translateth in the text, Idols, yet
he puts in the Margent, or Images: and the Church walls still say, Keep your
selves from Images. But not content with this, sometimes they add the word,
Image, to the text, when it is neither in the Latin or the Greek, as may be
seen in Fulke Act. 19.35. and in the Engl. Bib. of Anno 1562. in 2. Paral.
36.8. I omit sundry such like, only for breuity.

SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers expound the Scriptures for the lawful use
of Images, and Religious Reverence done unto them, agreably with Catholics.
SAint Athanasius in justification of this Doctrine writes thus Ad Antiochum
Principem. c. 38.
God forbid, and let it be far from us, that we Chistians adore Images as
Gods, as the Greeks do. We declare only our affection, and the care of our
love toward the figure of the person expressed, by his Image: therefore
oftentimes we burn as unprofitable the wood which erstwhyle was an Image, if
the figure be worn out. Therefore as Jacob when he was to dye, adored the top
of Joseph's rod, not honoring the rod it self, but him who held the rod: so we
Christians do no otherwise adore Images, but even as moreover, when we kiss
our Children and Fathers, we declare the desire of our mind. Even as the Jew
also did adore in times past the tables of the Law, and the two golden
Cherubims, and certain other Images, not worshipping the nature of the stone
or gold, but our Lord who commanded them to be made.

With S. Athanasius agrees Tertullian saying, L. 2. Cont. Marcionem. c. 22.
And therefore he forbidding the similitude of all things to be made, which are
in heaven, and in Earth, and in the waters, he does show the causes
restrayning, to wit, the substance or matter of Idolatry; for he adds
afterward, you shall not adore them, nor serve them: but the figure of the
brazen Serpent which our Lord commanded Moses afterward, did not belong to
the title of Idolatry, but to remedy and help those, Def of the Engl.
Tra^slat. c. 3 p. 119.
who were infested by the serpents And I say nothing of the figure of the
remedy (to wit the Cross) so both the golden Cherubims and Seraphims etc.

The Fathers were so full for our Catholic use of Images, as that they
allowed the public placing of them in Churches, though Fulke thinks this to
be L. 2. Cont. Marcionem. c. 22.
against the Commandment. For sundry examples and testimonies of the Ancient
Fathers are in proof thereof alleged by the Prot. against Sym^o^^z ng. part
1. p. 32. them. Exam. part 4. p. 26. 29. 30 Cent. 4. Col 409.
Parker, Chemni^ius, and the Centuristes. In so much, that in respect of such
public allowance of Images, the Prot. Functius affirms, that, Lib 7. Comment
in praeced. Chronol. at anno 494.
Anno 494. Xenaias was the first in the Church that stirred up war against
Images.

And whereas Prot. pretend, that we Catholics do take away the second
Commandment, S. Austine affirms this part of the Commandment, Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven thing, not to be a several distinct Precept
of it self, but parcel of (and therefore explayned by) this former, Thou shall
not have strange Gods. In this he writes so largely and plainly, and his
Judgment is so confessed, that Musculus speaking of Catholics says, Loc.
com. de Decalogo. p. 39.
They divide the precepts of the first table into three, and of the second
into seven, and so they leave out the Commandment concerning Images, and
graven things, following Austine, who l. 2. quaest. super Exodus c. 71.
appoints three Precepts to the first table, and the other 7. to the second,
Willet also confesses, that Comment. upon Exodus in c. 20. p. 515.
Austine would have but 3. Precepts in the first table. And again, Ibid. p.
314.
The Romanistes opinion is, that there are but 3. Commandments in the first
table, putting the 2. first into one etc. of this opinion is Austine, quaest
71. in Exodus

And whereas S. Austine taught this our Catholic Principle, that De Doct.
Christ. l. 3. c. 9.
The houour given unto profitable signs appointed by God, passes from them to
the thing signified, Hospinian affirming that Sacraments may as signs be
honored, says even as we say of Images Hist. Sacram. part. 1. l. 5. c. 8.
That honor stays not in them, but passes from them to the things which are
signified: in proof whereof he alleges S. Austine, saying, Those things
which Austine writ, de doct. Christ. lib. 3. c. 9. do agree with these: Who
adoreth (says he) a profitable sign appointed by God, whose power and
signification he understands, does not honor that which is seen or passes,
but rather that whereunto all such things are to be referred. This place is so
pregnant, that it is therefore alleged to the same purpose by Peter Defense de
Euchar. loc. 1. col. 382.
Martyr.

In further proof yet of Images, let us see what honor the fathers gave to
the Cross. Perkins acknowledges that, Vol. 2. p. 596. and Fulke aga. Hesk. p
657.
Paulinus Ep. 12. says, The Bishop of Jerusalem yearly at Easter set forth
the Cross for the people to worship, himself being the chief of the
worshippers. Now Paulinus according to Osiander, Cent. 5. l. 3. c. 2.
was familiar with Hierome, Austine, and Ambrose. Danaeus avouches that Cyril
and sundry other learned Fathers 1 ^art. all p^^t. ad Bella^ ^. cont^ou. Resp p
1415. and Parker ^g. Symbol. part. 2. c. 7 p. 61.
were plainly superstitious and blinded with this enchantment of the Crosses
adoration. Burges confesses that, In Couels Answ. to Burges. p. 130 136.
There is nothing ascribed to the Cross in or out of Baptism, by the rankest
Papists, but the Fathers are as d^eply engaged in the same: so as if we w^ll
use it as the Fathers did etc we take the Soul to be fenced with crossing of
the Body, and the Cross to have virtue of consecrating the Sacrament, dryuing
away Devils, witchcraft etc. In proof whereof he alledgeh sund^y Ancie^^
Fathers, and the like is acknowledged by other Cent 4. Col. 302. and 1493.
Treatise of the sign of the Cross. p. 21.
Protestants.

Directly contrary to all Puritanes, and the more usual practice of
Pro^estants, S Austine teaches that, In Euang. Joan. Tract. 118. See also de
Temp. ser. 182. c 3. ser. 19. de Sanctis.
unless the sign of the Cross be applied, whether to the foreheads of the
be^euers, or to the water wherewith they are regenerated, or to the oil
wherewith they are anointed, or to the Sacrifice wherewith they are nourished,
none of these are rightly administered. The Centuristes reciting this saying,
affirm that, Cent. 5. c. 6. Col. 657.
He speaks superstitiously. And D. Fulke acknowledges that, Against Rhem.
Test. in 1. Cor. 11.34.
Indeed S. Austine in Joan. Tract. 118. says, that the sign of the Cross was
a Ceremony used in all the Sacraments, which if it were not used, nothing of
them is duly done: with whom agree other Prot. reproving S. Austine for his
Catholic doctrine of the sign of the Cross. And yet S. Chrysostom (living
in the same age with S. Austine) gives like testimony for the Greek Church
saying, In Math ho. 55.
All things which help to our salvation are perfected by the Cross for when we
are regenerated, the Cross of our Lord is present, when we are nourished with
the most sacred meat, when we take Orders every where and always that ensign
of victory is at hand. So usually and generally was the sign of the Cross
used, by the Fathers in the Administration of the holy Sacraments.

And as concerning the signing of our foreheads with the sign of the Cross S.
Austine says, Cont. Faust. Man. l. 11 c. 30.
The people are marked in their foreheads with the sign of our Lords Passion,
in preservation of their safety. And he avouches, that, Christ In Eu^ng. Joan.
Tract. 3.
would not have a star to be his sign in the forheads of the faithful but a
Cross. Yea speaking of himself and his own pract^ce, he glories of the
Cross in these words, In Ps. 141. and 46.
I am so far from being ashamed of the Cross, that I do not keep the Cross
of Christ in a hidden place, In Joan. Tract. 36.
but I carry it on my forhead. And speaking against a Pagan he says, In Ps.
141.
Let him insult against Christ crucified, let me see the Cross of Christ in
the forheads of Kings. Surely all this is superstitious with Protestants.

Now to the many miracles wrought by the sign of the Cross, and by us
objected in this behalf, from the Fathers, D. Couell avouches that, Answ. to
Burges. p 138.
No man can deny but that God manifested his power, to the amazement of the
world in this contemptible sign, as being the instrument of many miracles. And
H^spinian confesses that, De Templis. p. 301.
Austine tells many true miracles done by the sign of the Cross, and the
Devil put to flight. De Ciu. Dei. l. 22. c. 8.

And whereas Aug. sermon de Temp. ser. 130. Orig and the rest in Comment. in Mat.
24.30.
S. Austine, Origin, Chrysostom, Hierome, Hilary, Theophilact, Euthimius and
Bid do teach, that at the day of Judgment Christ will come, with the sign of
the Cross before him, the same is defended by the Prot. Trig. saying, True
Catholic. p. 295.
Gualter of famous memory so expounds Matthew 24.30. And by the sign of the
son of man, he understands the Cross, these be his words: Most of the
Ancient Fathers expound the Cross to be this sign etc. Also Thomas Cowper
Bishop of Lincoln said, My Brethren, can you not endure that sign to be made
here upon Earth, which before the coming of the Judge shall be conspicuous in
heaven? Wherefore though Prot. and Devils cannot endure the sign of the
Cross, yet Christ, and his true servants will ever honor it.

SECT. IV. That Protestant writers do acknowledge and allow the use of Images in
Churches: and that due honor may be exhibited unto them.
TO begin first with Wicliffists, Wicliffe himself confesses that, L. 18. Ep.
4^.
It is evident, that Images may be well and ill made; well, to excite,
facilitate, and inflame the minds of the saythfull, that they may more deuouth
worship their God. Again De Euchar. c. 9.
Therefore it is granted that Relickes, Images, and Sacraments, are with
wisdom to be worshipped.

To come to the Hussites, John Husse acknowledges that Cont Im^ginum
ado^ationem.
Although before the Image of Christ or any Saint, men may lawfully kneel
down, pray, sacrifice place candles and do so but yet they ought not to do
those things in the Name of the Image but in the name of him whose Image it is:
even as the Image not for it self, but for the thing drawn, is to be graven,
placed, painted before men. Perzib^an allows the^ placing in Chu^ches,
saying, Cap. ^4.
I profess that Images of Christ and his Saints, all secular indecency, in
indecent worship omitted may lawfully be had and profitably kept in the
Churches of Christians. So superstitiously Popish are the Hussites.

The Lutherans also are no less faulty, for Doctor Luther n Beza in Resp ad
Acta Colloq. Montisb. part. alt. Praef p. 12.
and Brentius were of opinion, that the Commandment in Exodus against graven
things, was but peculiar to the Jews, and Ceremonial. But Luther further
teaches that, Centra cae^estes Prophetas.
The spirit of Images-breakers is not good, it breaths slaughters and
seditions etc It is proved from Moses, that the Images of the Crucifix, and
Saints are to be permitted. Again, De Communione sub vtraque specie.
It is lawful to keep ^mages, because God himself in the Old Testament
commanded a brazen serpent to be erected, and a Cherubim at the golden Arc
etc. Beza and Iacobus In Epitom. p. 39.
Andreas thought the making of Images, and which is more, even the placing of
them in the Church, to be a matter of indifferency. Exam. part. 4. p. 14. and
33.
Chemnitius is also of the same mind, alleging Luthers testimony for the same.
Bucer also says, In Centur. Epist. Theol. 170.
We do not condemn the Image of Christ and of his Saints. And Brachman
iustifyeth Images by way of demand and comparison thus, In Centur. Exercit.
Theol. Centur. 1. p 53. post med.
What was the cause that Exodus 25.
God himself commanded to make two golden Cherubims etc? That therefore if it
were lawful to paynt oxen and lions in that most sacred Temple, why may it not
be lawful for us in our Churches to have the Images of Christ himself, holy
Angels, and of the Apostles?

The Fulke in his Def. of the Eng Transl of the Bibl. c. 3. page 1. 9.
Lutherans yet retain the use of Sacred Images in their Churches. And Beza
speaking of the Lutherans, makes them as yet far more chargeable, saying
unto the^. Ad acta Co^loq. Montisb. resp. part. alt. p. 23.
Vos autem etc. do not you. D. Luth^r himself leading you knecle down to your
Crosses and Images of the Crucifi^e? Do you not also in token of reverence,
light thereto in the day time, waxen Candles etc. and this how little and how
great soever it be, is it not, I pray you, external and religious adoration,
which being done unto the Image (is not as he there tells them to be excused)
by our pretense of carrying your mind to the Exemplar (or thing signified) for
(says he a little there before) the wiser Papists will answer, that they also
exhibit this worship not to the Image of the Crucifixe, but in mind to Christ
himself.

Fulke confesses, that, Def. of the Engl. Transl c. 3. p. 119.
Lutherans have still Images in their Churches, and they are therein desended
by sundry other Fother by answ. to certain object. pa. 83. and 53. Touchburne
Antid. p 91. Bucer in Cent. Ep. Theo. p. 270. Pet. Mart. and Melanct. in
Palmerus de Imag. sect. 374. 476. 471.
Protestants.

The book of Reformation in the time of King Henry the eight, which was
allowed amongst others, by M. Act. Mon. p. 1472. B. ante med.
Latimer and Cranmer, affirms, Act. Mon. supra.
The worshipping of Images: which article was Act. Mon. supra.
written, and added by the Kings hand. M. Thomas Bilney affirmed, and believed
in plain terms the adoration of Images. Add that In Cent. Exercit. Theol.
cent. 1. q 19. p. 45.
Brachman confesses, that the Papists do not adore the Images themselves, but
their first patterns. And again, they teach, that they do not adore the
Images, but the things signified thereby

Concerning the worship due to the sacred name of Jesus, which is the same to
the ear, that the Image is to the eye, and being lawful, proves the like for
Images; the same is appointed and allowed by the Injunctions Art. 52.
made in the time of Q. Elizabeth, and it is defended by D. Defense aga.
Cartwright. tra. 21. c. 7. p. 74^. Wright in his Summons for sl^epers. p. 30.
Whitguife and Leonard Wright. D. Fulke grants that, Ag. Rhem. Test. fol. 340.
Capping or kneeling at the name of Jesus, is of it self an indifferent thing,
and therefore may be used etc. and that, it may be well used in sign of
reverence to his Majesty. Musculus also says, Loc. com. in Explanat. 3.
Praecept. p. 59.
Thou may find those who at the naming of their King do uncover their heads,
or show some other sign of Reverence etc. And amongst Christians very many do
make mention of God the Father, and of his son Jesus Christ etc. without any
sign of honor and reverence. This is plain blockishnes. Calvin confesses
that, In Math. 1.23.
The Divine Majesty of Christ is so to be steemed of us in this Name, that it
may gain that reverence with us, which is due to the One and Eternal God.

Concerning the use of the sign of the Cross, Lu^her says, In Catechismo.
When thou risest in the morning, first thing of all, thou shall sign thy
self with the sign of the holy Cross, saying, In nomine Patris, and Filij,
and Spiritus Sancti. Amen. Other Prot. give testimony of the Lutherans doctrine
herin, saying, Descriptio and ^efut, caerim. Missae. p. 118.
We do not disalow the sign of the holy Cross, if sometimes without
superstition it be freely applied and used in the divine Offices; yea if our
meat and drink be freely signed: for when we go to bed, or rise from bed, we
sign our selves with the Cross, according to the Instruction of Luther, and
other godly men. M. Parker mentions, Against Symboliz. part. 1. c. 2. sec. 30.
A Catechism of Lutheranes, which has these words, Let the sign of the
Cross be made in the forhead and breast of him that is to be baptized. And
next after he further says, Luther crossed himself every morning, and every
evening, and is never seen painted, but praying before a Crucifixe. And the
like of Luthers practice is affirmed by Manlius Loc. com. p. 636.
Luthers own scholar. But to look nearer home, the Communion book in time
of K. Edward the 6. (penned by advise and approbation of Cranmer, Latimer,
Ridley, and other Prot. Deuines of that time, and printed Anno 1549.)
prescribes the Priests signing Fol. 11^.
of the Sacrament with the sign of the Cross, and the Priests like
consecrating the 131.
Fountain of Baptism, with the sign of the Cross.

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture, urged by Protestants against the lawful
use of Images, answered.
SOme object that of Isay, 40. 1^.
to whom will you lyken God, or what similitude will you set up unto him? The
like may be objected out of other Isai. 46.5. Deutr. 14.15.16. Act. 17.29.
places. Answ. These places only concern such Images, as are adored and made
for Gods, as may plainly be gathered out of the same places. But for more full
answer, observe that a thing may be painted three ways: first, to express
the perfect similitude of the form and nature of the thing it self, and thus
only Corporal things can be painted, and in this sort to endeavor to paint
God, is to make a true Idol. Secondly, to represent to our sight some history,
as God almighty walking in Paradise in the shape of a man, Adam and Eve naked
hyding themselves amongst the trees, and the Angel in man's shape with a sword
in his hand. And thus to paint, were not to represent the nature of God or the
Angel, but only by painting to exhibit that to the eyes, which another by
reading the Scripture would exhibit to the ears. Thirdly, a thing may be
painted without a history, to express the nature of the thing, not by any
immediate or proper similitude as it is in it self, but by Analogy, or
metaphorical and mystical signification; and so we paint Angels as young men,
beautiful, barefooted, having wings, thereby to express their strength,
agility, and glory: and both these ways may God and Angels be painted.

The Rogers Def. of the Art. 21. p. 126.
second objection is taken out of diverse Exodus 20.4.5. Deuteronomy. 4.15 ^6. Leuit
^6.1. Ps. 96.7. Romans 1.23.
places of Scripture, which seem to forbid the making o^ any similitude, as,
Thou shall not make any graven thing, neither any similitude etc. Thou shall
not bow down to them, neither serve them. To this S. Bid De Templo Salomonis.
c 19.
answers, that heerby is as plainly prohibited the making of any Kings Image,
or bowing down thereto, Deuteronomy. 4.24. Leuit. 26.2. Ps. 96.7. Romans 1.23.15. Exodus
10.13. number. 26.1. Esa. 41.8.
or to his Chair of Estate, the words being general, as the making of the
Images of Christ and of his Saints, or worshipping them. Secondly, that hereby
is only forbidden the making and adoring of Idols or false Gods, is manifest,
even by the place objected, and the circumstances thereof, for it is said
immediately before, Deuteronomy. 20.3.
Thou shall have no other Gods before me: and after, Thou shall not bow down
to them for I am the Lord thy God: and see the like explication els-where often
set down in the Scriptures.

Yea this place is so impertinently urged, that Calvin as ashamed thereof says,
Moses In Exodus 20.4. Edic. Gal.
only speaks of Idols. And a little after, That which some foolishly have
thought, here to be condemned all grauing and Images, needs no Confutation,
seeing Moses had no other intent, but to exempt the glory of God from all
fictions, which tend to corrupt it. And upon that of Exodus, Exodus 25.18.
Thou shall make two golden Cherubims, he affirms, In Exodus 25.18.
that they were Images that had wings, which did represent Angels.

Some reply unto this, that both the Jews and Gentiles did adore their true
God in their Images, Calu. Inst l. 1. c. 11.. 9. 10.
not thinking the Images to be Gods, and yet such their worship was forbidden.
But the falsehood of this reply is sundry ways discovered: for first the Jews
called their Idols expressly their Gods; Exodus 32.4.8. ^. Reg 12.28. Iud. 18.24.
Ierem. 2.28. Deuteronomy. ^2.17.
and so also did the Gentiles. Dan. 5.4. Sap. 13.10.
Secondly, whereas Calvin Inst. l. 1. c. 11.. 9.
avouches, that the Jews were not so unadvised, to forget that it was God by
whose hands they had been brought out of Egypt: to the contrary it is
directly said of them. Deuteronomy 31.15.17.
Thou have forsaken God which made thee, and have forgotten the Lord thy
Creator. And elsewhere, Ps. 105.19.11.
They made a Calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the graven thing: they forgot God
their Savior which had done great things in Egypt: And in another place,
Hier. 2.5.6.
They have walked after vanity, and they have not said, where is our Lord that
made us come out of the land of Egypt.

Neither as Calvin Inst. l. 1. c. 11. 8.
further pretends, did they make these Images that thereby they might know
that God was the guide of their Journey: for if they desired a Corporal sign,
they had already a Cloud, and a Pillar of fire, which were mo^e fit to guide
them then a Calfe, which of necessity must be carried: besides no cause can be
given why they rather made a Calfe, then a Sheep, or other thing, but because
they were accustomed to see the great God of the Egyptians, which was a black
Cicero l. 1. de natura deorum. Aug. l. 18. de Ciu. Dei. c. 5.
Calfe with white spots called Apis. And also in vain had been that choice
which Iosue Iosue 24 15.
offered the Hebrews, to serve the Gods which their Fathers served, or the
Gods of the Amorites, or the true God. And Elias 3. Reg. 18.21.
^a^ing, If the Lord be God, fellow him, if Baal be he, then go after him
therein clearly opposes Baal to the true God. And lastly that of Deutronomy,
32. 17.
They offered unto Devils, not to God, to Gods whom they know not, new Gods
that came newly up. So clear it is, that the Jews forsook the true God, and
committed Idolatry in serving strange Gods.

Concerning the Heathens or Gentiles, it is also certain that they adored in
their Images false Gods, for the Prophets laboring to teach, that the Idols of
gold and silver were not God, proved the same because they could not speak,
Esa. 46.67. Ps. 113.13.14.15.134.16.17. Abac. 2.19. Bar. 6.7 11.13 14.
see etc. which had been in vain, if none had believed the same. And though
Calvin Inst. l. 1. c. 11. 9. Danaeus Contro. 7 p. 394. Zuing Resp. ad Va^entin.
Tom. 1. fol. 247.
and others would persuade us, that the Heathens were not so blockish, as to
think there was no other God but stones, stocks etc. yet it is most manifest,
that many of them were so blockish, as that they thought them to have sense,
and life, and to be Gods: whereunto they were moved by the doctrine of the
Priests, by the general conceit thereof almost through the whole world, and
chiefly by the cunning of the Devil, by whose art the Idols seemed to move
Aug. de doct. Christ l. 3. c. 7. and ep. 49. and in Ps 113. and de Ciuit. l 8.
c. 23. Arnobius l. 1. contra gentes.
speak, and prophesy. Neither makes it against this, that they changed their
Idols, or made new ones, or made many for one God: for with the like ignorance,
that they thought them Gods, with the like they thought they might make and
destroy them at their pleasure: and having some in heaven, and some in Earth,
they thought it no absurdity, that an heavenly God as Jupiter, Apollo etc.
might have many lesser Gods of the same nature in Earth. Lastly, both Jews
Exodus 32.6.8. 1. Cor. 10.20.
and Gentiles offered Sacrifice unto their Idols, which is a worship only
proper to the true God.

Thirdly the fact of Ezechias 4. Reg. 10.4.
pulling down the brazen Serpent, and breaking it in pieces, is objected
against Images, which yet was a figure of Christ. The Answer is, The Jews
offered incense to it as to God, for with them it was not lawful for any to
incense, but the Priest, which seems to argue, that they sacrificed unto it
as to God, and so committed 3 Reg. 11.32.33.2. Paral. 26.16.13.
Idolatry

A fourth objection is, An Image has neither life, sense, nor reason,
therefore it is not capable of honor. I answer, This only proves that in
regard of it self, it deserves no honor, but it proves not the same in
regard of the relation which it has to the Exemplar.

Fifthly, some Images of Christ, or our Lady, are more for example frequented
and reverenced, then others of the same in other places, therefore this
argues, that we place some divinity and virtue in the said Images. I answer,
the more freque^ting or reuerencing of some Images then others, is not by
reason of any supposed virtue, but either because God works miracles by some,
and not by others (which also is the cause why we rather pray to one Saint then
another) or else by reason of the sanctity of the maker of some; for some are
thought to have been made by our Euagrius l. 4. c. 26. Metaphrac^es in vita
Constantini Magni. Damascen l. 1. de Imaginibus.
Savior, others by an Euodius l. 2. de miraculis.
Angel, others by S. Theodorus. l. 1. Collectaneorum. Niceph. hist. l. 14. c.
2. Metaphr. in vita S. Lucae.
Luke, and other See Eusebius. hist l. 2. c. 14. Sozom l. 5. c. 20. Damascen l 1.
de Imag. Athanas. de Passione Imaginis Domin. c. 4.
holy men: or lastly because some do more perfectly represent the Exemplar then
others.

Many object, that in favor of Images, we take away the second Commandment.
Answ. Though our in Catechismes, which are made for a brief memorial or
abstract or our C^ristian faith, we do not set down all the words at large
which are in the Bible, as neither do we in sundry other Points of Christian
Doctrine; yet having them in our B^bles as largely as Prot. have, if any thing
could be produced from thence, against Images, it were much more forcible
against us, then if it were in our Catechismes never so often. But besides,
this difficulty is further solued thus; Clemens Alex. l. 6. strom. Aug. q. 78.
in Exo. Ep. 119. c. 12.
Some divide the Decalogue so, as the Precept against graven things, and the
adoring of any other but one God, is all one Precept; and so all graven things
are not prohibited, but only such are taken for a strange God: and those of
this opinion, do make these two, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, and,
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors goods, to be distinct Precepts. Others
Philo l. Decalogo. ant. med. Joseph. l. 3. Antiq. c. 6. 8. Orig. ho. 8. in
Exodus Ambros. and Hier. in c. 6. ad Ephesians.
make the Precept, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, and his goods, to
be all one, and so these divide the first Precept into two, making, Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven thing etc. and, Thou shall not adore them nor
worship them to be two distinct Precepts, and these consequently think, that
the making of Images to adore them for Gods, is only prohibited by the second.
Wherefore after what manner soever we divide the Commandments, not the making or
use of Images, but the making or adoring them for Gods, is here only prohibited.

CHAP. XVIII. The true State of the Question, concerning the Sacraments of the
New Law conferring grace.
Whether the Sacraments of the New Law do truly confer grace to the worthy
receauer, as Gods Isntrumental causes: or that they are only signs, and
remembrances of grace received by Faith. SECT. I
Catholic Doctrine.
THE Holy Sacraments being ever esteemed amongst the principal means whereby
the merits of Christ are to be applied unto us, and his heavenly Grace to be
obtained to the remission of Sin, and the gayning of eternal glory: what the
Catholic Church in this belieueth, is clearly set down by the Council of
Trent in these words: Council. Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 4.
If any man shall say, that the Sacraments of the new Law are not necessary
unto Salvation, but superfluous, and that men may ob^ayne of God only by faith
the grace of Justification without them, or the desire of them, although all of
them be not necessary to every particul^^ man etc. Can. 5.
Or that the Sacraments were ordained for nourishing of faith alone etc. Can. 6.
Or that the Sacraments of the new Law do not contain the grace which they
signify or do not confer grace it self, to such as put no impediment, as
though they were only exte^nall signs of Grace received by faith, or of
Justice, and certain badges of Christian Profession, whereby amongst men the
faithful are distinguished from Infidel. etc. Can. 10.
Or if any shall say, that all Christians have power in the word, and in
administering of the Sacraments etc. Can. 11.
Or that in the Ministers, when they do make or give the Sacraments, Intention
is not required, at least of doing what the Church does; let him be accursed.

The Council of Florence speaking of the Sacraments of the new Law, define^h
that Conc. Florenc. in Decret. Eugenij P. 4.
They differ much from the Sacraments of the Old Law: for they did not cause
grace, but did figure the same to be given through the Passion of Christ; but
these ours do both contain grace, and give the same to the worthy receyuers.
And the like is taught by the Council of Cap. 11.
Moguntia. And so all Bellar. de Sacram. l. 2. c. 3. etc. Rhem. Test. in Act.
21.17. etc. in Romans 4.11.
Catholics still teach, that the Sacraments instituted by Christ, are true
isntrumental causes of his grace, not only signifying, but truly conferring
the same to the worthy receiver.

Points Disputable.
Some Paludan. and Capreol. in 4. Did. 1. q. 1.
think that the Sacraments produce grace by some quality superadded,
inherent in them, which some teach to be corporeal, others spiritual. Sotus
in 4. Did. 1. q. 3. Alanus de Sacram. c. 36.
Others only by the obedientiall power of the things sensible, by which all
things created may serve God instrumentally for any effect. Some Ledesmus in
4. Did 1. q. 3. art. 1. Canus in relecti^ne de Sacram. and others in 4. Did. 1
teach that the Sacraments are only moral Causes of Justification: D. Tho. 3.
par. q. 61. art. 4.
Others more truly, that they are causes physical.

Some Magist. Sent. in 4. Did. 1.
that the Sacraments of the old law, Circumcision excepted, do not justify ex
opere operantis, through the faith and devotion of the Receiver. But others
Bellar. de effectu Sacram. l. 2. c. 13.
more probably teach the contrary.

Some Alex. part. 49. 7. Memb. 7. art. 4. ^ouauent. Scotus, Gabr. in 4. Did. 1.
that Circumcision did confer grace ex opere operato. Others D. Tho. 3. part.
q. 70. art. 4. Capreolus, Sotus, ^edesmus, in 4. Did. 1.
deny it, ascribing only that power to the Sacraments of the New Law: and this
is much more probable.

Some Ocham. Mayor. Richar. in 4. Did. 1.
that a Sacrament cannot properly be defyned, seeing it is either, aggregatum
quoddam per accidens, seeing it consists of things and words; or Ens
rationis, if it be formally taken. Scotus Did. 1. q. 1. Sotus. Did. 1. q. 1.
art. 2.
Others, that a Sacrament is Ens rationis, and vnum per se, and therefore may be
defyned imperfectly. Bellar. de Sacram. in genere. l. 1. c. 10.
Others, that if a Sacrament be taken morally, it may properly be defyned, but
not if it be taken physically.

Some Dom. Soto. in 4. Did. 1. q. 1. ar. 1. Caiet. in 3. part. q. 60. art. 6.
teach, that in the Sacraments the thing sensible, is the matter, whether it be
things words, or both, and the signification to be the form. Others, D. Tho.
3. p. q. 60. art. 6.
that the Sacrament consists of things as the matter, and the words as the
form. Others, Durand. in 4. Did. 1 q. 3. Adrian. q. 2. de Bap.
that not all the Sacraments, but only some do consist of things, and words.
Others, Alex. 4. part. sum; q. 8. Mem. 3. art. 1. 3.
that all the Sacraments of the new Law, do consist of things and words.

Some Duran. in 4. Did. 4. q. 1.
think that the Character imprinted by some Sacraments is not any real thing
distinct from the Soul. Scotus did. 6 q 9.
Others that it is a real relation: Bellar. de effectu Sacram. l. 2. c. 19.
others an absolute quality, which some make to be inherent in the
understanding, others in the will, and others in the substance of the Soul.
But these are all points that may be disputed by Deuines, not being defined by
the Church.

Protestant Untruths.
Luther falsely says of Catholics, Sermon. de Baptismo.
They are enforced to ascribe so much to the Sacraments of the New Law, that
they decree them to profit even those who are in mortal sins, neither faith
or grace to be requisite, but to suffice, not to have put a bar, that is, an
actual purpose not to sin again etc. They say they profit the wicked and
unbelievers, so that they put not the bar, as though incredulity were not of
all things the most obstinate, and deadly bar of grace. But all this is mere
forgery.

He also accuses Ibid.
the Master of the Sentences and Schoolmen, for that they write only of the
matter and form of Sacraments etc. but leave untouched the spirit, life, and
use, that is, the truth of Gods promise and our faith: But he, and they l. 4.
Did. 4. and 9. treat at large of the faith of the receyuer, and true use of
the Sacraments.

He In assert. 1. Articuli.
makes Scotus the first author of that opinion, that the Sacraments do
confer grace to him that puts not a bar. But the same was formerly
taught by C. Maiores de Baptismo.
Innocentius 3. and S. Ep. 23. ad Bonif.
Austine. And he charge In assert. 1. Articuli.
the Scotistes, not to require in the use of the Sacraments, faith, good
purpose, or good motion of the heart. But the contrary appears in their own
Scotus in 4. Did. 4. q. 2. and q. 5. and did. 17. q. 1.
writings.

Heshusius charge the Fathers of the Council of Trent to teach that, De
erroribus Pontific. lo^ 15. de Sacramentis.
Without external Papisticall Ceremonies, neither the truth, nor dignity, nor
efficacy of the Sacraments to consist. But no such thing is to be seen in the Sea Sess. 7. Can. 13.
Council.

Protestant Doctrine.
Prot. Willet Synop. p. 418. Musculus loc. Com. c. de fignis Sacram. p. 299.
teach that the Sacraments of the new Testament are no better in efficacy then
were the Sacraments of the old. And that, Willet. Synop. p. 145.
they be only Seals of Righteousness, and not works of Grace. In so much that
Calvin says, Instit. l. 4. c. 14.. 23.
Whatsoever he has given us in the Sacraments, the same the Jews in times
past received in theirs. What virtue ours have, that also they perceived in
theirs.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
D. Whitaker confesses that, Cont. Duraeum l. 10. p. 883. Sar^er. loc. com ^o
1. de Bap fol. 232.
The Manichees were accustomed to deny, sins to be forgiven and grace
conferred in Baptism. For which also they are condemned by S. ^a^. 46.
Austine Petilian the Donatist taught that, The Baptism of John and Christ.
were all one, for which he is impugned by Saint L. 2. cont lit. Petil. c. 32.
34. 37.
Austine. The Messalians Damascen. de Haeresibus.
also were condemned for denying to the Sacraments the power of Sanctification,
which they ascribed to prayer. The Guido de Arme^ijs. Error 16.
Armenians taught, That the Sacraments of the new Law do not confer grace,
and the selfsame you have lately heard to be taught by Protestants.

Protestant Errors.
The very word Sacrament is so hateful to Prot. that Zwinglius says. L. de
vera and fall. Relig. c. de Sacram.
I greatly wish that word Sacrament had never been received by the Germans. And
the like dislike thereof show sundry other Luther. l. de Captiuit. Babyl. c. de
matrim. Carolostad. l. de Imaginibus and Sacram. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 14..
13.
Protestants. In so much that Melancthon in his Common Places intituleth the
Chapter wherein he treats of Sacraments, De signis, Of signs. We (says he)
call signs, that which others call Sacraments.

Calvin Instit. l. 4. c 14.. 4. Beza in summa Doct. de re Sacramentaria.
is of opinion that the words which with the Element makes a Sacrament, are
not any words of Consecration, but the Ministers Sermon preached aloud. I will
not say (says L. de Missa priuata. and vnct. Sacerd.
Luther) what the Papists say, that none of the Angels, nor Mary herself can
consecrate: But I say to the contrary, that if the Devil himself should come,
and I afterward know the Devil so to have crept into the Office of the Pastor
of the Church, in the shape of man, to be called to preach, and publicly in
the Church to have taught, baptized, celebrated Mass, and absolved from sins
and to have performed that Office according to the Institution of Christ, then
we should be enforced to confess, that the Sacraments were not therefore
without efficacy, but that we received true Baptism, true Gospel, true
absolution, true Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. He also teaches in
sundry places that, L. de Captiuit. Babyl. c. de ordine. In Articulis a Leone
10. dam. art. 13. l. ad Pragenses de instituendis Ministris Ecclesiae.
All Christians are Priests: and produces several Examples L. de Abroganda
Missa.
out of Scripture, to prove that women may preach. A great friend to women will
Luther ever be. And so likewise to the Devil, whom he acknowledges may be a
Minister, with power to preach, baptize, say Mass, consecrate the Sacrament
etc.

Luther, De Captiuit. Babyl. c. de Bap. and art. 12. a ^eone. damn. Calu. in
Antidot Conc. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 12. Chemnit. Exam. part. 2. p. 141. 154. 1045.
Calvin, and other Prot. teach, That intention in the Minister is not required
in the administration of Sacraments, but that the same are effectual though
they be not given in the name of God, or seriously, but only in jest, or skorne.

Whitaker avouches that, Cont. Dur. li. 8. sect. 18.
Paul expressly teaches, the Israelites to have had indeed the selfsame
Sacraments, which Christ has given to us. Wherefore according to Prot. the very
Jews inioyed the selfsame Sacraments, which Christians do.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures that the Sacraments of the New Law do
truly confer grace to the worthy receauer.
THe efficacy which Catholics ascribe to the holy Sacraments may first be
proved by the difference betwixt S. John Baptists and Christ's baptism. S. John
says, Mar. 1.8. Mat. 3.11.
I have baptized you with water, but he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost;
here so great difference is put between the efficacy of John, and Christ's
Baptism, as between water and the Spirit: But the Baptism of John was
sufficient to stir up and nourish faith, no less then the Baptism of
Christ, therein being external ablution and the word of promise, for he
preached not only the Baptism of Penance unto Luc 3.3.
remission of sins, but even the Act. 19.4.
faith in Christ Jesus.

Calvin here Calu. in Mat. c. 3.
replyeth, that the difference of these two Baptsmes consisted only in this,
that John was the Minister of the external Ceremony, and Christ the Author of
the internal Sanctification: but this is easily confuted, because had it been
so, John neither could, nor ought to have said, I baptize etc. he will baptize
etc. as before; but should have said, I baptize, he does baptize: neither would
Saint Paul have commanded those to be baptized with the Baptism of Christ,
whom he had already heard, to have been Act. 19.3.^ 8.16.17.
baptized before, with the Baptism of John.

Neither will it suffice to answer with In Act. 29.
Calvin, that they were not baptized again, but only visibly received the
gift of the holy Ghost; but against this the text is over plain; Hearing
these things, they were baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus. And when Paul
had imposed hands on them, the holy Ghost came upon them, and they spoke with
tongues and prophesyed. Agreeable to this, when Act. 8.12.15.16.17.
S. Philip had baptized many in Samaria, S. Peter and S. John coming thither
afterward prayed for them that they might receive the holy Ghost, for he was
not yet come upon any of them, but they were only baptized in the name of our
Lord Jesus. Then did they impose their hands upon them and they received the
holy Ghost. So different things are Baptism, and the receiving of the holy
Ghost by the imposition of hands.

Secondly Christ says, Mar. 16.16.
he that belieueth and is baptized shall be saved. Here salvation which is not
wrought but by Justification, and washing away of sin, is attributed alike to
Baptism, and to faith. To reply, that Baptism saves, by stirring up faith,
is insufficient; for first faith goes before, whereas it is absurd to place the
effect before the cause, even as it were absurd to say, he that is cured, and
takes physic etc. and so, seeing to hear the word of God, is truly the cause
of faith, therefore the same in the Scriptures is set before, as, Io. 5.24.
he which hears my word, and belieueth him that sent me, has life
everlasting: See the like Io. 6.45.
elsewhere. Besides Christ here joins not the Sacrament with preaching, as
Protestants do, but with faith, which is the effect of preaching: wherefore as
faith according to Protestants does immediately justify, by applying the merits
of Christ, not by stirring up any other cause, why may not the same be said of
Baptism, seeing Christ alike attributes Salvation to both?

Thirdly our Savior says, Io. 3.3.5.
Unless a man be borne again of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. Here Baptism is plainly made the cause of our new birth,
which cannot be said, by stirring up faith, for then it had been false to have
said, Unless a man be borne again of water etc. seeing that faith, which
according to them only iustifyeth, is otherwise sufficiently without Baptism
stirred up. Calvin here again In Comment. huius loci. and l. 4. Instit. c.
16.. 25.
answers, that it is not spoken of the Sacrament of Baptism, but only of
internal renouation, and so the sense to be, Unless a man be borne again of
water, that is, of the holy Ghost, who cleanses like water. But this is Idle,
for if it were lawful thus to pervert the Scriptures, we might easily take
away not only Baptism, but all other Mysteries. Secondly, water here is placed
before the holy Ghost, whereas first to place the Exposition, and after the
thing to be expounded, is most absurd. Thirdly the Ancient Fathers do generally
Cypr. l. 3. ad Quirin. Ambr. l. de Spir. S. c. 11. Hieron. in c. 16. Ezech.
Aug. Chrysostom. and Cyril. in Comment. huius loci. Basil. Nazian. Nyssen. Ser.
de Bap.
expound this place of the Sacrament of Baptism.

Fourthly, of Baptism it is said, Act. 2.38 and Act. 22.^7.
Do penance, and be every one of you baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for
remission of your sins. Tit. 3 5.
He has saved us by the lauer of Regeneration, Ephesians. 5.26. and 1 Pet. 3.21.
clensing her (viz. the Church) with the lauer of water in the word. In which
places is taught, that by Baptism a man has his sins remitted, is cleansed
and saved.

Fifthly, of the efficacy of other Sacraments it is said. Act 8.18.
When Simon had seen that by the imposition of the hands of the Apostles, the
holy Ghost was given etc. and again, 2. Tim. 1.6.
I admonish thee that thou resuscitate the grace of God, which is in thee by
the impositio^ of my hands: these places cannot but be understood of the
Sacraments of Confirmation and Orders: And here the impositions of hands is
manifestly made the cause of the giving of grace and the holy Ghost; neither
can it be said, that this they do by stirring up faith, for those upon whom
hands were imposed, were already belieuers.

SECT. III. Reasons in proof that the Sacraments do confer Grace.
SEeing the Scriptures do refer the giving of Grace and remission of sins
to the Luc. 5.21.
Godhead, to Luc. 5.2.
Christ, and to Io 3 5. Act. 22.16. Tit. 3.5. 1. Pet. 3.21.
Sacraments, yea unto the Io. 20.23.
Ministers thereof, none of these therefore is to be excluded, but an
explication is to be made, in what fort every one of these conferreth and
works the same: and here an example may be given in a man's writing, that as
in the action thereof, the person of the writer is the principal Agent, his
hand is the Instrument conjoined to his person, and his pen the instrument
separated from his person, every one of these working in its kind, without
injury of the one to the other: so likewise there is a semblable subordination in
the other, the Godhead being the principal Agent, Christ's Humanity and Passion
being likewise the instrumental, conjoined to the Godhead, and Sacraments as
being the separated instrument. Sundry Prot. writers acknowledge every one of
these in their Chem. Exam part. 2. p. 17. Haffenr. loc. Theol. l. 3. p. 277.
Andreas Halthamerus in concilias. locorum pugnantium fol. 218. 212.
degree to concur and work: the Godhead without dishonor to Christ's
Passion, his Passion without offense to his Godhead, and lastly Sacraments by
grace and virtue from the Godhead and Christ's Passion, and without dishonor
to either: and understanding thus Sacraments to serve only as working
instruments, there is (as In Exa. part. 2. p. 21.
Chemnitius confesses) reserved to God his own glory. And this efficacy of
inward grace thus attributed to Sacraments, is no more dishonorable to God,
then were the like effects of corporal health referred to the brazen Number.
21.9.
Serpent, to the Io. 5.2.3.4.
Pond upon Probatica, to S. Act. 19.12.
Paul's Napkins, to S. Act. 15.16.
Peter's shadow, and our Saviors Mar. 5.28.29.
garment; or then was Sampsons strength being referred to the Iudic. 16.17.
hayres of his head, which as they were Ibid. ver. 19.20.
cut off, and did Ibid. 22.
grow again, so did his strength Ibid. 19.
decrease, and Ibid. 22.
increase accordingly.

And whereas it is commonly affirmed in Catholic books and Schools, that the
Sacraments confer Grace ex opere perato, of the work wrought, this phrase of
speech is used for two reasons, as De effectu Sacram. l. 2. c. 1.
Bellarmine observes: first thereby to signify that Sacraments are not only
signs of Grace, but also instruments instituted to work and confer the
same. Secondly to exclude all efficacy in this behalf from the party that
works; whose work (in distinction from other) is called opus operantis, the
work of him that workteh, intending heeerby, that the efficacy of Sacraments
rests not in the worthiness of him that works, that is, of him that
ministers or receives the Sacrament, but, ex opere operato, of the work
wrought in the Sacramental action it self, as it is instituted by Christ to
that end. As for faith, and repentance, Bellarm. vbi supra.
we hold them to be needful dispositions for our receiving of the
Sacramental grace, and such as may not be wanting in such as are of
discretion, yet it is not our faith and repentance that works the
Sacramental action it self, as it is the Institution of Christ.

The second reason, is drawn from the nature of signs, which are of two
sorts, the one Theoricall, which does only represent the object, not working
any thing immediately, or by its own power, as the sign of a Tavern, or the
like: and another practical, which works immediately, and by its own power:
so a Seal does not only represent the Im^ge, but does also impresse the same
in the wax. Protestan^es make Sacraments only signs of the former kind,
affirming them not o^herwise to justify, but by stirring up faith. But the same
is disproued evidently, in that they may be righ^ly administered Aug. l. 4.
Confess. c. 4. and l. de adult. coniugijs c. 26. and 28. Leo Ep. 91. ad
Theodorum. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 76. Arauficanum. 1. Can 12.
to Infants, to the deaf, and to the mad, to whom to apply preaching or other
signs only to stir up ^ayth, were foolish and vain.

Thirdly if the Sacramen^s be bu^ bare figures to stir up faith, then they
might easily have been ordained by men, and have had the same power; for what
skilleth it, to bare signification, who ordained them, so that they represent
the same object; by whomsoever the sign is placed at the Inn, it represents
alike. The Hebrew words written by God in the Tables, do signify alike with the
same written in Hebrew, Greek, or Latin by men: And the Trumpets Number. 10.2.
commanded by God to be made, do but in the like manner encourage to battle,
as the trumpets of the Heathens. Now it is granted by the Protestants that the
Sacraments could not be ordained by man but only by God.

Fourthly, Scraments depend of God, not only in their Institution, but also in
their use; for it is God who by his Ministers does baptize, consecrate, absolve
etc. And this truth is generally Chrysostom. ho. 83. in Mat. and Aug. Tract. 5.
in Joan.
holden, and granted even by Protestants: But this dependence were not
needful, if they were only bare and not working signs; for that words and
other signs may only signify and move the mind by representation, it is
impertinent from whom they proceed, for whether the Mr. or servant speak the
same words, they do always signify the same thing.

Fifthly, Sacraments ministered in Greek or Latin, are of no less efficacy
then administered in the vulgar, which the party baptized, for example,
peradventure only understands; so Protestants admit Catholic Baptism, which
always is ministered in Latin. But this were false, if they wrought only in
manner of a Sermon, which profi^eth only those who understand it: Besides the
Sacraments only profit those who receive them, though many other present do see
and behold the administration thereof, and yet all present may be stirred up
to faith, the promise of God being denounced, and the visible sign put before
their eyes; further, whilst the Priest says, I Baptize thee, according to
Prot. he does not say, I wash away thy sins, but I testify to thee, thy
sins to be forgiven: Now this testification profits not him that is
baptized, according to them, but because in the mean time he thinks and
belieueth, that God, through Christ is merciful unto him. But all present, may
think and believe the same, the promise being general: for not therefore is
God propitious unto him that is baptized, according to Protestants, because he
is baptized; but therefore the Testification of Baptism is true, because God is
merciful unto him, so that by faith he apprehend this mercy of God.

Lastly if our Sacraments be but bare signs, then they do not excel nor
differ from the Sacraments of the old law, which in the Scriptures are but
little esteemed, 1. Cor. 7.19.
Circumcision is nothing, says S. Paul: who also calls the Old Sacraments,
Galat. 4.9.
Weak, and poor Elements.

SECT. IV. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures agreably with
Catholics in proof of the Sacraments conferring grace.
THe former textes of Scripture produced in proof that the Sacraments
instituted by Christ, do confer grace, are in like sort interpreted by the
Ancient fathers: of Baptism, S. Clemens Romanus writes thus, Epist. 4.
But you will say peradventure, what does the Baptism of water confer to the
worship of God? First truly because Gods will therein is fullfilled: secondly,
because the frailty of the former nativity, which came to you by man is cut of
to one regenerated of water, and borne of God, and so at last you may come to
salvation, otherwise, it is impossible: for so the true Prophet has witnessed
unto us with the Sacrament, saying, Verily I say unto you, unless a man be borne
of living water, he shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: and therefore
make have to these waters, for in these waters there is a certain mercy of
him, who in the beginning was carried upon the waters, and he acknowledges
those who are baptized under the Appellation of a threefold Sacrament, and does
deliver them from punishment to come, offering up their Souls to God
consecrated by Baptism, as a certain gift. Fly therefore to these waters, for
they are they alone, which can quench the fury of the fire to come: to which he
which lingreth to come, it is manifest, that the Idol of Infidelity does yet
remain in him etc.

With S. Clement agrees Origin, saying, Tract. 7. in Math.
Much company followed Jesus until he came beyond Jordan, whom he also healed
in those coasts of Judea beyond Jordan, where Baptism was given unto men, and
peradventure therefore it is said of the Company following our Lord to the
Bap^isme of Jordan: and he healed them there, for all are truly saved from all
their spiritual infirmities in Baptism. Ho. 14. in Lucam.
Again, Therefore also Infants are baptized, because by the Sacrament of
Baptism the filthes of Nativity (or Original sin) are put away or cleansed,
for unless a man be borne again of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven.

The Council of Nice decrees thus of Baptism, L. 3. de Sanct. Bapt.
Our Baptism is not to be considered with the eyes of the body, but with the
eyes of the mind. Do thou see water? consider the power of God hidden in the
waters, for the Gospel does teach us, that we are baptized in the holy Ghost,
and in fire, for in the faith of the Baptizer, and in the faith of the
Baptized, by a holy Invocation consider the waters full of sanctification of
the Spirit, and of divine fire: for he says, he shall Baptize you with the
holy Ghost and with fire, therefore he who is baptized descends full of
sins, and obnoxious to the servitude of Corruption, and he ascends freed
from this servitude and sin, being made a Child of God, and heir of his
Grace, and coheire with Christ having put on Christ, as it is written:
Whosoever you are who are baptized in Christ, you have put on Christ.

S. Hierome for the power of Baptism writes thus, Epist 83. ad Ocean. c. 2.
All strumpets, and the public sinkes of naughty company, impiety against
God, incest with Parents and extraordinary carnal sins, the nature of either
sex being changed, are purged by the fountain of Christ etc. all crimes are
pardoned in Baptism: neither is severity to be feared after the Judges pardon,
the Apostle saying, 1. Cor. 6.11.
And these things truly were some of you, but you are washed, but you are
sanctified, but you are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
spirit of our God, all sins are pardo^ed well and faithfully. What efficacy
Baptism has, and what grace the water sanstifyed in Christ has, I will teach
a little after.

S. Gregory affirms that, L. 4. moral. c. 3.
Whosoever is not loosed by the water of regeneration, he is held bound with
the bonds of the first gu^lt. And what with us avails the water of Baptism
the same wrought only faith amongst the Fathers of the Old Testament, either
for their little ones, or the virtue of Sacrifice for them of ripe age, or the
mystery of Circumcision, for them who came of the Stock of Abraham: for that
every one is conceived with the sin of his first Parent, the Prophet
testifyeth saying, Ps. 50.7.
Behold I am conceived in iniquityes, and in sins has my mother conceived
me: and because he whom the water of Salvation does not wash, does not escape
the punishments of original sin, truth plainly witnesses by it self saying,
Unless a man be regenerated of water, and the holy Ghost he shall not have
eternal life.

Concerning Confirmation M. Hooker will tell us that, Eccl. pol. l. 5 sect 66.
The Fathers every where do impute unto Confirmation the guifte or grace of the
holy Ghost, not which m^keth us first Christian men, but when we are made such,
assisteth us in all virtue, armeth us against temptation and sin. And in this
truth the Fathers are approved by D. Couell, Modest. Examinat. p. 192.
and by the Communion Book turned into Latin, and printed at London Anno 1574.
In so much that the Protestants are herin reprehended by the Nichols in his
Plea of the Innocent p. 25. Ministers of Lincoln Diocese in their Abridgment.
p. 76. Carthw. in whitg. Def. p 7^6.
Puritans.

Concerning the Eucharistes conferring grace, S. Cyprian says: But De coena
Domini.
since our Lord said: do this in remembrance of me: this is my flesh: this is
my blood: as often as it is done (to wit this mystery) with these words, and in
this faith, this supersubstantiall bread, and Cup consecrated, and offered to
God by solemn benediction, it avails for the life and Salvation of the whole
man, being together a medicine and a holocaust, to heal our Infirmities, and
to purge our iniquities.

S. Basil the great speaking of the profit that comes by often receiving,
says: Epist. ad Caesaream Patriciam.
To Communicate every day, and to participate of the holy bread and blood of
Christ, is both amiable and very profitable, our Lord himself manifestly
saying: he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has Io. 6.54.
eternal life; for who doubts but the often participation of life, is
nothing else but to live many ways? we therefore Communicate four times every
week, Sunday, Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, and other days if there shall
happen any Commemoration of any Saint.

The like Efficacy of the Sacrament of Penance, is taught by sundry Fathers,
S. Ephrem says, De Poenit. and Conuers.
Thou art good O Lord and merciful, and although once by rapine we have
fallen, by penance we will study to be healed; and if like men we are
violently carried away with our perturbations, let us not to the very end cast
down our Courages, but acknowledging him God who has called us, and the
vocation wherewith we are called, let us hear him speaking; Do Mat. 3.2.
Penance for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. For neither has he limited
his Penance upon some sins, and not upon others, but for every wound of our
sin, that great Physician of our Souls, has given us this great remedy.

S. Chrysostom uses these words of admiration, Ser. d^ Poenit.
O Penance which forgiuest sin God showing mercy, and openest Paradise,
which healest the contrite man, and exhilaratest the heavy hearted, call life
from death, restorest our state, renewest honor, give confidence, and
reformest our strength, and powrest out most boundant grace! O Penance, what
new thing shall I rehearse of thee? all things bound thou loosest, all things
loosed thou make free, thou mitigatest all adversity, thou healest all
contrite things, thou cleerest all confused things, all desperate things thou
encouragest! O Penance more glittering then gold, more bright then the sun,
which sin does not overcome, nor infirmity vanquish, nor desperation blot
out, or extinguish! Penance refuses Covetousness, abhors Luxury, dryueth
away fury, strengthens love, treads underfoot pride, conteyneth the tongue,
composeth manners, hates malice, excludes envy. O Penance Mother of mercy,
and Mistres of virtues, great are thy works, whereby thou loosest the guilty,
and do repair the delinquents, helpest such as be fallen, recreatest such as
despair, by thee Christ has designed the Kingdom of heaven appropriated for
us, saying; Do penance, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Pacianus his opinion is that, Ep. 1. ad Simp^on. Nouat.
God would never threaten the unrepentant, unless he meant to pardon the
Penitent: thou will say, only God alone can do this, it is true, but what he
also does by his Priests, is his power: for what is that which he says unto
the Apostles, Mat. 16.19.
What you bind upon Earth shall be bound also in heaven etc. to what end is
this said, if it were not lawful for men to bynd and loose? Or was this only
lawful for the Apostles, therefore for them only it is lawful to baptize, and
to give the holy Ghost?

S. Ambrose teaches that, Exhort. ad agend. Poenit.
A man baptized, if afterward he shall become a forsaker and violater of the
Sacrament he sins and drives God for him: but if he do Penance from his
whole heart, where God sees, he shallbe saved; as God saw the heart of David,
when being grievously reprehended by the Prophet, after Gods terrible
Comminations, he cried out aloud saying, I have sinned and immediately he heard,
God has taken away thy sin: how much do three syllables prevail, for three
syllables are, peccau^, but in these three syllables the flame of the Sacrifice
of his heart ascended to heaven etc.

S. Hierome avouches that, Ad c. 14 Ose
The Nouatians call themselves pure, when as they are the impurest of all,
denying Penance, whereby sins are cleansed. according to that which is
written; Ps. 50.9.
Thou shall wash me, and I shallbe whyter then snow: and as it is in Esaias, Esa.
1.16.
Wash ye be clean. But this lauer he calls not Baptism but every Penance
which wasketh away the filth of sins. These and sundry other places of the
fathers considered, it was no small impudency for Melancthon to say, In Apol.
art. 13.
Not any one letter can be produced from the ancient writers, which does help
the Schoolmen in this matter. But this is contrary to the acknowledgment of his
own Brethren: for Luther says, L. cont. Cochlaeum.
But if there be any of the Fathers who has thought the Sacraments to justify
by their own virtue, though it be Austine, as Cochlaeus contendeth, I nothing
care, they are the sayings of men. Agreably to which writes Calvin, L. 4.
inst. c. 14. sect vlt.
Peradventure those immoderate Commendations of the Sacraments, which are read
in the Ancient writers, as that of Austine etc has deceived these miserable
Sophisters. And again, Instit. l. 4. c. 15 sec. 7. Chemnit. Exam. part. 1. p.
38.
Let it trouble no man that the Ancient Fathers strive to make a difference
between the one and the other (to wit, the Sacraments of the old Law, and New)
their authority ought not to be such as to shake the Infallibility of
Scriptures etc. neither is that quirck of Austine to be approved, that by the
Baptism of John, sins are forgiven in hope, but by the Batisme of Christ,
sins are forgiven in deed. And whereas S. Austine speaks thus clearly, In
Ps. 73.
There are some Sacraments giving Salvation, others promising the Savior. The
Sacraments of the New Testament give Salvation, the Sacraments of the Old
Testament promise the Savior. This saying is so pregnant against P^ot. as that
Musculus blusheth not to say, Loc. com p. 299. See Calu. inst. l 4. c. 14.
sect. vlt.
It was spoken inconsideratly by Austine. Swinglius says, De Bap. fol. 701.
It was a great error of the old Doctors, in that they supposed the external
water of Baptism to be of any value, toward the purging of sin. So
confessed are the Fathers.

SECT. V. That the learned Protestants do, agreably with Catholics, teach
that the Sacraments of the New Law do confer grace to the worthy Receauer.
THis Doctrine of the Efficacy of Sacraments conferring grace is so clearly
convinced from sacred Scriptures and holy Fathers, that many Prot. subscribe to
Catholics against their own brethren. Husse belieueth, that, In Ps. 117.
The Sacraments of the old law did not justify etc. but the Sacraments of the
New Law do justify.

Haffenrefferus teaches that, Loc. Theol. l. 3. p. 315.
Baptism is not only a sign signifying regeneration, but it is the Instrument
whereby God conferreth and works in us regeneration. Iacobus In Confut. Disp.
Joan. Iacobi Grinaei. p. 187.
Andraeas evidently Ibid. supra. fine p. 187. 188. and 210.
compares Baptism to faith, and refers to them both alike the force of
Justification, in so much as he reproves Grinaeus for denying, that the force
of Justification, was to be attributed to Sacraments. Beza is also charged
with error, Iacobus Andraeas in Epitom. Colloq. Montisb, p. 58. prope i^it.
for that he affirmed it, mere Idolatry to assign any intrinsecall force to
Sacraments: and in like manner he is further reprehended for understanding
Metaphorically Ibid. p. 42.
the former Scriptures alleged concerning Baptism.

Adamus Francisci reprehendeth the Swinglians and Caluinistes, saying of them,
In Margarita Theol. loc. 24. de Bapt. pa. 221.
They dare impudently write that Baptism properly speaking is not the lauer of
Regeneration, but figuratively by a Sacramental Metonymia. Chemnitius teaches
expressly that, Examen. Conc. Trid. part. 2. p. 52.
Baptism is a mean or Instrument, by which is made a Communication of
Christ's benefits, and having produced in proof thereof the sundry textes
before alleged, he says of them, Exam. part. 2. p. 20.
These be most manifest testimonies, which do expressly attribute efficacy to
Sacraments, and that, they are not to be perverted Ib. prope fin.
by tropes from the natural sense, which the signification of the words does
affoard. And he further explaineth this truth, saying, Exam. part. 2. p. 17.
Those things that are necessary to Salvation, are to be distinguished, as
Christ meriting the Father Lord (or giver,) the instruments, or Sacraments
etc. by which the holy Ghost does offer and apply those benefits of the New
Testament etc. Every one of these in their manner and degree, are ordained for
our salvation etc. It does not follow, The Sacraments are necessary to
salvation, therefore not Christ alone by his merit has gained it for us. The
like Explanation is made by Haffenrefferus, teaching that Loc. Theol. l. 3. p.
277.
We are saved by Christ's merit, we are saved by the Sacraments, we are saved
by faith, a peculiar respect being reserved for every one. Which is directly
our Catholic faith.

In like manner Benedict Morgensterne not only affirms that, In Tra. de
Ecclesia p 74. paulo ante med.
Baptism is not only the Seal of Grace and Justification, but also does
regenerate. But he reproves Ib. Initio.
as well Calvin for his contrary doctrine, as also Vrsinus, for affirming the
aforesaid textes of Scripture to be improper Ib. p. 73.
or figurative.

Luther expressly teaches that, In Sermonibus Conuiualibus, titulo de
Sacramento Altaris.
The Sacraments of the New Law are not only bare signs, such as were in the
Old Testament, but they work remission of sins, Justice and salvation in
them who use them with true faith. Again, Ep. Cont Regem Angliae.
The Swermery Sacramentaries are to be detested, who esteem the Sacraments for
external signs, wherewith Christians are marked, as sheep with red roddle.

But to omit certain See Philip. Marbachius in Disp. Theol. de sacr. Bap.
Sacram. sect. 76. 77. 87. 96. see Lobechius Disp. Theol. 1. p. 22. and Disp. 15
p. 331. Schlus. in Theol. Calvin. l. 1. f. 58. Amandus Polanus in Partit.
Theol. l. 1 page selb. 239. Calu. Instit. c. 12. de coena Domini.
others, and to come unto some of our own writers at home, one of them
doubts not to reprove his Puritan Brethren for extenuating the force of
Baptism, The book entitled Quarimonia Ecclesiae. p. 79.
Our New Reformers make no great reckoning of Baptism, and in that point from
their Brethren the Anabaptists are wont to differ, though more fearfully, and
more diffidently. D. Bilson also teaches that, In his true difference between
Christian subjects. part. 4. p. 539.
Christ has annexed Grace to his Sacraments, and power to his creatures after
an unspeakable manner, and he disliketh Ibid. p. 591.
them who affirm and defend, that the Sacraments do only signify, and not
exhibit grace: affirming of Children that, Ib. p. 368. post med
they are newborn of water and the holy Ghost. M. Hooker also is so full and
plain In his Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sec. 57 p. 127. 128. and p. 132.
in this question, that he is therefore reproved by a late See the Chr. letter
to the Reverend man M. Rich. Hook. p. 27.
writer. I omit D. Whitgui^t Defense. p. 527.
and M. Ibid. p. 532.
Cartwright.

M. D. Whitaker doubts not to say, Cont. Camp. rat. 8.
That Baptism is the conduit of Grace, it deriueth Christ's merits unto us:
neither does it only signify salvation but does also perform and bring the
same: Yea he allows herein Cont. Duraeum l. 8. p. 664.
Alani sententiam, the opinion of D. Allen, affirming Ib,
with him that, God does work grace in the soul of m^n by his Sacraments, as
by an Isntrumental cause and no less truly then a man is said to write by his
pen. Which Example for comparison of writing with the pen, is in M. Parkins
judgment so pregnant for Catholics, and so directly against the Protestants,
that In his reformed Cath. p. 292. 293.
he to that end mentions and reiecte^h the same. D. Couell writes thus
Catholikely, Defense of M. Hook. art. 14. p. 96.
That saving grace which Christ originally is, or has for the general good of
his own Church, by Sacraments he severally deriueth unto every member thereof
etc. Now, Agent causes we know are of two sorts, the Principal, which works
by virtue of his form, as fire makes hoa^, and thus nothing can cause grace
but God himself: the Isntrumental which works, not as the other etc. but
only by that motion which it has from the principal and first Agent; thus do
Sacraments work. And somewhat after he therefore says, P 98.
For God does iust^fy by the Sacramen^s. And yet further, P. 99.
Sacraments passiuely may by the work done affoard Grace, for in that
justification and means of righteousness, whereof man is made partaker by the
Sacraments, many things do concur: first on Gods behalf, a will, that we
should use those sensible Elements: on Christ's behalf, his Passion, from
which the Sacraments have their virtue etc. In respect of the Sacr^ment it
self, the external action which aryseth out of the fit application of the
matter and form^ of Sacraments: Now, that which in all this actually and
Instrumentally brings Grace is the external action, which is commonly called
the Sacrament. No Catholic writes more plainly for the Sacraments conferring
Grace, then D. Couell.

Lobechius a Lutheran Doctor and Professor of Divinity, is so confident in
this truth, as that he explayneth the matter, and answers the Zwinglians
Objections, Disp. Theol. etc. p. 331. 332.
The objections made by Zwinglians(says he) are easily answered: If the
Sacraments (say they) do confer grace, and apply the promise of grace, and
save, then they shall be made equal with the holy Ghost, and with the merit of
Christ etc. I answer: The efficient cause of Salvation is only God, the
material cause is only Christ etc. The Isntrumental causes by which God the
Father does communicate his grace to the faithful are the Sacraments etc.
therefore there is a double agent cause etc. the principal and isntrumental.

SECT. VI. Objections from Scripture, in proof that the Sacraments do not
confer Grace, answered.
LVther In Babylon. c. de Bap. and in assert. art. 1.
obiecteth these words of Christ, Mar. 16.16.
He that belieueth and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that belieueth not
shall be condemned: From whence he argues first thus, he that belieueth and is
baptized is saved, he that belieueth not, is damned, though he be baptized:
therefore not Baptism, but only faith saves. Again, Christ said, He that
belieueth not, shall be condemned, but he said not, he that is not baptized
shall be condemned; therefore Baptism is not necessary to Justification. Answ.
The first Consequence is false, for from that Antecedent, is only truly
inferred, that therefore, not only Baptism saves; for by the like reason I
might conclude, that S. Paul affirming. 1. Cor. 23.1.
Faith without Charity not to profit, therefore faith nothing profits. To the
second, Christ said not, He that is not baptized shallbe condemned, not that
this is not most true, when it is the parties fault that he is not baptized,
seeing the same Christ said, Io. 3.5.
Unless one be borne again of water and the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of heaven: but because it was not needful to say it, it being of
it self understood by those other words, He that belieueth not, shall be
condemned: for he that belieueth not, consequently will not be baptized, and
although he would, yet it would not profit him. Now in the affirmation it is
requisite to add baptism to faith, because not every one who belieueth is
baptized. Arguments drawn thus from genus to species, are of force
negatiuely, as, He is not a living creature, Ergo, not a man: but not
affirmatively: It is a living creature, Ergo, a man.

Some object all such Habac. 2. Romans 1. Heb. 10. Romans 4. and 10.
textes of Scriptures as affirm, that a man is justified by faith, therefore
(say Prot.) he is not justified by the Sacraments. Answ. No text affirms
that a man is justified only by faith, and therefore there may be place left
also for the Sacraments to justify. For otherwise God and Christ's merits
should also be excluded from the working of Justification. Wherefore as
Justification is ascribed to faith, so also is it often ascribed to the
Sacraments, as I have formerly See next before sect. 2.
proved.

Zuinglius urges those words, Luc. 5.21.
Who can forgive sins but only God? The Pharisees (says L. de vera and falsa
Relig.
Zwinglius) understood that God only, not the Sacraments, cold justify:
according to that, Isa. 43.25.
I am he that blots out iniquities. Answ. It seems Zwinglius desires rather
to believe the Pharisees, then Christ our Savior: for if the Pharisees said,
who can forgive sins but only God? Christ also in answer thereto said, but
that you may know that the son of man has power in Earth to forgive sins,
he said unto the Paralyticke, take up thy bed. And so also he said unto men.
Io. 20.23.
Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them, The words of Esaias are
understood of him, who by his own proper authority does forgive sins, who is
only God.

CHAP. XIX. The true state of the Question, concerning the number of the
Sacraments.
Whether there be seven Sacraments instituted by Christ our Savior: to wit,
Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Order, and
Matrimony: or only two, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
IF the word Sacrament be distasteful to some Protestants (as I have formerly
See before Chap. 18. sect. 1.
showed) much more will they dislike so great a number of them, as the
Catholic Church decrees in these words: Conc. Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 1.
If any man shall say, that the Sacraments of the new Law were not all of them
instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, or that they are more, or fewer then
seven, to wit, Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction,
Order, and Matrimony; or that any of these seven are not truly and properly
Sacraments, let him be accursed.

In the Council of Florence it is defyned, that Decret. Eugenij P. 4. etc.
Council. Moguntin. (...). 11.
There are seven Sacraments of the new Law, to wit, Baptism, Confirmation,
Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Order, and Matrimony etc. By Baptism we
are spiritually borne again; By Confirmation we are increased in Grace, and
strengthened in faith: being borne again and strengthened, we are nourished by
the divine food of the Eucharist: And if by sin we incur the sickness of the
Soul, by Penance we are spiritually cured: and both spiritually and
corporally (as is best for the Soul) by Extreme Unction: By Order, the Church
is governed, and spiritually multiplied: by Matrimony, it is corporally
increased. The opinion Bellarm. de Sacram. l. 2. c. 24. Rhem. Test. in Gal. 4.3.
of Catholics is, and ever has been, that the forenamed 7. Sacraments, are
all of them truly and properly Sacraments instituted by Christ.

Points Disputable.
All Catholics holding the Sacrament of Confirmation; Some S. Bonauent.
Duran. and Adrian. in 4. Did. 7.
hold, that by Dispensation it may not be administered by a Priest: but others
S. Tho. 3. p. q. 72. ar. 11.
more truly teach the contrary. Some, Canus.
that the matter thereof substantially consists in Oil and Balm, but
disiunctiuely, as integrall parts of the matter. Sotus di. 7. q. Vnica. art. 2.
Others, that both jointly are of the substance of the matter, and so of
necessity of the Sacrament. Others Caiet. in 3. p. art. 2. Nauar. in Manuali.
c. 22 n. 8. Victor. in sum. de Sacram. q. 41.
yet more probably, that in the Oil consists the matter of the substance
thereof, and so is of necessity of the Sacrament. And that the Balm is only of
necessity of Precept, whether Ecclesiastical, or from Christ.

Some Richar. Did. 7. art. 5. q. 1. Palud. q. 4. Siluest. verbo, Confirmatio.
n 3.
think, that by Precept divine, or Ecclesiastical, this Sacrament is
necessary to Salvation: Others D Th. 3. p. q. 71. art. 1. and 8.
better the contrary, if contempt be wanting.

All acknowledge Orders to be a Sacrament: some Canonistae ap. Nauar. in Man.
c. 22 n ^8.
make nine degrees, adding the degree of Bishop, and first Tonsure. Others
Tilman. l. de Sacram c. 3.
add yet Singers. Others S. ^h q. 7. art. 2. Alex. 4. part. q. 79. mem. 8.
only make seven, and Altisiodor. l. 4. Sum. c de Ord. q 1. Waldens. Tom. 2.
de Sacram. c. 116. Caiet. Tom. 1. opusc. Tract. 11.
others 8. adding the degree of Bishop. Some, Durand. in 4 Did. 24. q. 2. See
Victoria. q. 226. de Sacram. and Caiet. Tom. 1. Tra 11
of all these degrees think only Priesthood to be a Sacrament. Sotus in 4.
Did. 4 q 1. art. 4. Nau. in Man. c. 22 n. 18.
Others the 3. greater Orders, excluding the lesser. Others S. Th. q. 37. art.
2. and l. 4. cont gent. c. 65. S. Bonauent. in 4. Did. 24. art. 2. q. 4.
most probably, think the greater and lesser Orders to be a Sacrament.

Some Durand. in 4. Did. 24. q. 2. Palud. 19. q. 7. Nauar. in Man. c. 22 n 18.
most probably think, the degree of Bishop to be of it self a Sacrament. S.
Bonau. Albertus M. Richard. in 4. Did. ^4.
Others think that it does not differ from Priesthood, and other Orders. Some
Dom. Sotus. did. ^4. q. 1. art. 4.
think that imposition of hands, is only accidental in the Ordination of
Priests and Deacons; and the giving of the Instruments, to wit, the Chalice,
and the Patten to the Priest, and the Gospel to the Deacon to be only
essential: But Hosius in Conf^ss. Polon. c. 50. Pet. Sotus lect. 5. De Sacram.
Ordinis.
others more probably, that imposition of hands is also matter essential to
them.

All believing Matrimony to be a Sacrament, some Canus de locis. l. 8. c. 1.
Gul. Parisiensis. l de Sacramentis, Tract. de Matrim. c. 9. q. 1.
Schoolmen think, the matter thereof to be the mutual consent of the parties
contracting, expressed by words of the time present: and the form to be the
words of the Priest, wherewith he conioyneth them in Marriage. Others Palud. in
4. Did. 26. q. 4 Adrian. in 4. q. 1. Couarruuias in Epitome l. 4. Decret. 2.
part. c. 1.
teach, that the parties contracting, are the matter, and their words
expressing their consent, the form. Others S. Tho. in 4. Did. 26. q. 2. ar.
1. Did. 1. Victoria q. 245. de Sac. Sotus Did. 26 q 2. Art. 3.
that the words of the parties contracting are to themselves matter and form,
so that the words of the party lastly expressing the consent, are the form,
and the words of the first speaker, the matter. Cancuista communiter super
Caput, Tua nos. Extra. de sponsalibus. Nauar. in Man. c. 22. n. 20.
Others most probably, that the mutual consent is the matter, and the words
or signs expressing the same, the form.

Some Canonista tum Glossa in cap. ex publico. Extra. de Conuers. coniug.
Anton. 3 p. tit. 1. c. 21.. 3.
teach that the Pope may dispense in Matrimony contracted but not co^summated:
Couarru. in Epit. l. 4. Decret. 2. par. c. 7. n. 13.
Others deny it.

Some Alphons. a Castro l. 11. cont. haer. verbo, Nuptiae, haer. 3 Pet. a Soto.
lect. 2. de Matrim.
teach that Matrimony was a Sacrament in the Old Law, with the Jews, and so
not first instituted, but confirmed by Christ: But S. Tho. in 4. Did. 26. q.
2. art. 2. 3. S. Bona. in 4. Did. 26. art. 2 q 2. Scotus Did. 26. q. vnica
Conclus. 4
others much more truly teach, that it was first instituted by Christ, and does
excel in grace the marriages of the old Law.

As touching Extreme Unction: some Th. Waldens. To. ^. de Sacram. c. 163. Alph.
a Castro. l. de haer. verbo, Extrema Vnctio.
think, that the Apostles did administer the Sacrament of Extreme Unction when
they anointed the sick, cured them. Mar. 6. but others Iansen. in c. 6. Mar.
Dom. a Soto. Did. 23. q. 1. art. 1.
more probably teach, that this was only a figure or shadow thereof. None of
these differences are defyned by the Church.

Protestant Untruths.
Calvin affirms, that the Inst. l. 4. c. 19.. 12.
Ancient (writers) when they speak properly, do no where mention more then two
Sacraments: but this ^o be false is clear by S. Cyprian L. 2. Ep. 1.
and S. Austine Aug. l. 2. cont. Ep. Petil. c. 10^.
He also avouches, that Inst. l. 4. c. 19. 12.
Austine plainly affirms that imposition of hands (or Confirmation) is
nothing else but prayer. But S. Austine himself says, L. 2. cont. lit. Petil.
c. 104.
The Sacrament of Chrisme, in the kind of visible signs, is holy, even as
Baptism it self.

Chemnitius teaches, that, Exam. ad Sess. 4. in fine Disput. de Traditionibus.
Siluester invented the Confirmation of Children: But this is no where read of
him. And there are Decrees De Consecrat. Did. 4. Can. in Catechismo. and Can.
Non plures. and Did. 5. Can. 1. 2. etc.
of Popes more Ancient then S. Siluester, where not the Sacrament it self, but
some other Ceremonies concerning the administration thereof, are ordained.

Yea Chemnitius Exam. part. 2. p. 198.
himself deriueth Unction of Chrisme from Montanus, and adds, that it was
confuted by S. Hierome. But whereas many Epiph. haer. 48. Eusebius Hist. l 4. c.
14. Clem. Alex. strom. 4. Philastrius in Catal. Hier. Ep. ad Marcellam. Aug.
haer. 26. Theodoret. lib. 3. de Fab haer. Damasc. l. de 100. haer.
Fathers do write against the Errors of Montanus, not one of them mentions or
numbreth this amongst his Errors: neither does S. Hierome Dial. con^. Lucifer.
in the place objected confute any such matter.

Calvin Inst. l. 4. c. 19.. 24.
affirms, that Minor Orders are a late Invention; no where read of but in the
Sorbonistes, and Canonistes. But before all Sorbonistes and Canonistes, they
were mentioned by S. Isidore, Isid. l. 7. Etym. c. 12. Conc Carth 4. a. c. 1.
ad 10. ^^er in c. 2 ad Tit and Ep. ad Nepoti^n. Conc. Laod. c. 24. Cornel. apud
Eusebius. Hist. l. 6 c. 3^. Ignat. Ep. ad ^ntiochenses.
by the 4. Carthage Council. by S. Hierome, by the Council of Laodicea, by S.
Cornelius, and by S. Ignatius.

Calvin Instit l. 4. c. 19. 34.
teaches, that Matrimony was not houlden for a Sacrament before the time of S.
Gregory: but this to be false is convinced by S. L. de bono coniug. c. 18. and
l. 1. de nupt. and concupisc. c. 10.
Austine. He also Just. l. 4. c. 19. 36.
affirms that we call it impurity and pollution: and Chemnitius Exam. part 2.
page 1207.
in proof thereof alleges Siricius in his Epistle to Himerius: but Siricius
only speaks against Priests marriages, which he calls Sacrilege: and in
the like sense, that it is said, Apoc. 14.
Those are they who with women are not defiled, for they are Virgins, may
Marriage be called impurity.

Calvin Inst. l. 4. c. 19.. 10.
urges from Sigebert, that Extreme Unction was instituted by Innocentius the
first, and Exam. part. 2. p. 1135.
Chemnitius by Faelix the fourth. But this Faelix living above an 100. years
after Innocentius, Chemnitius is answered by Calvin; and as for Sigebert, he
relates only that which is to be seen in Ep. 1. c. 8.
Innocentius his Epistle, where he affirms it to be a Sacrament, and
alleges S. James in proof thereof: but there is no intimation of any
Institution by Innocentius.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Prot. Church has Decreed, that, Article 25.
There are 2. Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is
to say, Baptism and the supper of the Lord. Those 5. commonly called
Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation, Penance Orders, Matrimony, and
Extreme Unction, are not to be accounted for Sacraments of the Gospel being
such as have grown partly of the corrupt following of the Apostles, partly are
states of life allowed in the Scriptures; but yet have not like nature of
Sacraments, with Baptism and the Lords Supper, for that they have not any
visible sign, or Ceremony ordained of God. Other Prot. teach that the^e are 3.
Sacraments, others that there are 4. others 7. all which I shall show See
hereafter sect. 4.
hereafter in the Section of Protestants.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
The Sacrament of Confirmation was rejected by the Theodoret. l. 3. de haer.
Fab. de Nouato.
Nouatians, Conc. Nicen. 1 Can. 31. Arab. Conc. Ar^lat. 2. Can. 17.
Arrians, Optatus l. 1. cont. Parmen.
Donatistes, and Guido Error. 21. Armen.
Armenians Holy Chrisme was spitte upon, and trodden underfoot by the Optat. l.
2. cont. Parm.
Donatistes, and despised by the Theod l. 3. de haer. Fab.
Nouatians. The Sacrament of Penance was denied by the Cyprian l. 4. c 2.
Ambros. l. 4. de Poen. c. 2.
Nouatians. The Sacrament of Extreme Unction was rejected by the Guido de haer.
Arm.
Armenians, Guido de Waldensibus.
Waldensians, and Antoninus 4. part. sum. tit. 11. c. 7.
Albigenses. The Sacrament of holy Orders was denied by Robert. Montensis in
append. ad Sigebert,
Tandemus, and by Prateolus Verb. Mahomet.
Mahomet. And Ae^ius was condemned by S. Haer. 75.
Epiphanius, and S. Haer. 53.
Austine for making Priests to be equal in authority by Gods law with Bishops.
And the Sacrament of Matrimony was impugned by the Alphonsus Zamurensis. c. de
Matrimonio.
Armenians. All which heresies were condemned by the Ancient Fathers, and
written of in those times, and yet are all renewed by the Sectaries of these
days.

Protestant Errors.
Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 19.. 11.
professes not to esteem Oil, whether in Baptism or Confirmation, so much
as a little dunge. And Exam. part. 2. p. 314.
Chemnitius deemeth it not impious for a trauailer, having his boots hardened
with heat, to annoint or grease them with this Chrisme. Luther is in such
dislike of Extreme unction, that he opposes himself against S. James saying,
Lib. de Captiuit. BaBylon. c. de Extrema Unction.
If it were James the Apostle, I would say it were not lawful for Apostles by
their own authority to institute a Sacrament etc. for this belongs to Christ
alone; as though S. James after the receiving of the holy Ghost, should err in
a matter of such weight, or would assume to himself what is proper to Christ
alone: but here you may see Luthers zeal and humility.

Calvin, Instit. l. 4. c. 19.. vlt. Bucer in c. 19. Math. Brent. in Confess.
Wittemb. c. de coniugio. Chemnit. Exam. part. 2. p. 1249. Melan^th. loc. Theol.
Tit. de coniugio. Luther in c. 7. 1. ad Corinth. and l. de causis
matrimontalibus.
Bucer, Brentius, Chemnitius, and other Prot. teach that it is lawful in case
of Adultery to have divorce, and the innocent party to marry another. Luther is
a man of such indifferency, that, In Genes. c. 16.
He will neither being in Poligamy, nor condemn it: So that if one man have 4.
or 5. wives at once, Luther will not reprove him for it.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that there are seven Sacraments
instituted by Christ our Savior.
ALl parts agree, that 3. things are necessary and sufficient to the Essence of
a Sacrament. First, that it be an external and sensible sign: secondly, that
it have a promise of grace annexed unto it: and thirdly, a Commandment, or at
least an institution of God, whereby it is commanded or ordained to be
administered. Now, that none of these 3. things is wanting to any of the
foresaid 7. Sacraments (for defect whereof they should be rejected for
Sacraments, as they are by Protestants) is proved first of Baptism, where the
external sign is, Ephesians. 5.26.
the lauer of water; the Commandment, Io. 3.5.
unless a man be borne again of water etc. and elsewhere, Mat. 28.19.
Go therefore teach you all nations, baptizing them in the name etc. the
promise of grace annexed is, Mar. 16.
he that belieueth and is baptized, shall be saved.

In the Eucharist the external sign is, Mat. 26.26.
he took bread and blessed, and brake etc. the commandment, 1. Cor. 11.25.
This do ye; and Io. 6.53.
unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man etc. you shall not have life in
you: the promise of grace, Io. 6.52.58.
he that eats this bread shall live for ever.

In Confirmation, the External sign is the Imposition of hands, Act. 8.18.
And when Simon Magus saw that by the imposition of hands of the Apostles etc.
And again Act. 8.17.
then they viz. Peter and John) put their hands upon them etc. the effect or
promise of Grace is, the holy Ghost was given; the Commandment from these
Scriptures is deduced by necessary consequence; for what man can institute a
Ceremony, upon the application whereof the Grace of the holy Ghost shall
follow? And shall we think, that the Apostles would so confidently and so
ordinarily have imposed hands, ^o communicate thereby the Grace of the holy
Ghost, unless God had commanded it unto them? But the Apostles did confidently
and ordinarily use imposition of hands upon the baptized, to the end that
thereby the holy Ghost might come upon them, therefore it must needs follow, that
herin either the Apostles did amiss (which were absurd to say) or else, that
they had Commandment from Christ to do what they did, since they knew right
well, that no man Chem. Exam. part. 2. p. 13.
could institute a Ceremony to which the Grace of the holy Ghost should
infallibly follow.

Now, that this Ceremony of Imposition of hands was ordinary and necessary, is
proved by many places of holy Scriptures, as where it is said of S. Peter and
S. John thus, Act. 8.15.16.17.18.19.
They prayed for them, that they might receive the holy Ghost, for as yet he
was not come upon any of them, but they were only baptized in the name of our
Lord Jesus: then they laid their hands upon them, and they received the holy
Ghost. And when Simon saw that by Imposition of hands of the Apostles, the
holy Ghost was given, he offered them money saying: Give unto me also this
power, that upon whomsoever I lay hands he may receive the holy Ghost. Again,
Act. 19.6.
when Paul had laid his hands upon them the holy Ghost came upon them, and
they spoke with tongues and prophesied. And in another place, Heb. 6.2.
Not laying again the foundation of Penance from dead works, and of faith
toward God, of the Doctrine of Baptismes, and of Imposition of hands, and of
the Resurrection of the dead, and of Eternal Judgment. These places convince,
that by the imposition of hands, the Holy Ghost, and his Grace were given by
the Apostles.

That Penance is a Sacrament of the New Law truly and properly, it is proved
out of these words, Io. 20.22.23.
As my Father has sent me, I also do send you, when he had said this, he
breathed upon them and he said to them, Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose
sins you shall forgive they are forgiven them, and whose you shall return,
they are retained. Here we have an External ryte or sign of the Acts of
Contrition and Confession, manifested by the Penitent, and the Judicial
absolution of the Priest, uttered in those words, Whose sins you shall
forgive. Secondly there is a Promise of Grace annexed unto them in these
words, they are forgiven them. Thirdly we have a Commandment in these words,
as my Father has sent me, I do also send you. And unto this Sacrament the
Apostle alludeth saying, 2. Cor. 5.18.
God has given unto us the ministry of reconciliation etc.

That Extreme Unction is also a Sacrament true and proper, is likewise proved
from these words of S. James, Iac. 5.14.
Is any man sick amongst you? let him bring in the Priests of the Church, and
let them pray over him, annoyling him with oil in the name of our Lord; and
the Prayer of faith shall save the sick, and our Lord shall lift him up, and
if he be in sins, they shall be remitted him. Here is first the sign or
external ryte, Is any man sick amongst you? let him bring in the Priests of
the Church, and let them pray over him, annoyling him with oil in the name of
our Lord. Secondly here is a promise of grace. And the prayer of faith shall
save the sick, and our Lord shall lift him up, and if he be in sins, they
shall be remitted him. Thirdly the Commandment is evidently gathered out of
those general words, Is any man sick? let him etc. neither durst the Apostle
so absolutely have promised so great an effect, as remission of sins thereby,
if he had not received the same of our Savior.

Whitaker not able to deny, but that S. James commanded the sick to be
annoyled, yet he numbreth this Argument amongst Sophismes: Ad rat. 3 Camp. p.
43.
James commands to annoint the sick, therefore the sick are to be anointed
by us. As though Christians were not bound to obey the Apostles, and their
writings.

Molinaeus answers that those words, Scuto. part. 2. p. 51.
If he be in sins, they shall be forgiven him, do signify the same, That health
shall be restored him, the sins being forgiven, for which God had afflicted
him. And he adds, that Ib. p. 52.
Christ, Mat. 9. does teach us, That to say to the sick man, Thy sins are
forgiven thee, and to say arise and walk, are things equivalent. So that a
Minister may say, Arise and walk, when he declares remission of sins to the
people. But what more absurd then to confound remission of sins, with
restoring to corporal health, as though these were but all one?

That Order is a Sacrament, it is proved first, because here is the external
rite, to wit, imposition of hands, 1. Tim. 4.14.
with imposition of the hands of Prieshood, or as it is elsewhere, 2. Tim. 1.6.
by the imposition of my hands. Secondly here is a promise of Grace, 1. Tim.
4.14.
Neglect not the grace that is in thee, which is given thee by Prophecy, with
imposition of hands: and elsewhere, 2. Tim. 1.6.
I admonish thee that thou resuscitate the Grace of God, which is in thee by
the imposition of my hands. And thirdly here is the Institution or
Commandment, Ephesians 4.11.12.
And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and
other some Pastors and Doctors etc. But these three in the judgment of our
Adversaries are sufficient to make a true and proper Sacrament of the New Law.
Besides how could the Apostle know, grace to be given to Timothy by the
imposition of hands, if he had not learned of God, by that sign Grace to be
given?

That Matrimony is also a Sacrament, is proved from those words spoken of
Matrimony, Ephesians 5.32.
This is a great Sacrament: and although Protestants wrangle upon the word
(...) in the Original, yet it imports as much as Sacramentum does: and here
the external sign is the visible Contract betwixt the man and woman; for of
that the Apostle speaks in the place cited, according to S Hierome In hunc
locum.
and S. Chrysostom. Secondly we have the Institution, where it is said, Mat.
19.3.
That therefore which God has joined together, let no man separate. Thirdly
the promise of grace is gathered by necessary inference, for that Matrimony
amongst Christians, which is Conjunction of man and woman, does signify the
Conjunction betwixt Christ and his Church, which is by grace and Charity, not
only in regard of conformity of nature, but also in spiritual love: but that
cannot be signified unless besides the civil Contract, there were also a
spiritual union of the minds of the husband and wife. Therefore since Almighty
God has for that end instituted matrimony amongst the faithful, no doubt he
therein conferreth his grace, whithout which the said spiritual union cannot be
had. And it might be confirmed out of other places of Scripture, 1. Tim. 2.15.
1. Cor. 7.14.1. These. 4.4.
as where it is said, by generation of Children the shall be saved, if they
remain in faith and love, and sanctification with sobriety. We find then in
the Scriptures, that all things required to a true Sacrament, are also found
in these seven.

SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers agreably with Catholics believed, and
taught that there were seven Sacraments of the New Law.
COncerning the number of the Sacraments, it is to be observed, that the
Fathers not foreknowing our present Controversy thereof, did but speak of them,
as also of other points of Faith casually, and as occasion was ministered, and
so accordingly S. Austine sometimes mentions but one, sometimes two, and
sometimes In ps 103. con. 1. and de Bap. cont. Don. l. 5. c. 20. and Ep. 119.
c. 7.
more, therefore it is sufficient if the Fathers in this sort do make mention of
all our Sacraments. And yet in our behalf the Testimony of Luther is very
strong, who writing of this point, obiecteth thus, Tom. 2. Wittemb. de
Captiuit. Babyl. f. 84.
But thou will say, what do you answer to Dionysius, who numbreth up six
Sacraments etc. I answer (says Luther) that h^ alone of the old (writers) is
to be had for seven Sacraments, although omitting Matrimony he only recites
six. And the like is confessed of him by D. Humfrey, Jesuit. part. 2. p 519.
who affirms that S. Dionisius in this respect displeased Luther. A great
offense.

Exam. part. 2. p. 7.
Chemnitius Upon the folio 187.
confesses out of S. Cyprian, that he numbreth five Sacraments. And only
euadeth that the Sermon de ablutione pedum, is not S. Cyprians, but forged
under his name: but certainly it was the writing of an Ancient Author, who
lived in the time of S. Cyprian; the book de operibus Cardinalibus Christi,
whereof this Sermon is a parcel, being dedicated to Cornelius B. of Rome, in
S. Cyprians time, and to whom S. Cyprian himself wrote, lib. 1. ep. 1. and 3.
In so much as Erasmus in his Annotations annexed to Cyprians works, affirms
it to be Upon the folio 187.
The work of some learned man of that age; and Fulke acknowledges that,
Against Rhem. Test. in 1 Cor. 11.20. sect. 6.
The Author was not in time much inferior to Cyprian.

In like sort where Tertullian casually mentions diverse of our Sacraments,
namely, Baptism, Extreme Unction, Confirmation, Orders, and the Eucharist,
saying most wittily L. de resur. Caruis. c. 8
The flesh is washed, that the Soul may be cleansed, the flesh is anoyled that
the Soul may be consecrated, the flesh is signed, that the Soul may be armed,
the flesh is covered with imposition of hands, that the Soul may be
enlightened with the Spirit, the flesh eats the body and blood of Christ,
that the soul may be fatned to God. This saying is so displeasing to Prot.
that Mr. Parker in great choler demands, Ag. Symbol. part. 1. sect. 11. p
77. and part. 2. sect. 10. p. 13^.
Who can brook it?

S. Austine also teaching, In Euang. Joan. Tract. 118.
Unless the sign of the Cross be applied, whether to the forhead of the
belieuers (by Confirmation) or to the water wherewith they are regenerated (by
Baptism) or to the Oil wherewith they are anointed (by Extreme Unction) or to
the Sacrifice wherewith they are nourished (by the holy Eucharist) none of these
are rightly administered. The Centurists Cent. 5. c. 6. Col. 657. Fulke ag.
Rhem. Test in 1. Cor. 11.34.
and D. Fulke reciting this his saying, do reprove him for the same. And yet
the like saying to this of S. Austine, is used by In Math. ho. 55.
S. Chrysostom.

But more in particular concerning Chrisme or Confirmation, sundry Ministers of
Lincoln Diocese in their Abridgment p. 42. And see Perk. ag. Symbol. p. 1. p.
133.
Protestants reprove Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, with Error of using the
Cross in Confirming those that were baptized. M. Perkins says, Vol. 2. p. 653.
This Unction pertayned to Baptism in the West till above 300. years after
Christ, for then was there another Confirmatory Unction devised by Melchiades,
or as some say before him by Urban the first, who lived about Anno 223. S.
Cyprian teaching, that, L. 1. ep. 1^.
It is necessary that he who is baptized, receiving Chrisme, should also be
anointed, the Cen. 3. col. 115.
Centuristes reprove him for the same, affirming further, that in the Ancient
times, Unction and imposition of hands followed Baptism, of which Tertulian
etc. which custom Cyprian erroneously makes necessary. Exam. part. 2. p. 58.
Chemnitius also reprehendeth S. Cyhrian for saying of Baptism and
Confirmation, then they may be clearly sanctified, and become the sons of
God, if they be borne of both Sacraments. Mr. Against symbol. p. 133.
Parker reproves S. Ep. ad Iubaianum.
Cyprian for terming the Oil, Signaculum Dominicum, our Lords Seal. And Exam.
part 2. p. 58. 64. 65.
Chemnitius charge not only S. Cyprian, but also the Laodicean Council,
Melchiades, Cornelius, and Tertulian for the Sacrament of Confirmation: for
which also Danaeus recites and rejects sundry of the Ancient Fathers, in
these words, Resp. ad tom. 2. Bell, p. 451. 452.
Ambrose favors over much his Siricius, and the Roman Bishops, who brought
forth that Confirmation. Therefore what etc. Ambrose wrote, it is to be
attributed to his Error, or favor toward the Pope of Rome, not to the truth:
Hieromes sentence against the Luciferians corrupts the place of the 8.
Chapter of the Acts: Austine was overwhelmed with the Error or shipwreck of
his age. So general was this Doctrine in S. Austines age. And others do
report, that M. Confer. at Hampt. Court p. 10. 10. Downhams Def. l. 4. p. 23.
Whitguift showed at large the Antiquity of Confirmation, as being used in the
Church euersince the Apostles times. And sundry Puritanes charge Abridgment. p.
41.
Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, with Error of using the Cross, in confirming
those that were baptized.

Concerning holy Orders, to omit that already it is confessed here, that S.
Cyprian, Tertullian, and S. Denis, did teach them to be truly a Sacrament,
numbering them amongst the rest: the very Minores Ordines, inferior Orders of
Deacons, Subdeacons, Readers, Exorcistes, Acolytes, are so plainly taught in
the Primitive Church, that D. Field makes Of the Church. l. 5. p. 121. Osiand.
Cent. 1. p 131.
no question, but these Minor Orders were very ancient; alleging in proof
thereof, the testimonies of Cyprian, Cornelius and Ignatius; and for the same
the Cent. 4. Col. 873. 874.
Centuristes allege the Fathers of the fourth Age. But Tom. 6. Wittemb. f. 53.
Luther confesses, that S. Denis (S. Paul's Scholar) affirms that there are
in the Church, Bishops, Deacons, Subdeacons, Lectours, Exorcistes etc.

That Matrimony is a Sacrament, S. Austine teaches, that, De nupt. and concup.
l. 1. c. 10.
A certain Sacrament of Marriage is commended to the faithful that are
married, whereupon the Apostle says, Husbands love your wives, as Christ loved
the Church. This Doctrine is so clear in S. Austine and others Fathers, that
Fulke grants, that, In Rhem. Test. in Ephesians. 5.32. sect. 5.
Austine and some other of the Ancient Fathers take it, that matrimony is a
great Mystery of the Conjunction of Christ, and his Church. In regard of which
inseparable Conjunction, Melancthon acknowledges; that, In Ep. ad Romans c. 14.
p. 367.
The Mileuitane Council, at which Austine was present etc. decreed concerning
divorce, that the innocent party should not many again. Whereof also say the
Centuristes, Cent. 5. c. 4. Col. 519. etc. 10. Col. 1233.
The opinion of Austine is, that it is not lawful for the Innocent party to
marry again: for which also he is reprehended by Exam, part. 2. p. 263.
Chemnitius.

Lastly, as touching Ex^reme Unction, S. Austine speaking of the sick, says,
Tom. 9. de Rectitudine Cath. Conuersationis post medium.
Let him ask of the Church holy Oil, wherewith his body may be anointed,
according to the Apostle, James 5. And again, Ser. de temp. 215. and de visit.
Insir. l. 2. c. 4 Orig. ho. 2. in Leuit. Prosper. de Praedict. l. 2. c. 29.
Let him annoint his body, that it may be fulfilled in him, which is written,
Is any man sick? let him bring in the Priests, and let the^ pray over him
anointing him with Oil. S. Innocentius speaking of the same words of S.
James says, Ep. ad Eugubin.
Without doubt it is to be understood of the faithful being sick, who may be
anointed with the holy Oil of Chrisme. Affirming further that, Not only
Priests in their sick^es, but also lay persons in theirs, may have the benefit
and use thereof. This is so clear in Innoce^tius, that Bale says Pageant of
Popes. fol. 26.
Of the annoyling of the sick, Innocentius has made a Sacrament. Agreably to
which writes Szegedine, that Speculum. Pontif. p. 33.
Innocentius the first, and Felix the fourth have made a Sacrament of the
annoyling of the si^ke. But to clear these good Popes of all Innoua^ion, the
Epistle of S. James is for this very cause rejected by Luther in these words,
(46) But I say, if in any place it be foolishly written, in this especially
etc. But if it were the Epistle of James the Apostle, I would say, that it were
not lawful for an Apostle by his own authority to institute a Sacrament etc.
for this belongs to Christ alone. Tom. 2. Wittem. de Captiu. Babyl. fol. 86.
As though an Apostle would assume to himself the institution of a Sacrament,
or any other authority that were not lawful. S. Chrysostom says of the
effect of this Sacrament, L. 3. de Sacerd.
they (speaking of Priests) do not only remit sins in Baptism, but
afterward also according to the saying of S. James, If any man be sick, let
him bring in the Priests etc. And such is the confessed ancient use of Extreme
Unction in the Church, that Whitaker answering to the Ancient Fathers objected
testimonies in behalf thereof, says, Cont. Duraeum. l. 3. p. 650.
I acknowledge the superstitious custom of this Unction to have continued
longer in the Church then was meet. So confessedly were all the seven
Sacraments taught, and believed by the Ancient Fathers.

SECT. IV. Protestant writers do teach, and confess the number of seven
Sacraments agreably with Catholics.
Ib. p. 170. 171.
COncerning Confirmation the English Communion Book turned into Latin, and
printed Anno Domini 1574.
at London by ^homas Vautrollerius cum Priuilegio says, Confirmatio illis
adhibetur etc. Confirmation is exhibited unto them that are baptized, that by
Imposition of hands and prayer they may receive strength and defense against
the invasion of sin, the world, and the Devil. This is so clear, that the
Puritanes with much dislike say, Abridgment. p. 76.
The Communion book gives to Confirmation the definition of a Sacrament. In
like manner does Mr. Hooker acknowledge and affirm, not only the visible sign
of Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 66. p. 169.
laying on of hands hitherto always continued in Confirmation but also the
gift or grace of the holy Ghost, which armeth us agayinst Temptation and sin.
And as well Ib. pa. 170. See Whiteg. defense of the answer to the Admonition.
Tract. 14 p. 582. 583. and 726. 727.
he as other Prot. writers do affirm and prove the same from Scriptures. D.
Couell says, Ag. the Plea of Innoc. p. 192.
In Baptism we are regenerated to life, but in Confirmation we are
strengthened to battle.

As touching Orders, Melancthon defends it to be a Sacrament properly,
saying, Loc. com. Edit. 1536.
Maxim aute^ placet etc. I like very well to have Orders (as they call it)
numbered among the Sacraments. And in other his Common places Edit. 1552. 1558.
of later Edition, he not only calls it a Sacrament, but affirms further,
that it is commanded by the Gospel, and has a promise annexed. In like
manner does L. de vera and falsa relig.
Zwinglius account it for a Sacrament, as also does M. Hooker, in acknowledging
therein not only the visible sign of Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 77. p. 230.
hand imposing, but also the Ibidem.
(...), and gift Ibidem prope init.
of the spirit. Bilson also ack^owledgeth in like sort, the grace Perp. Govern.
p. 109.
of the holy Ghost given by hands imposing: and alleadg^th M. Calvin Ib post
med.
confessing that it is a kind of Sacrament, and saying thereof, Calvin. cited
Ibid. vide Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 9. sect. 28 31. 32. etc. 14..20.
Libenter eo loco habeo: I willingly accept it for a Sacrament for there is a
Ceremony of hand imposing a sure sign of spiritual Grace; and that I put it
not the third in number of Sacraments, was (says he) because it is not
ordinary, nor common to all the faithful, but a special rite for a certain
function. And hence it is, that in his treatise against In Antidoto Council.
Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 1.
the Tridentine Council, he rejected from the number of the 7. Sacraments,
only the other four. Chronol. c. 8.
Clapham alleating Austine, Calvin, Bucer, Melancthon, and others, affirms it
to be a Sacrament.

As concerning Extreme Unction, the Deuines in their Conference at Lipsia,
whereat were present (as M. Sleydan Histor. l 10.
witnesses) Melancthon, and other learned men of Lipsia and Wittemberge,
acknowledge Extreme Unction to be a Sacrament: In so much as Illyricus does
therefore reprove them, saying, L. de veris and falsis Adiaphoris.
They have not obscurely restored as Sacraments, Confirmation Order, and
Extreme Unction. Calvin speaking of Extreme Unction says, Comment. in lac. 5.
14. and in Antidot. Conc. Trid. ad Can. 1. de Sacram. in genere.
I do truly confess, that it was used for a Sacrament, by the Disciples of
Christ, neither do I assent unto them, who think it was a medicine.

Again, De vera Eccles. reform p. 330.
As we Confess that Unction was a Sacrament, which the Apostles ministered for
the curing of the sick, so we deny that it belongs to us: Here Calvin
confesses it to be a Sacrament, and that the Apostles in their time did
minister it, and yet it must not belong to us Christians, which is most
ridiculous.

As concerning the Sacrament of Absolution and Penance, Luther in a Tract. of
his published a little before his death says, ^assert. cont. Louan. Assert 35.
We willingly acknowledge Penance with the power of the absoluing keys to be
a Sacrament, for it has a Promise, and faith of Remission of sins from
Christ. Also the Apology of the Confession of Augusta says, Vide Apol.
Confess. August. Art. 13. de numero and vsu Sacram. f. 161.
It is easy to judge which be properly Sacraments, therefore Baptism, the
supper of our Lord, and Absolution are truly Sacraments, for these rites have
the Commandment of God, and promise of Grace: and of the same judgment,
expressed also in the very same words, is their learned Divine Margarita
Theol. de Sacram. p. 116 117.
John Spangeberge. Melancthon also says, Loc. com. Edit. 1536. de Sacram.
numaro.
The Sacrament of Penance is profitably numbered amongst the Sacraments. And
again, Ib. de Poenit.
It is easy to Judge which be Sacraments (namely says he) Baptism, the
supper of our Lord, and Absolution. And the same account is made as well by
Andreas In Conc. loc. Script. pugn. n. 191. f. 211. and n. 195. f 119.
Athamerus, as also by Loc. com. Tom. 1. de potest. Ecclesiae f. 305.
Erasmus Sarrerius. As concerning Matrimony, Zwinglius seems L. de vera and
falls. relig. c. de Matrimonio.
to acknowledge it for a Sacrament: Yet he is not willing that the name
Sacrament be ascribed unto it, because he thinks the word Marriage, or
Wedlock, is much more excellent, then the word Sacrament. So this carnal
Heretic.

Melancthon acknowledges, that, Matrimony In locis vltimo editis Anno 58.
is a sign of a sacred thing, and has a Commandment from God, and Promise of
Grace annexed unto it: only one thing (says he) is wanting unto it, that it
was before Christ. But this in his opinion can be no impediment, who teaches
that the Baptism of S. John Baptist was most truly a Sacrament, and the same
with ours, and yet it was before Christ: wherefore as he thinks Baptism to be
a Sacrament, because it was received and confirmed by Christ, by the same
reason he may think of Marriage.

And to conclude, it is manifest that John Husse Vide Conc. Constant. Sess. 15.
Act. 8. and Act. Mon p. 216. Huss. ad c. 5. Ep. Iac.
and the Waldenses L. Lutheri ad Waldenses.
did acknowledge with us, all the 7. Sacraments. And Benedict Morgensterne
Tract. de Ecclesia p. 150. 123.
reproves the Waldenses, for that, says he. Cum Papistis septem Sacramenta
numerant, with the Papists they number 7. Sacraments. Wiccliffe Wicclif. in
postilla super. 15. cap. Marci. and super. 1. Cor. 1.
also believed 7. Sacraments. And so also, as Illyricus In adhort. ad Constan.
in agnita Christi relig. etc.
witnesses, did the Divines assembled at the Conference of Lipsia, as also at
the Conference of Ratisbone 1541.
, whereat were present Melancthon and Bucer, and also, as M. Beza In vita
Caluini.
affirms, John Calvin; there those Deuines acknowledged 7. Sacraments. In so
much that Bucer himself said thereof, In Actis Colloq. Ratisb.
Protestants non grauatim admiserunt septem Sacramenta, the Protestants
willingly admitted 7. Sacraments. And Luther himself confesses that, De
Potestate Papae.
Of all Ecclesiastical (men) it is the same Baptism, the same Church, the
same Confirmation, the same word of God, the same Priesthood, the same of
Penance, Unction, Marriage, and all Sacraments. Rokizana confidently writes
thus, De Sacramentis in genere.
I constantly say, that there are seven Sacraments of the New Law, Baptism,
Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Order, Matrimony.
Perzibrane makes this Confession of his faith in this point, Cap. 8.
I Confess, that the 7. Sacraments of the holy Church delivered by God the
Author, and instituted by the Authority of his Apostles, are by all to be
faithfully and inuiolably believed, kept, and reverenced; which are, sacred
Baptism, Confirmation, Order etc. But to conclude, you see the whole number of
our Sacraments to be taught and believed by Hussites, Waldensians,
Wiccliffistes, and Lutherans, and most of them also by the Caluinistes.

Only I must wish the Christian Reader to advertise, that seeing Prot. Luth. l.
de notis Eccl. and Confess. August. and Apol. Art. 7.
do make a chief note of the true Church, to be the consent in the Doctrine of
the Sacraments, yet themselves could never with Common consent agree of the
very number of them; some of them as you have heard, teaching 2. others 3.
others 4. and diverse 7. From which disagreement in a matter of such weight, we
may well hope that their Heresies cannot long continue, seeing every kingdom
divided within it self, shall be destroyed. In so much that Luther himself
observes, that, In ps. 5. See also S. Hilar. l. 7. de Trinit.
No heretics are overcome by force of craft, but by mutual dissension:
neither does Christ fight otherwise with them, then by sending amongst them the
spirit of giddines and dissension, as among the Sichimites, Iud. 9. and as
among the builders of the Tower of Babel, Genesis 11. and in the New Law amongst
Arrians, Donatistes, and Pelagians: to whom I may justly join Lutherans,
Zwinglians, Caluinistes, Puritanes, and all sorts of Protestants.

SECT. V. Containing certain Reasons, or Congruences establishing the number
of seven Sacraments.
FOr so much as by the Confession of M. Hooker, Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 57. p.
128.
There have grown in the doctrine concerning Sacraments, many difficulties
for want of distinct explication, what kind, or degree of grace does belong
unto each Sacrament, I will therefore explain the same under Example and
resemblance of our Corporal life. In Baptism we are Io 33.5.
borne again, and as 1. Pet. 2.2.
Infants newborn, it being to us therefore the beginning, or lauer of our
spiritual Tit. 3.5.
regeneration: Original True difference part. 4. p. 308.
sin (as Bil^on accoucheth) being not remitted but in Baptism.

Secondly, being heerby thus entered into the Infancy of our spiritual life,
our B. Savior did institute Confirmation, for our spiritual growth, strength
The Communion Book of Anno 1574. Hook. Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect 66.
and defense: which power, or strengthening, as our Savior did Luc 24.49. Act.
1 8.
promise, so did he also perform the same; instituting to this end, the
visible sign of Imposition Act. 8.17.18.
of hands, and the giving of the holy Ghost by the same, which gift though it
was in the Apostles times accompanied with other miraculous guiftes, as of
languages etc. yet as M. Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 5 sect. 66. p. 170.
confesses, and answers herto, the said miraculous gift, was not the
principal effect of the then giving of the holy Ghost, but only an accident
thereto, as being a miraculous external testimony, of the inward grace thereby
conferred, necessary for the increase of faith in those times, as in like
manner the unworthy receiving 1. Cor. 11.39.
of the Sacrament, the preaching Mar. 16.17.18.
of the word, were accompanied with like external testimony of miracles: and
so also were offenders punished and excommunicated, accompanied with visible
punishment, as appears by example of Ananias Act. 5.5.10.11.
and Saphira, the incestuous 1. Cor. 5.4 5.
Corinthian, and Elimas Act. 13.6.11.
the Magitian: in so much as S. Austine speaking of the Confirming of young
Children, says, Aug. in Ep. Joan. tract 6.
Is there any of so perverse a heart, as to deny these Children, on whom we now
impose hands, to have received the holy Ghost, because they speak not with
tongues? affirming elsewhere, that the miraculous gift of tongues, accompanied
the other gift of the holy Ghost, Ibid.
for the enlarging of the Churches first beginning.

Thirdly, the Eucharist is our spiritual nourishment and food, whereby is
preserved our spiritual life and strength, before received in Baptism: and so
M. Hooker confesses saying, Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 67 p. 173.
The grace which we have by the holy Eucharist, does not begin (as Baptism
does) but continue life: with whom agrees Peter Martyr saying, Loc. com. Engl.
part. 4. p. 153.
In Baptism Christ is given as a Regenerator, but in the Eucharist he is
distributed unto us as meat and nourishment.

Fourthly, being newborn, grown, and fed, as aforesaid, we are as Souldiars
still subject to a spiritual 1. Pet. 2.11. Heb. 10.32. Ephesians. 6.11.2.
conflict with sin, wherewith if we be wounded, we are not, as before, to be
newborn again, as in Baptism, but to be cured: in remedy therefore hereof,
God had ordained the Sacrament of Penance, giving our spiritual Physicians
power to cure our hearts: the vi^ible and external rite whereof, is the
judicial Absolution, implied in these words, Io. 20.23.
Whose sins you shall forgive, and the invisible grace annexed thereto, which
is remission of sins, in these other words, Ibid.
They are forgiven them.

Fifthly, for our more secure departure out of this world, God has instituted
the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, to preserve us against all spiritual and
sickly dispositions and relickes of sin: the visible sign whereof is
signified in these words, Iac. 5.14.
Is any man sick? let him bring in the Priests etc. and let them pray over
him, anoyling him with oil; and the invisible grace in these other words,
Ibid.
And the Lord shall lift him up, and if he be in sins, they shall be forgiven
him. And whereas the Protestants Fulk. ag. Rhem. Test. fol. 433. Willet Synop.
p. 549.
would understand this, not of any Sacrament, but only of the miraculous cure
of those who were anointed Mar. 6.13.
with oil and healed; this collusion will not serve the turn, for this first
miraculous curing by oil mentioned in S. Mark, was used only as a preparatiue
to the other mentioned by S. James, which did differ from the said first in
many respects. As first we find our B. Savior in Cure of the diseased, used
sometimes Mar. 7.33.35.
Clay, and spitle, and the Apostles, oil etc. but that he generally appointed
any of them for a general medicine we find not. Again men are no where
commanded to seek for their cure by miracle, but in this place of James is a
commandment signified; also the gift of Miraculous cure was not common 1.
Cor. 12.9 10.27.28.
to all Priests or Elders, but to some only; whereas here the Commandment is
indefinite, referred indifferently to them all.

Fourthly, S. James speaks not of curing the party, but of easing, or lifting
him up in soul. And if this place of S. James had concerned a miraculous cure,
which the sick person had been commanded to seek for, and promised to obtain
(as the thing here intended is commanded to be sought for, and promised to be
given,) who then would in those times have dyed, when he might have obtained
his cure by miracle, and been commanded so to do? And lastly to omit many other
differences, this conferreth Remission of sins, which a miraculous cure did
not. And hereunto may be added, that the Catholic Church throughout the
world, observes this practice of Extreme Unction, not as invented by men, but
affirmed by Fathers and Protestants, and used in all ages without any first
Institution thereof noted, other then that which was in the Apostles time. A
truth so certain, that Calvin himself says, Comment. in Iac. 5 17. and in
Antid. Conc. Trid. ad Can. 1. de Sacram. in genere.
I do truly confess that it was used for a Sacrament by the Disciples of
Christ, neither do I assent unto them who think it was a medicine.

Now concerning Order and Matrimony, as in our Corporal life and Common
wealth, there are required as well parents, who by propagation may continue and
increase the same, as also Magistrates, to order and govern it: So in our
spiritual commonwealth, Matrimony is established answerable to the first, and
the Sacrament of Orders for the other: and that as the visible contract between
man and wife, is not only a civil and natural contract, but also an external
Symbol of a sacred thing, namely of the Espousall of Christ with his Church,
(in respect whereof he is called the bridegroom, and she the spouse) for
example; And, Ose. 2.19.20.
I will despouse thee to me for ever; And, I will despouse thee unto me in
Justice and Judgment, and in mercy, and in Commiserations, and I will despouse
thee to me in faith. And elsewhere, 2. Cor. 11.2.
I have despoused you to one man, to present you a chaste Virgin to Christ. And
yet in a third place, Apoc. 29.7.
Let us rejoice and exult, and give glory to him, because the Marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his wife has prepared herself. And lastly, Apoc. 21.9.
Come (says one of the 7. Angels) and I will show thee the Bryde, the wife of
the Lamb. By all which places it appears, that marriage conferreth grace,
that the parties married 1. These. 4.3.4.
may know to possess their vessel in sanstification etc. and being
accordingly Ephesians. 5.32.
called a great Sacrament, or mystery: So also concerning the Sacrament of
Orders, there is mentioned the invisible grace, which is given by, 2. Tim. 6.1.
1. Tim. 4.14
and with the external ryte of Imposition of hands.

The second reason or congruence, to prove the foresaid number of 7. Sacraments,
is drawn ^^om the number of our sins and wounds: for Baptism is against
Original sin, Penance against actual, Extreme Unction against the
remainders of sin, Confirmation against infirmity, Eucharist against malice,
Matrimony against Concupiscence, Order against ignorance.

The third Congruence arises from the number of virtues. Baptism answers to
faith, Confirmation to Hope, Eucharist to Charity, Penance to Justice, Unction
to Fortitude, Order to Prudence, Matrimony to Temperance.

The fourth may be taken from the honor of the seventh Number used in
Expiations by Sacrifice, as we may see in Exodus 29. Leuit. 4. and
8.13.14.15.16.23 number. 19. Deuteronomy. 15. 3. Paral. 29. Job. vlt. 4. Reg. 5. S. Th.
in 4. Did. 2. q. 1. 3. part. q. 65. art. 1. and cont. Gent. l. 4. c. 58.
several places of Scripture, where 7. beasts are offered, or 7. days, or 7.
times sprinkled with blood etc.

Now whereas Chemnitius in answer to these our Co^gruences affirms, that,
Exam. part. 2. p. 16. 17. 18.
These are the Demonstrations, these the foundations, wherewith the number of
7. Sacraments was brought into the Church, and received by Scholasticall
writers: And that in the Old Law there were virtues and sins, and a
spiritual and corporal life, and therefore by the like reason they should
have 7. Sacraments. As also, that in the Scriptures there are several numbers
renowned and sacred, as 3. 12. etc. And therefore, that hence we may as well
prove that there are 3. 12. or more Sacraments. But all this is but weak, for
no Divine affirms, these to be demonstrations or foundations, but only
supposing faith to be congruences. Schoolmen endeavor to show, that those
things which we believe, are not repugnant, but conformable to reason. In like
sort, The Old Sacraments were not ordain^d to perfect man in a spiritual life,
nor for remedy of sin, Circumcision excepted, but only to represent Christian
Mysteries, and certain other ends: Whereas our Sacraments are instituted in
remedy of sin, and to justify and perfect man in spiritual life, and
therefore these congruences may fitly be applied to our Sacraments, not to the
Old. So also the Congruence from Numbers, is not taken from all numbers
whatsoever, but from such as signify Expiation or Satisfaction for sin. Now,
the number of 7. in Expiations, is so frequent in Scriptures, as that the whole
Scripture may be thought to have proclaimed and fortould, that a time there
should be, wherein 7. most excellent, and efficacious remedies of sin should
be given by God, for the Expiation, and Purgation of sin.

SECT. VI. Containing certain Objections, had from Scriptures against the
number of 7. Sacraments; with Answers thereto
THe first Oiection is, The Scripture do no where name 7. Sacraments, therefore
there are not seven. Answ. Neither do the Scriptures name or call Baptism and
the Eucharist, Sacraments, which yet are not excluded from being Sacraments.

Secondly, if want of naming them in Scripture, were sufficient to abrogate and
disallow them, by the same reason might, Trinity, and Unity, be rejected, for
that these names also are no where to be found in Scripture. If reply be made,
that for Trinity, and Unity, and for Baptism, and the Eucharist, the substance
of the things themselves are expressed in Scripture, therefore these are to be
admitted; I grant the whole, and consequenly likewise infer upon the same
ground, that as for the things required to make the other 5. Sacraments, that
is, a Visible sign, and Invisible grace, and a Commandment, these are
sufficiently found in Scriptures, as has been already proved by Scriptures.
In like sort though the Scriptures do not in express words say, there are 7.
Sacraments, yet neither do they say how many books there are of Canonical
Scriptures, and yet they say in general, there are divine Scriptures: the
certain number whereof is only known by the Tradition of the Church, and
General Councels, not by the Scriptures themselves. And if they question must
be de nomine, of Names, then who knows not, that the name Saccrament is
ascribed often in the Scriptures to sundry things, which by the consent of all
sides are not properly Sacraments. So the Intention of calling the Gentiles to
the faith, is called Ephesians. 1.9.
The Sacrament of Gods will: the Incarnation of the son of God, is called 1.
Tim. 3.16.
a great Sacrament of piety: and the sign written in the forhead of the woman
representing Babylon, is called, Apoc. 17.7.
The Sacrament of the woman. So many ways is this Objection answered.

The second Objection urged by Exam. part. 2.
Chemnitius, is, that out of Christ's side issued Io. 19.34.
only blood and water, whereby is signified, that there are but two Sacraments,
the Eucharist and Baptism. I answer, though thereby were only Chrysostom.
Cyril. and Theophilact. in hunc locum. Damasc. l. 4. de fide. c. 10. Aug. l. 2.
de Symbolo. c. 6. and Tract. 9. in Joan.
signified these two, as being most principal, yet it does not follow, that
there are no more: So also S. Paul only reckons Hebr. 6.2.
Baptism, and the Imposition of hands, viz. Confirmation. Secondly, Cyr.
Catech. 5. Hier. Ep. 83. ad Oceanum.
others understand by blood and water, Martyrdom and Baptism, and some, which
seems also most litterall, Ambr. l. 10. in Luc. c. 105. Leo Ep. 4. Aug. and
Beda in c. 19. Joan.
understand by blood, the price of our Redemption, and by water, Baptism.

Chemnitius also obiecteth that the Angel calls Apoc. 17.5.
the Beast which had 7. heads, a Sacrament, thereby signifying the number of 7.
Sacraments, to belong to Antichrist. Answ. If the seven heads of the beast be
the 7. Sacraments, then Baptism and the Eucharist which are two of them, are
two heads of the Beast, which any Christian might blush to affirm. Secondly,
S. John does not call the 7. heads 7. Sacraments, but one Sacrament or Mystery:
which agrees better to Luther, who affirmed De Capt. Babyl.
sometimes, that there was but one Sacrament. Thirdly, S. John expounds those
7. heads, to be 7. Kings, saying, Apoc. 27.9.
The seven heads, are seven hills, upon which the woman sits, and they
are 7. Kings. So weak and impertinent are these Objections from Scripture.

CHAP. XX. The true state of the Question, concerning the necessity of Baptism.
Whether the Sacrament of Baptism, or the desire thereof, be not absolutely
necessary to Salvation, not only because it is commanded by Christ, but because
it is a means necessary thereto: so that children dying without Baptism,
cannot be saved. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
AMONGST the greatest blessings which the Church inioyeth through the merits of
Christ, one of the first and chiefest is the holy Sacrament of Baptism:
concerning which, the Catholic Church teaches, that, Council. Trident. Sess.
6. Cap. 4.
The Justification of the wicked etc. after the preaching of the Gospel
cannot be made without the lauer of Regeneration, or the desire thereof. And it
further decrees, that, Conc. Trid. Sess. 7. c. 1.
If any shall say, that the Baptism of John, had the same force with the
Baptism of Christ etc. Can. 2.
or that true and natural water is not of the Necessity of Baptism etc. or
Can. 5.
that Baptism is free, that is, not necessary to Salvation, etc. Can. 15.
Or, that Children baptized, because they have not actual faith, are not to be
accounted amongst the faithful, and therefore to be rebaptized when they shall
come to the years of discretion etc. let him be accursed.

In the first Council of Nice it is decreed, that, L. 3. Decret. de S.
Baptismate.
He that is baptized descends guilty of sins, and subject to the servitude
of Corruption; and ascends freed from his servitude and sin, made the Son
of God, and the heir of his grace, coheyre also of Christ, having put upon him
Christ himself, as it is written, Gal. 3.27.
Whosoever you are that are baptized in Christ, you have put on Christ. In the
Couucell of Constantinople it is said in the Creed, Conc. Constantinop. 2.
universal in Symbolo.
I believe one Baptism to remission of sins. In the second Mileuitane
Counsel it is defyned, that, Conc. ^. Mileuit. cap. 2.
Whosoever denies Children newly borne to be baptized, or say etc. that they
contract nothing of Original sin from Adam, which may be cleansed with the
lauer of regeneration etc. Anathema. And the like is taught in sundry other
Conc. Constantinense Sess. 12. F^orent. Decret. Eugenij Papae. Conc. Lateran. 4
Oecum. cap. 1.
Counsels. And agreably Bellar. de Bapt. l. 1. c. 4. etc. Rhem. Test. in Joan.
3.5.
all Catholics now believe, the necessity of Baptism to be so great, as that
Children dying without it cannot be saved, nor others of years of Discretion
without it, or the desire thereof.

Points Disputable.
Some S. Tho. in q. 5. de malo ar. 1. 2. 3. and he, and others in 2. Sens.
Did. 33.
writers teach, that infants dying without Baptism are damned with Eternal
death, but yet so punished with the want of the fight of God, as that they
suffer no pain internal, nor external. Pet. Lomb. in 2. l. Sent. Did. 33.
Others think, they have pain internal through the want of eternal
happiness. Greg. Ariminens. in 2. Sent. Did 33. q. 2. Driedo in 1. l de gra.
and lib. arb. tract. 2. c. 2.
Others more severe, think they are tormented with Poena damni, and Poena
sensus, that is, with internal pain for want of Beatitude, and external with
fire and other punishments.

Some Hugo de S. Victore l. 2. de Sacram. par. 6. c. 2. Magister. l. 4. Sent.
Did. 3.
think, that the Invocation of one Divine person, especially of Christ to be
sufficient for Baptism. But others See many Schoolmen in 4. Did. 5.
teach, that in that case Baptism is to be reiterated, either absolutely, or
conditionally. And this is more probable. But none of these are defined by the
Church.

Protestant Untruths.
All the Godly (says In Antidoto Conc. Trid. Sess. 7 Can. 13.
Calvin) complain, or at least groan that in Baptism Chrisme, w^xe, taste of
salt, finally spittle to be more esteemed, then the lauer of water, wherein the
who^e perfection of Baptism consists: But this is so untrue, that all
Catholics believe Baptism with water without these to suffice to
Justification, and that these are only holy Ceremonies, not any thing
essential: and that water is essentially necessary.

Melancthon affirms S. Austine to say, In Apol. art. 2.
Sin it remitted in Baptism, not that it is not, but that it is not imputed.
Here he plainly confesses sin to be, that is, to remain, although it be not
imputed. And this opinion so pleased later writers that it is recited also in
the Decrees. And the same is avouched also by Luther, Assert. Art. 2.
But it pleases Heretics to be liars and corrupters, for S. Austines own
words truly set down are these, L 1 de Nupt and concup. c. 25.
If it be demanded, how this Concupiscence remains in the regenerate, in whom
there is made remission of all sins? It is answered, the Concupiscence of the
flesh to be forgiven in Baptism, not that it is not, but that it is not
imputed to sin. And as for the Decrees, there is not any one Gratianus Did.
4. de Consecrat. Can. Per Baptismum.
which affirms sin, but only Concupiscence to remain after Baptism. Hence
also appears Rogers gross untruth, affirming that according to our
Catholic Doctrine, Def. of the Art. art. 27. pa. 168.
Baptism serves to the putting away of Original sin only. But it seems M.
Rogers little knows what is Catholic Doctrine.

Protestant Doctrine.
Luther teaches, that Captiuit. Babyl. c. de Bap.
Baptism justifies none, nor profitteth any but faith upon the word of
Promise, to which Baptism is added, this does justify, and fulfill that which
Baptism signifies. Zwinglius affirms that, Ad vrbanum Rhegium. de Orig. Pec.
By the lauer of Baptism no sin at all is taken away. And Swingl. l. de vera
and fall. relig. Bucerus in c. 3. Math. Calvin in Antidot. Council. Trid. ad
Sess. 6. c. 5. and Inst. l. 4. c 16. 24.. 25.
he, and others think, that it is not necessary to the remission of Original
sin, or eternal Salvation. Yea they think, the Children of the faithful
without Baptism to be Saints, and members of the Church, and though they so
dye, yet to be saved.

In so much, tha^ Zwinglius thinks Baptism to be only De Baptis. tom. 2.
fol. 96.
a Ceremony, winch the Church may omit, and duly take away. And according to
Whitaker, Controu. 4. q. 7. c. 2. p. 716.
It is lawful to abstain from Baptism, so that in this fact there be no
Contempt and scandal. And he plainly avouches, that, Controu. 1. q 6. c. 8.
p. 376. and cont. Dur. fol. 8. sect. 73.
The salvation of Infants does not depend of the Sacraments. They also teach,
that there is no diff^rence between the Baptism of John, and the Baptism of
Christ. Whitaker says, Ad rat. 8. Camp. p. 40.
It was the same Ceremony, the same doctrine, the same Grace. Beza L. quaest.
and resp. p. 344. Calu. in Luc. 3.3.
I say, that indeed it is the same, and one Baptism ministered first by John,
afterward by the Commandment of Christ. Wherefore according to Prot. Baptism
is not necessary to salvation, but may be omitted, or taken away, so that it be
without Contempt or scandal.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
The Pelagians were condemned by S. Austine, Haer. 88. and cont. Julian. Pelag.
l. 6. c. 7.
for teaching that children might have life everlasting, although they were not
baptized. This Error is so certain in them, that it is confessed, and reported
by the Centuristes Cent. 5. Col. 585.
and Loc. com fol. 88.
Sarcerius.

D. Synop. p. 415. Fulk ag. Purgat. p. 35.
Willet, Fulke, and many other Prot. denying remission of sins and Grace to
be given by Baptism, are condemned in the Manichees, by the acknowledgment of
D. Whitaker, saying of himself and some other Prot. Cont. Dur. l. 10. p. 883.
Sarcer. loc. com. To. 1. de bap. fol. 232.
We believe and teach that sins are forgiven, and Grace conferred in
Baptism, which the Manichees were accustomed to deny.

S. Epiphanius Haer. 28.
condemns Cerinthus, for teaching that a man may be saved without Baptism:
which Error wa^ also maintained b^ Prateolus verb. Mahomites.
Mahomet.

The denial of Exorcisme and Exufflation used by Catholics in Baptism, and
rejected by Prot. was condemned by S. Austine De Nupt. and Concup. l. 2. c. 29.
etc. 17. and cant. Iul. Pe^ig. l. 6 c. 2.
in Julian the Pelagian. Julian (says he) reprocheth the most ancient
Tradition of the Church, whereby children are Exorcized, and breathed upon. And
M. Parker alleges Nazianzen Against Symbolyzing. Part. 1. sec 13. p. 152.
and Part. 2. sect. 9. p. 132.
reporting that, Julian laughed at the sufflations of Baptism. And yet all
Prot. are content to laugh with him, and therefore must be content to be
censured with him.

Protestants Errors.
Beza teaches that, Ep. sua Theologica 2. Thomae Tilio.
If water be wanting and the Baptism of any one cannot, or ought not with
Ed^fication to be differred, that then in any other liquour he may Baptize, as
duly as in water. Luther In Colloquiis Symposiacis c. 17.
being asked whether water being wanting, it was lawful to baptize in milk or
beer, answered first, that it was to be referred to Gods Judgment: but
afterward he added, that whatsoever might be called by the name of Bathe, that
was fit for Baptism. Now, no man doubts, but that there may be bathes of
wine, milk or beer. Polanus teaches that, In Syllog these. part. 2. p. 556.
The external and sensible matter of Baptism is water, or that wanting, other
like liquour. And the same is taught by sundry other Hunnius in disput. 45. p.
273. Vorstius in Antibel. p. 367.
Protestants.

Luther thinks that, De Capt. Babyl. Tom. 2. fol. 75.
In what manner soever Baptism be given, so that it be not given in the name
of man, but in the name of the Lord, it does truly save: Yea I do not doubt, if
any one shall receive it in the name of the Lord, although the wicked Minister
do not give it in the name of the Lord, him to be truly Baptized in the name of
the Lord.

I am not Ignorant (says Tom. 2. ad struthionem. fol. 312. and de Bap. fol.
66. 67.
Zwinglius) the Apostles not to have taken these words (In the name of the
Father etc.) for such, as without which Baptism could not consist. And sundry
other Prot. Calu. de vera Eccles. reform. p 325. Vorstius in Antibel. p. 366.
Pol^nus in Disp. private. disp. 30.
do teach, that the form of Baptism, with Invocation of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, is not necessary or essential.

Luther L. de Captiuit. Babyl c. de Bap. and l. cont. Cochlaeum and and l. ad
Waldenses.
taught, that Infants Baptized had actual faith.

Luther, L. de Captiuit. Babyl. c. de Bap. Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 15.. 3. 4.
Calvin, and other Prot. defend that sins committed after Baptism, are
forgiven by the memory and faith of the Baptism formerly received. Whereof
Perkins says, Tom. 1. in serie causarum. c. 33. Col. 77. Zanchius in Confess
c. 15. col. 517.
In Baptism once ministered remiss^on is given not only of sins past but also
of present and to be, through the whole life.

They likewis^ ^^ach, that Children are borne Christians before they be
Bapt^zed; so Zwinglius, Tom. 4. in. 1. Cor. 12. p. 477.
Children of Christians are within the Church and the body of Christ, even
before they be bapt^zed. Calvin, In Act. 8.37.
I say the Children of the Godly are borne the sons of the Church, and from
the womb are reputed amongst the members of Christ. De reform. Eccles. p. 347.
They belonged to the body of Christ before they were brought to light, and
acccording to Perkins, Tom. 2. in Gal. 2.15. Col. 83.
The ch^ldren of the faithful are borne holy. But Zwinglius teaches the same
concerning the Children of Infidels, Tom. 2. de Bap. fol. 91.
I leave to the Judgment of the Omnipotent and just God, Children who are
borne of Parents not believing although I can find no cause of Damnation in
them: De ratione fidei. fol. 540.
We ras^^y condem^e Children borne of Christian parents, yea the Children also
of Gentiles. And the same is taught by See Vorstius in Antibel. p. 542.
Hemingius in Enchyr. class. 3. p. 322.
other Protestants.

By this we see what poor esteem Prot. make of Baptism, neither thinking
water to be necessary, nor the words In the name of the Father etc. and that
Children, may be saved without it, being borne Christians, even the Children of
Infidels.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures that Baptism is necessary to Salvation.
CHrist our Savior avouches, that Io. 3.5.
Unless a man be borne again of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. Which words as S. Austine De pec. mer. and rem. l. 1. c. 30.
demonstrateth, do not only signify a Precept, but even the means necessary
for the entering into the Kingdom of God. This place taken literally,
conuinceth the necessity of Baptism: wherefore Prot. to euade the force
thereof, are enforced to deny the said words to be so much as understood of
Baptism: and so here by water, they understand only the holy Ghost, and the
sense they make this, unless a man be borne again of water, that is, of the
holy Ghost, who cleanses like water etc. To which end they also allege these
words, Mat. 11.
He shall baptize you in the holy Ghost and fire, where by fire, they
understand the said holy Ghost, as he has a similitude with fire. Thus
Bullinger and Calvin expound this place, and therefore says Calvin, Inst. l.
4. c. 16. sect. 25.
Falluntur etc. They are deceived, who think mention to be made of Baptism in
this place, because they hear the name of water; with whom agrees Bullinger,
In his Decades. p. 1408. init.
Fulke, Ag. Rh. Test. in lo. 3. sect. 2. f. 143.
Peter Martyr, Loc. com. Anglic.
and D. Whitaker, Cont. Duraeum. l. 8. p. 676.
all of them affirming, under the name of water, nothing else but the holy
Ghost to be signified.

But this reply is most absurd, and false. First, in that the forsaid place of
S. John is understood of Baptism by the Ancient Fathers, as will appear in
the Section following. Secondly, by the like liberty of Exposition, we may
utterly deny the Sacrament of Baptism at all, understanding always by the
name of water, the holy Ghost, and in like sort it is most easy to pervert all
the mysteries of out faith. Thirdly, the comparing it with that other Example
of Baptizing in the holy Ghost and fire is impertinent, for that the word,
Fire, may be taken properly, and is, without further question, most rightly
understood of the External fire, which visibly descended upon the Apostles,
upon the Act. 2, 1.
day of Pentecost, in cloven Act. 2.3.
tongues, as it were of fire: and so our Savior foretelling the same, calls
it expressly their Baptism, which is so plain a performance of S. John
Baptistes prediction of our Savior his Baptizing of his Apostles with fire,
that the very English Bible Edit. an. 1576. and the marginall Citations in Luc.
3.16. where is cited Act. 2.5. and Act. 15.16. See also in the same Bible the
Marg. citat. in Act 15.16. where also is cited Mat. 3.11. and Luc. 3.16.
in the Marginall citations, over against both the said places, does make a
mutual relation, reference, and citation of the one place unto the other. In
so much as M. Hooker In his Eccl. Pol. sect. 50. p. 131.
and other Protestant writers affirm, that the Baptism of fire meant by John,
was really performed by the forsaid visible descent of fire.

Fourthly, though the word (fire) should not here signify material fire, as is
aforesaid, but only the holy Ghost; yet it is impertinent to prove, that the
word Water, in the other place should be so likewise understood: for whereas the
exposition does ordinarily follow the thing which is to be expounded, the word
fire being placed next after the, holy Ghost, might thereby the rather be taken
improperly as to explain the word, Holy Ghost, in signifying the purifying
effects thereof: but in the other place the word, Water, is placed before the,
holy Ghost, and therefore cannot be taken as a like Exposition thereof, nor
without great absurdity be said to be an Explication, of the clensing effects
thereof. Fifthly, whereas Nicodemus did misunderstand our Saviors first words of
(a man to be borne again) and asked our Savior, Io. 3.4.
how it could be? our Savior thereupon answering (with the forsaid words now
in question) thereby to explain to Nicodemus his own firster saying, and to
satisfy his demand, must needs be thought to use the word Water, properly, for
otherwise he had rather obscured, then explained his former saying, and not so
much have satisfied, as increased Nicodemus his doubt. Sixthly, for as much as
the Scripture elsewhere calls Baptism, the Tit. 3.5.
lauer of Regeneration, or being borne again, that therefore the other forsaid
mention of our being regenerate, or borne again of water, being in terms so
answerable thereto, is in like manner to be understood of Baptism. Seauenthly,
this point is so evident, that as well the Ancient Fathers (even by the
Protestants own Hook. Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 59. p. 130.
Confession) as also the Luth. in his Ser. Englished. p. 145. Conf. of Sax in
the Harm. page 405. of Bohem. page 339. Hofman de poena l. 3. c. 4. p. 229. Now
else Catech. p. 141. Bilson in his true diff^r. part. 4. p. 168. Aret. loc. 4. p
136, Da^aeus Isag Christ. l. 5. de Sacra. c. 39.
Prot. learned writers, do take the word, Water, properly, and so do understand
the said place of Baptism: in so much as M. Hooker Hook. vbi sup sect. 59 p.
13^.
mentioning the foresaid conference, or objection of the holy Ghost, and Hook.
ibid.
Fire, answers the same notwithstanding, that the forsaid saying of our being
borne again of Water, is according to the general consent of Antiquity, to be
understood of external Baptism, and terms it a Ibid. page 130. in fine.
Critical conceit to expound is otherwise. Danaeus, to avoid the force Tom.
2. Controu. de Bap c. 4. p. 323.
of these words, expounds them thus, Unless a man be borne again of water,
and the holy Ghost, the particle Et, and, is to be taken for the disjunctive,
Aut, or, (says he.) But this is merely his own fiction, and by the like
liberty a man may affirm or deny any thing from the Scripture: Yea according
to this Exposition, it were sufficient to be baptized with water without the
holy Ghost, which is most impious to affirm.

Others yet reply; that although the forsaid place be understood of Baptism,
yet it proves no further the necessity thereof, then does this like saying, Io.
6. 53.
Unless you eat the flesh of the son of man etc. you shall not have life in
you; which eating does not include any such necessity. But the Comparison is
unlike, for our Savior says not so generally, unless one eat the flesh, as
he said before. Io. 3.5.
Unless one be borne again of water, for he says but, unless you eat the
flesh, directing so his speeches to those that were of discretion and capable
of his Commandments, and so this place pertayneth not to Infants; whereas the
other firster saying, being general, and without limitation, must needs
compr^hend them. Again the words objected, whether they be taken in the
Protestant sense of eating Christ's flesh, to wit, the effects and merit of
his Passion by faith, or in our sense of receiving really Christ's flesh in the
Sacrament, contains after either sense, a necessity in it, and therefore make
against Prot. that v^ge them: for being taken in their sense, they imply a
necessity, in that they think faith absolutely needful. And being taken in our
sense, they do the like: for both Prot. and Catholics think, that such as be
of Discretion, whom only these words concern, are under pain of sin, bound
to receive the Sacrament, and cannot be excused from this necessity, but only
when in straites of time, when the Sacrament cannot be had, the parties own
effectual desire, which is in wanting in Infants, is in Gods mercy accepted,
instead thereof: As also in the like case, the same supplieth the place of
Baptism, and the performance of all other like Commandementes.

The Scriptures also ascribe remission of sins, and Salvation to Baptism,
Mar. 16.^6.
He that belieueth, and is baptized, shall be saved: Act. 2.38.
Do penance and be every one of you baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for
remission of your sins: Act. 22.17.
rise up and be baptized, and wash away thy sins inuocating his name: Tit.
3.5.
be has saved us by the lauer of regeneration; and sundry Ephesians. 5.26. 1. Pet
3.21.
other such like: which textes are so plain for the necessity of Baptism to
remission of sins that Zwinglius instead of all other answer, most wickedly
writes thus: Tom. 2. de pec. orig. fol. 122.
How foolish would he seem, who for the words (of Scripture) should contend
that we are washed from sins by the water of Baptism? But if it be
foolishnes to believe Articles of faith, because the Scriptures words are
plain for them; I do not know wherein the wisdom of a Protestant will consist,
who usually denies all other proof, but only Scripture.

But it will be worth the laughing to hear Zwinglius expound the forsaid places,
Tom. 1. Ep. ad Lindouerum. fol. 204.
Thou (says he) see here, 1. Pet. 3. Baptism saves us. First, Baptism is
to be taken for faith. And, Tom 2. fol. 201. l. de Relig. cap de Bap.
He knew that they were by Apo^lo baptized, that is, taught. Again, L. de Bap.
fol. 68.
It is to be noted, the word, Baptizing, in these words of Paul, Act. 16. to
be taken for doctrine. And In subsidio Ibid. fol. 254.
Baptism, 1. Pet. 3. is taken for Christ when he says, we are saved by
Baptism. And, To. 2. l. de Bap. fol. 73.
They have learned often of us, by, Water, in this place (Io. 3.) ought to be
understood the knowledge of Christ, and the comfort of faith: So that in none
of these places must be understood by Baptism, the Sacrament, but either
faith, teaching, doctrine, Christ, or what you will, so that it be not the
Sacrament of Baptism.

But the best refuge that Protestants have against clear textes, is to corrupt
them. And so because these words of S. Paul, Tit. 3.5.
According to his mercy he has saved us by the lauer of Regeneration etc. do
prove that Baptism does concur to the working of our Salvation; the
Geneuians do take away these words, He has saved us, and have placed them in
the verse precedent, where they do not so clearly make against them. This is
their surest way of answering, by chopping, changing, adding, taking away, as
their need shall require.

Lastly the necessity of Baptism is proved by overthrowing the Protestants
contrary ground, who therefore think Baptism not to be necessary, because
according to them, the Children of believing Parents are borne free, though
not from Original sin it self, yet from the guilt thereof, it being not
imputed unto them. But this to be false, it appears first, in that Jacob and
Esau were both the sons of holy Isaac, and yet God loved Romans 9.11.13.
Jacob and hated Esau, before they had done any good or evil. Secondly the
places of S. Paul for Original sin are general, viz. Romans 5.12.
in which all have sinned: 1. Cor. 15.22.
As in Adam all dye, so also in Christ all shallbe made alive. Neither can it
be said, that those places are to be understood of the vice of nature, not of
the guilt, for then none should have had the same guilt of sin. Neither can
it be said, the sons of the faithful to contract Original sin, but
forthwith the sin to be forgiven them before they be borne: for if they be
therefore sanctified, because they are the sons of the faithful, then in the
same moment they begin to be holy, wherein they begin to be the sons of the
faithful: but in the same moment wherein they begin to have being, they
begin to be the sons of the faithful; therefore they never have Original
sin, which is against the Prot. themselves, who admit the same, and yet do
not observe that they contradict themselves. Lastly the said ground is against
a general Tertul. in Apolog. etc 17 Hieron. Ep. 7 ad Laetam.
principle given ^y the Ancient Fathers, which is, that we are not borne, but
made Christians, which were most false, if without Baptism we were Christians,
by being only borne of Christian Parents.

SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the sacred Scriptures in proof
of the necessity of Baptism.
NOw that the foresaid cleerest texts of Scripture are answerably expounded by
the Fathers; we find, that Clemens Romanus makes this demand, Epist. 4.
But you say peradventure; what does the Baptism of water confer to the
worship of God? first of all truly, it is accomplished, because it pleased God:
secondly, because the frailty of our former Nativity, which is made yours by
man is cut of to one regenerated of water, and borne of God, and so at last you
may come to Salvation, otherwise it is impossible. For so the true Prophet has
testified unto us, with the Sacrament, saying; verily I say unto you, unless one
be borne again of living water, he shall not inter into the Kingdom of
heaven: And therefore hasten you to it, for there is in these waters a certain
mercy of him, which mercy was carried upon the waters from the beginning: and
he (viz. the holy Ghost) does acknowledge them who are baptized under the
Appellation or name of the threefold Sacrament (^e means the mystery of the
B. Trinity) and does deliver them from torments to come offering the Souls
consecrated by Baptism, as a certain gift unto God: fly therefore to these
waters, for they are they alone, which can quench the rage of the fire to come,
unto which waters whosoever lingreth to come, it is evident that the Idol of
Infidelity does yet remain in him and that he is forbidden of that Idol to
hasten to the waters which confer Salvation. Here according to S. Clements
exposition of the Scriptures, Baptism gives Salvation, delivers from Hell,
and that it is Infidelity not to hasten to that Sacrament.

With S. Clement agrees S. Justinius Martyr, writing thus, Orat. 2. ad Antonium.
Afterward the Catechumens are brought thither by us where water is, and are
regenerated with that manner of Regeneration, wherwithall we our selves are
regenerated: for in the name of the Father of all things, and of our Savior
Jesus Christ, and of the holy spirit, they are then washed in water, for Christ
himself has said: Unless you be regenerated of water and the spirit, you shall
not enter into the kingdom of heaven etc. since that being Ignorant of our
former birth by a certain necessity etc. and brought up in evil manners and
naughty Custom, that we may not remain Children of necessity and Ignorance,
but sons of Election and knowledge, and may obtain in water remission of our
sins formerly committed etc. Thus from the words of Christ Justinius proves
Baptism to obtain remission of sins.

Consonant unto these forsaid Fathers S. Gregory teaches most plainly that, L.
4. Moral. c. 3.
whosoever is not loosed by the water of regeneration, he is held bound with
the bands of the first guilt, for what the water of Baptism is able to do with
us, this did in former ages, either sole faith, for little ones, or the virtue
of Sacrifice for great ones or the mystery of Circumcision for those who were
of the Stock of Abraham, for that every one is conceived with the sin of his
first Father, the Prophet witnesses saying, Ps. 50.7.
Behold I am conceived in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me,
and that he whom the water of Salvation does not wash, does not escape the
punishment, truth witnesses of himself, saying, unless a man be borne again
of water and the holy Ghost, he shall not have life eternal. To conclude this
place of S. John is understood of the Sacrament of Baptism by many others of
the learned Justin. Mart. Apol. 2. Tert. l. de Bap. Cyp. l. 3. ad Quir. c.
25. Amb. l. 3. de SS. c. 11. Hieron in c. 6. Ezech. Basil. Nazianzen. Nyssen.
in Ser. de Bap. Orig. Chrysostom. Aug. Cyr. Bed. Theophil. Enthymius and a^ij in
hunc loc.
Fathers.

S. Austine demands, Aug. de pec. mor. and rem. l. 1. c. 23. 24.
what Christian may abide when it is said, that one may be saved, though he be
not borne again in Christ, which Christ would have to be done by Baptism etc.
Wherefore the Apostle says etc. He has saved us by the lauer of Regeneration.

S. Austine is so clear for Cont. 2. Ep. Pelag. l. 3. c. 3.
Baptism, washing away all sins, altogether, of deeds, words, thoughts, or
original, as that the Cent 5. c. 4. Col. 368. Chemn. Exa. part. 2. p. 38.
Centurists and Chemnitius do allege sundry his sayings, and confess his
Judgment in our behalf. But Zwinglius confesses of the Fathers in general
thus: Tom. 2. de Bap fol. 76.
Here most of the Doctors understanding by the name of water, that material
and external water of Baptism, have attributed unto it, much more then was
fit, whereupon it afterward came to pass, that they ascribed the clensing of
souls to the Element of water. Of which also says Luther, Tom. 2. Wittem.
fol. 229.
I excuse the Fathers who driven either by temptation or necessity, stoutly
denied sin to remain after Baptism.

And as concerning the necessity of Baptism, S. Austine avouches that, De
anima and eius origin l. 3. c. 9. and de verb. Ap. Ser. 14.
If thou will be a Catholic, do not believe, do not say, do not teach, that
Children dying before they be baptized, can come to forgiveness of Original
sins, Ep. 28. ad Hieron.
And whosoever says, that Children shall be revived in Christ, who dye without
participation of this Sacrament, this man truly contradicts the Apostolical
preaching, Ib p. 516.
and condemns the whole Church etc. And, though, De pec. mor. and remiss. l.
1. c. 16.
it may be truly said, that children dying without Baptism are to be, in
damnatione omnium leuissima, in the easyest state of damnation: yet he
deceives, and is deceived, who teaches that they are not to be damned. These
sayings are so unanswerable in S. Austine, that Mr. Cartwright confesses, that
In Whiteg. def. p. 521.
Austine was of mind, that children could not be saved without Baptism: for
which he impudently charge him, (15) with absurdity. And for the same
Doctrine is S. Austine reproved by other Bulling. in his Decad. in Engl. Dec.
5. ser. 8. Muscul. loc. com. c. de Bap. Dilingae. de Symb. p. 45. Centurist.
cent. 5. c. 4. col. 379.
Protestants. Yea the Fathers were so resolute heerin, that as Calvin
testifyeth Inst. l. 4. c. 15 sect. 20.
It was usual many ages since, even almost from the beginning of the Church,
that in danger of death lay people might Baptize, if the minister was not
present in due time. Cartwrigh also acknowledges that, In VVhiteg. Def. p. 522.
Austine does seem to allow of the Baptism of a lay man, in time of
necessity. And Whitguift confesses that, Ib. p. 523.
Austine does say, that a lay man may baptize in time of necessity. And D.
Bilson avouches tha^, Confer at Hampton Court. p. 18.
The denying of private persons in case of necessity to baptize, were to cross
all Antiquity. Thus clearly teach the Fathers the necessity of Baptism,
confirming the same from the sacred Scriptures.

SECT. IV. That Protest^nt writers do teach and defend the Catholic Doctrine
of the necessity of Baptism.
M Hookers belief is, that, Eccl. pol. l, 5. p. 154.
Original sin is purged by Baptism; and M. B^lson acknowledges, In his
true difference part. 4. p. 368.
that, Original sin is not remitted but by Baptism. Now if Original sin
be purged by Baptism, according to M. Hooker, if Original sin be not
remitted but by Baptism in the Judgment of M. Bilson, the Consequence
according to them is inevitable, that Baptism must be necessary unto
Salvation. And this they prove also by those former places of Scripture, which
have been urged. Chemnitius teaches that, Exam. part. 2. p 53. and 17.
God does not save us without means, but by the lauer of Regeneration. Tit. 3.
And, Ibid. p. 53.
Baptism is a mean or Instrument by which is made the Communication of
Christ's benefits, for by Baptism Christ cleanses and sanctifyeth. Ephesians. 5. Yea
says he, Ibid p. 20,
The testimonies of Scriptures are manifest, which as they cannot be denied, so
they ought not to be shifted of. Tit. 3. Baptism is called the lauer of
Regeneration. Ephesians. 5. Clensing her with the lauer of water in the word. Io. 3.
Unless one be borne again of water etc. Act. 22. Be baptized and wash away thy
sins. 1. Pet. 3. speaking of water etc. he says, Baptism being of the like
form (to wit of the Ark of Noah) saves us. And hence he concludes, These
being most manifest testimonies, which expressly ascribe Efficacy to
Sacraments, and declare what that (efficacy) is, are not to be perverted by
tropes (as other Prot. use to do) from their simple and native signification,
which the proper signification of the words gives, and so the Ancient
(Fathers) have understood these testimonies simply, as they sound. So absolute
is Chemnitius, proving our Catholic Doctrine, from so many testimonies of
Scripture, and the answerable Interpretation thereof made by the Fathers.

Vrbanus Regius affirms Iu. 1. part. operum in Catechismo minori. f. 105.
That the Scripture, and the authority of the Ancient Church constrain him to
believe, that little children dying unbaptized are damned.

Mr. Hofman (commended by See the prefaces of Melancthon and Bren. set before
the beginning of Hofmans book.
Melancthon and Brentius) says expressly, In Com. de poenit. l. 3 c. 4. de Bap.
Infant f 229.
Ideo certum est etc. It is therefore right and Godly that the sins of
Infants be washed away by the Churches Ministry by Baptism; seeing that
without this lauer of Regeneration, they cannot be saved. D. Bilson also
concludes from S. Austine and the Scriptures In his true diff. part. 4. p. 368.
that if children be excluded from Baptism, they be likewise excluded from the
Kingdom of God, and that without Baptism they cannot be saved, by reason
Original sin is not remitted, but in Baptism. This Doctrine of the necessity
of Baptism for the Salvation of children is further taught by Loc. com. de
Bap. f. 238. 239. 240.
Erasmus Sarcerius, and by the Confession of See the Harm. of Conf. p. 403. 404.
Auspurge, where it is taught, that, Baptism is necessary to Salvation as a
Ceremony ordained by Christ. Also that by Baptism the grace of God is offered.
And that young Infants are to be baptized, and that they being by Baptism
commended unto God, are received into Gods favor, and are made the sons of God
as Christ witnesses, speaking of little children in the Church, Mat. 18. It is
not the will of your heavenly father, that any of these little ones should
perish. They condemn the Anabaptists, which allow not the Baptism of Infants,
and hold that infants are saved, though they dye without Baptism, and be not
within the Church of God. The Prot. also of Saxony confess the same in these
words Harm. of Confess. p. 40^.
That the holy Ghost is given in Baptism, Paul affirms in his Epistle to
Titus, saying. By the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy
Ghost. And in John it is said, Except a man be borne again of water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Therefore we teach that
Baptism is necessary etc.

To these I might add sundry See Chemn. par. 2. Exam. p. 52. and in his
Treatise ag. Osorius. p 421. See also Iac. Andraeas cited by Beza ad Act. Col.
Monsp. resp. part. 2. p. 126. See also Conradus Sclusselb. in Catal. haer. l.
13 and ep. Ded. page 24.
Protestant writers: in so much as Peter Martyr does therefore reprehend
certain of his Brethren, because says he, In collect. annexis loc com.
Anglic. and there see Pet. Mart. his Ep. to the Engl. Church.
They despair that children can have Salvation without Baptism: And in
reguard of this necessity many See Schusselb. in Theol. Calu l. 1. f. 68. Iac
Andraeas in Ep. Col. Montisb. p. 46. 58. Hook. Eccl pol. l. 5. sect 61. 62.
Hofman Comment. de poen. l. 2 c. 13. La^bert. in Act. mon. p. 541. Woodman Ib.
p. 1590. Sarc. loc. com. tom. 1. de Bap. f. 229. 230. 234. See Whitg. in his
Def, p 518. 522, 523. Zwing, ib, p. 518. Bucer. ib. p. 521.
Prot. do allow and defend Baptism ministered by lay persons, men or women in
case of necessity.

Concerning the necessity of the matter and form in Baptism, M. Antonius de
Dominis teaches that, L. 5. de Repub. c. 5. n. 4.
In the very material Baptism, there are, by divine express institution,
both things and words, because Christ commanded that they should baptize, In
the name of the Father etc. Reinectius reproves Beza, saying, Tom 1. Armat. c.
18. p. 201.
Beza vainly thinks, water wanting, that it is lawful to take other liquour:
but this he confuteth by many places of Scripture. Yea Beza himself avouches
thus for the contrary, L. quaest. and resp. vol. 3. Theol. p. 348.
If any one should not baptize in the Trinity, or for water (especially
knowing) should use I know not what other thing, altogether different, this
were not truly the Baptism instituted by Christ. Pareus therefore affirms
very well, that, In Col. Theol. 9. Disp. 22.
No Christian truly doubts, but that the Baptism of water ought to be
administered according to Christ's Institution, only in the name of the Father
etc. So confessed it is even by Prot. that Baptism is necessary to Salvation.

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture, against the Necessity of Baptism,
answered.
THe first objection is urged upon occasion of those words of Almighty God to
Abraham, Genesis 17.7.
I am thy God and of thy seed: which words, say Prot. were spoken to Abraham
and to his Posterity, which we by Christ our Savior are. Answ. Literally this
concerns a Promise of peculiar Protection and worldly felicity: and though it
may be understood in a mystical sense, of the spiritual promises of
remission of sins, and of eternal life, and the same to belong to us: yet
this is not by carnal generation of our Parents, but by our spiritual
regeneration; for S. Rom 4.12.13. and 9.7.8. Galat. 3.7.8.9.29.
Paul plainly teaches, those to be the sons of Abraham, not which are the
sons of the flesh, but which are the Sons of faith: that is, who imitate
the faith of Abraham, which children do not, but when they are baptized, for to
them to be Aug. l. 1. de pec. merit. and remiss. c. 27.
baptized, is to believe. Besides, by Carnal generation we cannot be made the
sons of Abraham, seeing our Parents descended not from Abraham: but because
Christ was truly the son of Abraham, then also begin we to be the sons of
Abraham, when we begin to be the sons or Brothers of Christ, which
undoubtedly we are not but by Baptism, we being also therefore called
Christians. Besides these words no more seclude the necessity of Baptism,
then of Repentance, or good life, they making no difference herin, but
extending to all alike. Again these words, notwithstanding the Commandment
for Infantes to be Circumcised, did strictly bynd, after the Covenant made with
Abraham.

A second Objection is from those words, 1. Cor. 7.14.
The man, an Infidel is sanctified by the faithful woman, and the woman an
Infidel is sanctified by the faithful husband, otherwise your children should
be unclean, but now they are holy: therefore Children borne of faithful
Parents, are holy without Baptism. Answ. In the like sense that the Children
here are said to be sanctified and holy, is the Infidel husband or wife said
to be sanctified, and yet none belieueth that the Infidel husband by only
living with the faithful wife, without conversion to God and Baptism can be
saved: and therefore this place does no more prove the Salvation of Children
without Baptism, though borne of a believing mother, then it does prove the
salvation of the unbelieving husband without Baptism, who by this Text is no
less sanctified then are the Children. And therefore howsoever this place may
import the legal Sanctity of the Marriage, and that the Children are borne
holy, that is to say in wedlock, yet to the salvation of Children without
Baptism, this is a very forlorn Argument, answered and rejected long since by
S. Augustine, who expounds this place thus, L. 3. de pec. merit. and remiss.
c. 12.
It is to be held without doubting, whatsoever that sanctification was, it was
not of power to make Christians, and to remit sins, unless they were made
faithful by Ecclesiastical Institution and Sacraments: neither little ones,
how just or holy soever their Parents were, of whom they were borne, can be
absolved from the guilt of Original sin unless they shall be baptized in
Christ etc. Whereupon it comes to pass, that none can be regenerated in their
parents not being borne, but if he shallbe borne, it is meet he be regenerated,
because unless one be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. And M.
Bilson also conform to S. Augustine, repeating the forsaid text of 1. Cor.
7.14. thereupon writes thus, In his true difference betwixt Christian
subjection etc. part. 4. p. 368.
This is spoken not of the secret election of the faithful, which is neither
common to all, nor known to any but of their Christian Profession. And a little
after says, If then Infantes be partakers of the same vocation and holiness
with their Parents, and without Baptism etc. neither we nor our Children can
be holy: surely the Children of Saints, if they be excluded from Baptism, are
as unholy and unclean, as the Children of Infidels. The like answer is given
by Marbachius, saying, Disp. Theol. de Baptismatis Sacramento. sect. 111. 112.
It does nothing help them, that which they dispute from the place of Paul,
that the Children of Christians do take sanctification from their Parents etc.
For the word Sanctity in that place, does not signify spiritual sanctity,
whereof the Controversy is, but legal, or civil. The true sense of the place
objected then is, that whereas Children are said to be holy, the meaning is,
Ambr. S. Thom. and Anselmus in hunc locum.
that they are borne lawful, and not base, which some might well have doubted
of, by reason of disparity of Religion in their Parents, or else because they
were Tertul. l. 2. ad vxor. Hieron. l. 1. in Iouin. and in Ep. 153. ad Paulin.
l. 2. Aug. l. 2. de pec. mer. and remiss c. 26. and l. 3. c. 12. et. l. 1. de
sermon. Dom. in mo^te c. 27.
consecrated to God by the faithful parent, being baptized and brought up in
the fear of God; which they had not been, if the Infidel had departed from
the faithful, for then the Children would have followed the Infidel Parent.

A third Objection is, If Baptism were so necessary to Salvation that none
could be saved without it, then many Children should perish without their
fault, which seems neither to stand with Gods Justice, or Mercy. I answer,
the Aug. l, 2. de bono perseuerantiae. c. 11. Prosper l. 2. de vocat. Gentium
c. 8.
Judgments of God are just, true, and righteous, yet secret, inscrutable, and a
bottemles depth: when he permits man^ Children to perish, even then are his
Judgments most just, for though it is without their fault, that they are not
baptized, yet without their fault they do not perish seeing, being tainted, and
found guilty of Original sin, they justly perish.

Fourthly it is urged, that Baptism is to us, as Circumcision was to the
Jews; but it is not likely, that all such as dyed before the eight day
uncircumcised, perished, therefore Baptism is not so necessary unto salvation,
as that all perish without it. Answer. The whole Argument stands upon
uncertainties, for Philo l. de Circumcisione. Josephus. l. 1. Antiquit. c. 12.
Justin. Martyr Dialogo cum Tryphone Iudaeo. ant med. Iren. l. 4. c. 30. etc.
28. 29. 32. 34. Epiph haer. 8. Chrysostom. ho. 27. in Genesis Tertul. l. cont.
Iudaeos. c 1. Cypr. l. 1. cont. Iud c. 8. and l. 3. Ep. 8. Ambros. Ep. 72.
Hieron in c. 3. ad Gal. Aug. in ps. 73.
many hold that Circumcision was not ordained, as a remedy against sin,
neither do we know whether the Infantes of the Jews had any other remedy, or
what it was. And lastly it it not a like reason of Christians and them, for now
there is a certain Remedy determined by Christ, which is most common and easy,
what then it was, we certainly know not, seeing the Scripture says nothing.

Lastly it is objected, and further excepted, that according to our Catholic
Doctrine many are saved without Baptism, namely such as have the vow, wish,
and desire of Baptism, which could not be, if Baptism were so absolutely
necessary to salvation, as Catholics teach. Answer. This Exception of such
so dying with a vow, or desire of Baptism, is grounded upon Scriptures, as
where it is said, Ezech. 18.21.
If the impious shall do penance from all sins etc. living, he shall live,
and not dye. And the reason which Deuines give for this is, Voluntas reputatur
pro facto, The parties effectual desire of Baptism, when in straites of time
it cannot be had, supplyeth the place of Baptism: as also the like desire
supplieth the performance of all other like Commandementes, though otherwise
never so necessary. And this Exception is also warranted by the holy Ambr. in
Orat de obitu Valentini ini Iunioris. Aug. l. 4. de Bap. c. 12. Bern. Ep 77.
Fathers. But the former Exception is impertinent, and cannot be applied to the
Case of Infantes, because all such Effectual desire in them to have Baptism,
is wanting, and the forsaid holy Fathers do therefore justly upon warrant of
Scripture, for want of Baptism, together with the desire thereof, which
Infantes cannot have, exclude them from heaven: Excepting always the Case of
Martyrdom, by which Infantes are saved, See Mat. 2.16. Mat. 10.39. Mar. 8.35.
Aug. de Ciu. Dei. l 13. c. 7.
though not baptized: for so S. Cyprian affirms, Praefat. lib. de Exhort.
Martirij.
Martyrdom to be a Baptism, and more excellent then Baptism of water. In ps.
118. sermon. 3.
S. Ambrose distinguishes three Baptismes, one of water, another of blood, and
another of Purgatory in another life. And Hier. in c. 4. ad Ephesians. Aug. l. 3. de
Ciu. Dei. c. 7. Cyril. Catech. 3. Nazianz. Orat. in sanctae Lumina.
many other Fathers do distinguish the Baptism of water, from the Baptism of
Martyrdom.

CHAP. XXI. The true state of the Question, concerning the B. Sacrament of
Christ's Body, and Blood.
Whether in the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, under the forms of Bread
and wine, there be truly, and really, and not only in sign, figure, or
representation, contained the very Body and Blood of Christ our Savior, which
was borne of the B. Virgin Mary, and afterward crucified. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
WHEREAS Protestants pretend to believe two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords
Supper; in the precedent Chapter I have showed how little esteem they have of
Baptism, as thinking it not necessary to remission of sins or salvation, and
that it may be omitted, or taken away: I intend in this to show their like, and
far greater contempt of the most divine and heavenly Sacrament of the
Eucharist, making it in substance to be nothing else but bread and wine, and
only in figure, sign, and representation the Body and Blood of Christ. But in
Condemnation of this Heresy, the Catholic Church Council. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 2.
teaches, and does openly and simply profess, that in the sacred holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist, after the Consecration of Bread and wine, Our Lord
Jesus Christ, true God and Man, is truly, really, and substantially under the
form of these sensile things contained: for neither are these things repugnant
amongst themselves, that our Savior himself may always sit at the right hand
of his Father in heaven, according to the natural manner of being, and that
notwithstanding, his substance may be present with us, in many other places
Sacramentally, in that manner of being, which although we can scarcely express
with words, yet by our thoughts illuminated by faith, we may apprehend it
possible to God, and constantly we ought to believe it: for so all our Elders,
so many as were in the true Church of Christ, who have disputed of this holy
Sacrament, have most openly professed, that our Redeemer has instituted this
most admirable Sacrament in his last Supper, when after the Benediction of
Bread and Wine, he witnessed in evident and plain words, that he did give
them his own very Body and Blood: which words rehearsed by the holy
Evangelists, and afterward repeated by S. Paul, seeing they bear that
proper and most plain signification, according to which they were understood
of the Fathers, it is verily a most heinous wickedness, that those words should
be wrested by certain contentious and naughty men, to feigned and Imaginary
tropes, whereby the truth of the flesh and Blood of Christ is denied, against
the universal sense of the Church, which as a Pillar and foundation of truth,
has detested these false fictions, as Sathanicall, devised by wicked men,
acknowledging ever with a grateful and myndfull heart, this most excellent
benefit of Christ.

And therefore, Can. 1.
If any shall deny, that the Body and the Blood, together with the soul and
Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore whole Christ, to be really and
substantially contained in the Sacrament of the most holy Euchariste, but shall
say, that he is only in it, as in a sign, or figure, or virtually, Anathema.
Can. 2.
And, If any shall affirm in the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, the
substance of bread and wine to remain together with the Body and Blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ: and shall deny that admirable and singular Conversion of the
whole substance of Bread into the Body, and whole substance of wine into the
Blood, the forms of Bread and wine only remaining, which conversion the
Catholic Church does most fitly call Transubstantiation, Anathema. Can. 4.
If any shall affirm, that Consecration being made, there is not the Body and
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ in the admirable Sacrament of the Eucharist, but
only in the use, whilst it is received, but not before or after: And that in
the Hosts or particles consecrated, which are reserved, or remain after
Communion, not to remain the true Body of our Lord, Anathema. And, Can. 6.
If any shall affirm, that in the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, Christ the
only begotten son of God, is not to be adored with the worship of Latria (or
divine) even external etc. Anathema Can. 8.
Or that Christ exhibited in the Eucharist, is only eaten spiritually, and not
also Sacramentally and really, let him be accursed. Can. 9.
If any shall deny, that all and every Christian of either sex, when they shall
come to the years of Discretion, to be bound yearly, at least at Easter to
communicate, according to the Precept of our holy Mother the Church, Anathema.
Can. 11.
And if any shall say. Only faith to be preparation sufficient to receive the
Sacrament of the most holy Eucharist, Anathema. And least so great a Sacrament
should be received unworthily, and so to death, and condemnation, the holy
Synod does ordain and declare, that Sacramental Confession is necessary to be
first used by them if they have means of a Ghostly Father, whom the
Conscience of Mortal sins does burden, although they think themselves never
so contrite. So clearly and particularly is our Catholic Doctrine declared,
and Decreed by this sacred Synod.

In the first and most famous Council of Nice, it is thus determined, Conc.
Nicen. 1. l. 3. Decret. de diuina Mensa.
Let us not be a little attent to the Bread and Cup proposed on the divine
Table, but eleuating our minds by faith, let us understand that Lamb of God
which takes away the sins of the world, to be placed upon that sacred Table,
to be sacrificed by Priests vnbloudily, and that we receiving his precious
Body and Blood, to believe these to be the signs of our Resurrection. This
Canon is acknowledged for true, by the Prot. writers, Apud Iac. Andraeam. in
Confut. Disp. Grinaei. de coena Domini. p. 88. Oecolamp. l. Epist. Oecol. and
Zwingl. p. 663. 667. Bills. true differ. part. 4. page 553.
Grinaeus, Oecolampadius, and D. Bilson.

In the second Council of Nice, it is said Act. 6. Tom. 3. eiusdem fine.
of Christ our Savior, that having taken Bread giving thanks, he brake, and
gave to his Disciples, and said, Take ye, and eat ye. This is my body etc.
And he said not, take ye, and ear ye the image of my Body etc. Our Lord, or
his Apostles, or Fathers, have in no place called an Image (or figure) the
unbloody Sacrifice, which is offered by the Priest, but the very Body it self,
and the Blood it self etc. Before they are sanctified they are called types,
but after Sanctification, they are called, are, and believed, properly the Body
and Blood of Christ.

In the Council of Laterane it is defined that, Conc. Lateran. 4. Oecum. sub.
Innoc. 3. Cap. 1.
There is one universal Church of the faithful, out of which none at all is
saved: In which Christ Jesus is both the Priest, and the Sacrifice, whose Body
and Blood in the Sacrament of the Altar, are truly contained under the forms
of Bread and wine; the Bread by divine power transubstantiated into the Body,
and the wine into the Blood, that for the perfecting the Mystery of Unity, we
might receive of his, what he has received of ours. No man can make this
Sacrament, but a Priest, who is duly ordered according to the keys of the
Church, which Christ Jesus granted to the Apostles, and to their Successors.
And the like is taught by the other General Councels of Sess. 13.
Constance, and Decret. Eugen. P P.
Florence.

Answerably to these holy Counsels, all Bellar. de Euchar. l. 1. c. 2. etc.
and l. 3. c. 18. etc. Rhem. Test. in Mat. 26.26. and in Luc. 22.19.
Catholics now believe, that in this blessed Sacrament, the Body and Blood of
Christ are not only figuratively, spiritually, or by faith, but truly and
really, the Substance of Bread and wine being wholly changed or
transubstantiated into that very Body and Blood of our Lord, which he took
from the ever B. Virgin Mary, and which was afterward offered upon the Cross.

Points Disputable.
All teaching, that the Accidents of Bread and Wine remain without subject:
yet concerning the manner, Scotus in 4. Did. 22. q. 1.
Some think, that nothing of new is added unto them, but that God only does
preserve them without subject. Caietanus.
Others, that God gives them a certain substantial manner of being, by
virtue whereof they subsist by themselves.

Some Paludan. 4. Did 18. q. 3. Capreol. eadem Did q. 1. Council. ^. Pet. a
Soto in Instit. Sacerd. lect. 2. de Euchar.
think, that the form consists in all those words ( enim excepted) which
according to the rite of the Latin Church, are pronounced at Consecration. But
Alex. Halen. 4 p. q. 33. mem. 4. art. 3. Bonau. in 4, Did. Art. 1. q 2. Alanus
de Euchar. c. 19.
others more truly teach, that the words Noui, and Eterni, and the rest that
follow, are not of the Essence of the form.

Some See Bellar. de Euchar l. 3. cap. 28. and D. Morton in his Mass of
Christ. l. 3 c. 3. Sect 1.
teach that, Transubstantiation is made by Production; Others by adduction;
Others by Conservation: but none of these are determined by any Council.

Protestant Untruths.
Luther L. de Captiuit. Babyl. c. 1. quod est de Euchar.
affirms, that S. Thomas was Author of that opinion which all Catholics
teach, to wit, that in the Sacrament of the Altar, there is not the substance
of Bread and Wine, but only accidents. But to omit more Ancient testimonies,
this Doctrine was defyned in the Council of C. 1.
Lateran, before S. Thomas was borne.

Calvin Instit. l. 4. c 17.. 43.
teaches, that Pope Alexander was the first that used unleavened bread: but is
clear that Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22.
Christ used it before upon the first day of the Azimes.

Luther L. de Captiuit. Babyl. c. 1. Pet. Mart. l. 1. cont. Gardin. object.
228. Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 17. 15.
and others avouch, that Transubstantiation was first invented by the Council
of Laterane. But to omit all other proofs; the Centuristes affirm, that S.
Chrysostom Cent. 5. Col. 517.
seems to teach Transubstantiation: and that, Eusebius Emissenus Cent. 4. c.
10. Col. 985. 295.
did speak unprofitably of Transubstantiation: and that S. Ambrose Cent. 4. c.
4 col. 295.
did not write well of Transubstantiation. Vrsinus confesses, that,
Commonefactio cuiusdam Theol. de S. Coena etc. p. 211. 218.
In Cyprian are many sayings which seem to affirm Transubstantiation. And
Adamus Francisci, will not deny, but that Margarita Theol. pa. 256.
Transubstantiation entered early into the Church.

Peter Martyr and Chemnitius report, that the Grecians do reject
Transubstantiation: but this is proved clearly false, by the Censura
Orientalium ad August. confess. c. 10.
Censure of the Grecians, given upon the Confession of Augusta.

Chemnitius accuses Andradius to teach, that Transubstantiation is one of
those points which cannot be proved from Scriptures: but he corrupts him, his
words are these: Lib. de coena Dom.
Although Transubstantiation could not be proved by manifest Scriptures, as you
think etc. But Chemnitius to serve his own purpose, can easily change a
Conditional speech into an absolute.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Prot. Church decrees, that, Article 28.
Transubstantiation, or the change of the substance of Bread and wine in the
supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by holy writ: but it is repugnant to the
plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many Superstitions. The body of Christ is given, taken, and
eaten in the supper only after an heavenly and spiritual manner. And the mean
whereby the Body of Christ is received and eaten in the supper, is faith. The
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, was not by Christ's ordinance reserved, carried
about, lifted up, or worshipped.

Zwinglius teaches that, Tom. 2. de coena fol. 289.
Bread is only a figure whereby that Body is signified, whereof we ought to be
myndfull. Ibid. fol. 291.
The drink was indeed nothing else then wine. Cartwright, Apud Martyr. in
disp. Oxon. p 134.
The Eucharist is only a sign. Perkins Tom. de coena. Col. 858.
Bread is called the body, when as it is only a sign, or seal of the Body.

All know that Luther and his followers do believe the Real Presence, but
their Error was, that with the Body and the Blood, there was also Bread and
Wine in the Sacrament.

Calvin condemns in this both Luther and Zwinglius, and inuenteth another way
of his own, which I shall examine and confute, in the next Section at large.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
The first Heretics (as S. Austin In psalm. 54.
terms them) that impugned the Real Presence, were the Capharnaites, saying,
Io. 6.52.
How can this man give us his flesh to eat? But they were reproved by Christ
himself in these words Io. 6.53.
Amen, Amen I say unto you, unless you eat the flesh etc. And whereas not only
the Capharnaites, but some of Christ his Disciples doubted also hereof, as
appears by these words, Io. 6.60.
Many therefore of his Disciples bearing it said, This saying is hard, and who
can hear it? These also are reprehended by Christ Io. 6.61.64.
for murmuring and Incredulity. Now, that Judas was one of these Disciples who
did not beliue the Real Presence, S. Chrysostom Ho. 46. in Joan.
gathers out of these words: Io 6.64.
But there be certain of you that believe not: for Jesus knew from the
beginning who they were that did not believe, and who he was that would betray
him: and S. Austin affirms, Tract. 27. in ^oan.
Judas to have stayed then with Christ, not to understand and believe, but to
deceive. Yea S. Austine In Enar Ps. ^4. aduer. 22. and ps. 55. aduer. 7.
affirms Judas to have been the chiefest suborner and mantainer of this
heresy, and that this was the first Heresy against Christ's doctrine: and he
commends Peter for his humble obedience, infirmely believing Christ's words
to be true, which he did not yet understand. So that as the Jews used Judas
for their Captain and chief helper in the betraying and apprehending of
Christ; so the Sacramentaries use the same Judas, as their ringleader and
Master for their taking Christ from the Sacrament, and Altar. And as Judas
was tempted by the Devil to betray Christ, for Luc. 22.3.
Satan entered into Judas etc. so also by the Devil was he made a Sacramentary:
for as I have showed before, that he was one of those Disciples that did not
believe the Real Presence, for which he was reproved by Christ, so presently
after this Christ says of him Io. 6.70.
Have not I chosen you the 12. and of you one is a Devil? So that the first
Impugner of the Real Presence, was the Devil, after him the Capharnaits and
Judas, from whom our modern Prot. are lineally descended: and so I may say of
them, Io. 8.44.
You are of your Father the Devil, and the desires of your Father you will do.

But this their Pedigree is so certain, that Luther In Colloquio Wittemberg.
avouches Martin Bucer to have been taught by a Malignant Spirit to deny the
Body and Blood of Christ to be truly and really in the Eucharist. Zwinglius
confesses of himself, that he had, L. de subsidio Eucharistiae.
An admonisher black or white, he remembers not; who taught him by Scriptures
to make the Eucharist only a figure: but Schlusselburg determines, that it
Theol. Calvin. l. 2. fol. 76.
was the black spirit of darkness, from whom the Zwinglians took this their
Sacramentary opinion. And diverse Baronius Anno 1208. Nicolaus Serrarius in
opusculo de M. Calvin.
authors do record of Berengarius, that he being in the Chamber of Bishop
Fulbertus, formerly his Master, who was at the point of death, the Bishop
commanded, that he should be cast out of the chamber, because he saw the Devil
upon his shoulder, beckoning with his hand to others to follow him, and thereby
foresaw Gulielmus Malmesburie^sis l. 3. de Rebus gestis, Anglorum.
that by the Instigation of the Devil, he would prove a great deprauer of
Catholic doctrine, S. Cyrill L. 4. Pentab. apud Turrianum. l. 1. de Can.
Apost. c. 11.
of Alexandria gathers from S. Paul, (38) that some of the Corinthians did
not believe this mystery: for the Apostle against this their Error, with great
vehemence of words repeateth the Institution of Christ: You meeting (says he)
together, I hear there are divisions amongst you, and in part I believe, for
there must be Heresies etc. for seeing (says S. Cyrill) some of them did not
know the Tradition and force of the Mystery, 1. Cor. 10. and 11.
they made in the Churches, dainty bankets, and pleasing suppers. So that, they
had not the Celebration of that mystery, for a thing so sacred as the Body and
Blood of Christ, but almost for a vulgar, or peradventure mystical supper, in
regard of some signification: which Error, with some other Abuses that the
Apostle might confute, he repeateth the Institution even as he had received it
from our Lord etc. And he infers, that they did receive unworthily, because
they did not discern the Body of our Lord, as not being so in their opinion.
S. Austine writing of this point, affirms, that Ep. 118. c. 3.
The Apostle says, therefore they received unworthily, who did not discern
this from other meat: (veneratione singulariter debita) with honor singularly
due: for forthwith when he had said, He eats and drinks Judgment to
himself, he annexed, that he might say, not discerning the Body of our Lord:
which sufficiently appears in all that place of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, if it be diligently marked. Here S. Austine insinuates (as also
S. Cyrill did observe) that to this belongs that which the Apostle said in
the precedent Chapter; The Bread which we break is it not the Communication of
the Body of Christ? and the Cup of Benediction which we bless, is it not the
Communication of the Blood of Christ? as though some there were amongst the
Corinthians which did deny this, although there were others that did believe it.

And though some understand this place not of heresy, or Error in Doctrine, but
of Error in Manners, in that some of the Corinthians did bancket in the Church,
and did not admit the poor to the holy Communion: yet in that it is said
heerof that, There must be Heresies, which sundry Ancien^ Cyprian l. de unit.
Eccl. and l. 3. ad Quirinum. c. 93. August. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 16. c. 2. and l.
1. de Genesis cont. Manich c. 1. and in Ps. 67.
Fathers do expound of heresies in Doctrine, I do not see but it must be
understood both of heresies in doctrine, and abuses in Manners. The
Sacramentaries then have for their Ancient Patrones, certain of the
Corinthians, but they have also S. Paul reproving and condemning them.

The Saturnians did not believe the Divine Word to have taken unto him man's
body, but only a certain figure or Image thereof; whereupon they thought
consequently, that in the Eucharist there was only a figure of a man's body; S.
Ignatius says of them, Ep ad Smyrn ap. Theodoret. Dial. 3. And see Iren. l 5.
cap. 2.
They do not admit Eucharistes and Oblations, because they do not confess the
Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered for
our sins. These words are acknowledged and cyted for the words of Saint
Ignatius, by Exam. part. 1. p. 94. Hamelman. de Tradit. Apost. Col. 746. Simon
Method. aliquot. loc. part. 3. fol. 172.
Chemnitius, Hamelmanus, Simon Pauli, and other Protestants.

To omit many others, for the same Error was condemned Berengarius by the
Council of Vercelles, under Leo the nynth. And after by the Council of Tours,
under Victor the second: where being present, he promised by Oath never to
defend that Heresy again. But afterward falling into a relapse, a general
Council was assembled at Rome, by Nicolas the second, in which he was again
Decret. de Consecrat. Did. 2. Can. Ego Berengarius.
condemned, and himself, in the presence of the Pope and the whole Council,
burned his own Books, and renewed his Oath, and See Thom. Waldens. tom. 2. de
Sacram. c. 43.
form of faith which he had formerly made. But for all this he relapsed
again, and thereupon was called to a Guliel. Malmesb. de gestis Angl. l. 3.
Council assembled at Rome under Gregory the 7. where he was again condemned:
and there, it is said, he seriously repented, and afterward dyed well and
piously.

The Antropomorphites denied the Eucharists reservation, but they were
condemned by S. Ad Calosyrium.
Cyrill, as is also confessed and disliked by Pet. Cont. Gardin. col. 838. Fulk
against Heskins p. 8^. Oecolamp. l. 3. Ep. ^89.
Martyr and other Protestants. From these condemned Heretics our Modern
Sectaries have learned to deny the Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in
the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar.

Protestants Errors.
Beza broacheth this strange Doctrine, Epist. Theol. 2. Tho. Tilio circa med.
Where bread or wine are either not used, or not great plenty thereof at
somtymes, must no supper of the Lord be celebated? Yea it will be duly
cel^brated, if that which either by common use, or, by reason of the time,
supplyeth the place of Bread and Wine, be used instead of Bread and wine. So
that a Pye-crust, and a bowl of Beer or milk, will be matter sufficient for a
Protestant Communion. And in further proof of this his Error, he produces
Ep. 25. Tilenus in syntag. c. 61. p. 719. Bucanus Instit. Theol. loc. 48. p.
661. Hunnius Disp. 47. p. 282.
at large the same Doctrine of Calvin, and other Protestants.

Luther speaking of the Preparation to be made before receiving, says, In
Concione de digna Praeparatione ad Sacram. Euch.
The best disposition is none but that wherewith thou art worst disposed: and
on the contrary, then thou art worst disposed, when thou art best disposed. And
heerupon he persuadeth not to repent before Communion, but after. And In
Concione de Confessione and Euchar.
thinks that man most fit for Communion, who is fallen into fowlest crimes. I
will ( Tom. 3. in psalm. 5 fol. 172.
says he) speak rashly and freely, There are not any nearer to God in this
life, nor more grateful and loving sons, then these haters and blasphemers
of God. Yea he judges that De Captiuit. Babyl. c. de Euchar.
only those may receive worthily, who have sorrowful, afflicted, troubled,
confounded, and erroneous Consciences. And in the same place he contradicts
himself, for he affirms that, only says is the peace of Conscience, only
Infidelity the trouble of Conscience. And yet he exhorts Christians to come
to receive with undoubted faith. But if they only receive worthily who have
troubled Consciences, and only Infidelity is the trouble of the Conscience,
then they only receive worthily who want faith, for those that have faith, have
peace, not trouble of Conscience, and therefore according to him, it is
unlawful to exhort Communicants to come with faith. He In Tra. de Communione
populi.
further teaches, that none ought to be admitted to Communion, but those who
acknowledge they come, because they are troubled with the Conscience of mortal
sin, whereby he excommunicateth the B. Virgin, and all the Apostles after
their receiving of the holy Ghost, for doubtless they could not say, that they
were troubled with the Conscience of mortal sin.

Concerning Gods Omnipotency, a Protestant writes thus, Resp. ad calum.
Nebulonis. p. 730.
Calvin in sundry places sharply refuteth the fiction of Gods absolute power,
which the Sophisters do publish in their Schools. And yet others of his
Brethten teach, that so potent is Faith, that Sadeel. de Sacram. manduc. p.
300. Whitak. l. 2. Cont. Dur. sect. 8.
it can make things future, absent, and most remote, to be present. Whereupon
Andreas infers very well, that, Apud Schluss. l. 4. Theol. Calu. art. 9. p.
344.
they attribute more power to faith, then to Christ.

Some Prot. think the real Presence to be impossible: for Beza writes, that,
God In Colloq. Montisb. p. 27.
cannot make that the Body of Christ at one, and the same time essentially be
present in many places. Sadeel says, Resp. ad Art. 14. abiurat. p. 433. 414.
We have showed, that the Body of Christ cannot indeed be present in many
places at the same time, and that the Omnipotency of God cannot do this. The
like is taught by sundry Prot. Tilenus in syntag. p. 75. Beza l. quaest vol. 1.
p. 658. Danaeus apud Andr. in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 170.
concerning Christ his Body penetrating the doors, the stone of the Sepulcher
etc. and his body not occupying place.

Zwinglius professes his damnable Infidelity concerning the B. Sacrament, in
these words: Apud Schlusselb. l. 4 Theol. Calvin art. q. p. 344. And see the
like in Resp. ad Billicanum. Tom. 2. fol. 263.
Although God with all his Blessed Angels should descend from heaven, and
should swear, in the supper of the Lord the Body and Blood of Christ to be
given to all that receive it; yet I neither could, nor would believe it, unless
with my eyes and hands I should see and feel Christ present. So that according
to this accursed Heretic, we must in this Sacred Mystery, rather believe our
eyes, and hands (being but fallible senses) then the Oaths of God, and all his
blessed Angels, being of Infallible verity: what argument then can be expected
to be so powerful, as to withdraw an heretic from his obstinate blindness?

SETC. II. Wherein is enquired what Protestants understand by receiving
spiritually, or by faith.
I Desire to premonish the Reader of the strange proceedings, shameful
contrarieties, and desperate shifts which Prot. use in their disputes with us,
in this weightiest Controversy of the B. Sacrament. The Question of the Real
Presence being but propounded, they presently tell us, that Christ never
intended or willed it. And when to declare his will, we allege his word, they
make then new question of his power, under pretense, that it is impossible. And
when in reply thereto, we prove to them directly and confessedly that it is not
impossible, then returning by a Circle to their former Evasion, they answer,
that the Question is not of his power, but only of his will. And when we urge
the words of Christ himself, their answers sometimes are, that the words are
plain for Transubstantiation: but at other times they maintain, that they are
full of figures and obscurities. The figure they will sometimes have in the
Pronowne, This; but this being by us cleared, then they remove it to the verb.
Is: and when this also is convinced of falsehood, then they fly to the
Substantive Body: and when this will not serve their turn, then they look out
figures in the Cup, in the Blood, and in the Testament: but these being
clearly discovered to be false or impertinent, they finally charge the
Evangelist S. Luke with Solecisme, inco^ngruity, and error in the Text. That
these and sundry other such like Rounds the dance, and betake themselves to
such base and unworthy shifts, I refer my self to this subsequent Discourse.

Protestants understand by receiving spiritually or by Faith, that they do
receive in their Communion, not only the Sacrament of Christ's Body, neither
only the grace and spiritual effects of his Body, but besides all this, they
affirm, that they do really and truly receive the very Body and Blood of
Christ after a spiritual and wonderful manner. To this end M. Whitaker says,
Whitak. cont. Duraeum. l. 2. p. 169 circ. med
whereas you do affirm that I do slip from the Body of Christ, to the force
and benefit of his Body, it is very idle; as though I separated the force and
benefit from the Body it self, or when I denied that we excluded the Communion
of his Body, I did not openly affirm the Body it self to be received. The
Confession of Belgia does likewise teach, that, See the Harm. of Confess p. 431.
that which is eaten is the very natural Body of Christ etc. And, that this
Supper is the Spiritual Table, in which we are partakers as well of Christ
himself, as of the merits of his death and Passion. In like manner Amandus
Polanus says, Syllog. Thesium de coena Domini. p. 304. et. l. 1. partit.
Theol. p. 279.
Not only Bread and wine, neither only the Deity, neither only the virtue and
efficacy of Christ is present in the Supper; but the very Body and the very
Blood of Christ, are in very deed present in the Sacred Supper. And the like
presence as well of his Body, as of the efficacy thereof, is yet further
plainly affirmed by sundry other Protestant See Smith ser. 1. p. 103 and the
French Confess in the Harm. p. 426. and Obseru. annexed thereto. sect. 14.
writers; in so much as D. Whitaker declaring what is in question between them
and us, says expressly, Whitak. cont. Duraeum. p. 169.
We make not question of the Presence of Christ's Body, but only we dispute of
the manner of his Presence, which you affirm to be Carnal and Capharnaicall;
and we heavenly, spiritual, and divine. And howsoever Zwinglius,
Oecolampadius, Peter In Ep. annexed to his com. places in Engl. Ep. 25. p. 107.
Martyr, and some Oecolamp. l. de verbis Domini. Hoc est corpus meum.
Lauatherus Hist. Sacram. p. 4. Art. Sermon. 3. de coen^.
others stand adverse to this Protestanticall Real Presence of Christ's Body,
yet as M. Hooker confesses, the former opinions of Zwinglius and Oecolampadius
notwithstanding, Hook. Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 67. p. 174.
All sides at length are grown to a general agreement, concerning the Real
participation of Christ: whereupon he concludes, that, Ib. p. 177.
the Eucharist is not a figure only, and that the efficacy of Christ's Body and
Blood, is not all we receive in this Sacrament; affirming further, that these
mysteries do make us partakers both of the Grace of that Body, and besides also
do impart to us, even in true and real, though mystical manner, the very
person of our Lord himself. This may seem much to come from Protestants.

But yet they further confess, that although they say, they receive Christ's
Body spiritually, yet they say, they use not the word (Spiritual) meaning
thereby to seclude their former real receiving of Christ's natural Body: for
the Deuines of Geneua do explayne the matter, Vide Apol. mo^est. ad acta
Conuentus 15. Theologorum Torgae nuper habit. p. 49.
Spiritualis perceptionis nomine etc. by the name of spiritual receiving, we
do not mean that, whereby is received the only spiritual Grace of Christ. And
the French Confession answerable to this says, Sect. 14.
We do utterly deny, that instead of the very Body and Blood of Christ, we do
place only his merits, or his spiritual force and operation, affirming further
that they, though spiritually and mystically, do yet notwithstanding truly
participate Christ himself. And here Prot. give a twofold reason for the
using of the word, spiritual: first, for that their spirit or faith, and not
their bodily mouth receives Christ's Body in the Sacrament. Secondly, for that
according to M. Fulke, In his Defense of the Engl. Translat. ag. Gregory Mart.
p. 455.
The Creatures or elements, being blessed and consecrated, are by the working
of Gods spirit, changed into the Body and Blood of Christ, after a Divine and
spiritual manner unto the worthy receyuers, the cooperation of his Omnipotent
power making it his Body and Blood unto us.

Now for the manner of their Real spiritual Presence of Christ's Body, they
explain it in diverse of their Confessions, as first in that of France thus, In
Harm. Confess. p. 426.
We say it is done spiritually, not that we may counterfayt an Imagination etc.
but rather because this mystery of our union with Christ is so high a thing,
that it surmonteth all our senses, yea and the whole Order of nature; and
because it being divine and heavenly, cannot be perceived, nor apprehended but
by faith. Secondly, the Confession of Belgia says, In Harm. Confess. p 431.
The manner it self being far above the reach of our Capacity, cannot be
comprehended of any etc. Neither shall we err in saying that, that which is
eaten is the very natural body of Christ etc. Furthermore this supper brings
to pass, that we in it are partakers as well of himself, as of the merits of
his death and Passion.

Thirdly, the Brethren of Geneua express the manner, by way of demand saying;
In Apol. modest. ad acta conuentus. p. 47. ante med.
But how can it be brought to pass, that we living upon Earth, should
participate the flesh of Christ now placed in Heaven, and though it be
spiritually, yet it is truly and by faith etc. This I say surmounteth our
Capacity, and is that Mystery which the Apostle pronounces to be Great. Lastly
John Calvin concludes for all, saying. Inst. l. 4. c. 17. sect. 7.
Nothing remains but that I should burst out into admiration of that Mystery,
to which neither mind in thinking, nor tongue in speaking can be equal. And
the like is affirmed by diverse others.

But this Doctrine and manner of the Prot. Real Presence thus explicated, is
chargeable with manifest and manifold Contradictions: as first, that Christ's
natural body should be truly and really present, and yet not bodily but
spiritually: if they understand, spiritually, as excluding the Real substance
and being of a thing corporal, this seems a manifest contradiction, for as
the true substance of Christ's spirit cannot be corporally or bodily present to
us, because it is no body but a spirit, so neither can Christ's body be present
to us spiritually, (except we understand the word spiritually as the 1. Cor.
15.44.
Apostle does, which would be impertinent to the matter in hand) because it is
no spirit but a Body: and therefore whether the Protestants affirm Christ's
Body to be truly present in, or with the Sacrament, or truly present to their
faith, yet the true presence thereof, must needs be bodily, and not spiritually
in the above mentioned sense, unless they will change his Body into a spirit.

Secondly, what more contradictory, then Christ's body must be contained in
heaven, only, and that until the day of Judgment, and yet also the same Body
is truly present to them upon Earth? here also they are forced to fly to their
imagined Evasion, crying out, that this also is wonderful and above all course
of nature. Calvin says hereof, Instit. l. 4. c. 17. sect, 10.
Although it may seem incredible, that in so great a distance of places as of
heaven and Earth, the flesh of Christ should penetrate to us, that it may be
meat for us, we must yet remember, how much above all our senses, the secret
power of the holy Ghost can show it self. And after: Ib. Calu. sect. 31.
If any man (says he) ask me the manner hereof, I shall not be ashamed to
confess, that it is a secret more high then can be comprehended by wit, or
declared by words. With Calvin agrees B^za, in like manner saying hereof, De
re Sacram.
Nevertheless we confess the Mystery of God to be incomprehensible, whereby it
comes to pass, that, that which is in heaven and no where else, should be
truly communicated to us who are now upon Earth and no where else. And the
Deuines of Geneua conclude, and say of this very point, Apol. modest. ad acta
conuentus. p. 23. and 47. antemed.
that it surmounteth all understanding even of the Angels themselves, and
shows sufficiently that we do by this our doctrine, attribute more to the
Omnipotency of Christ, then they who think the true Communicating of Christ to
be abolished unless the Real Presence and receiving of Christ's Body with the
mouth, be established.

But now the Instrument or means of this great wonder D. Whitaker teaches to
be our L. 2. cont. Duraeum. p. 170.
Faith, the same being the ground of things Heb 11.2.
hoped for, and an argument of things not seen: our faith therefore it is, and
the holy Ghost, which as Calvin says, does Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 17. sect. 10.
vere vuire quae locis disiuncta sunt, truly unite together things which are
severed in places: and which as Bastingius teaches, In Catechismo Anglic. fol.
150.
makes things absen^ to be present.

Whence also it comes to pass, that Christ's Body, though not then in being,
was yet, according to their Doctrine, truly present to the Fathers of the Old
Testament, and that not in efficacy only, but in very deed, and as truly as he
is now present to them in the Sacrament. In so much that in reguard of the
Fathers said Real eating of Christ's Body, before it was borne or in being
(which manducation or eating is but an accident thereunto) they doubt not to
defend, that, non ens, may have accidentia, nothing may have accidents: Yea D.
Whitaker goes so far in this kind of the Fathers eating Christ's true and
Real Body by faith, that he delivers this Doctrine following for current, L.
1. cont Dur. p. 170.
But the Body of Christ was not yet borne or framed? that hinders nothing
whereby faith may not enjoy the Body of Christ not yet created etc. For if
Christ were slain, from the beginning of the word, then was he present to the
Ancient Fathers by his Body and Death. And in the fame place following, he
adds, Ib p. 171.
That all the Fathers did eat^ the same spiritual meat, and drink the same
spiritual drink, to wit, Christ: but if they did eat and drink Christ, it
follows, that Christ was present unto them. And to the like effect speaks
Grinaeus a Caluinist, in answering a Lutheran Opponent in a public
Disputation, his words are these, See Acta Disp. de S. Coena in Academ.
Heidelburg. habit. Anno 1584. fol. 73.
Therefore there is a double craving of the thing in question; first, that in
the Old Testament the Body of Christ was not at all present, and elsewhere,
Grinaeus further answers, saying, Ib. p. 74.
Now because you do confess, that the Fathers of the Old Testament, by a
lively faith were made partakers of the efficacy of the Body of Christ, you
must also necessarily confess this thing further, that the same Fathers also
were made partakers of the Body of Christ. And yet again returning upon the
Opponent, he says, Ib. vt scip. p. 74.
Either you must deny that the Fathers of the old Testament were made partakers
of the Efficacy of Christ's body, or you must grant that they no less then we,
were made partakers of Christ's Body etc. Neither do I dis^^sse, or debate the
point touching Christ's benefits alone, as if the Fathers were made partakers
of sole grace of the goods and benefits of Christ, neither speak I of the
efficacy. And yet again in another place, he concludes saying, Fol. 76. loc.
sup. citato.
I plainly say, that the substance or Essence of the Body and Blood of Christ,
was truly, and in very deed received, but no otherwise then spiritually, of
either Fathers, as well of those who lived in the Old Testament, as of those who
have been in the New, and yet are. And for last vpshut of all, whereas the
Lutheran Opponent against this Caluinisticall conceit of the Old Fathers Real
eating of Christ's Body, had rightly urged, Non entis nulla esse accidentia,
that nothing could have no accidents; and therefore Christ's Body having no
Existence, or being at all, could not be eaten at all, (because the eating of
Christ's body, was an accident to his Body) Grinaeus replyeth, Vide ib. f. 73.
and 77 and 78.
Maiorem negamus esse vniuersalem, in qua dicis non entis esse nulla
accidentia: we deny the Mayor to be universal, wherein you say, that nothing
can have no accidents. To such gross absurdities are Protestants driven by
this Imaginary Conceit of receiving only spiritually and by faith. But the
truth is, these Caluinistes, resolving to oppose the Catholic truth, and
affecting to have some Nouelty, different from Lutheranisme and Zwinglianisme,
invented this of receiving the true and real Body of Christ spiritually and by
faith. A mystery so deep, as that they think, neither mind in thinking, nor
tongue in speaking can be equal to express it.

SECT. III. The Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament, is
proved by Testimonies of Scripture taken from the Old Testament.
THe figures of the Old Testament were accounted Col. 2.17. And see S. Hieron.
in c. 1. ad Titum.
shadows of things to come. And so, that the Paschall Lamb was a figure of
the Eucharist is generally Tert 1.4. in Marcion. I^ichius in c. 23 Leuit.
Hieron. in c. 26. Mat. Chrysostom. ho. de prodit. Iudae. Cyp. l. de unit.
Ecclesiae. Aug. l. 2. cont. liter. Petil. c. 37. Leo ser. 7. de Pass Dom. Greg.
hom. 22. in Euang.
taught, and the same may be proved, in that our Savior immediately after the
eating of the Paschall Lamb, instituted the Eucharist, thereby to signify, that
the old Rite was Luc. 22.18.19. Mat. 26.26.
fulfilled in this new Sacrament, and so to be taken away: and that the
Paschall Lamb of the Jews was a thing more excellent then the Eucharist, if
therein be not contained the Body of Christ, is evident, for if they be
considered according to their own natures, a lamb excels bread, and if
they be considered as Sacraments or external signs, the difference betwixt
them manifestly appears; for the flesh of Christ is more perfectly signified
by the flesh of a Lamb, then by bread: and the death of Christ is better
represented by the death of a Lamb, then by breaking of bread: and so also
Christ's innocence, and other properties, are better figured by that chosen
La^be without spot, which in the Law was commanded to be offered up and eaten,
then by bread, which has none of these. S. Austine speaking of this figure
says, One thing is the Pasche, which the Jews celebrated of a sheep, another
that which we receive in the Body and Blood of Christ.

The same may be also proved by the Blood of the Testament, used by Moses, as
God had commanded him, L. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 37.
Exodus 24.8.
And he took the blood, and sprinkled it upon the People, and said, This is
the blood of the Covenant, which our Lord has made with you upon all these
words. And yet further in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Heb. 9.18.
Whereupon neither was the first certes dedicated without blood: for all the
Commandment of the Law being read of Moses to all the people: be taking the
blood of Calves and Goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and Hyssope,
sprinkled the very Book also it self, and all the People saying, This is the
blood of the Testament, which God has commanded unto you. The Tabernacle also,
and all the vessels of the Ministry he in like manner sprinkled with blood,
and all things almost according to the law are cleansed with blood, and without
sheeding of blood there is not remission. Now that this figure was fullfilled
in the Institution of the Eucharist, appears in that our Savior says, Luc.
22.20.
This is the Chalice, the new Testament in my blood, so that at his supper his
Testament was made. Secondly, in that our Savior as it were of purpose, used
also the same words with Moses, saying, Mat. 26.28.
For this is my blood of the new Testament. And thirdly in that our Savior, as
Moses before proposed a Law; so did he, saying, Io. 13.34.
A new Commandment I give unto you, that you love one another: sprinkling as
it were the blood into the breast of the Apostles.

Now, that this Blood of the Old Testament is better then Wine, is easily
proved by the like Argument, whereby we proved a Lamb, to be better then Bread.

In like sort the same may be proved by the Manna which God rayned down to the
Jews in the desert, for that it was a figure of the Eucharist is manifest, by
those words of our Savior, Io. 6.49.50.
Your fathers did eat Manna in the desert, and they dyed. If any man eat of
this bread he shall live for ever. So also S. 1. Cor. 10.1.2.3.
Paul compared the red sea to Baptism, and Manna to the Eucharist. and the
great similitude between them, plainly confirms the same; for Manna was
given in the desert, whilst the Children of Israel having passed the red sea,
went to the land of promise; so the Aug. tract. 12. in Joan.
Eucharist is given in the desert of this life, whilst by Baptism we pass to
our true country, which is life everlasting. Manna had this singular
Prerogative, that though some seemed to gather much, others little, yet all
found the same measure, Exodus 16.18.
and they measured by the measure of a Gomer: neither he that gathered more had
above nor he that provided less, found under: so in the Eucharist, the same
virtue and fruit, is in a little part of the signs, which is in a greater: and
that Manna was a figure of the Eucharist, it is Chrysostom. Cyr. Theophil. and Aug.
in 8. Joan. Ambr. l. 5. de Sacram. c. 1. and de ijs qui initiantur mysterijs c.
8. and 9.
commonly taught by the Ancient Fathers.

Now that Manna was more excellent then our Eucharist, if it contain not the
Body of Christ, is plain, it being made by the hands of Angels, this of the
baker; it coming from heaven, this from the Oven or furnace; i^ tasting
whatsoever the eater desired, according to that of the Book of wisdom, Cap.
16.20.21.
For the which things thou did nourish thy people with the meat of Angels,
and bread prepared thou gave them from heaven without labor, having in it
all delectation, and the sweetness of all taste. For thy substance did show thy
sweetness which thou have toward thy children, and serving every man's will, it
was turned to that every man would: but this of the Eucharist tastes only
Bread. Manna also better represented Christ, then bare figurative bread, it
coming from heaven, having all sweetness, and equal measure being received by
all, though it seemed diverse: And yet our Savior much prefers the
Eucharist before Manna, saying, Your Io. 6.49.50.51.
Fathers did eat Manna in the desert, and they dyed; this is the Bread that
des^endeth from heaven, that if any man eat of it, he dye not. I am the living
bread that came down from heaven: If any man eat of this bread he shall live
for ever: and the bread which I will give is my flesh, for the life of the
world. This pre-eminence given by our Savior in this place unto the Bread, and
calling it his flesh, conuinceth that the same is not bread, as only a figure
of Christ's Body, but even the Body it self, and in that respect far more
excellent then Manna.

Against these Arguments taken from the figures of the Old Testament, Peter In
sua Defens. de Euchar. part. 3. p. 692.
Martyr replyeth, that though the signs and forms of the Sacraments of the
Old and New Testament be different, yet the thing received by both is the same,
to wit, Christ, 1. Cor. 10.3.4.
S. Paul affirming the Hebrews to have eaten the same meat with us. But first
S. Paul does not say, as this lying Martyr forgeth, that the Hebrews did eat
the same meat with us, but only that themselves did eat the same meat. Neither
does he say, that bread or drink of the Hebrews or the thing received in
those Sacraments, to have been Christ, which yet this Martyr affirms with
greatest confidence, for his words are truly these: And they drunk of the
spiritual Rock that followed them, and the Rock was Christ. where he does not
say, that Christ was the water which they did drink, but the Rock from whence
that water flowed; and not that material Rock from whence the water did
visibly flow, but that invisible Rock which did follow the Hebrews, to wit,
Christ's providence and power, which was the efficient cause of that water, and
all other their blessings.

SECT. IV. That the Scriptures of the New Testament, convince our forsaid
Catholic real Presence of Christ's Body, and Blood in the Eucharist.
THe first proof is taken from the Promise of our Savior saying, Io. 6.51.
The bread which I will give is my flesh. And again, Ib. verse. 53.54.55.
Amen, Amen. I say unto you, unless you eat the flesh of the son of Man, and
drink his Blood, you shall not have life in you: he that eats my flesh and
drinks my Blood has life everlasting etc. For my flesh is meat indeed, and
my Blood is drink indeed. In answer to this plain Testimony for the real
Presence, which is so clear, that nothing can be devised to be spoken more
plainly, yet Luth. l. de Capt. Babyl. c. 1. Zwingl. l. de ver. and falls. Relig.
c. de Euch. Chemuit. Exam. part. 2. p. 657. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 17.. 33.
Prot. reply, that these wo^des do not concern the Eucharist, and therefore by
bread, they indeed understand Christ, but not as in the Sacrament, under the
forms of Bread and wine, but as taking upon him our human nature, and we
receiving him by faith. But besides that the Chrysostom. Aug. Cyr. Theoph and alij in
hunc locum. Orig. ho. 7. in Nu. Basil. l. 1. de Bap. c. 3. and in reg. mor. c.
21. Cyril. Hier. Catach. 4. Mystag. Epiph. haer. 55. Theod. hist. l 4. c. 11.
Damasc. l. 4. de fide. c. 14. Cypr. Ser. de Orat. Dom and l. 1. cont. Iudaeos.
c. 21. Hill. l. 8. de Trinit. Ambr. l 6. de Sacram. c. 1. and deijs qui
initiantur mysterijs. c. 8. and l. 4. de fide c. 5. Hier. Ep. ad Hedib. q. 2.
and in. 1. c. ad Ephesians. Aug. Ser. 2. de verb. Domini. Leo. ser. 6. de I^iu^.
Greg. l. 7. Moral. c. 4. Ber. Ser. 2 in Vigil. Natiu. and ser. 1. de Pascha^e.
contrary is taught by many Fathers, the truth hereof is proved first, in that
our Savior spoke of the time to come, when he said, the bread which I will
give is my flesh, whereas that spiritual eating of Christ by faith, is common
to all times, the Fathers of the Old Testament receiving Christ in that sort.
Secondly the similitude betwixt these words of Promise, and those of the
Institution, take eat, this is my body, which is given for you to remission of
sins, where the promise was performed, confirms the same. Thirdly it is
said, The Jews therefore strove amongst themselves, saying, how can this man
give us his flesh to eat, And many therefore of his Disciples hearing it, said,
this saying is hard, and who can hear it? From these places the deduction is,
and very evident, that the Jews and those Disciples thought some new and
strange thing to be promised by Christ, and yet our Savior did not correct
their conceit, but persisted still saying, as it follows in express words,
Io. 6.53.54.55.56.57.58.
Jesus therefore said unto them, Amen, Amen I say unto you, unless you eat the
flesh of the son of Man, and drink his Blood, you shall not have life in
you; he that eats my flesh and drinks my Blood, has life everlasting. And
I will raise him up at the last day; for my flesh, is meat indeed, and my Blood
is drink indeed: he that cateth my flesh and drinks my Blood, abides in me
and I in him; At the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father, and
he that eats shall live by me. This is the bread that came down from heaven
etc. And now these Textes being so plain, who would imagine that our loving
Savior would with such offense, scandal and hurt, yea Apostasy of his
Disciples, whom he loved so dearly, cover with so many dark pretended
Metaphors, a thing so easy, as to believe in Christ, whereas he might have
declared the same almost in a word, by telling only that his meaning was no
more, then that they should eat his Body and drink his Blood spiritually, and
by faith, or eat only the figure of this Body.

Besides our B. Savior had that care that his auditors should understand him,
that always when he speak any thing obscurely in Parables, he was wont to
explicate the same afterward to his Disciples: as Io. 3.3.4.5.
first where he had told Nicodemus, Unless a man be born again, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God: and Nicodemus understood him not, as appears by his
demand, how can a man be borne when he is old? our B. Savior explicated his
former speech, saying, unless a man be borne again of water and of the spirit
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Again, when Christ said, Io. 10.2.
But he that enters by the door is the Pastor of the sheep, and his
Disciples understood him not, for it follows. Ib. ver. 6.
This Proverb Jesus said unto them, but they knew not what he speak unto
them: he explicateth himself saying Ib. verse. 7 and 11.
Amen, Amen I say unto you, that I am the door of the sheep. The good
shepherd gives his life for his sheep. The like explication of dark
speeches, Proverbs, and Parables, explicated by our Savior unto his Disciples
you shall further read of in another Io. 16.17.19.20. Mat. 13.36.37. Mar.
4.10.14.34. Luke. 8.9.10.12.
places: so that out of these places, and the like I may draw and make this
general Rule and Collection, that our B. Savior, howsoever sometimes upon
just occasions, he did not explicate every dark or parabolicall speech unto
the profane and common people, either because they were not capable, or cared
not for it, or that it was impertinent unto them, or for that he would not cast
pearls before swine, or give the Childrens bread to dogs: yet he never spoke
to his best beloved Disciples, who had left all to follow him, and to whom by
his own Confession it was given, as belonging unto them, to understand all
mysteries belonging to the Kingdom of God; for as much as they were not only
thereby to save their own souls, but many others, which they could not have
done without a true conceit and right understanding of all that proceeded from
our B. Savior his sacred mouth: To these I say, his best beloved Disciples, he
never spoke any thing parabolically, but at one time or other ordinarily he
explicated the same, and so left them possessed and invested with the true and
right sense of his meaning. And shall we think, that here he would not have
done the like, but that the sense was easy, plain and literally to be
understood, as the very words went and sounded? And yet we see here he does
not declare himself otherwise, but says to them who did not depart, Io. 6.67.
What will you also depart, as if he should have said, I have not otherwise to
tell you, he that will not believe, let him depart.

Fourthly, spiritual receiving by faith, needs not that frequent distinction
of Flesh and Blood, Meat and drink, seeing that in receiving by faith all is
one to eat and drink seeing that in receiving by faith all is one to eat and
drink.

Fifthly, our Savior would never so seriously by Oath have avouched saying,
Amen, Amen, that we must eat this flesh, if he had meant the same only
figuratively, seeing Oaths must be made of things plain and certain, and not
of things figuratively spoken.

Sixthly, the Jews and the Disciples offended not in misunderstanding our
Saviors words, but in no^ believing them, saying accordingly Io. 6.52.
How can this man give us his flesh to eat? And Ib. verse. 60.
this saying is hard, who can hear it? Our Savior also in the beginning of
his speech in this matter, exhorts them to believe, saying, Ib. verse. 47.
He that belieueth in me has life everlasting: and in the later end he notes
their not believing, and says, Ib. verse. 64.
But there be certain of you which believe not: He said not, says S. In Joan,
Tract. 27.
Augustine, There be some among you which understand not.

Besides, if they had been mistaken in taking that literally, which our
Savior spoke figuratively, he would never so earnestly have persuaded them to
believe his words without any Explication, seeing none can believe that which
they do not in some sort understand; neither is it credible, that he who
thirsts after salvation of Souls, would suffer his own Disciples to depart
from him, if he might have recalled them, by affirming only that his foresaid
words were figurative. Lastly Peter L. cont. Gardinerum. ob. 34.
Martyr confesses, that the Capharnaites hearing our Savior his words, did
think, that Christ's flesh should be eaten corporally as the Papists think.
Whereupon it follows, that seeing the Capharnaites were reprehended for not
believing as they understood, that therefore the Papists belief, is a right
belief.

But some reply, that our Savior explicated himself, when he said Io. 6.63.
It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing; the words that I
have spoken unto you, are spirit and life. Answ. When our Savior says, The
flesh profits nothing, he does not understand the same of his own flesh
(which doubtless profits our Redemption) but of the Chrysostom. Theophil.
Enthymius in hu^c locum. Orig. l. 3. in Epist. ad Romans Cyp. ser. de coena
Domini.
carnal understanding of the Capharnaites, as S. Chrysostom and other Fathers
do expound it: which Explication to be true, appears first, in that the word
flesh is usually taken in Scriptures, for carnal wisdom and understanding, as
Io. 8 15.
You judge according to the flesh. Flesh Mat. 16.17.
and blood has not reueyled this unto thee. Romans 8.6 7.
The wisdom of the flesh is death: The wisdom of the flesh is an Enemy to
God. I 1. Cor. 3.1.
could not speak unto you as to spiritual, but as to carnal. 1. Cor. 2.13.14.
We speak not in learned words of humane wisdom, but in the Doctrine of the
spirit etc. But the sensual man perceyueth not those things that are of the
spirit of God. And in this sense the flesh profits nothing, that is, to
understand the flesh of Christ to be eaten after a carnal manner, as though it
were to be divided into parts, and to be boiled, roasted, broyled, and chewed,
and converted into the substance of the receiver. And according to this faith
S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Joan. hom. 46.
what then, the flesh profits nothing, he does not speak this of his own
flesh, god forbid, but of those who understand carnally what is spoken. And a
little after, know, that this particle, the flesh profits nothing, is not
spoken of his flesh, but of a Carnal hearing. The like Explication is given
also by S. Cyprian in these words, Ser. de coena Domini.
There rose a question of the newnes of this speech, as it is read in the
Gospel of John: and the auditors were astonished at the Doctrine of this
Mystery, when our Lord said, Unless ye shall eat the flesh of the son of Man,
and shall drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. Which because
certain of them did not believe, nor could understand, they went back, because
it seemed to them horrible and wicked to eat man's flesh, thinking that it was
spoken in such sort, that they should be taught to eat his flesh, either
boiled or roasted, and cut in pieces; whereas the flesh of that person, if it
should be divided in pieces, could not suffice all Mankind, and which being
once consumed, Religion would seem to have perished, no Sacrifice remaining
unto it any longer. But in these kind of thoughts, flesh and blood does not
profit any thing: because, as the Master himself has expounded, these words
are spirit and life: neither does Carnal sense penetrate to the understanding
of so great depth, unless faith be added to it. In like sort answers S.
Austine, Tract. 17. in Joan. 6.63.
O Lord my good Master, how does the flesh profit nothing, seeing thou say,
unless one shall eat my flesh, and shall drink my blood he shall not have life
in him? does life profit nothing, and for what end are we that which we are,
but that we may have life everlasting, which thou promisest by thy flesh? What
is this then, it profits nothing? The flesh profits nothing, but as they
understood it, for they so understood flesh, as it is torn in the carcass, or
sold in the shambles, not as it is quickened with the spirit. And again, For if
the flesh profited nothing, the Word would not have been flesh, that it might
dwell in us. And a little after, As they have understood flesh, I do not give so
my flesh to eat. So fully and clearly do the Fathers answer this Common
Objection.

Secondly, as by flesh is understood knowledge depending upon sense and reason,
so by spirit and life (which is here opposed to flesh) is understood such
knowledge as being above humane and natural reason, submits it self to
faith; which opposition and explication, the Apostle before expressed saying,
Romans 8.6.
The wisdom of the flesh, is death, the wisdom of the spirit is life. And for
this want of faith, our Savior in the same place complains, saying: But
there are some of you which do not believe.

Thirdly, the word spirit, or spiritual, can nothing hinder the Real
presence, seeing it is said of the Body. 1. Cor. 15.44.
It is sown a natural Body, it shall arise a spiritual Body, if there be a
natural Body, there is also a spiritual Body.

Lastly it cannot be understood of the eating of the flesh of Christ, that it
profits nothing, seeing our Savior says there himself plainly, Io. 6.54.
He that eats my flesh etc. has life everlasting, and Ib. verse. 53.
unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man etc. you shall not have life in
you. So evident is is, that those obscurer words make nothing indeed against
the other plentiful, most clear and manifest sayings to the contrary. And yet
all this notwithstanding, Hist. part. 2. fo. 181.
Hospinian relates that Zwinglius in sundry places inculcateth, that flesh
eaten profits nothing. And therefore Zwinglius inuenteth these strange
interpretations In Exegesi. fol. ^50.
Flesh in this place Joan. 6. is put for the divine nature; so that by flesh
must be understood Christ's Divinity: And, Tom. 1. in Explicat. Art. 18. fol. 37.
Thou see here Io. 6. the Body and Blood of Christ to be nothing else, then
the word of faith: to wit, that his Body dead for us, and his blood shed for
us, has redeemed us: here flesh must be understood faith, or Christ's death.
But these are over gross to require confutation.

The second proof out of the new Testament, is taken from the words of the
Institution of the Sacrament, where our Savior performed his former promise,
when at his last Supper, Mat. 26.26.27.28. Mar. 14.22.23 24. Luke. 22.19.20.1.
Cor 11.24 25.
He took bread and blessed and brake, and he gave to his Disciples and said,
take ye, and eat, this is my Body. And taking the Chalice he gave thanks,
and gave to them saying, drink ye all of this, for this is my Blood of the
new Testament, which shall be shed for many unto remission of sins. These
words of themselves are most plain for the real Presence, and almost every
word does confirm the same. In so much that Zwinglius speaking hereof says,
In Explanat. Art. 18.
what can be spoken more clearly, then, This is my body? In like sort Calvin,
Admonit. vlt. ad VVestphal. p. 812. Beza ad repetit. Sanctis. p. 8.
I do not deny, but that Christ would speak most plainly. Beza, Muscul. in
loc. tit. de coena. Perkins of the supper. Col. 858. Hospin. Hist. part. 1. c.
2.
Christ could not speak more plainly or significantly of the Sacraments. And
the like is acknowledged by sundry other Protestants.

Yea these words of Christ are so plain for us, that Calvin will not have
Instit. 4. c. 17.. 20.
The words of Christ to be made subject to the common Rule, nor to be squared
by the Grammar. And indeed the words of Institution are so conuincing, that
Protestants refuse to be tried thereby. Peter Martyr says, Cont. Gardener.
fol. 440.
That which he adds is Idle, that in the mystery of the Eucharist we are to
fly to the words of our Lord ordayning it. Calvin De rat. Concor. p. 866.
It is not agreeable to reason, to insist in the essential Verb (is).
Bullinger, De rat. Concor. p. 866.
We desire of our Adversaries, that they do not hereafter as heertofore they
have done, make the words of the Lords Supper, whereof the Controversy is, as
it were the foundation of their opinion. Zwinglius De vera and fall. Relig. c.
de Euchar. p. 267.
We do not reply of those words (of the Supper) but upon this one word, The
flesh profits nothing, Yea they scornefully call this proof, Apud
Schlusseth. l. 4. Theol. Calvin. art. 20.
Pet. Mart. apud Schluss. l. 4. Theol. Calvin. art. 20.
A five words proof. Burensis calls the^, Apud Schluss tom. 3. catal. haeret
in Praefat.
four impotent words. Shelden, De miraculis Antichristi. p. 82.
five omnipotent words. Hospinian Hist. part. 2. fol. 63.
five magical words. And Peter Martyr further says In Dial. Col. 130.
You have always seemed to me to be less wise then is meet, when you so
labor for an opinion as absurd as unprofitable, nor have any thing to defend
it but the word of Christ, This is my Body. So that the words of Christ
himself, though most plain, must not now be sufficient to confute and
confound an heretic, though never so absurd.

But though the words be thus confessedly plain as you have seen, yet Prot.
greatly labor by sundry sleightes to euade them; for so concerning the word,
blessed, whereas we affirm that our Savior used not to blessed insensible
creatures, but when he was to work some great and wonderful thing: Io. 6.^^
Mat. 15.36. Mar. 8.67. Io. 11 44. Luc. 9 16.
so that his Benediction was not only praying, but even working, as when God
gave Genesis 1.22.
Fecundity to living creatures, it is said, he blessed them; Even as on the
contrary when Christ cursed the fig tree, forthwith it withered. Protestants
reply, that blessing, is not referred to the Bread, but that thereby only praise
and thanksgiving is given to God. But first seeing S. Mark says, 14, 22.
Jesus took bread, and blessing, brake and gave to them, it cannot be said,
but as, brake, and gave are referred to the matter which was in his hands, so
also, blessed, must likewise be referred to the same matter. Secondly S. Paul
directly applies the blessing to the Cup, saying, 1. Cor. 10.1^.
The Chalice of Benediction which we bless etc. And in like sort it is
understood by the Ancient Justin. in Apol. 2. liturg. Iacobi. Basilij,
Chrisost. Cypr. l 2. Ep. 3. ad Caecilium.
Fathers. But yet for all this Zwinglius expounds Blessing thus, Tom. 2. in
Exegesi fol. 355.
It came to pass when he Blessed, that is, when he had them farewell. So that
blessing the bread in the Institution of the B. Sacrament, is a bidding
farewell to the Apostles: to such blind absurdity does obstinacy bring an
heretic.

But when such foolish Interpretations will not serve their turn, then they
spare not to corrupt the Text it self: for so, because the words, Benediction,
and we bless, in those words of the Apostle 1. Cor. 10.16.
The Chalice of Benediction which we do bless, do prove the wine in the
Chalice to be consecrated: Zwinglius in great dislike thereof, says, De coena.
fol. 294. Tom. 2.
They ought not to use in this place the words of Benediction and blessing, for
these are usually taken almost for the word of Consecrating. And therefore to
avoid Consecration, he translateth the forsaid words thus, Tom. 4. in. 1. Cor.
p. 470.
The Cup of thanksgiving wherewith we give thanks, is it not the Communion of
the Blood of Christ? Calvin In Math. 26.26.
also not only expounds the word (...), benedixit, blessed, by gratias egit,
gave thanks; but also in the very Text of S. Matthew he translateh, when he had
given thanks: And yet as himself there confesses. Mark and Matthew use the
word of blessing. This injury unto the sacred Text is so great, that Illyricus
says thereof, In 1. Cor. 5.
Some corrupt this Text, translating the Cup of thanksgiving wherewith we give
thanks, and so they use in their Lyturgies a corrupted Text, instead of the
words of Institution, or the sacred supper, doubling their Sacrilege. To this
Corruption of the Text of Scripture, our Prot. still fly, when all other
shifts do fail them.

But to proceed, (for few of these sacred words must escape them, against
which they will not offer some violence) by the Pronowne, this, some Prot.
understand Bread or wine, making the sense to be this, This Bread is my Body.
But this to be false, appears in that the word, this, must either be taken
substantiuely, or adiectiuely; if the later, then it cannot agree with Bread or
wine, seeing this both in Greek (...), and in Latin, Hoc, is the neuter
Gender, which agrees with Body, which also is in Greek, (...), and in Latin,
Corpus, the neuter Gender; whereas bread both in Greek, (...), and Latin Panis,
is the Masculine Gender. So also wine in Greek is the Masculine Gender, and
Blood, the Neuter: and so this is the Neuter Gender, to wit, (...); hoc, not,
(...), hic. And of the contrary in Latin, wine is the Neuter Gender, and Blood
the Masculine, and yet all read, hic est sanguis. If, this, be taken
substantiuely, for, this thing, then it cannot be understood of Bread, for it
cannot be so taken, when the thing it self is present, and openly seen and
known, unless the said thing be also of the Neuter Gender: Whereas here our
Savior took bread, accepit panem etc. and said, hoc est etc. Who seeing his
Brother present, and pointing to him, would say, Hoc est frater meus, this
thing is my Brother.

Danaeus observing the great advantage given here by the Pronowne, This, has
invented an excellent help in these words; L. de Euchar. c. 1. p. 543.
What if I shall except the natural words of Christ, to have been only these
two, My flesh: I shall with one word make void, all that proof of the
Pronowne, Hoc, This. Nothing less, but you would strongly prove your self to
be a man void of all honesty or conscience, by so grossly corrupting the word of
God. Some Puritanes are not ashamed to mistranslate the words thus. This Bread
is my Body: of which addition to the Text M. Hutton says, Answ. to the last
part of reasons for refusal of subscription. p. 2^9. 266.
Had it been in our Communion book, we should have been challenged for adding
these words (This bread) more, then is in the Evangelists, or S. Paul etc. But
the matter is so clear that Carolostadius does refer the particle In Zwingl.
l. Epist. p. 543.
This, not to Bread, but to Christ's Body: whereof he gives this good reason, In
dial. de coena.
(...) is a Greek pronowne of the neuter Gender: now the word (...), in Latin
panis, is the Masculine, and therefore the pronowne (...) cannot be joined to it
etc. Therefore I must of necessity confess, that Christ saying, This is my
Body, to have pointed unto his Body, not to bread. So clear and confessed it
is, that the pronowne, This, cannot relate to bread, but to Body.

Besides all this S. Luke plainly says, Luc. 22.20.
(...): Hic calix Nouum Testamentum in sanguine meo pro vobis effusus, where
the words, which is shed, in Greek, differing in Case from Blood, and in
Gender from Testament, have true relation only to the Cup: now it was not the
vessel or wine which was shed for us, but the true Blood of Christ, therefore
the Cup does not signify the Cup of wine, but the Cup of Blood.

To this Argument, Beza had no other Answer, but only to deny the Text of the
Gospel to be perfect, for writing upon this place he says, Annot. in Luc. 22.
Seeing these words, if we look unto the Construction, do necessarily belong
not to blood, but to the Cup, and yet they cannot be understood of the wine,
much less of the Cup, either it is a manifest incongruity, seeing it should
have been said, (...): or rather, seeing these were noted at the Margin of
Matthew and Mark, they afterward crept into the Text. And agreably Beza in
his Latin Translation changes, Quod, into, Qui, saying, Hoc poculum est Nouum
illud Testamentum per sanguinem meum, qui pro vobis effunditur. And the same
Corruption is used in the French Caluinian Bibles. But it seems this charging
S. Luke with incongruity, did make him somewhat ashamed of himself: And
therefore in another place he says, Ad Repetit. Santis. c. 8. p. 18.
My Conjectures tend to this, that rather then I will contend Luke to have
committed a Soloecophenes, either this particle, to etc. to be inserted into
Lukes Texts, out of the other Evangelists, or to have been casually il changed
by the writers (or Printers) although Coppies do agree: to such hard shifts is
Beza driven.

Piscator will In Refut. Sophism. Hunnij. p. 648.
not admit, (...), to be referred to the Cup, and adds that, It may be, that
Clause crept out of Matthew. Bucanus acknowledges that, Loc. 48. p. 688.
If we look into the construction of the words according to Luke, (...), is
referred to the Cup. Zwinglius thinks that it is Resp. ad Conf^ss. Lutheri.
Tom. 2. fol. 511.
an Enallage of the Nominative Case for the Dative: but if it were lawful to
go by, may be, and such strange changing of Cases, any man may from Scripture
defend what he list. But this truth is so clear, as that our own Whitaker
confesses that, Ad rat. 1. Camp p. 11.
If thou will adhere to the words themselves, it is necessary either that thou
confess the Cup to be shed for us, or that thou bring in a Soloecisme: which
is either to acknowledge our Catholic Real Presence, or to accuse the
Evangelist of Incongruity.

But Castalio, (whose Translation is by several Humfred. de Rat. interpret. l.
1. p. 62. 63.
Prot. preferred before all others) translateth thus, Gesnerus in Biblioth.
Sebast. Castal. Furius in Defens. Cast. p. 236.
Hoc poculum est Nouum foedus, quod fit per meum sanguinem, quod est pro vobis
effundendum: so plainly referring quod and effundendum, to poculum, and not to
sanguinem. And Beza himself confesses that, Annot. in Luc. 22.20.
These words if we respect Construction, necessarily do not belong to the
blood, but to the Cup. Agreably to which says Whitaker, Answer to Reinoldes
p. 210.
The words in Luke 22.20. in the Greek that Beza translated, by Construction
indeed require, that the Cup is called the New Testament, which is shed for us:
In which respect Beza translateth them otherwise etc. But Enthymius expounding
these words says expressly, In Luc. 22.
That which is said, which is shed for you, is to be referred to the Cup. So
unanswerable are the words of Scripture, when they are not corrupted by
Protestants.

To come now to the little word, is, Zwinglians thereby understand, to signify:
but this to be false, appears, in that it has another signification most
ordinary and common, in so much as all other verbes are resolved into this, and
some other thing. Wherefore Ochinus makes this strange Evasion saying, Apud
Schluss. l. 2. Theol Calu. Art. 23. fol. 125.
We answer it may be that when Christ said, This is my Body, he would have
said. This bread signifies my Body. So making it doubtful whether Christ
spoke those words, which he would and intended to speak. But I will answer
this impious foolery with the words of S. Hilary, L. 8 de Trinit.
Does he which is the Word, not know the signification of the word etc. And he
that is virtue, was he in that Infirmity, that he could not utter what he would
have to be understood? he uttered plainly the true and sincere Sacraments of
Evangelical faith.

Zwinglius has a better shift, which the Prot. Schlusselburge relates in
these words, Theol. Calvin. l. 2. art. 6. fol. 43.
It is most certain that the Sacramentaries do falsify and change the word of
God himself: And truly we have a notable and evident Example of this in
Zwinglius I de vera and fall. Relig p. 262. where in recital of the words of
Institution of the son of God, for the verb is, he puts, signifies for
so Zwinglius recites the Text: So therefore has Luke, with whom of the
Evangelists, we will content our selves: And taking Bread, he gave thanks,
and brake, and gave them, saying, This signifies my Body which is given for
you: hitherto Zwinglius etc. Neither can this wickedness of Zwinglius be
excused, with any color, the thing is most manifest etc.

And in like sort the Tigurines in their Bibles, have changed it into
(significat, does signify) as Theol. Calvin. l. 2. c. 6 fol. 44.
Schlusselburge testifies himself, to have seen and read. And Zwinglius
himself dared to write thus, Tom. 2. de vera and fall. Relig. c. de
Eucharistia. fol. 210.
So therefore has Luke, with whom of the Evangelists we will be content, Hoc
significat Corpus meum quod pro vobis datur: this signifies my Body which is
given for you. For as himself confesses elsewhere, Tom. 2. l. de coena, fol.
174.
If (est, is,) be put substantiuely it must needs be confessed the true
substance of Christ's true flesh to be present in the Supper. And, Resp ad
Billican. fol. 261.
If thou take, est, is, substantiuely, then the Papists have conquered. This
Corruption is so gross and wicked, that the Prot. Schlusselburge says thereof,
Theol. Calvin. l. 2. c. 6. fol. 43.
This only one Corruption of the words of the Son of God, ought to terrify
all men, from the Company and impiety of the Caluinistes.

The absurdity heerof is yet further proved by these words of S. Luke, This Cup
the new Testament in my Blood: where the sentence standing thus imperfect, for
want of a Verb to knit the parts together, it cannot be supplied by the word
signifies, because the Nowne, Testament, is here put in the Nominative Case,
whereas the word, signifies, would require the Accusative. Wherefore in this
respect, Prot. in their Bybles, are enforced to supply the sentence with the
Verb, is. Now is it but coulourable, that the Verb, is, being not expressed,
but only understood, and thereupon placed to make up the sense of the Text,
should so soon as it is so of nec^ssity placed, be immediately cast out, and
changed into the verb signifies: that the use of speaking does often make it
left out, as being easy to be supplied or understood. I willingly grant; but
that ever any use of speech, should in such case, cause it to be (as in this
example) brought in and placed, and yet withal to loose its proper
signification, is no less strange, then is our Adversaries Doctrine grounded
thereupon. And seeing the Pronowne, this, as I have proved, cannot relate to
Bread, but to Body, to say, that his Body should signify his Body, were more
then Idle. And therefore M. Hooker and other Prot. teach, that there can be no
figure in the word, is. M. Hookers words are, Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 67. p. 177.
We do not interpret the words of Christ, as if the name of his Body, did
import but the figure of his Body, and to, be, were only to, signify.

By the word, Body, some understand Christ his mystical Body, to wit, his
Church: but this is most absurd it not being given for us, nor shed for us, nor
yet can poss^bly be eaten of us. Others a sign of his Body; but this cannot
be, for as not a sign of his Body, but the true Body of Christ, was given for
us upon the Cross, so also Christ's Body in the Scipture is never taken, but
either for his mystical or true natural Body. This is so certain, that D.
Whitaker and M. Hooker do both confess. That, Whitak. Cont. Dur. l. 2. p. 280.
Hook. Eccl. Pol. l 5. sect. 67. pa. 177.
The Trope is not in the Body or Blood of Christ, nor in bread or wine etc.
Besides, the Pronowne, This, not signifying Bread (as before) there is not any
thing whereof a sign of the Body should be affirmed or predicated, unless they
will have the Natural Body of Christ, to be a sign of it self.

But all this is so impertinent, that other Prot. disclaim in affirming, that,
Collatio Cath. and orth fidei, p. 358.
In the words of Chr^sts Testament, by the word, Body, they vnderst^nd nothing
else, but the figure of Christ's Body, the true Presence of Christ's Body denied.
And the very same is affirmed by Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 67.
M. Hooker.

Z ^inglius is of opinion, that, Apud S^hlussel. in Theol. Calu. l 1. art. 22.
fol. 101.
Body in the words of the Supper, may also be expounded for the Church. And,
Tom. 4. in Io. 6.
Heerby the ^ords of Christ are made clear, This is my Body, where Body is put
for Death: according to which, Christ is made to say, Take ye, and eat, This
is my Church, or this is my Death. Ridiculous.

To proceed, these other words, is given for you, is shed for you according to
the Greek in all the three Evangelists, and S. Paul, are in the Present tense,
and before his Passion, and therefore cannot agree to Bread and wine, which
cannot be said to have been then given for us: neither to his giving upon the
Cross, for that gift was not then present; they do therefore only relate to
his Body and Blood, which he then gave and offered for us at his last Supper.
Now whereas Fulke replyeth that, Ag. Rhem. Test. in Mat. 26 sect. 10.
The Apostles and Evangelists used the Present tense for the Future, as
signifying Christ's Passion was at hand: and that the Vulgar Interpreter
translateth accordingly, Mat. 26.28.
which shallbe shed: it is easily answered, that though the Present tense be
used sometimes for the future, yet much more often to signify a thing present:
and the rather here, in that not one only, but all the three Evangelists, and
S. Paul do to our Saviors action then present, add and use the Present tense.
As for the vulgar Translation, Prot. are in great straits when they do appeal
from the Original text to it, which they affirm to be Whitak. in his Answer
to Reinolds. p. 25-26. 344.
An old rotten Translation, full of Corruptions in all parts thereof, and of
all others most corrupt. But yet in defense of the vulgar Interpreter, I say,
that as he translateth in the Future tense, which shall be shed; so also he uses
the Present tense, translating Luc. 22.19.
which is given, both which he uses to signify a certain truth, the Present
tense signifying, that his Body was then given in the Sacrament, the future not
impugning the former sense, but signifying withal further, that it should be
then, and also afterward given upon the Cross. So little do these Euasions
prevail against the truth.

The third proof is taken from such places as contain the use of this
Sacrament, as 1. Cor. 10.16.
The Chalice of Benediction which we do bless, is it not the Communication of
the Sea Chrisost. ho. 24. in 2. ad Cor. c. 10.
Blood of Christ? and the Bread which we break, is it not the participation of
the Body of our Lord? As also, 1. Cor. 11.29.
he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Judgment, or (as
the Prot. Translation has it) damnation, to himself not discerning the Body
of our Lord: or, as it is elsewhere; Ib. verse. 27.
shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of our Lord. Here some are reprehended for
receiving unworthily the Body Basil. l. 2. de Bap. c. 3. Chrysostom. ho. 14. in 1.
Cor. ho. 83. in Mat. ho. 45. in Io. Hieron. in c. 1. Malach. Theophil. Oecom.
cum. Ambr. Theodor. in. 1. Cor. c. 11. Aug. l. 5. de Bap. c. 8. l. 10 cont.
Cresc. c. 25. Ep. 120. ad Honorat. c. 27. et. ep. 162.
and Blood of Christ; but these receive not with spirit and faith, for then
they received, according to Prot. worthily, therefore they receive only with the
Body, and yet, as so, they are said to receive the Body and Blood of Christ,
even to the unworthy Receiver: therefore the Body of Christ is present in the
Eucharist; for as it is in heaven, it cannot be received with the corporal
mouth. I will but name unto you the Interpretation made by Zwinglius of these
words, The Chalice of Benediction which we bless, which he expounds thus,
In. 1. Cor. 10.
The Cup of thanksgiving wherewith we give thanks, what I pray you is it else
then we our selves? So that according to him, Blessing is only Thanksgiving,
and the Cup, is our selves, that drink the Cup.

Lastly by these words, This is my Body, our Savior instituted a Sacrament,
and which is more, with a Commandment thereto annexed, saying, Take eat etc.
Do this etc. He also hereby made his last Will, and Testament, which he would
never do in words so figurative and obscure, as that the most learned could
not understand the same, seeing thereby instead of greatest Blessings, which
doubtless he only intended, he should have given and left unto us most dangerous
occasions of errors, scandal, ruin, mischief, strife and Contention. And I
would demand of a Sacramentary Minister, whose Father making his will, should
by express words and writing, make this his son his heir of all his gould;
what he would think of that Judge, who should expound his Fathers words not
of true gould, but of Counters, figures, or Pictures of gold? Certainly he
would think his sentence to be false, unjust, and maliciously wrested. Now if
his Fathers mind was truly agreeable to this Sentence, then would he complain,
that his own Father had deceived him: none of which without blasphemy can be
applied to Christ.

But this is a truth so certain, that Melancthon says, In l. Epist. Oecolamp.
and Zwing. Ep. ad Pridericum. p. 645.
I do not find a firm reason, why by the name of Body in the words of the
Supper, only the sign of a Body absent, should be understood, for although in
the sacred Scriptures, there be words full of figures of all sorts, yet there
is great difference between the narrations of things done, and divine
ordinations, or decrees of the nature, or will of God etc. For it is necessary
that the meaning of those places be certain, from whence Decrees, or Articles
be taken: if it were lawful to interpret these any way, all things might be
depraved etc. In like sort Musculus acknowledges that, Loc. com. c. de Caena
p. 332.
Christ at his last supper made his Testament, which argues that he did it in
words plain to be understood; for as the Apostle says, Gal. 3.15.
A man's Testament being confirmed no man despises, or further disposes,
according to Beza's Translation, if it be but a man's Testament etc. no man
adds thereto, much less then to our Saviors Testament may Prot. add so many
of their own most different and absurd Glosses. To this purpose says
Andraeas, Collat. Cath. and orth. fidei etc. p. 321. n. 39.
The words of Christ are the words of a Testament, in which he speaks
expressly and perspicuously, that his will may be understood by all. But to
conclude, what Scriptures can be so plain, or reason so conuincing for the
recalling of an Heretic, when Zwinglius avouched, as before, that, Apud
Schusselb. l. 4. Theol. Calu. art. 9. p. 344. And see the like in Resp. ad
Billicanum. To. 2. fol. 263.
Although God with all his Blessed Angels, should descend from heaven, and
should swear in the Supper of the Lord the Body and Blood of Christ to be
given to all that receive it, yet I neither could, nor would believe (says he)
unless with my eyes and hands I should see and feel the same.

Yea so plain are the words of Scripture in our behalf, that Zwinglius says
In Explan. Art. 18.
What can be spoken more clearly, then, This is my Body? Calvin In Admon. vlt.
ad West ph. p. 812.
I do not deny, but that Christ would speak most clearly. Beza, Ad Repetit.
Santis. p. 8.
Christ could not speak more expressly, and more significantly of the
Sacraments. And De coena cont. Westphal. in Tract. I heol. p. 216.
we have truly often said, that which now also I will repeat, that there cannot
be kept (...), the Propriety of the words, in these words, This is my Body,
but the Papisticall Transubstantiation must be established. Chamierus repeateth
and allows this last saying o^ Beza for most true, saying, Epist. Jesuit.
part. 1. p. 49. 16.
I acknowledge my Master his speech to be most true. The Deuines of Geneua
profess to believe, that, Apol. Modest. etc. p. 18.
If the words of Christ be to be taken simply, it is necessary that the dotage
(so are heretics pleased to term it) of Transubstantiation must infallibly
follow. D. Reinolds is enforced to say, In his Confer. c. 2. sect. 1. p. 13.
I will grant the words of Christ, This is my Body, in show rather to favor
your Real Presence, then that Sacramental which we defend. So confessedly
clear are the sacred Scriptures taken in their literal sense, for the Real
Presence and Transubstantiation.

SECT. V. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proof of our
Catholic Doctrine of the Real Presence and Transubstantiation.
THe Ancient Fathers are no less clear in their Interpretations: so S. Justin
Martyr writing hereof, says, In Apologia. 2. ad Antonium.
This nourishment is called amongst us the Euchariste, the which is lawful for
no other to receive, then he who belieueth our Doctrine to be true, and is
washed with the lauer for remission of sins, and regeneration, even as Christ
has given it to the living. For we do not receive these Elements, as common
bread, nor as common drink, but even as Christ our Savior was made flesh by
the word of God, and had flesh and blood to procure our Salvation. After the
same manner also, we have been taught, that, that nourishment, wherein thanks
are given, by the prayers of his word proceeding from him, is the flesh and
blood of that incarnated Jesus, whereupon our blood and flesh are nourished by
mutation. For the Apostles in their Commentaries, left written by them, which
are called the Gospel, have so delivered, that Jesus commanded them; for that
he taking bread, when he had given thanks, did say; do you this in remembrance
of me, This is my Body. And the Cup likewise being taken, and thanks being
given, to have said, This is my Blood. The Centuristes speaking of Justin and
Irenaeus, say, Cent. 2. Col. 48.
Neither did they think Bread and wine to be only naked figures of the Body
and blood of Christ etc. They taught according to the word and Institution of
Christ himself, with bread and wine the flesh and blood of Christ Incarnate to
be distributed, as the place of Iustine does plainly testify, in Apol. 2. So
confessedly are these two Ancients for the real Presence.

Origin comparing the former figures with our truths, says, Ho. 7. i^ Numer.
In former times Baptism was in obscurity in the Cloud and in the Sea, now
Regeneration is in kind, in water and the holy Ghost: then obscurely Manna was
the food, but now, in form, the flesh of the word of God is the true food:
even as he says, because my flesh is truly meat, and my blood is truly
drink. And in Ho. 16. in Number.
another place, Seeing the drinking of blood is forbidden by God with so strong
Commandes, what people is this that uses to drink blood? To this he answers,
But Christian people, a faithful people, hears and imbraceth these things,
and follows him who says, Io. 6.54.
Unless you shall eat my flesh and drink my blood, you shall not have life in
you: because my flesh is truly meat, and my blood is truly drink. And the
same Origin elsewhere to the like effect affirms, Ho. 5. in diuersis.
When thou receiuest the holy food, and that incorruptible banquet, when thou
do enjoy the bread and Cup of life, thou do eat and drink the Body and
Blood of our Lord, then our Lord enters under thy roof: and therefore then
humbling thy self imitate this Centurion, and say, O Lord I am not worthy that
thou should enter under the roof of my house: for where he enters
unworthily, there he enters to Judge, and punish the receiver. The Prot.
Scultetus acknowledges that, Medulla Theol. p. 169.
The Centuristes of Magdeburge c. 10. cent. 3. do ascribe to Origin the
erroneous doctrine of Consubstantiation.

Magnes also another Greek Father, and very ancient, living in the age 350.
teaches the same doctrine, saying, Ad Theosthenem. l. 3.
If therefore the earth be affirmed of the Body, (that is, if the Body be called
Earth) in reguard of the ancient origin, and the Earth was Christ's own and
proper Creature, by reason of Creation, and of this Earth Bread and wine has
come, of it (to wit Bread) the body of man has been made again, and this Body
Christ has put on worthily, justly, deservedly, when he took Bread and wine
he has said, This is my Body etc. For it is not a figure of his Body or blood,
as some by a stupid and senseles Exposition have tryfled, but rather truly the
Body and Blood of Christ etc.

But who can speak more plainly then S. Cyrill of Jerusalem? Catech. 4.
Mystag.
When then Christ himself does thus affirm and say of Bread, This is my Body,
who ever hereafter dare doubt? and the same Christ also confirming and saying,
This is my blood, who I say, may doubt, and say, there is not his blood? In
times past he changed water into wine, which is near to blood, in Cana of
Galilee, by his only will, and shall he not be worthy whom we may believe, that
by transmutation, he turned wine into his blood? For if being invited to
corporal Marriages he wrought a stupendous Miracle, shall we not much more
confess him to have given his body, and his Blood to the Children of the
spouse? Wherefore with all certainty and assurance let us receive the Body and
Blood of Christ, for under the form of Bread, there is given thee the Body,
and under the form of wine, his blood is given thee, that receiving the body
and blood of Christ, thou may be made unto him compartner of his body and
blood: (...), we shall be made bearers of Christ, when we have received his body
and blood into our Members, and so, as Peter says, we shall be made partakers of
the divine nature etc. Knowing this, and houlding it for most certain, that
this bread which is seen of us, is not bread, although the taste perceive it to
be bread, but that it is the body of Christ: and the wine which is seen of us,
although to the sense of taste it seem to be wine, yet it is not wine, but the
blood of Christ. And in another place, Ad Calosyrium.
Do not doubt whether this be true, he manifestly saying, This is my Body. So
manifest are Christ's words, and S. Cyrils Exposition for the Real Presence,
and Transubstantiation.

S. Chrysostom also to the like effect says, Ho. 83. ex. c. 26. Mat.
Let us therefore every where believe God, neither let us gainsay him, although
it seem absurd to sense, and our cogitation, that which he speaks; his word
surmounts both sense and our reason: what we do in all things, but especially
in the mysteries, let us do it, not looking upon those things only which lie
before us, but also behoulding his words, for we cannot be deceived by his
words, but our sense is most apt to be deceived: his words cannot be false,
this sense is often and often deceived: therefore because he said it, This is my
body, let us not doubt, but believe, and let us behold it with the eyes of our
understanding, for no sensible thing is given unto us by Christ, but by
things indeed sensible: but all things which he delivered are insensible. So
also in Baptism by water which is a sensible thing; that gift is granted: but
that which is done therein, to wit, the regeneration and renouation, is a
certain thing to be conceived, for if thou were incorporeall, he had given
unto thee barely those incorporeall guiftes, but because thy soul is conjoined
to a Body in sensible things, things intellectual, or to be understood, are
delivered unto thee. O how many do now say, I would see his form and shape,
his garments, his shoes; him therefore thou see, him thou touchest, him thou
eatest etc. these works are not of humane power, which Christ wrought in that
supper: he also does now work, he does perfect: we hold the Office and order
of ministers, but it is he who truly sanctifyeth, and by transmutation
alters. I will rather give my life then I will give our Lords Body to any
one unworthily, I will rather suffer my blood to be shed, then deliver that
sacred blood, except to a worthy person. Again, Hom. de prodit. Iudae. quae
est Tom. 3.
There was sometimes a Pasche of the Jews but it is abrogated, and made void
by the coming of the spiritual Pasche, which Christ delivered, for when they
did eat (says he) and drink, he took bread, and brake, and said, This is my
Body which shall be given for you etc. And again, he took the Chalice and said,
This is my blood which shall be shed for many to remission of sins. And Judas
was present when Christ spoke these words, This is the blood: Speak Judas,
This is the Blood which thou souldest for 30. pence, for which before thou
bargaynedst with the Pharisees? O mercy of Christ, O madness of Judas! who
couenanted to sell him for 30. pence, and Christ offers to him the blood
which he has sold, that he might have forgiveness of sins, if so be it he
would not be wicked, for Judas was present, and made partaker of that
Sacrifice. And expounding those words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10.16.
The Chalice of Benediction which we do bless, is it not the Commnication of
the Blood of Christ, he says: the meaning of these (words) is this, that
which is in the Chalice, is that which flowed from his side, and we are
partakers of it. The Centuristes cite many particular sayings of S. Chrysostom
wherein, say they, Cent. 5. c. 4. Col. 517.
He seems to confirm Transubstantiation. But he is so far from only
seeming, that most directly he teaches Real Presence, Transubstantiation,
Judas his receiving the Blood, the Sacrifice at the last Supper, and that these
things are to be believed, though they seem absurd to sense and reason.

S. Cyrill of Alexandria secureth us of this truth, saying, Ep. ad Calosyrium.
Neither doubt thou whether this be true, he plainly saying, This is my Body,
but rather receive and believe the words of our Savior, for whereas he is the
Truth, he does not lie: they are mad therefore, who say that the mystical
Benediction does cease from sanctification, if any relickes thereof remain to
the next day: for the most holy Body of Christ shall not be changed, but the
virtue of Benediction, and the quickening grace is everlasting in it; for the
quickening virtue is the only begotten word of God the Father, which was made
flesh, not ceasing to be the word, but making the flesh quickening etc. It did
therefore beseem him to be in some sort united to our bodies, by his holy
flesh and precious blood, which we receive in the quickening Benediction in
bread and wine: for least we should abhor flesh and blood, put upon the
Sacred Aultars, God descending to our frailties, does instill to the things
offered the power of life, turning and converting them into the truth of his
own flesh, that the body of life as a certain quickening seed, may be found in
us. Whereupon he adds, Do this in remembrance of me. S. Cyril is so plain
herein, that Peter Martyr says, In his Ep. to Beza annexed to his Com. Pla.
p. 106.
I will not so easily subscribe to Cyril, who affirmed such a Communion as
thereby even the substance of the flesh and blood of Christ is joined to the
blessing.

S. John Damascene proves the same thus, Orthodoxa fidei. c. 14.
Wherefore if the word of God be lively and efficacious, and our Lord did all
whatsoever he would; If he said, Let there be light, and light was made, Let
there be a firmament, and it was made: if the heavens were established by the
word of God, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth; If heaven and
Earth, the water also and fire, and air, and all the ornaments of them, were
made complete and accomplished, and moreover this noblest Creature called Man:
If God himself the word, since so it was his will became man, and framed to
himself flesh, without humane seed, of the pure and immaculate blood of the
holy and ever Virgin, what can at last be alleged, but that of Bread he ca^
make his Body, of wine and water he can make his blood? He spoke of old, Let
the Earth bring forth the green herb and she produced, enforced, and
strengthened by his divine precept, her fruit and buddes, when as yet there
was no rain. God said, This is my Body, This is my blood etc. this do you in
remembrance of me, and by his Omnipotent Commandment this is done till he come
(for he used these words, till he come) and the rain for this new Corn is
the ouershadowing virtue of the holy Ghost: for as whatsoever God made, he made
it by the power of the holy Ghost, in like manner now also the working of the
spirit does effect those things which surmount nature, and which cannot be
comprehended or understood but by only says. After what manner, at the last
shall this be done, demanded the holy Virgin; because I know not men? The
Archangell Gabriel answered, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
of the highest shall ouershadow thee. Thou also now demaundest, how bread and
wine mixed with water, is made the Body and blood of Christ? And I in like
manner answer thee: the holy spirit comes upon, and makes them; which
things so made, exceed all ability of speech and understanding of the mind.
Moreover bread and wine are therefore used, because humane imbecility is well
known and manifested to God; because for the most part it is auerse, and
cannot endure but things common by Custom. Hence it comes to pass, that
God for his accustomed Indulgence toward us, works those things which
surmount nature by things usual and familiar to nature. And even as he has
therefore coupled the Grace of the holy Ghost in Baptism with oil and water,
and has made it the Lauer of regeneration, because it is usual amongst men to
be washed with water, and anointed with oil: in the same manner, because the
use and custom of men, does so bear it that men eat bread, and drink wine
and water, therefore he has joined his divinity with these, and has made them
his Body and his Blood, that by things usual and agreeable to nature, we may
arise to supernatural things. Doubtless the body truly united to the Divinity,
is that body which was borne of the holy Virgin, not that, that Body was
assumed of the heaven and descended, but because the very Bread and wine are
changed into the Body and blood of God. But if thou require how it be done, let
it suffice thee to hear, that it is done by the holy Ghost, as our Lord also
framed to himself, and in himself flesh of the holy Mother of God by the holy
Ghost. Neither any more is known and searched out of us, then that the word of
God is true and efficacious and omnipotent, for the manner is such, that no
reason can search it out. Moreover let it not seem strange to say this also,
that even as Bread by way of food, and wine and water by way of drink are
changed into the Body and Blood of the eater and drinker, and become another
body, and diverse from the body they were: So the bread of Proposition, and the
wine and water by Invocation of the holy Spirit and his coming, are turned
into the Body and Blood of Christ after an admirable manner, neither are they
two, but one and the same. Neither truly are bread and wine the figure of
Christ's Body (for be this far from us to say) but the very self same body of
our Lord, qualifyed with his Divinity: because where our Lord himself has
said; this is not a sign of a body, but a Body: nor a sign of blood, but
blood etc. That S. Damascene taught Transubstantiation, it is acknowledged, and
disliked by many Carlisle that Christ descended not into Hell. fol. 58.
Oecolamp. in Epist. l. 3. p. 661. Whitak. cont. Duraeum. p. 238. Chemnit. Exam.
part. 2. p. 83. 90.
Protestants.

To come to the Latin Fathers, S. Cyprian writing purposely of this point,
speaks thus, De coena Domini.
This bread which our Lord did reach unto his Disciples, changed not in form
or figure, but in nature, became flesh by the Omnipotency of the word: and even
as in the person of Christ the humanity was seen, and the Divinity lay hid; so
the Essence infuseth it self after an unspeakable manner into the visible
Sacrament etc. Again, De coena Dom. prope init.
They had eaten and drunken of the same bread according to the visible form,
but before those words, that common bread was only fit to nourish the body etc.
but after it was said by our Lord, Do this in Commemoration of me, this is my
flesh, and this is my blood, as often as it is done with these words, and this
faith, that substantial bread and Cup, consecrated with solemn Benediction,
profits to the life and salvation of the whole man, being both a medicine and
holocaust to cure Infirmities, and to take away sins. The difference also of
spiritual and corporal meat is made manifest, that it was one thing which at
first was set before them and eaten, another which was given and distributed by
our master. And in another place of the same Sermon he says, The Doctrine of
this Sacrament is new, and the Evangelical Schools brought forth this first
Maistership (or teaching,) and Christ being the Master, this Doctrine was
first made known unto the world, that Christians should drink Blood, the
eating whereof the authority of the old Law does most strictly forbid: for the
law forbids eating of blood, the Gospel commands that it be drunk. S.
Cyprian is so clear, that the Prot. Vrsinus confesses that, Commune factio
etc.
Many things are spoken by Cyprian, which seem to establish Transubstantiation.

With S. Cyprian agrees S. Hilary, writing thus, Lib. 8. de Trinitate.
If the word be truly made flesh, and we truly receive the word made flesh in
our Lords food, how is not Christ thought naturally to abide in us who now
borne man both assumed unto himself the inseparable nature of our flesh, and
also has joined the nature of his flesh, to the nature of Eternity, under the
Sacrament of Communicating his flesh unto us? For so we are all one, because
the Father is in Christ, and Christ is in us etc. Touching the natural truth
of Christ in us, what things we speak, unless we learn of him, we speak
foolishly and wickedly. For he says. My flesh is truly meat, and my Blood is
truly drink; he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, abides in me, and
I in him. Touching the verity of his flesh and blood, there is left no place
of doubting, for now both by Confession of our Lord himself, and by our faith,
it is truly flesh, and it is truly blood: and these being received and drunken,
do work that thing, that both we are in Christ, and Christ in us: what is not
this verity it self? Therefore he is in us by his flesh and we are in him
whilst this which we are is with him in God: And that we are in him by the
Sacrament of his flesh and blood, communicated, he witnesses saying. And this
world now sees me not, but you shall see me, because I live, and you shall
live, because I am in the Father, and you in me and I in you. S. Hilary is so
plain in this, that Calvin professes L. Epist. etc ep. 208. 392.
He will not subscribe unto him.

But who can speak more clearly then Saint Ambrose does in these words De ijs
qui misterijs initiantur. c. 9.
Peradventure thou may say, I see another thing, how do do affirm unto
me, that I receive the body of Christ? and yet this remains unto us to prove:
how great examples therefore do we use? We prove that it is not that which
nature framed, but what Benediction consecrated; and that greater is the power
of Benediction then of Nature, because by Benediction Nature it self is
changed. Moses held a rod, he cast it from him, and it became a serpent etc.
And after he had told many other miracles of Moses, Elias, and Eliseus, he
concludes: But if humane Benediction were of such power, that it could convert
Nature, what do we say of the very divine Consecration, where the words of our
Lord and Savior work? For this Sacrament which thou do receive is made by
the word of Christ: but if the word of Elias was so potent, that it could call
for fire from heaven, shall not the word of Christ be of so much power, that it
may change the forms of Elements? of the works of the whole (world) thou have
read: Because he spoke, and things were made, he commanded and they were
crea^ed. Therefore the word of Christ which could make of nothing the thing that
was not, can it not change the things which be into that which they were no?
for it is no less to give new natures to things, then to change natures etc
Our Lord Jesus cries out. This is my Body; before the Benediction of the
heavenly words another form is named (he means Bread) after Consecration
the Body of Christ is notifyed: he calls it his blood, before Consecration it
is callled another thing, after Consecration it is named the Blood of Christ.
And thou say Amen, that is, it is true: What the mouth speak^th the inward
mind acknowledges etc. It is evident that besides the order of nature a Virgin
brought forth, and this Body which we make, is of the Virgin: why do thou
seek here the order of nature in the Body of Christ, whereas besides nature the
Lord Jesus was borne of a Virgin? And the same S. Ambrose elsewhere goes yet
further, and says, L. 4. de Sacram. c. 4.
Peradventure thou say, My bread is usual Bread, but this bread is bread
before the words of the Sacraments, when Consecration shall come of bread is
made the flesh of Christ. This therefore we affirm how can that which is bread
become the body of Christ? by Consecration. Consecration therefore with whose
words, and with whose speeches? of our Lord Jesus Christ. For all other things
which are said, praise is given to God, supplication is made for the people for
kings, for others: but when it is come, that the Venerable Sacrament must be
made, now the Priest does not use his own words, but he uses the words of
Christ Therefore the word of Christ does make this Sacrament. What word of
Christ? to wit, that, whereby all things were made. Our Lord comm^nded and
heaven was made: Our Lord commanded, and the Earth was made: Our Lord commanded
and the seas were made; Our Lord commanded and every Creature was made. Thou
see therefore how powerful in operation Christ's word is! If therefore there be
so great power in the word of our Lord Jesus, that things which were not
begun, to have being; how much more is it able in operation to cause that
things which were, should be, and be changed into another thing? heaven was
not, Sea was not, Earth was not, but hear one saying. Ps. 148.^.
He spoke, and things were m^de, he commanded, and they were created. Therefore
that I may answer thee, There was not the Body of Christ before Consecration,
but after Consecration I say unto thee, that there is now the Body of Christ
etc. therefore thou have learned, that of Bread there is made the Body of
Christ, and that wine and water is put into the Chalice, but it is made blood
by the Consecration of the heavenly word but peradventure thou say, I see
not the form of blood but it has the similitude, for as thou have taken the
similitude of his death, so also thou drinkest the similitude of his precious
Blood, that there may be no horror of his Blood, and yet it works the price
of Redemption. Thou have learned therefore that, that which thou receiuest, is
the Body of Christ.

And elsewhere he concludes, L. 4. de Sacram. c. 5.
Before it be consecrated, it is but bread, but when the words of Consecration,
come, it is the Body of Christ. To conclude, Hear him saying, Take and eat of
it all, for this is my Body: and before the words of Christ, the Chalice is
full of wine and water; when the words of Christ have wrought, there it is
made Blood, which redeemed the people: Therefore mark you in how great matters
the word of Christ is potent to convert all things. Moreover our very Lord
Jesus testifyeth unto us that we receive his Body and Blood: What ought we to
doubt of his fidelity, and Testimony? Again, expounding those words of the
Psalmist, Ps. 98.52
Adore ye the footestoole of his feet, he says, L. 3. de Spir sanct. c. 12.
It is no small question, and therefore let us consider more diligently, what
is the footestoole: for we read else where, Isa. 66.1.
Heaven is my Throne, but the Earth the footstool of my feet. But neither are
we to adore the Earth, because it is a Creature of God: yet let us see if the
Prophet does not affirm that earth to be adored, which our Lord Jesus took in
the Assumption of flesh. Therefore by the footestoole, the Earth may be
understood, but by the Earth the flesh of Christ, which at this day we also
adore in the Mysteries, and which the Apostles adored in our Lord Jesus etc.
And the like exposition heerof is given by S. Hierome, In ps. 98.
who also further says, In Tit. 1.
There is as great difference between the Bread of Proposition and the Body of
Christ, as between a shadow and bodies, between an Image and the truth,
between patterns of things to come, and the things themselves which are
prefigured by those patterns. S. Ambrose is so clear for the Real Presence,
that he is therefore reproved by Oecolamp. in l. Epist. Oecolamp. 19 c. l 3. p.
756 and Cent 4. c. 4. Col. 295. Melancth. 16. p. 636. Luther. l. cont. Regem
Anglia.
sundry Protestants.

Gaudentius also a very Ancient Father, living in the year 400. writes to
like effect, saying: Tract. 2. de Exodus
The same throughout the several howses of the Churches being offered in the
Mystery of Bread and wine, does revive being believed, does quicken being
Consecrated, does sanctify such as Consecrate. This is the flesh of the Lamb,
this is the Blood, for the bread which came down from heaven does say, The
bread which I will give, is my flesh, for the life of the world: with good
reason and very aptly even then is blood expressed under the form of wine,
because where he says in the Gospel, I am the true vine, he does
sufficiently declare, that all wine which is offered in the figure of his
Passion, is his blood. Whereupon the most B. Patriarch Jacob prophesied of
Christ, saying: He shall wash his stole in wine, and in the blood of the Grape
his cloak; because he was to wash the clothing of our Body with his own
proper Blood. He therefore the Creator and Lord of Natures, who brought bread
forth of the Earth, and again of Bread (because he both can, and has
promised) does make his own Body: and he who made wine of water, and of wine
his blood etc. O depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! It is
the Pasche of our Lord, that is, Our Lords Passe-ouer. Esteem it not terrene,
which is made heavenly by him who passes into it, and made it of his Body and
blood etc. Believe thou must that which is denounced and spoken, because that
which thou receiuest is the Body of that heavenly Bread, and the blood of that
sacred vine: for when he taught and gave the Consecrated Bread and wine to his
Disciples, he thus spoke; This is my Body. This is my Blood. Let us believe him
whom we have believed, truth cannot lie etc. let us not infringe that most
solid word of his mouth. This is my Body, This is my Blood. But if any thing
even now in any man's opinion or understanding remain, which he has not
comprehended in this Exposition, let the flame of a fiery faith consume it.

S. Austine expounding the title of the Psalm in which it is written, And he
was carried in his own hands, says. Conc. 1. in ps. 33.
Brethren who can understand how this could be done in man? For who is carried
in his own hands? A man may be carried in the hands of another, in his own
hands no man is carried. How this may be understood in David himself, according
to the letter, we find not, but in Christ we find. For Christ was carried in his
own hands, when commending his own Body, he said, This is my Body: for he
carried that Body in his hands. This place is so unanswerable that Hospinian
undertaking to set down, Hist. Sacram. part. 2 l 4. p. 292. 293.
The Hyperbolicall phrases of the Fathers, does among others, for such place
this saying of S. Austine. In like sort commenting upon these words, Adore ye
the footstool of his feet because it is holy, he says, In ps. 98.
What are we to adore? The footstool of his feet etc. But Brethren consider
what he commands us to adore. In another place the Scripture says, Isa. 66.1.
Heaven is my seat, and the Earth my footstool. Therefore he commands us to
adore the Earth, because he said in another place, that it was the footstool
of God? And how shall we adore the Earth, seeing the Scripture says plainly,
Deuteronomy. 6.13. Mat. 4.11.
Thou shall adore the Lord thy God; And here he says, Adore ye the footstool
of his feet? And expounding to me, what is the footstool of his feet he
says, The Earth is the footstool of my feet. I am become staggering, I fear
to adore the Earth, least he damn me, who has made the heaven and Earth.
Again, I fear not to adore the footstool of my Lords feet, because the
psalm says to me, Adore ye the footstool of his feet etc. Wavering, I
turn my self to Christ, because I seek him here, and I find how without
impiety the Earth may be adored; without impiety the footstool of his feet
may be adored: for he took earth of earth, because flesh is of Earth, and he
took flesh of the flesh of Mary: And because he walked here in his flesh, and
gave to us his flesh to be eaten to Salvation: now no man eats that flesh,
but first adoreth it. It is found out how such a footstool of our Lords feet
may be adored, and that we shall not only not sin by adoring, but sin by
not adoring. Now whereas Bilson answers herto that, True difference part. 4.
p. 536.
It is eaten with the spirit, adored with the spirit, yea the very eating of
it, is the adoring of it, S. Austine directly to the contrary distinguishes
eating from adoring, and makes, as we do, adoring in priority to eating: and
this adoring not to be only in spirit, but by external bowing down and
prosternation. Lastly says S. Austine, Ser. ad Neophitos.
Receive this in Bread, which hunge upon the Cross; Receive this in the
Chalice, which flowed from the side of Christ. S. Austine is so clear herin,
that Bucer says, Scripta Anglic. p. 679.
How often does Austine write that even Judas received the very Body and Blood
of our Lord. Ibid. p. 678.
And Austine writes in many places, that the Body and Blood of our Lord, is to
be honored and received in the visible signs. Hospinian confesses S. Austine
to say, Hist. Sacram. part. 1. l. 5. p 531.
We do truly honor in the form of Bread and wine which we see, things
invisible, that is to say, flesh and blood. So clear and confessed is S.
Austine for the real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament, and
our Adoration thereof.

Eucherius of Lions his wholesome advise and doctrine is this: Ho. 5. de Pascha.
Let all doubtful infidelity depart, since he who is the author of the gift,
he also is the witness of the truth; for the invisible Priest does by his word
and secret power convert the visible creatures, into the substance of his Body
and Blood, saying thus, Take ye, eat ye, for this is my Body. And the
sanctification being reiterated; receive and drink, This is my Blood.
Therefore as at the beck of our Lords commanding, immediately the highest
heavens, the deepest waters, the vastnes of the earth subsisted, with like
power, the virtue of the word does command in spiritual Sacraments, and the
effect obeys. Nor let any man doubt, that the primary Creatures at the beck
of this power, by the presence of his Majesty may pass over into the nature of
our Lords Body, when he sees man himself made the body of Christ by the
workema^ship of heavenly mercy: and as he who believing before the words of
Baptism, is yet in the Bond of his old debt, but the words of Baptism once
said, presently he is freed from all degres of sin: even so when the
Creatures blessed with the heavenly words, are put upon the sacred Aultars,
before they are consecrated by the Invocation of the supreme Deity, there is
the substance of Bread and wine; but after the words of Christ, it is the Body
and Blood of Christ. And what marvel is it, if he can convert things created,
which he could create by his word? Yea now it seems to be a less miracle, if
that which he is known to have made of nothing, being now created, he be yet
able to change into a better thing.

In like sort S Leo advises, Ser. 6. de ieiun. 7. men's.
Because our Lord says, except you eat the flesh etc. let us so communicate,
that we nothing doubt of the truth of Christ's Body and blood: for that is
received with mouth, which is believed in heart.

The Fathers do so confessedly agree with Catholics herein, that it is
acknowledged by Prot. themselves, Humfr. Ies. part. 2. rat. 5.
That, Gregory the great taught Transubstantiation: that, Cent. 5. Col. 517.
Chrysostom is thought to confirm Transubstantiation: that, Antony de Adamo
in his Anatomy of the M^sse. fol. 2^1.
The Books of Sacraments ascribed to Ambrose, affirm the opinion of Christ's
bodily presence in the Sacrament: That, S. Ignatius said of the heretics of
his time, Theodoret. dial 3. Hame^m. de Trad. Apost. Col. 746. Chemnit. Ex.
part 1. p 94.
They do not admit Eucharists and oblations, because they do not confess the
Eucharists to be the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered
for our sins: Adam F^ancisci in Margar. Theol. p. 256.
That, Transubst^ntiation entered early into the Church: And that, Ant. de Adamo
Anatomy of Mass. p. 236.
they have not yet hitherto been able to k^ow, when this opinion of the Real
and bodily being of Christ in the Sacrament did first begin. So confessedly
most ancient is the doctrine of Real Presence and Transubstantiation: and so
clearly are the sacred Scriptures expounded in proof thereof by the learned
and holy Fathers, both Greek and Latin.

SECT. VI. That Protestant writers do teach and believe from Scriptures, the
Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist.
TO examine now what sundry Prot. teach and believe concerning the Real
Presence; and first to begin with the Hussi^e^, John H^sse himself
prescribes tha^, L de coena Domini. c. 2.
Whatsoever Christ Jesus delivered by himself to his Apostles, and by them and
other holy Doctors; and whatsoever his holy Roman Church houldeth of this
Venerable Sacrament, that firmly is to be believed etc. By power and
Institution of Christ etc. by the ministry of Priests, his true Body is in
the venerable Sacrament, which was conceived and borne of the most chaste Virgin
Mary etc. Likewise the blood which was shed upon the Cross in remission of
sins out of the same Body. And now for Transubstantiation, says he Cap. 3^
the Son of God etc. with his word by Transubstantiation makes true Bread,
flesh, and wine by Transubstantiation is made blood. Lastly for Adoration he
tells his own pract^se saying. Tract de omne Sanguine Christi glorificato.
We adore the Body and blood of Christ being at the right hand of God the
Father, and hid in the venerable Sacrament which Priests m^ke and so we know
what we adore. Again, Contra Bu^lam Papae de Electione Crucis.
The Eucharist is more to be worshipped by the faithful, then the rel^ckes of
other Saints.

Perzib^ane another Hussite declares the unanimous consent of the Hussites in
this point, saying, Cap. 21.
I truly profess, that above 20. years ago M. John Husse, with the Masters
and Doctors of the Country of Bohemia, by their full Counsel, and unanimous
Consent, none, as they said contradicting have rejected, and confuted, and
prohibited publicly those Articles of Wiccliffe, to wit, that material bread
remains in the host after Consecration: also that in the Sacraments,
Accidents do not stand without their subject: Also that Christ is not in the
same Sacrament identically, and really.

We need not doubt to find the Lutheranes fully joining with us in the real
Presence. Luther wrote a special book, entitled, Extat. tom. 7.
Defensio verborum Coenae Accipite, comedite, Hoc est corpus meum: contra
fanaticos Sacramentariorum spiritus, wherein he avouches that. post init.
The Devil with blaspheming the Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ does assault
us at this day by fanaticall men, who dream that therein is given only Bread
and wine in sign or symboll of Christian profession neither will they grant
that the Body and blood of Christ is there, when as the words are most
express and clear, Eat ye this is my Body etc. nothing does more promote
this heresy, then nouelty etc. I cannot persuade my self, that this heresy
will long continue: for it is very gross and immoderate, and it does not
impugn doubtful opinions, and doubtful Testimonies of Scripture, but plain
and express sentences of Scripture. Again, I will take God to witness, and the
whole world, and I will confess, that I will not be of opinion with the
Sacramentaries, nor never was, nor world without end, God willing, will be. And I
will have my hands clean from the blood of all those, whose souls by this
poison they drive from Christ, they seduce and kill etc. And I would friendly
and familiar entreat them, that they would not be angry at me for this, that I
condemn their doctrine, and ascribe it to the Devil: For I cannot do, or
speak otherwise, then I bear in my heart and believe. And some pages after,
Doctor Carolostadius of these sacred words, This is my Body, does pitifully
wrest the Pronowne, This, Zwinglius vexes the Verb substantive, Is.
Oecolampadius puts the Nown, Body, upon the torture; others tear in pieces
the whole text etc. These tread underfoot and destroy all things: and yet
the holy Ghost is in every one of these, and none will be reproved of Error
etc. So grossly and clearly does the Devil take us by the nose. Again, This is
worthy of admiration, that none of the Fathers, who are infinite in number, do
so speak of the Sacrament, as the Sacramentaries do. And in another place he
writes thus Catholickly, De sermon Euch^r.
In the Sacrament of the Altar it is not Bread and wine, but the forms of
bread and wine: for bread is changed into the true and natural Body of Christ,
and wine into the true and natural Blood of Christ.

But this Doctrine of Real Presence is so clearly taught by Luther, that Prot.
confess, that he maintayneth See Bridges in his Defense of the Government, and
Perkins in his 4. Treatises how to apply Gods word.
Consubstantiation, or the real Presence in the Sacrament. We have here then
from Luther, that the impugning of the real Presense proceeded from the
Devil, and is heretical: and that the Testimonies of Scripture for it are
clear, and not doubtful, as also of the Fathers: and that for his part, he
will not be a Sacramentary, world without end.

Neither was this Luthers particular opinion, for Chemnitius has also written
purposely another Exam. part. 2. p. 110.
Book against the Sacramentaries, as also Iacobus Andraeas, entitled,
Confutatio disputationis Ioannis Iacobi Grinai de coena Domini: wherein all the
foresaid authors of these Books, have (uncharitably as Prot. complain)
condemned them for Vide libros sup. cit.
Sacramentaries, and Heretics. And heerin they have proceeded so far, that
they affirm with Catholics against Protestants, that, the Iac. Audraeat in
Confut. Disp. Grin^ide coena Dom. p. 110.
wicked do verily receive the Body of Christ. In so much that the Prot. do
therefore Vide Apol. Modest. ad Act. Conuentus 15. Theol.
reprove them.

But the Lutherans do not rest only with the real Presence, for they defend
also with Catholics against Prot. the Adoration of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament. This does Chemnitius clearly defend; Exam. part. 2. p. 92.
affirming moreover this point of Adoration to be extra Controuersiam, out of
Ib p. 92. post ^^^d.
Controversy, between him and the Papists: Yea says he, Ib. p. 94. circ. med.
herby we separate our selves from the Sacramentaries. And another Lutheran
Benedict Morgernsterne affirms, that Tract. de Eccl p 135. initio and prope
fin.
Christ is to be adored, not only in heaven, but also in the Mysteries, as
being present in the Supper. Brentius says, In Apol. Confess. Wit.
We confess that Christ the son of God is always, and every where to be
adored, whether in heaven or in Earth, or in the Eucharist, or out of the
Eucharist. Georgius Princeps Anhaltinus affirms Vide Georg. Princ. Anhalt.
propofit. Magdeb. conc. 4. de Sacram. Altaris. fol. 188.
That, 1541. he conferred with Luther upon this point, and showed by sundry
Arguments, that Christ is to be adored in the Sacrament, no less then was the
Holy Ghost descending in the form of a Dove. Timotheus Kirchmerus teaches
also out of Luther that, In thesauro etc. fol. 586.
The Sacrament is to be adored kneeling, because that the true Body of our Lord
is there present And D. Luther himself adored also in like manner, and writ a
special Treatise thereof, entitled, De Of this Book see in Benedict
Morgernsterne Trac. de Eccl. p. 147. circa med. and 149. ant. med.
adoratione Sacramenti ad fratres. Which opinion of Luthers, concerning the
Adoration of the B. Sacrament, the Prot. Vide Apol. Mod. ad Act. Convent. 15.
Theol. Torgae nuper habit. p. 40. circ. med.
acknowledge and reprehend; of which reprehension made by Prot. Luther himself
takes notice and complains, saying: Luther Tom 7. Witt^mb. de Euch. f. 335.
They mock us at their pleasure, calling us shamfull eaters of flesh and
drinkers of blood, and that we worship a God made of Bread. This is so clearly
the Doctrine or Luther, that Calvin says of Lu^her for calling it Adorabile
Sacramentum, Ep. 7^. ad Bucerum.
Madness draws with it Idolatry. For to what and is that of Luther, adorabile
Sacramentum, a Sacrament to be adored, but that an Idol should be erected in
the Temple of God? And yet this notwithstanding Calui^ esteems Luther. L 1.
de lib. arb. cont. Albert. Pigh. See more of Luther in Gualt. fol. 30.
For an excellent Apostle of Christ. Well thus Luther believed and his
followers, and in this faith he persisted even after that the Protestants
doctrine was explained Hereof Cowpers C^ronicle. fol. 290. circ. med. And M
Sleidam Comment. l. 6. f. 8^.
unto him by other learned Protestants: And yet notwithstanding all this,
Prot. do own and challenge him for theirs.

But to come to Caluinistes also, who speaks more plainly then Beza, who
writes two homilies with this inscription, Extant Tom. 3. operum eius.
Two homilies against the Error of the Sacramentaries, for the true Presence of
Christ in the supper of the Lord: In the later whereof, to omit sundry such
like, he says, Anto med.
W^ dissent from them, who for the thing of the Sacrament, do place the virtue
and merits of Christ, severed from Christ himself: for Christ said not, This
is the merit of my Body, delivered for you, but, This is my Body and this is my
blood. Neither is it added in vain etc. which is given for you, and which is
shed for you: so that it could not be said more plainly, Christ himself, whose
Body was given for us, and blood shed for us, to be truly given to us in the
supper, to the nourishment of eternal life: And therefore the thing of that
Sacrament is that very Body, which he offered for us upon the Cross, and that
very blood which he shed for our sins; we are so far from dreaming of any
Symbolicall or typical body, or allegorical Blood. And the same he teaches
in Quaest. and resp. q. 29. q. 6.
other places. And the like might be produced from Instit. l. 4. c. 17. 5. 10..
16.. 19.. 33.
Calvin.

Barnes, a Foxian Martyr, in his protestation at his death, said expressly, that
the Sacrament after the words spoken by the Priest, does change the substance
of Bread and wine, into the very Body and blood of Christ: which his
Protestation being then published by a professed Ghospeller of that time, and
then also answered unto by D. Standish in his Book then printed in English,
the said words are yet extant therein, though fraudulently since omitted by
Fox, Act. Mon. p. 610. 611. 612.
who following the said Copy verbatim, and coming by course to these very
words, does purposely ouerpasse them. The same Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
was believed also by the Act. Mon. p. 27^.
L. Cobham. So that we have Hussites, Lutherans, and Caluinistes teaching with
us from the Scriptures the Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the
most Blessed Sacrament.

SECT. VII. Objections taken from the Scriptures, in disproofe of the Real
Presence, answered.
THe Textes of sacred Scripture being so confessedly clear for the Real
Presence as has been showed, let us now see what poor Objections they make
against it. Some object, that what our Savior took into his hands, blessed,
and brake, that he gave to his Disciples: but he took, blessed and brake
bread; therefore it was but Bread which he gave to his Disciples. Answ. It was
not the same which our Savior took, and which he gave, for he took common
bread, but by his blessing and power of his word, he changed the same into his
Body, and so gave it to them, and so betwixt took and gave, passes the word,
blessed, which makes, that all the verbes govern not the same accusative case
in the same manner: as if one should say, a certain man struck Peter, slew
him, and buried him, he does not mean that he buried him alive, though he
stroke him alive. Yea Prot. themselves are enforced to answer this Argument,
for they teach, that our Savior taking common and ordinary bread, made it
Sacramental: so that it was not the same thing which he took and gave.

Secondly it is objected, that the word (is) is oftentimes taken in Scripture
for (signify,) therefore in the Sacrament there is not Christ's Body, but Bread
a sign thereof. Answ. Though this has been sufficiently See before. sect. 5.
answered before, yet I add, that the word (is) is more often taken for its
own signification. Secondly, it is so taken in Explication of words, as to
say, Amare est diligere, because here one sign is affirmed of another, and
because the very being and Essence of a sign is to signify: and so even in
these propositions, is, does signify to be, and because the very being and
Essence of words, is to signify, therefore, is, is explicated by, signify; but
in other propositions of things, not of words, as in this Proposition, Hoc est
corpus meum, where, that which is the praedicatum, is not formally a sign,
(is) cannot be expressed by signify. This truth is so certain, as that M.
Hooker speaking heerof says, Eccles. Pol. l. 5. sect. 67. p. 177.
We do not interpret the words of Christ, as if the name of his Body did but
import the figure of his Body, and to be, were only to signify. And the same is
defended by Kechermanus, saying, System. Theol. p. 444.
Others will have the figure to be in the Copula (is) which also cannot be
proved, for etc. So confessed it is that, is, is not taken for, signify.

The third Objection is, the Lamb is called the Exodus 12.11.
, Passover, Genesis 17.10.
Circumcision the Covenant, being but figures thereof; so also our Savior is
called a Io. 15.1.
Vine, a Io. 10.9.
Door, a 1. Cor. 10.4.
Rock, and the like, all which are figurative speeches: therefore in like sort
is the Sacrament figuratively called the body of Christ. Answ. Of this
Objection I say with S. Austine, De Doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 10.
If the prejudice of any erroneous persuasio^ preoccupate the mind, whatsoever
the Scripture has to the contrary, men take it to be a figurative speech.
Wherefore first I answer. By the same consequence may be proved all other
speeches in Scripture to be figurative. 2. The Lamb is not called the passover
figuratively, because it signifies the same, for what similitude is there
betwixt the killing of a Lamb, and our Lords passing over? wherefore it is so
called properly, even as the festival day was called Pascha, because the Lamb
was sacrifyced, and the festival day kept in memory and honor of the said
Passover of our Lord: and so in the Gospel, the Paschall Lamb is absolutely
called the Luc. 2^.7.8. Mar. 14.12.
Pascha. And though it were taken figuratively, yet is it expounded
sufficiently, being called the Exodus 12.27.
Sacrifice of our Lords Passe-ouer, and the blood thereof, being Exodus 12.13.
a token for the^ upon the houses. 3. Circumcision is not only a sign, but
even the Covenant it self; And so Iacobus Andr^as a Prot. teaches that,
Confut. Disp. Io. Iac. G^inaei. p. 209.
It does not only signify the Coue^ant, but also is in very deed the Covenant
(it self.) And though the Scripture should, as is objected, call it the
Covenant figuratively, yet as other Bulling. Dec. p. 988 and Commonefact. de
sacra coena. etc. p. 102.
Prot. do observe, the Scripture does explain it self sufficiently in the
same place, in that it does there also call Circumcision, Genesis 17.11.
The sign of the Covenant. Luther himself decydeth this Argument, thinking it
as wise a proof, as if a man should argue, that Defens. verb. Coenae. fol. 386.
Sara or Rebecca brought forth Children, and remained virgins, because our Lady
did so.

As for the words Rock, door, vine, and the like, they are sufficiently
explained in Scriptures. Christ is called the 1. Cor. 10.4.
Spiritual Rock by S. Paul. And Io. 15.4.5.6.
Christ himself expounds in what sense he is a vine, and his Disciples,
branches. And when he calls himself, a Door, it is expressly said, that he
spoke it by way of a Io. 10.6.
Proverb. So that it is evident, even by the places objected, that the
foresaid sayings are not taken literally, neither were they ever so understood
by any one Interpreter: whereas the foresaid words, This is my Body, are not
expounded or qualifyed, by any of the Euangeli^tes, or S. Paul, otherwise then
the litterall sense of it self affoardeth. And the same Interpretation of the
foresaid objected places, is given by sundry Bulling. in his Dec. in Engl, Dec.
5. ser. p. 988. See Vrsinus his Commonefactio etc. p. 202. Josias Nichols in
his Abraham's Faith, p. 111. Praetorius de Sa^ramentis. p. 1^8.
Prot. writers. But because this Objection is so frequently v^ged, I further
add, that whereas in the example of the B. Sacrament, our Savior did take a
certain portion of Bread into his hand, and pointing to that determinate
Substance, said, This is my body; in the other examples he pointed not, or
spoke to any determinate substance, so much as then present, or in being, into
which he might be changed; but uses only a general name of a kind of
Substance, as I am a vine etc, which has in it self no determinate and proper
being, and therefore must needs be figurative. Again, in these objected
examples, one different nature is affirmed of another, which would be clearly
false, if thereby should be signified identity of nature or Substance, and not
only lykenes of Condition or Property: whereas in these words, This is my
Body, one different nature is not affirmed of another, for I have proved
before, that the Pronowne, This, points not at all to Bread, but to Body.
Lastly, these and other such like Genesis 41.26. Apoc. 17.^. Mat. 13.
examples vulgarly objected, are all of them spoken upon occasion of
Explication, and to explain some other truth or saying, then formerly in
being, or precedent; whereas these other words, This is my Body, are not
spoken upon occasion, or for explication of any other saying, or truth then
precedent, but are originally uttered, as by way of Institution, to ordain no
less then a Sacrament, then before not in being. It is therefore more then
licentious bouldnes, to affirm these words to be figurative, because the
other are. And by like liberty, a man may defend any old or new heresy, though
never so damnable.

Fourthly it is objected that these words, Luc. 22.20. 1. Cor. 11.15.
This Cup is the new Testament in my Blood, must be taken figuratively, for
first the Cup is taken for the thing contained, and whether the same be wine or
blood, yet it is not the Testament, but the sign thereof. I answer. 1. to take
the Cup for the thing contained, is a figure most ordinary, and the same
withal is clearly expressed by our Saviors saying, take, drink, This is the
Cup, for not the vessel, but the liquour is drunk, neither was the vessel,
but the liquour shed for us. Besides instead of those words, This is the Cup,
set down by S. Luke and S. Paul, S. Matthew and S. Mark say, This is the
Blood: now, words obscure and figurative, are to be expounded by other more
clear and proper. And certainly if a man should say of the same vessel, drink
of this Cup, and should annex, drink of this wine, none would doub^, but that
wine, were contained in that Cup, and that man intended to make known the same:
wherefore seeing the holy Ghost by two of his writers, says, This is the Cup,
and by other two of the same thing, This is the Blood, it may not be doubte^,
but that blood is contained in the Cup. 2. The word Test^ment, is not taken
improperly, for the body and blood of C^^^^t under the forms of Bread and
wine, but is truly his T^stament, whereby is given to the worthy receiver, title
and interest to an euerla^ting Inheritance: and though it were figu^atiue, yet
it is sufficiently expressed by S. Matthew, plai^ly saying, Th^s is the blood
of the new Testament.

A fi^th Obi^ct^on is, Christ said, Luc. 22.2^.
Do this for a Commemoration of me; but memory or Commemoration i^ of things
absent, therefore Christ is not really present in the Sacrament. I answer,
what this means Saint Paul teaches saying: 1. Cor. 11.26.
As often as you shall eat this Bread, and drink the Chalice, you shall show
the death of our Lord until he come. Now, Christ's death and Passion is not
present, but absent, yea it is not, but was. Secondly it is not said here, to
be only a Commemoration or remembrance, but only we are here commanded to do it
in remembrance, which we daily do. Thirdly, one and the same thing in sundry
respects may be a body, and yet a figure, sign, or remembrance thereof: so was
Christ's Body transfigured upon the Mount Mat. 17.2.
Thabor, a figure of his Body glorified in heaven; and so also is he called,
Heb. 1.3. See the like Phil. 2 6. 2. Cor. 4.4.
The figure of his Fathers substance, and is yet also of, and the same
substance. This Objection though most common, is yet so poor, as that it is
answered by Calvin saying, In omnes Pauli Epist. in. 1. Cor. 11. p. 323.
The supper is a remembrance etc. But where some gather from hence, that
therefore Christ is absent from the supper, the Answer is ready etc.

Sixthly it is objected, that after the Institution of the Sacrament, Christ
said, Mat. 26.29.
I will not drink from henceforth of this fruit of the vine: therefore it was
wine which before he had immediately drunk. I answer first, S. Luke who
undertook to Luc. 1.3.
write things in order, sets down the forsaid words before the
Institution of the Sacrament, Luc. ^2.18.
applying them to the time of the eating of the Paschall Lamb, of which in the
sam^ place he uses the same words, saying, From Luc. 22.1^.
this time I will not eat it, till it be fulfilled in the kindome of God:
which being true, it evidently follows, that seeing our Savior said at the
time of the eating of the Paschall Lamb, which was before the Institution of
the Sacrament, that he would not drink from that time of the fruit of the
vine, that therefore that which he drank afterward, was not wine, but his
precious blood. And that this Interpretation is most true, is confessed by
Hutterus, saying, De sacrificio Missae. p. 393.
Those words, I will not drink of this fruit of the Vine etc. our Savior
spoke in treating of the Sacrament of the old Testament, to wit, the Paschall
Lamb. 2. Though it were understood of the Sacrament, yet it might be called
Wine, as the Body also is called 1. Cor. 10.16.
Bread, for 3. causes. First because it was so before; so Aarons rod being
turned into a serpent, Exodus 7.10.12.
was yet afterward called a rod: So water turned into wine, Io. 2.9.
was yet after called water. 2. Because it keeps the forms of bread and
wine, and things are called as they appear, so Angels appearing in the shape
of men, were called Genesis 18.2.29.5. Mar. 16.5. Luc. 24, 4. Act. 1.10.
men. 3. Because Christ in this Sacrament, is very true and principal bread
and wine, feeding and refreshing us in Body and Soul, until we arrive to
everlasting happiness. And lastly Prot. themselves do teach that Aretius loc.
com. p. 260. and 40. Marloret. in Encbyr. at the word Panis.
under the name of Bread the Scripture does (sometimes) understand not naked
bread, but all kind of food, which concerns this present life, or the
eternal: according to which acceptance, the Sacrament may be called Bread, and
so is Christ himself called Io. 6.35.48.52.
Bread.

Many object that the very word Transubstantiation, was but lately invented.
Answ. The word Transubstantiation was read and known some hundreds of years
before the name Protestant was heard or dreamed of; for that was expressed in
the Counsel of Laterane, which was celebrated Anno 1215. this was but stamped
since the time of Luther, some hundred years ago. And that difficult places
of Scripture may be cleared and expressed by words not set down in Scripture,
Calvin Inst. l. 1. c. 13.. 3.
acknowledges and proves by examples of the words Trinity, and Persons.

SECT. VIII. Objections, against the possibility of the Real Presence,
answered.
SOme Prot. think the Doctrine of the real Presence to imply in it certain
and several Contradictions, and therefore to be impossible; As first, that the
being of Christ's Body in many places at once (which must needs be admitted if
the real Presence be granted) does contradict the Unity of his Body, which is
but one, and not multiplied. 2. The being of Christ's whole Body in so small an
host, does also contradict the greater quantity of his Body. 3. His being there
invisible, and without Circumscription, does likewise (say they) contradict the
truth and natural properties of his humane Body. In reguard hereof Beza says,
Nego Cont. Brent.
Deum pesse etc. I deny that God is able to make Christ's Body present in the
Eucharist. Ridley also says, In the Acts and Monum. p. 964.
I do affirm, that it is impossible for Christ to be both in heaven, and earth
at one time. In like manner In his Answ. to Reinolds p. 179. and 180.
D. Whitaker discourses at large, endeavoring to prove the Real Presence, to
be a Contradiction, and therefore impossible.

For our better proceeding and easier dissoluing of all these falsely pretended
difficulties and contradictions, feigned and devised only by the Adversaries of
the Real Presence, we affirm first, that according to Rules of Logic
(according to which only, a Contradiction must be examined) a Contradiction
does consist of two Propositions, or sayings, whereof the one is an affirmative,
the other a negative, or denial of that which is affirmed; as for example to
say, that Christ's Body is present in this place, and Christ's Body is not
present in this place, these two sayings are contradictory, and being taken
(secundum idem) that is, in one and the same respect, they cannot by any
possibility be both of them true. Or secondly a Contradiction is that which
cannot stand with the essence of the things, as to say, that one and the same
time, and other like Circumstances, is, and is not. But the Presence of
Christ's Body in this place, and that place, yea in a million of places at one
time, is not of this kind, for it denies not the being of his Body in either
place, but only affirms the Presence thereof in all places where it is.
Neither is it against the essence of Christ's Body, or destroys the nature of
Christ's Body, to be in the Sacrament, and in as many places, as that sacred
and immaculate host is offered up. For better illustration whereof, I will give
some like resemblances: first in the mystery of the B. Trinity, do we not
believe, that one and the selfsame substance, and divine Essence in number to
be at once and for ever in three several and distinct persons? A matter no
less wonderful, then the manifold Presence of Christ's Body in many places:
for as there is in the Sacrament a Distinction of places, so in this Mystery of
the Trinity a distinction of persons; and therefore, as there is in this a most
simple unity, of nature or essence, notwithstanding the distinction of persons,
so in the other also without all danger of Contradiction, there may be a like
unity of Body, notwithstanding the aforesaid distinction of places. And here
the Arrians might, and did as well cavil about this Mystery of the Trinity, as
the Protestants do now about the Real Presence.

A second resemblance of this Mystery, may be given in the soul of Man: this
soul not being proportionable to the extension of the Body, (for so it were
material depending of the Body, and mortal with it) but an indivisible unity
and immortal, is notwithstanding, as both Philosophy and Truth teaches, wholly
in the whole Body, and wholly in every part thereof; and we may easily imagine,
that God by his power is able to conserve it at once in several members cut
of, and divided from the said Body, even as it was before in the same members,
when they were united to the Body.

This difficulty may also be better conceived, though not proved, by example of
one and the same word, the which being once uttered, is thereupon at one and the
same instant in the hearing of sundry persons, and not as a confused and
indistinct noise multiplied in the air, but as one peculiar word distinguished
with the same syllables, wherein it was uttered. As also one Seal does impart
to sundry pieces of wax, one and the same Print or form; and sundry looking
glasses can in like manner contain in them at one time, even one and the same
favor or resemblance.

Add herunto, that albeit Prot. do say and think, that Luther erred in point
of the Sacrament, yet certes they cannot doubt, but that he was so learned as
to discern a Contradiction: thus then he says thereof, Luth. tom Wittemb 1^57.
defens verb. ^oe ae f 388. See further Luthers opinion herin alleged by P^t.
Martyr in his Disp. annexed to his com. plac. in Eng. p. 221.
What Scriptures have they to prove, that these two Propositions be directly
contrary, Christ sits in heaven, and Christ is in the supper. The
contradiction is in their carnal Imagination, not in faith, or the word of
God. The like is affirmed by Ioachim Westphalus, saying, In Apol. cont. Calu.
c. 19. p. 194.
The body of man is circumscribed in one place, therefore at one time it cannot
be but in one place, therefore not in all places where the supper is ministered.
Is not this Geometrical Argument fetched from Euclids demonstrations, the
Pillar and up holder of all these Sacramentaries etc? Philosophy brought forth
all heresies, and she begat the Error of Zwinglius. And with him agrees Ho.
50.2. Tom. in Euang. Lucae.
Brentiu^, whom M. Jewel terms, In his Defense of the Apol. p. 473.
A most grave and learned Father: and so do the 15. Protestant Deuines
assembled together in Saxony, their words are as follows, In Apol. Modest.
ad acta convent. 1^. Theol. Torge nuper babit. p. 26. ante med.
Whereas the Sacramentaries do say, that the Body of Christ is in heaven,
therefore it is not in the Supper, etc. Therefore Luther provoke all
Sacramentaries, that they tell him, and show him the Antithesis, and repugnance
betwixt them. But Saint Chrysostom answers this Objection, saying, In Ep ad
Hebraeos. ho. 17. S. Ambr. in Heb c. 10. Nyss in orat. Catech. c 37. and see S.
Ch^ys stome de Sa^erd. l. 3. c 4. and ho. 2. ad Pop. fin.
This is one Sacrifice, otherwise by this reason, because it is offered in many
places, there should be many Christ's; not so, but one Christ in every place,
here whole, and there whole, one Body. Lastly M. Fox, (who should be able, as
a man would think, to discern a Contradiction, who was able to write such a
huge volume of lies, as is his Acts and Monuments) says, In his Act. and Mon.
p. 998. And see many more Prot. confessing the possibility in the Liturgy.
Tract 2. see. 4 p 150. 1^1.
That Christ abiding in heaven, is no let, but that he may be in the Sacrament,
if he list.

Add heerunto, that a body to be in a place, is not of the Essence of a Body,
but merely extrinsecall, and accidentary, for the highest heaven is a true
Body, and is not yet in any place: wherefore to be in any place, or more
places, is not to contradict the Essence of a true Body, and by Consequence
possible.

Christ our Savior when he appeared to S. Act. 9.4.5.17. and 22.8.9 15.16.
Paul, was at the same time in the highest heaven, and upon the Earth, or in
the air near the Earth: therefore, as then Christ's body was in heaven, and
near unto the Earth. That Christ as then was in heaven Prot. grant, and it
appears by those words spoken of him, Act. 3.11.
Whom heaven truly must receive, until the times of the restitution of all
things: that he was also near the Earth in the air, is evident by the text,
and will be made more evident by the ensuing discourse.

Heerto two answers are framed by John Calvin. 1. Inc. 9. Act.
that S. Paul saw not Christ in his own person, but only in some shape or
figure, neither heard a voice from Christ's own mouth, but only some voice from
heaven, such as was that of God the father, at his Baptism and
Transfiguration. 2. Calu. instit. l. 4. c. 7.. 29.
that he truly saw and heard Christ himself, but as remaining in heaven, so
that the eyes and ears of Paul did pierce the highest heaven. And here it
seems to me, that Calvin did not remember himself, forgetting in one place
what he had said in another: for in his Commentaries upon the 9. of the Acts,
he avouches, that Paul neither saw Christ in his own person, nor yet heard
any voice from Christ's own mouth; and in the fourth Book of his Institutions
the 7. Chapter, he affirms that S. Paul truly saw and heard Christ himself:
is not this a Contradiction? but pardon him, for he had forgotten the saying,
oportuit mendacemesse memorem.

But letting this Contradiction pass, against Caluins first gloss, that S.
Paul truly saw Christ himself, appears by these places, Act. 9.7.
But the men that went in Company with him, stood amazed, hearing the voice,
but seeing no man: Where a difference is made between S. Paul and his
Companions, in that they saw no man, but only heard a voice. Again, Ib. ver.
27.
Barnabas told the Apostles, how in the way Paul had seen our Lord, and that
he spoke unto him. And yet in a third place, Ib. verse. 17.
Ananias said, Jesus has sent me, he that appeared to thee in the way that
thou came. And yet further, Act. 22.15.26.
God has preordinated thee, that thou should etc. see the just one, and
hear a voice from his mouth: because thou shall be witness to all men, of those
things which thou have seen and heard. See the like Act. 1^.15.16. 1. Cor. 9.1.
elsewhere. And in proof of Christ's Resurrection, numbering the other Apostles,
of whom Christ was truly seen after his death, Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 15.8.
Last of all, as it were of an abortiue, he was seen also of me, which proof
had been of no force, unless he had truly seen the very body of Christ, as the
rest of the Apostles had before.

Concerning the second, that he saw Christ not as in heaven, but in earth, or
in the air near the Earth, may be proved first, in that the light of him that
appeared was so great, that it struck Paul Act. 9.8.
blind, which it could not have done, unless it had been near. Besides his
Companions also saw a light, and heard a voice, which argues, that Christ was
near them, for it is not probable, that their eyes and ears could pierce the
highest heavens; they also did not hear the voice of him Act. 11.20.
that spoke with Paul, which argues that Christ was nearer to Paul, whereas if
he had spoken from heaven, all might have heard alyke. Further if S. Paul had
seen him in the highest heaven, he would not have doubted who he had been,
saying, who art thou O Lord, nor yet have needed that answer of our Lord, I am
Jesus whom thou persecutest. Lastly, Prot. much marvel, how the Saints in
heaven can have so long eyes and ears, as to see and know things done upon
Earth. Much more may we marvel, how the Carnal eyes, and ears of Paul could
reach from Earth to heaven: and if this perforce they must attribute to the
power of God (which though it did not happen, yet to be possible we grant) with
far less reason can they deny through the same power, the like privilege to
the glorified souls.

S. Paul being in prison, it is said, Act. 23.11.
The night following our Lord standing by him, said, be constant: for as thou
have testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou testify at Rome also. This
place is so conuincing, that the Prot. Anno 1560. 1562. 1568. 1605.
of Geneua, instead of standing by him, assistens, or adstans, in Latin, do
translate, se present, he being present: and Tremelius changes it to, visus
est, was seen. But as by saying, being present, this does not impugn, but
rather prove Christ's being in the prison with S. Paul; so to change standing
into seeing, is a Corruption over gross, standing, and seeing being things so
different: And therefore Against Rhem. Test. in Act. 23.11. Bib. of 1578.
Fulke and other Translatours do truly say, stood by him. Now this proves that
though he was in heaven, yet was he also at the same time in the prison with
Paul; neither will it suffice to say, that it was an Angel that stood by him,
for the Text says, it was our Lord. Neither was it an Angel, but Christ our
Lord, of whom he had testified in Jerusalem, and whom he was to testify in
Rome.

Examples of other like apparitions of Christ upon earth, are plentiful in the
ancient Fathers: as to S. Peter whereof S. In orat. cont. Auxentium. Egefip. l.
3. de Excidio Hierus. c. 2.
Ambrose: Also unto S. Anthony, as appears in S. Athanas. in Apol. pro fuga
sua.
Athanasius: To S. Tharsilla, whereof see S. L. 4. Dial. c. 16.
Gregory: To S. Gregory himself, witness whereof is Ioannes L. 2. vitae
ipsius. c. 12. Paulinus Ep ad Macharium.
Diaconus.

But against this some further urge, that Christ's Body as it is upon the
Altar is not continuated with it self, as it is in heaven, for many other
Bodies are betwixt; therefore it is divided, and so not one. To this, I
answer, in that Case it is neither continuated, nor discontinuated or divided,
for this does properly belong to things which be many, whether they the wholes
or parts. And therefore though many Bodies be betwixt Christ's Body, as it is in
heaven and upon the Altar, yet this proves not that Christ's Body is divided
in respect of it self, but only in respect of the place, to wit, that heaven
and Earth are discontinuated.

It is urged again, if a Body can be in two places at one time, then at the
same time it may be remote and near, come to, and go from the said place; in
one place be extreme hot, and in another place extreme cold, in one place be
wounded and slain, and in another be safe and alive, or the like, all which
imply. Answ. Such respects are multiplied as follow the places, not others: so
in the foresaid case it might be above and below, near and remote, move and
rest etc. none of which do repugne, seeing they are in diverse respects, to wit,
in reguard of diverse places: even as the soul of man, which as it is in the
head and feet, is remote, and not remote from the Earth; and one hand moving,
the other resting, the soul at the same time is said to move and rest. Now
such actions and qualities as do not agree to the Body in reguard of the place,
but in reguard of it self, and so are received and inherent in the body it
self, are not multiplied, no more then the Body it self: So a Body hot in
one place, is also hot in another; and if extreme heat should be applied in
one place, and extreme cold in another, it should be in the same state, as if
the said Contraries were applied to a body in one place, that is, neither
extreme hot, nor extreme cold: and so if a man should be hungry, wounded,
slain etc. in one place, the like he should be in another. Add lastly what
Melancthon says hereof in general, Ep. ad Martinum Gerelitium.
I had rather dye, then affirm this which the Zwinglians affirm, that Christ's
Body cannot be but in one place. Therefore constantly reprove them publicly
and privately when occasion shall be. And this may suffice for answer to the
first supposed Contradiction of Christ's Body being in diverse places.

The second supposed Contradiction is, that it does imply, for Christ's Body to
be contained within so small a compass, as is the Sacramental host. But to
this I answer, as it is not essential to a Body to occupy a place, so neither
is it essential, that the greatness of the place must portionably answer the
greatness of the Body: for neither place, nor answerable greatness of place to
the body, is put in the definition of a Body, which they should be, if they
were essential to a Body; and the highest heaven has exceeding great
magnitude, and yet is without all place.

Again, it is no more impossible for Christ's Body to be in the Sacrament,
then it is for a Camel to go through the e^e of a needle: and yet our Savior
says, Mat. 19.24. Mar. 1^.25.27.
It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then a rich man
to enter into the kingdom of God. And whereas the Apostles heerupon demanding,
who then can be saved? Christ answered, with men this is impossible, but with
God all things are possible: here, that which is more hard, to wit, a Rich man
to be saved, is said to be possible; therefore much more possible is that which
is said to be more easy, to wit, for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle;
but this is not possible to be but by the Camel not occupying place: therefore
a Body may be, and not occupy place; and by what means soever it be, it is
more incredible and improportionable according to humane sense, then for the
Body of a man to be in the Sacrament: but with God these and all other things
are possible.

This possibility is affirmed by the Ancient Aug. de Spir. and lic. c. 1.
Nazianzen l. 4. de Theol. Orig. in c. 19. Mathaei.
Fathers, yea and by some of the Prot. writers: for M. Willet in his Synopsis
confesses that, Printed 1600. p. 526.
God by his absolute power, can draw the huge Body of a Camel, remaining still
of that bigness, through a needles eye: only he denies that it can be, that God
will do it, because (says he) it is contrary to the law of nature.

And here I would demand, whether it were not as strange, that the Godhead of
Christ being infinite, should yet be wholly in the limited nature of humanity,
and before his nativity wholly also in his Mothers womb, she being therefore
called the Mother of our Luc. 1.43.
Lord, and the Mother of Vide Vincent. Lyrin. l. aduers. her. paul. ant. med.
Amb. l. 2. de Virg. Ephrem de laud. Mariae. Et Conc. Ephesians. in Ep. ad Nestor.
Et Conc. Constantinop. 5. sub Justin. Imperat. c. 6. Epiph. in Anchor. iuxta
med. And see the Centuristes confessing and reporting this. cent. 5. col. 802.
608. 124. See also Socrates hist. l. 7. c. ^2.
God?

This may be somewhat explayned by the example of the sight of the eye, which
being but a small member, comprehends in it (in full proportion of outward
show, incomparably above the bigness of it self) the external figure and
largenes of a great part both of heaven and earth, with a distinguished and
answerable proportion of hills, dales, fields, and buildings, which at once, it
receives and discerns. And, which is more, we see by experience that, a
Looking glass, or a little Diamond, do comprehend in them the external show of
breadth and length of great Chambers and places exceeding greater then
themselves, and that (which is most) in such due and answerable proportion,
that whosoever behouldeth but in the said glass or Diamond the said figures so
in them represented, shall withal behold in them a show of proportion and
largeness far exceeding the said glass or Diamond, and so great as if he had
seen the things themselves. And it is in reason no more strange, for a man to
be in no greater a room then the Sacrament, then it is for the soul of man
(which is an indivisible unity, and of it self can fully re^ide in less then
a needles point) to be as it were dilated, and extended as far as the whole
Body of Man. But this Doctrine is so true, that Luther affirms, Luther cited
by Pet. Martyr. in Di^p. annex loc. com. Anglic.
that a body of quantity, may be without a quantitiue measure. And M. Jewel
likewise acknowledges, Reply against Harding, p. 352.
That God is able by his omnipotent power, to make Christ's Body present,
without place and quantity: so far in his opinion was this matter from all
contradiction.

This also is strongly confirmed by this relation made by S. John, that, Io.
20.19.26.
When the doors were shut where the Disciples were gathered together for
fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst. Whereupon the
Disciples Luc. 14.37.
were troubled, and affrighted, and imagined that they saw a spirit. Now this
could not be, but either by his Body not occupying a place, or else by
penetration of Bodies, which is as difficult. And the like might be showed in
Christ's Nativity, Resurrection, and Ascension. Besides it is as natural for
fire to burn, for a thing colored to be seen, for a thing heavy to weigh
down, for the water to be fluxible, and not to have the quality of sustayning
a heavy body, as it is for a Body to occupy a place: and yet with all these
things has Gods Omnipotency miraculously dispensed, yea suspended and
hindered the natural course thereof, though the organs, objects, means, and
all other things were applied, as appears by the Bush which Exodus 3.2.
Moses saw burn and consumed not: by the fyery furnace, whereinto the 3.
Children were Dan. 3.22.25.27.
cast: by the axe which falling into the water, 4. Reg. 6 5.6.
by virtue of the Prophets word, did swim above the water: by Christ's
walking Mat. 14.26.
upon the waters, at the sight whereof, the thing being supernatural, the
Disciples were so afraid that they cried out, it was a spirit: By Christ's
Luc. 4.29 30.
passing through the midst of them, that had brought him to the edge of a
hill etc. that they might throw him down headlong: By the Israelites passing
through the red sea, Exodus 14.22. Ios. 3.14.
for the water was as it were a wall upon their right hand and left. All which
passages recorded in sacred Scripture, are as miraculous, as Christ's Body
being in the B. Sacrament, and yet that only must by Protestants be denied,
and all these granted.

Lastly, the third supposed Contradiction is of Christ's Body, being in the
Sacrament without Circumscription. Answ. But how was Christ's Body
ci^cumscribed, when he entered in to his Disciples, as before, ianna^s clausis,
the doors being shut? for we read no where that they were miraculo^sly opened,
as the Angel opened the gates of the Prison, Act. 5.29. and 12.5.10.
where S. Peter was: but here at our Saviors entrance, the miracle consisted
not in the opening of the doors, but the miracle rested in our Savior his
sudden standing in the midst of the Apostles when the doors were shut: for
which cause S. John very carefully observes, and twyce over recites, the
doors being shut: in so much that the Apostles at this his appearance, were
Luc. 24.37.
afraid, supposing they had seen a spirit, as in like manner they cried out,
and were troubled, when they saw Mat. 14.16.
him walking upon the Sea.

This truth is acknowledged by S. Ambrose, who writing hereof says, Ambr. in
vlt. cap. Luc.
It was a wonder how the corporal nature passed through the impenetrable body.
S. Hilary likewise testifies, that, Hilar l. 1. de Tria^. post med.
Nothing of that which is solid gives place, neither d^ the wood or stones by
their nature loose any thing etc. Our Lords Body does not depart from it
self, that it should resume it self of nothing, and sense and speech gives
place, and the truth of the fact is without man's reason. I might allege
Chrysostom. de Resur. ho. 9. and in loan. ho. 86. Aug. in tract. sup. dicta verba
Euang. and de agone Christi c. 24 Et Ep. 3. ad volus. E^iph. haer. 64. and 20.
Hier. cont. Iouin. l. 1. c. 21 and ad Eus^o^h. and in Ep. ad Pammach. de
erroribus loan Hierosol. Cyril. in loan. l. 12. c. 53. Theodoret. Di^log. 2.
Leo Eo. 22. ad Flau. and Ep. 83. ad Palestinos.
sundry other Testimonies of the Fathers, all confessing it to be miraculous.

But I will content my self with the Doctrine of the great Deuines of Geneua,
who grant, Vide Apol. Modest. ad acta Convent. 15. Theol. Torgae nuper habit.
p. 35.
That suddenly to v^nish out of sight etc. neither also to penetrate through a
solid body, do take away the truth of corporal substance. As also of M.
Cranmer, who speaking hereof, teaches that by possibility Answer to Gardener
and Smith. p. 454.
Christ's body may be in the Bread and wine, also in the doors which were
shut, and stone of his Sepulcher. Whereupon the Conclusion must needs be, that
our Savior his Body passing through the doors, either was not as then
circumscribed in place; or else, which were as strange, it and the door being
two several bodies, were circumscribed both in one place.

The sum of all briefly is this, If God have often hertofore miraculously
suspended from sundry sorts of Bodies, sundry of their natural qualities, the
truth and natures of the said Bodies still preserved notwithstanding, as has
been already showed: And as touching our Saviors sacred Body, Mat. 14.26.
If he walked upon the Sea, against the natural property either of his bodies
weight, or the waters fluxibility apt for division: If, as before, he passed
through the sacred womb of his Virgin Mother, sealed up without reservation,
penetrated the stone in his Resurrection, the doors at his apparition to his
Disciples; if his Body was transformed Mar. 6.49. Mat. 17.2. Luc. 9.29. Mar.
9.3.
upon the mountain, appeared to his Disciples in Mar. 16.12.
another shape: If he suddenly vanished, Luc. 14.31.
as he sat at table with two of his Disciples, (...), became unseen of them:
as also in like manner, Luc 4.29.30. Of his like escape read John. 10.39. and
8.59.
whence all the Synagogue etc. cast him out of the City, and brought him to
the edge of the hill etc. that they might throw him down headlong, he by like
miracle passing through the midst of them, went his way, and so escaped
Seehte Marg. notes of the Engl. Bible printed 1576. in Luc. 4.30.
miraculously: I say, if nature and natural actions have been suspended in all
these, and every one of them, be as miraculous, as is the being of Christ's B.
Body in the consecrated host upon the Altar; and seem withal to imply in
each of them as much contradiction in nature, as does the B. Sacrament, and yet
there is no Contradiction in any of them against nature, but only the
Prerogative and supreme power of the God of Nature, working above nature: why
then should the Real Presence of Christ's sacred Body in the B. Sacrament,
imply in it a Contradiction, and consequently an Impossibility? I conclude all
with a notable sentence of Justinius Martyr, Quae sunt earundem virium eamdem
habent fidem, sieve concedantur, sieve tollantur. Things of equal power have
the same credit, concerning belief, whether they be granted, or denied. Now
let the Prot. apply, and either grant the real Presence, which is no more
miraculous, then the former instances, or else deny all, since they are all
alike, built upon Gods power, working above nature: but the former they dare
not deny, therefore neither let them dare to deny this.

These premises considered, sundry Prot. upon a second and better Consideration
do acknowledge the possibility of the Real presence. Calvin says, 1 Instit.
prin. Argent. de coena Dom. c 11. p. 336.
Here that they may cause us envy, they cause us to speak maliciously of the
power of God Omnipotent: but they either err foolishly, or maliciously: for it
is not here questioned what God can do, but what he will do. The deuines of
Wittemberge say, Harm. of Conf. p. 454.
We believe that the omnipotency of God is so great, Harm. of Conf. p. 454.
that in the Eucharist he may either annihilate the substance of Bread, or else
change them into his Body: But that God does exercise this his absolute
Omnipotency in the Eucharist we have no certain word of God for it. Cranmer
affirms that, Answ. to Steven Guard, p. 454.
The Controversy in this matter is not, what may be, but what is: Christ's Body
may be as well in the Bread, as in the Door (which was shut) and stone of his
Sepulcher. Whitaker his contrary assertion notwithstanding, says, Answer to
Reyn p. 192.
That Christ can make the Bread his Body, we grant; only show that Christ will
make of Real Bread, his Real flesh, and then this Controversy is brought to
an end. And the same words are used by In his Sermon. upon the Sacram. ser. 3.
fol. 85.
Bruis. So confessedly is the Real Presence possible.

SECT. IX. Objections against the Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in
the Eucharist, in regard of certain pretended indignities thereupon ensuing,
answered.
THe Willet in his Synop. p. 454. See Algerus mentioning the like Objections of
the Heretics of his time. l. 2. de Sacram. Euch. c. 1.
Indignities which Prot. imagine to follow upon the Real eating of Christ's
Body, are two: First, that Christ should be in continual voyage of ascending
up again to heaven, upon the daily corruption of the forms of Bread and wine.
Secondly, he that should pass into such indecent places, as men's stomachs
etc. eaten by myce, burned by the fire etc.

Concerning the first, it is explained by example of the soul being wholly in
every part of man's Body, the Comparison is this; even as when an arm or leg is
cut off, the soul that informed that member before it was cut off, does not
perish with it, for then he that lacked his arm should loose his soul;
neither does it hang in the air, because the air is not organized to receive
the information, but ceasing to inform the member cut off, it does without any
motion to place, only loose that subject and place, keeping still the place and
residence in the Body where it was before: even so the Body of Christ, when the
forms of Bread and wine are corrupted in the stomach, does without any motion
from place to place only become absent, or leaves that abode, which it had in
the stomach, and keeps the place which then, and before it had in heaven.

To the second I answer, that as the Divinity fills all places how indecent
and unclean soever; the Sun beams also beating upon a dunghill, and not
defiled therewith; so Christ's Body being immortal and impassible, cannot be
defiled with the touch or impression of any infection, or unclean Creature.
The stench of sin when he co^uersed upon earth amongst sinners, did much more
dislike the smell of his soul, then this other could molest his Body. And as
it was not indecent, but a sign of great mercy and love, that he should suffer
that; so it is not more unseemly, that his Body should admit the other, seeing
thereby he suffers nothing, but only his remaining there to testify and work
admirable effects of love and Grace.

And here for full payment and answer to all these vile, base, gross and
carnal Objections of these Dunghill Heretics; these Objections and the like,
are but raked out of the ashes of the old Heathens and Pagans, of whom says S.
Austine. Ep. 49. ad Deo-Gratias. q. 6.
We should not believe in Christ himself, if we feared the laughing of Pagans.
They, and some ancient heretics objected the very like to this against the
Tertul. de carne Christi. and l. de Resur. carnis. Hier. Ep. ad Pamach.
Euagrius hist. l. 1. c. 2. Theodor. l. 4. haer. fab.
Incarnation, Death, Passion, and Resurrection of our glorious Savior,
pretending that it was indecent, that God Hilar. de Trin. l. 9. 11. 12. and l.
cont. Constant. See Hook. Eccl. Pol. l 4. See 8. p. 183.
should lie in a woman's womb nine months, that he should take upon him the
Prison of our flesh, that he should endure the difficulties of our Infancy,
should be Circumcised, and coming to man's state, should See in Justin Martyr.
in Dial. cum Tryphone. Minutius Faelix in Octauio. And see the Centurists.
Cent. 5. Col. 1510.
suffer most shameful and dishonorable death; and all this because Adam did
taste an Apple, the offense whereof, as the Heathens thought, god was more like
to pardon, then thus to redeem. And yet all this Christians firmly believe.

Wherefore I will conclude this with the good advise of S. Chrysostom, saying,
In Mat. ho. 83.
Let us always believe God, and not resist him, although, that which he says,
may seem absurd both to sense and thought etc. his words cannot deceive us,
but our sense is easily deceived etc. For so much therefore as he has said,
This is my Body, let us in no sort doubt, but believe.

SECT. X. The foresaid truth of the Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood
in the Blessed Sacrament, is further proved by clear and confessed Miracles,
wrought by God in testimony thereof.
SInce the stumbling block of pretended impossibility and absurdity conceived
against our Doctrine, and whereat flesh and blood has taken such scruple and
offense, is by that which hitherto has been alleged, so clearly removed, and
that this matter is now at last confessed to be possible, as depending only
upon Gods holy will: Since likewise his will, which cannot be better known to
us, then by his word, is herin made so plain unto us, even by his written
word, that if Protestants would but for the time suppose, that the holy Ghost
were mindful and desirous to decree by Scripture the Real Presence,
themselves can hardly imagine words more evident to that purpose, then are
these, This is my Body which is given for you, which as Reinolds Confer. with
Heart. p. 68.
grants, are plainer in show for our Real Presence, then for their
Sacramental: Since also the answerable sense of the same words is accordingly
confirmed to us, not only by our Saviors forsaid promise, The bread which I
will give is my flesh, as also by S. Paul's agreeable Explication, whom sundry
Protestants confess herin Calu. in Ep. 333. p. 662. Whitak. cont. Dur. l. 2.
p. 188. Hook. Eccl. Pol. l 5. p. 176.
to be Christ's best interpreter: and likewise by the confessed testimonies of
the Primitive Church, which according to Prot. Confess. of Bohemia, in the Harm
of Confess. p. 400.
is the true and best Mistres of Posterity, but even also by the Doctrine and
belie^e of Prot. themselves, who enforced through the Evidence of truth, have
taught and maintained the same Real P^esenc^: hereof Luther himself shall
give us a plain testim^ny, In Epist. ad Argentinenses.
Th^s I cannot, nor will not deny (says he) that if C^rolost i^lius or any
other could for the last five years have persuaded me that there had been
nothing in the Sacrament but bread and wine, he should hau^ bound me unto him
by a great good turn: for I have taken great care in the discussion of this
matter, and have endeavored with all my power, and sinews stretched out, to
be rid thereof, for I did will see, that thereby I might very greatly hurt the
Papacy etc. But I do see my self captive, no way being left to escape, for the
Text of the Ghospel^ is so plain and strong etc.

These so conuincing proofs thus premised, I will now conclude this
Controversy with only adding thereto in further Confirmation to us of Gods
holy will in this behalf, some few, of many undoubted miracles, reported
either by Ancient Fathers, or Prot. themselves. Paulus Diaconu^ in vita S.
Gregorij, reports that, when S. Gregory to persuade an incredulous woman in
the Real Presence, had, after prayer made, found the little portion of the
(Sacramental) Bread, which he had placed on the Altar, to be made flesh, he
said to the woman, learn, and now believe him witnessing etc. my Blood is
truly drink. This History is also related and acknowledged by D. Iesuis, part.
2. rat. 5. p. 616.
Humfrey, and instead of better answer is only deryded. S. Ambrose reports,
that, Orat. Funeb. de obitu Frat. Satyri.
His brother Satyrus being by shipwreck thrown into the Sea, and having tied
the divine Sacrament in a stole, and fastened the stole about his neck, sought
no boarde whereby supported, he might be helped, but thinking himself therewith
sufficiently defended required no other help: neither did his hope leave him,
nor his opinion deceive him, but being the first that was saved from the water,
he was set safe on shore etc. This is so certain, that Peter Lib. cont.
Gardin. Object. 88. Whitak. l. 10. cont. Dur. p 872.
Martyr and Whitaker, acknowledging the matter of fact, instead of better
answer, reprove both S. Ambrose, and his Brother Satyrus. S. Cyprian reports
concerning Ser. de lat sis.
a certain woman who when she would with unworthy hands have opened her
Coffer, wherein was (reserved) the holy thing of our Lord, there sprung up fire
from thence, whereby the was so terrifyed, that she durst not touch it. Fulke
acknowledging this fact, only answers that, Against Heskins etc. p. 52^.
This was a just punishment for her reserving of that which should have been
received: but S. Cyprian says, she was punished, for that she would have
touched it with unworthy hands.

But now to relate some miraculous apparitions of Blood issuing from the
Sacrament upon the Jews misbeliefe or violence offered thereto: S. Basil
ministering the Sacrament, a Jew being present, and behoulding the Bread and
wine, laughed at the sacred Mysteries of Christians, which S. Basil perceiving,
offered both to be eaten, but they presently appeared to be flesh and blood.
This is related by Cyrus In Epigram. in D. Basilium.
Theodorus Prodomius, who lived Anno 440. and by the Cent. 4. Col. 431.
Century writers.

In like sort sundry writers relate that, Surius in Chron. Nicol Basilius in
additione ad Chronicon Naucleri. Pontanus l. 5. rerum memorabilium.
In February 1510. in a town called Knobloch, one Paul, a Sacrilegious person,
went secretly into the Church by night, broke the Pixe where the Sacrament was
reserved, and stole from thence two consecrated hosts, one of which he sold to
a Jew: afterward the Jew blinded with malice said, If thou be the God of
Christians manifest thy self, and that said, he pierced the Sacrament with his
dagger, whereupon blood did miraculously issue forth etc. This miracle was so
known and discovered, that thirty eight Jews assenting thereto, were
therefore apprehended, and publicly burned the 19. of July 1510. in the
Marchie of Brandeburge; and all Jews were also thereupon by public Decree
banished out of the said Territories. This history is so certain, that it is
reported by the Prot. writers, Manlius, Beuther, and Osiander. And sundry other
See Breerley his Liturgy of the Mass. 187.
such like might be produced, so free from all suspicion of fiction, that the
very time in which they happened, is specially described, the place
particularly named, the numbers of the Offenders noted, and their public
condemnation and execution even to death, certainly set down, and the ^ffence
in all these discovered, upon occasion of astonishment at the miracle showed.

CHAP. XXII. The true State of the Question, concerning the Communion of the
Laity, under one, or both kinds.
Whether under either kind of the Eucharist, the Body and Blood of Christ our
Savior are truly contained, and the true Essence of the Sacrament preserved;
and consequently whether it be lawful to administer the Sacrament only under
one kind unto the Laity: or that, Christ has commanded both kinds to be
administered unto them? SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
THE present Controversy is not, whether Christ did institute the Eucharist
under both kinds, or whether himself did administer the same in both to his
Apostles, or whether the Apostles, or the Bishops of the Primitive Church, did
in like manner at sundry times practice the same; for all this the Catholic
Church does willingly grant: But the main point in Controversy is, whether
Christ did Command the Administration of both kinds to the Laity, and whether
the Essence of this Sacrament be entyre in one, and the same Grace necessary to
salvation given to the Receivers by one, as both. Now, in this Case, the
Catholic Church declares and decrees that, Council. Trident. Sess. 13. Cap.
3.
Always this belief was in the Church of God, that immediately after
Consecration, the true Body of our Lord, and his true Blood, together with his
Soul and Divinity, are under the form of Bread and wine; but the Body truly
under the form of Bread, and the Blood under the form of wine, by virtue of
the words; and the Body under the form of wine, and the Blood under the form
of Bread, and the soul under both, by virtue of that natural connection, and
concomitancie, whereby the parts of Christ our Lord, who is now risen from the
dead to dye no more, are coupled amongst themselves: and the Divinity also, for
that admirable hypostaticall union thereof, with the Body, and the soul.
Wherefore it is most true, that as much is contained under either kind as under
both, for whole and entyre Christ is under the form of Bread, and under every
part of the form whole also under the form of wine, and the parts thereof.
Hereupon it does further decree that, Council. Trident. Sess. 21. Cap 1.
the Laickes, and Clerks not celebrating, are bound by no divine Precept, to
receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist under both kinds; neither by any means
can it be doubted with a safe faith, but that the Communion under one kind
suffices them to salvation: for although Christ our Lord instituted this
venerable Sacrament, in his last Supper, under the kinds of Bread and wine, and
delivered it unto his Apostles: yet notwithstanding, that institution and
delivery tend not to this, that all faithful Christians be bound by Decree of
our Lord to receive both kinds. But neither out of those words of John the
sixth is it rightly deduced, that the Communion under both kinds is commanded
by our Lord, howsoever it be understood according to diverse Interpretations of
holy Fathers and Doctors: for he that said, Unless you eat the flesh of the
Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you shall not have life in you; said also,
If any man shall eat of this Bread he shall live for ever. And he who said,
Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my Blood, has eternal life; said also,
The Bread which I will give is my flesh for the life of the world. And to
conclude, he who said, He that eats my flesh and drinks my Blood, abides
in me and I in him; said nevertheless, He that eats this Bread shall live
for ever.

Furthermore Sess. 21. Cap. 2.
it declares, this power ever to have been in the Church, that in the
dispensing of the Sacraments, their substance preserved, she might ordain, or
change those things, which she judged more expedient for the profit of the
receivers, or the reverence of the Sacraments themselves, according to the
variety of things, times, and places etc Wherefore knowing this her authority
in the Administration of Sacraments, although from the beginning of Christian
Religion, the use of both kinds was not rare; yet in process of time, that
custom being changed in many places, moved with great and just Causes, she
has approved this Custom of Communicating under one kind, and has Decreed
that it is to be houlden for a law; which it is not lawful to reject, or at
pleasure to change without the authority of the Church it self. And Can. 1.
therefore, if any man shall say; that all and singular Christians by Gods
Commandment or necessity of Salvation, ought to receive the Sacrament of the
Eucharist under both kind as etc. Or Can. 2.
that the holy Catholic Church has not been moved for just causes and
reasons, that the Laickes, and also the Clerks not celebrating, might not be
communicated only under the form of Bread, or that she erred therein etc. Or
Can. 3.
if any shall deny, whole and entyre Christ, the fountain and author of all
graces, to be taken under the one kind of Bread because as some falsely affirm,
he is not received according to the Institution of Christ himself under both
kinds, let him be accursed. Thus clearly and particularly has the Council of
Trent determined this Controversy.

It is defyned by the Council of Constance. That Sess 14.
seeing in some parts of the world some presume rashly to affirm, that
Christian people ought to receive the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist under
both kinds of Bread and wine, and do not only in many places communicate the
Lay people under the form of Bread, but also under the form of wine even
after Supper, or otherwise not fasting etc. Hence it is, that this present
Council etc. does defyne, that although Christ did institute thi^ venerable
Sacrament after Supper and gave it to his Disciples under both kinds of Bread
and wine, yet this notwithstanding the laudable authority of Sacred Canons and
the approved Custom of the Church has and does observe, that this Sacrament
ought not to be Consecrated after supper nor received by the people not fasting
but in the Case of infirmity or other necessity granted or admitted by the law
of the Church. And as this Custom for the avoiding of some dangers and
scandals, was justly brought in, that though in the Primitive Church this
Sacrament was received by the faithful under both kinds, yet afterward it
should be received, by those that Consecrate, under both, and by the Laity only
under the form of Bread, seeing it is firmly to be believed, and no ways to
be doubted, that the whole Body, and Blood of Christ is truly contained, as well
under the form of Bread, as under the form of wine: wherefore seeing this
Custom was rightly brought in by the Church and holy Fathers, and has been
very long observed, it is to be houlden for a law, which it is not lawful to
reject, or at pleasure to alter, without the authority of the Church. And the
same is Decreed by the Council Sess. 30.
of Basil. The Council of Florence declared, and that with the assent of the
Armenians, that, In Decret. Eugenij PP. 4.
By virtue of the words, the substance of Bread, is turned into the Body of
Christ, and the Substance of the wine into his Blood, yet so as Christ is
contained whole under the form of Bread, and whole under the form of wine, as
also whole under every part of the host consecrated, and the wine consecrated,
separation being made. The selfsame which these Councels have Decreed, is
generally taught, believed, and practiced by all Bellar. de Euchar. l. 4. c.
21. etc. Rhem. Test. in Joan. 6.
Catholics.

Protestant Untruths.
Luther very impudently and falsely says, De Captiuit. Babyl. c. 1. de Euchar.
I reguard not the Council of Constance, whose authority if it be of force,
why is not that of Basil of force also, which Decrees to the contrary, that it
was lawful for the Bohemians to receive both kinds. But this is untrue, for
the same thing was decreed in both Conc. Constant. Sess 13. Basile. Sess 30.
Councels, to wit, That the Laity were not bound by any divine Precept, to
receive under both kinds, and therefore the law and Custom of the Church to be
observed: And though the Council of Basil did allow the Bohemians to receive
under both kinds, yet it was but upon their acknowledgme^t, that it was
granted them by the Church, and that they were not obliged thereto by any Divine
law.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Prot. Church decrees that, Article 30.
The Cup ^f the Lord is not to be denied to the Lay people, for both the parts
of the Lords Sacrament by Christ's Ordinance, and Commandment, ought to be
ministered to all Christian men alike. And the same is taught by De formula
Missae. Call. Instit l. 4. c. 17. sect. 47. Chemnit. Exam part. 2. Sess. 11.
Luther, Calvin, and sundry others. In so much, that if you will believe M.
Morton, Of the Institution etc. or Mass of Christ l. 1. c. 3. sect. 1.
All Protestants, whether you call them Caluinists, or Lutherans, hold that in
the public and set Celebration of the Eucharist, the Communion in both kinds
ought to be given to all sorts of Communicants that are capable of both.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
Vrbanus Rhegius a Protestant writer, acknowledges that the Heretic
Nestorius Loc. com. fol. 56.
communicated the Laity under both kinds, (but) the Council of Ephesus
withstood him.

Peter Aeneas Siluius Hist. Bohem. c 35.
Dresdensis, and Iacobel Misnensis taught, that the lay people could not be
saved, unless they drunk of the Cup of our Lord. John Husse taught, Act. Mon p
260. Drisserus in Millen. 6. p. 255.
The necessity of Communion under both kinds.

Protestants Errors.
Luthers obstinate pride was such, as that he affirmed, that, In formula M^ssae.
If any Council should ordain or permit both kinds, we would not use both,
but in despite of the Council and the Decree thereof, we would either use one
or neither, and not both, accursing all who through the power and decree of the
Council should use both. And, It is Tom. 3. in ps. 22. fol. 348.
not determined according to the spirit of truth, nor by the authority of
Scriptures, but by the pipe of the Pope, according to the vain Traditions of
men, the Essence of God not to beget, nor to be begotten, the soul to be the
substantial form of the Body, bread and wine to be transubstanti^^ed upon the
Altar, one only form to be given to the laity for the whole Sacrament, and
such like mo^sters. Who but a Mo^ster in religion would censure Articles of
faith to be Monsters?

SECT. II. That under either kind is contained whole Christ, to wit, Body,
Blood, Soul and Divinity: as also the true Essence of the Sacrament.
THe proof of the first point, of Christ being whole in either kind, is drawn
from three Principles of faith: first that by reason of those words of Christ,
This is my body which shall be given for you, that in the Eucharist is truly and
really the very body of Christ. The second, that Christ our Savior after his
Resurrection from death was never to dye again according to those words of S.
Paul, Romans ^.9.
Christ rising again from the dead, now dies no more, Death shall no more
have Dominion over him: whence it necessarily follows, that under the form
of Bread is not the Body of Christ without Blood and Soul, for so it should be
without life, and consequently dead. The third, that Christ is one divine
person subsisting in two natures, from whence it immediately aryseth, that since
the Body of Christ has no other subsistence then that of his Godhead, which
really is all one with his Essence, that therefore wheresoever his Body is,
there is also his Divinity. This argument supposing these 3. principles does
evidently convince; and for the two later I doubt not but most Prot. will
admit; and the first is acknowledged for true by all Lutherans, and has been
already proved.

Secondly, the same is proved by those words of our Savior, Io. 6.57.
He that eats me, the same also shall live by me. Now, Christ is not eaten
but under the form of Bread, therefore under that form is not only his sacred
Body, but his blessed Soul, and precious Blood, even whole Christ: for of his
Body only he would never have said, he that eats me; and I am the bread of
life which descended from heaven; And again, This is the Bread which descended
from heaven.

Touching the second point, viz. that the true Ess^nce of the Sacrament is
found in either kind, it is proved; for in a Sacrament is only required that it
be a sign and cause of Grace. The sign in the Eucharist, as it is a
Sacrament, is twofold: the first of internal refection, according to those
words of Christ, Io. 6.55.
My flesh is truly meat; the second of perfect union of the faithful among
themselves, and with Christ, whereof S. Paul speaks, saying, 1. Cor. 10.17.
for being many we are one Bread, one Body, all that participate of one Bread.
Now, both these significations are found in either kind; for first, spiritual
refection only imports the refection of the soul, which whether it be by way
of meat or drink, or both imports not, seeing in spiritual refections, one
and the selfsame thing is said to be meat and drink. For example, of of
Justice our Savior says, Mat. 5.6.
Blessed are they who hunger and thirst Justice, for they shall be filled.
Likewise of wisdom the wiseman says, Eccles. 24.29.
They that eat me shall yet hunger, and they that drink me shall yet thirst:
Wherefore as our Savior said, my flesh is truly meat and my Blood is truly
drink, so also in the same place he said, he that eats this Bread shall live
for ever. And, he that eats me shall live by me.

Concerning the second signification of the Union of the faithful among
themselves, it is expressed by many graynes of Corn wrought together, by
making Bread thereof with flower and water, as S. L. 2. Ep, 3. ad Caecil.
Cyprian testifyeth, and the like may be showed of the wine composed of many
grapes, and mingled with water in the Chalice. And as for the cause of Grace
requisite in a Sacrament, it is found in either kind, for it is Christ, Cause
and Author of all Sacraments, and of Grace thereby given, who under either
form is whole and entire, as has been before proved. Neither does it
heerupon follow, that because the Sacrament is Essentially contained under
either kind, that therefore the Priest receiving under both, receives two
Sacraments, for being received both at once they make but one, as being
ordained to one refection, signifying one thing, and producing one effect: even
as six or seven dishes of meat set upon a Table, do but make one dinner,
whereas part thereof being but served one day, and the rest another, they would
make two. And the reason why Priests receive under both kinds, is because they
offer up a Sacrifice, which represents the Sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross, which were not perfectly represented but by both kinds, for the only
form of Bread would not represent Christ, as dead, without some sign of
blood, nor the only form of wine would sufficiently represent him as
sacrificed, seeing only wine is not an host, or thing to be sacrificed:
wherefore also in this sort was it prefigured in the Sacrifice of Melchisedech,
offering up both Bread and wine.

Having thus proved the Premises, viz. That whole Christ is contained under
either kind, and the true essence of the Sacrament: from hence it directly
follows, that neither irreuerence is offered to the Sacrament, it not being
(as is objected) given half or maimed, but essentially whole; nor injury to
the people by depriving them of any Grace necessary to Salvation, seeing the
very fountain of Grace is no less received under either kind, then under both.

By these premises it is evident, that if we respect the nature of the thing,
no obligation or necessity a^yseth of receiving both kinds: the only question
therefore remaining is, Whether thereto we be bound by any Precept of Christ,
whereof I will treat in the next Section.

SECT. III. That Christ our Savior, gave no Command of Receiving under both
kinds, it is proved by the sacred Scriptures, and by his own, and his blessed
Apostles Examples.
THough in this question it belongs to our Adversaries to prove, and to us
only to answer, they affirming and we denying, yet in more full demonstrance
of the truth, I will allege sundry reasons, in proof that Christ our Savior
gave no Commandment of receiving under both kinds. And first, as there were
figures, which did represent this Sacrament under both kinds; so also there
were others which did represent it under one only, as the Paschal Lamb: for
the blood which was sprinkled upon the Posts, did not prefigure the Blood in
the Chalice, but (as Ancient Aug. l. 12. cont. East. c. 30. Hier. in c. 66.
Isaiae. Cyp. in Tract. cont. Demetr. Isidor. in c. 12. Exodus
Fathers teach) the sign of the Cross, for that blood was not drunk, nor
given to others, but the Posts were sprinkled therewith, and that before the
Lamb was eaten; besides, in the old Sacrifices, those things which were
liquid, belonged only to Priests, the lay people using, or requiring no part
thereof. So also Manna was given without drink, for though S. Paul says, 1.
Cor. 10.3.4.
All did eat the same spiritual food and all drunk the same spiritual
drink, yet they were two distinct figures, and given at diverse times; Manna
being given in the Exodus 16.14.
Desert Sin, and afterward water from the Rock Exodus 17.1.
Raphidim: and so our Savior Io. 6.
comparing Manna with the Eucharist, makes yet no mention of water.

Secondly, as our Savior sometimes does mention both kinds, so also often he
mentions but one, as Io. 6.49.
He that eats me, the same also shall live by me: This is the Bread that came
down from heaven, Io. 6.57.58.
he that eats this bread shall live for ever, and the like.

Thirdly, the practice of our Savior is the best witness of his Doctrine. S.
Luke relates of him, that being at supper with two of his Disciples at Emaus,
he took Bread and-blessed, and brake, and did reach to them, by which Bread is
understood the Eucharist, not only by S. Lib. 3. de consensu c. 25. Author
operis imperfecti. in Mat. ho. 17. Hieron. Epitaph. Pauli. Beda and Theophil.
in hunc locum Lucae.
Austine and the other Fathers, but even by Prot. Melancth. Apol. confess.
August. in Art. de vtraque specie.
writers, and yet he makes here no mention of wine, or of the Cup, but rather
by the words and circumstances, of the want thereof, for it is said, Luc.
24.30. See Act. 2 42.
And it came to pass, whilst he sat at the table with them, he took bread,
and blessed, and brake, and did reach to them, and their eyes were opened, and
they knew him, and he vanished out of their sight; so joining to the reaching
of the Bread, and their knowing him, his vanishing away, not leaving any time
for the Benediction and Consecration of the Chalice.

Fouthly, in like sort also was the practice of the Apostles after Christ's
time. For S. Luke speaking of the faithful, affirms. Act. 2.42.
That they were perseuering in the Doctrine of the Apostles, and in the
Communication of the breaking of Bread; where also by breaking of Bread is
understood the Eucharist, as well in that it is joined with Doctrine and Prayer,
as also in that it had been rather a dispraise then praise, to report of the
faithful, that they were perseuering in corporal dinners and uppers: and so
also is it understood by Author operis impe^f. in Mat. hom. 17. Beda in 2. c.
Act.
Fathers and Luther ser de Euch. Calu. l. 4. Instit. Chem. in Exam. Conc. Trid.
S^ss 21. part. 2. Examinis.
Protestant writers; and yet neither here is there made any mention of wine,
or the Cup.

Besides there were many Christians in Jerusalem, whom in those beginnings,
the Apostles did permit in some things to Act. 21.24.26.
Iudaize, amongst whom were the Number. 6.3.4.5.18.
Nazarits, who drunk no wine, nor shaued their heads, until the time that
their vows were expired; now, it is not credible, that those drunk against
their vow, nor probable that they altogether abstained from Communion, seeing
S. Luke says, they were perseuering etc.

Fifthly, many in hot Countries do abstain from wine from their Childhood,
and either by nature or education do abstain and abhor it so much, as they
cannot endure to taste it. Also in some Countries wine is so scarce, and so
dear, as that sufficient can not be provided for all the people: To these and
sundry such inconveniences, it is not probable that the All-seeing wisdom of
God would bynd us.

To Answer with Chemnitius, that by breaking of bread, is understood also the
giving of the Chalice, by Synecdoche, by the Part understanding the Whole, this
I say is insufficient, as being an answer only imaginary, and not grounded,
and such, as by the like liberty any doctrine though never so impious or
absurd, might easily be maintained, against all Scripture though never so
plain. Neither is it any thing confirmed by affirming, that if the Chalice be
not understood, that then would follow thereof, that the Apostles did but
Consecrate under one kind, which yet Catholics do not admit: for S. Luke does
not set down what the Apostles did, but what the people did, and therefore they
might Consecrate under both, though they did administer unto the people only
under one.

SECT. IV. That Communion under one, or both kinds being a thing indifferent,
the Church might lawfully determine the same: And of the reasons that moved the
Church in limitation thereof.
ALthough we were not thus stored with such plentiful and pregnant proofs, as
in sundry other high mysteries of our faith we are not, nor with reason can
expect; yet the Doctrine of the universal Church, inspired by the holy Ghost,
and made known unto us by the absolute and infallible Decrees of Sundry
General Councels, might sufficiently serve to free the understanding of any
man from Error, or his Conscience from sin; for it may not be avouched
without great temerity, either that she should so haynously trespass against
the sacred Laws of her dearest Spouse, or so unnaturally or uncharitably
deprive her own Children of necessary blessings and helps bequeathed unto
them; yea in the end it should redound to the blemish of Christ himself, if he
should suffer his Church so daungerously to err, in a matter of that moment,
and that clean contrary to so many promises made unto her, of his directing
and continual assistance, by his spirit, and leading into all truth.

Wherefore in this our present Controversy we are to assume, that the Catholic
Church only, expresses (that power which she ever had, to wit, in dispensing
of the Sacraments, their substance or essence preserved, to ordain or alter
whatsoever she shall judge more expedient for the profit of the receyuers, or
reverence of the Sacrament, according to the variety of things, times, and
places: which her Authority the Apostle seems not obscurely to insinuate,
when he said, 1. Cor. 1.4.
So let a man esteem us as the Ministers of Christ, and the dispensers of the
Mysteries of God: and himself to have used this power, it is manifest, both in
many other things, as also in this Sacrament, when having ordained some things
concerning the use thereof, 1. Cor. 11.34.
the rest (says he) I will dispose when I come. Christ our Savior said to his
Apostles, Mat. 28.19.
Going, teach you all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of
the son, and of the holy Ghost, and yet the Church commands Infantes to be
baptized, who are not capable of teaching. In like sort the Church has
lawfully decreed, See S. Aug. l. 15. de Ciuit. c. 16. Ambr. Ep. 66. ad Pattern.
Greg. l. 12. Regist. Ep. 31 ad Faelicem.
certain impediments of marriage, which yet neither the law of nature, nor any
positive divine law exacted. And not only in the Sacraments, but also in other
things has the Church upon just occasions exercised her said authority, by
reducing things of their own nature indifferent, to be matter of precept and
necessity: so the Apostles themselves imposed upon the Gentiles for a time a
new Law of abstinence Act. 15.29.
from the things immolated to Idols, and blood, and that which is strangled
etc. Which yet Christ himself had never imposed, but left the eating of them a
matter indifferent; whereas after the Apostles Decree, the said eating had been
sin, and abstinence necessary, as is manifest by those words, Act. 15.28.29.
It seems good to the holy Ghost and to us, to lay no further burden upon
you then these necessary things, that ye abstain from things immolated to
Idols etc. And so of S. Paul it is said, that he Act. 15.41. and 16.4.
walked through Syria and Cilicia confirming the Churches, commanding them to
keep the Precepts of the Apostles and Ancients. And in the Primitive Church it
was not only thought Tertul. in Apol. c. 9. Orig. l. 8. cont. Celsum. Cyril.
Catech. 5. August. Ep. 154. Leo Epist. 79. c. 5. Council. Gang. c. 2.
unlawful to violate the said Law, but also severe punishment was inflicted
upon the Can. Apost. c. 62. Council. 1. Aurel. can. 19.20.
transgressors thereof; yea there has scarce been any Council in the Church of
God, which has not commanded or forbidden under sin some thing, which before
the said Council was free and indifferent: wherefore Communion under one or
both kinds, being proved and acknowledged to be a thing of indifferency, the
Church in fulness of her power, might lawfully permit or limit the same, and yet
her Decree once past, the violating thereof is undoubtedly sin. So S. Bernard
says, De praecepto and dispens.
Although the quality of the work enjoined of it self be free from fault, yet
the weight of authority adjoined, makes it subject to Command, and the
Commandment subject to sin. Yea D. Whiteguift teaches that, Defense etc. p
258.
Things indifferent of themselves, do after a sort change their nature, when
by some Commandment they are commanded or forbidden. And, they remain Ib. p.
91.
indifferent, till the Church has taken order in them, which being done they
are no more indifferent. With him agrees Beza affirming that, Ep. Theol. Ep.
24. p 155.
Things of themselves indifferent, do in a manner change their natures when
they are Commanded, or forbidden by any lawful Command. Yea says M. Powell,
Of things indifferent. p. 7.
Such indifferent things, as by the Church have been lawfully and orderly
instituted and approved, are so far humane, as that they are also divine, and
therefore have more then humane Authority, yea plainly divine etc. Therefore the
Precepts of the Church in things indifferent, are both true and holy: and
consequently seeing the Church has determined, receiving of the Sacrament to
be under one kind which was formerly indifferent, it is now under sin
accordingly to be used, and observed.

Now, the reasons moving the Church to the restraint thereof were many and
forcible, as first to prevent thereby the Occasion of Error: for whereas in the
beginning of the Church the use of one or both kinds was indifferent, as may be
showed in Condemnation of the Manichees, See Aug. l. de haer. c. 46. Leo ser. 4
de Quadrag. Chemnit. Exam. part. 2. p. 145. Zepperus de Sacram. p. 41. Mortons
Appeal. l. 2. c. 4. p. 139.
who abstained from wine, as a thing of it self unlawful, holy Bishops
hereupon did much commend the use of the Chalice: but this error being
extinguished, and another arysing against the integrity of Christ Aeneas
Siluius hist. Bohem. c. 35.
under either kind, as also auouching the absolute necessity of both; the
Church of God herupon began more universally to practice the Communion under
one, and withal in declaration of the truth and prevention of schism and
scandal, did absolutely Decree the lawfulnes thereof, with prohibition of the
contrary: so in ancient times when the Ebionites taught unleavened bread to be
necessary in Consecration of the Eucharist, the Church Commanded Consecration
to be made in leuened bread: And when the Heretic Nestorius denied our B.
Lady to be the Mother of God, and only to be called the Mother of Christ, the
Church condemned him, and commanded the contrary: so that no course has ever
been found more effectual for confutation and utter extirpation of error and
heresy, then by contrary Decrees to declare and establish the truth.

A second reason moving the Church, was the deserved reverence of this highest
Sacrament, in due Consideration whereof, the holy Fathers Aug. l. 5. ho. 16. ho.
25. Cyril. Catech. 5. Mistag. Orig. ho. 13. in Exodus
did carefully prescribe most diligent care to be used, least any little
particle of the Host, or drop of the Chalice, should fall upon the ground. Now
the multitude of Christians being very great, and their negligence in sacred
things, through want of zeal and Devotion notorious, it could not morally be
possible, but that frequent spilling of the Blood would happen, if the Chalice
were ordinarily to be given to the people, of which Aeneas Siluius Ep. 13. de
errore Bohem. and narratio de Bohemis ad Conc. Basil.
prophanations over frequent experience has been had.

SECT. V. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures in Confirmation of
the lawfulnes of the Administration of the blessed Sacrament under one kind.
S. Austine writing by occasion upon the forsaid place of S. Luke, says. De
consensu Euang. l. 3. c. 25. and Ep. 59. ad Paulin. Beda and Theophil. in hunc
locum.
Something happened to the eyes of them that went to Emaus, which is permitted so
to remain, until the breaking of Bread, for the reason of a certain mystery
that another form might be showed unto them in that Bread, and so they should
not know him but in the breaking of Bread, as it is evident by S. Luke his
narration etc. And it is not amiss if we understand, that this impediment was
caused in their eyes by Satan, least Jesus should be acknowledged; but yet the
permission was wrought by Christ until the Sacrament of bread: that the unity
of his Body participated, the impediment of the Enemy might be removed, that
Christ might be acknowledged. Again, Sermon. de temp. 140.
O Brethren where would our Lord be known? In the breaking of Bread, we are
secure, we break bread, and do acknowledge our Lord. He would not have been
known there but for us, who were not to see him in flesh, and yet we were to
eat his flesh.

Jonas Aurelianensis writes thus, Lib. 3. de Imag.
In the Acts of the Apostles, the Apostles are read to have taught every day
in the Temple, and at their houses, and to have celebrated the Mysteries of our
Lords Body in the breaking of Bread. The Christians in Syria instead of
reading, in C^mmunion, and breaking of Bread, in their Syriacke text read, in
the breaking of the Euchariste, which proves thi^ place to be understood not
of Common bread, but of the E^charist.

Andreas Friccius says, L. 2. de Eccles. c. 2. p. 411.
Christ at his last Supper joined wine with bread if therefore the Church
separate these, she is not to be hea^d: the Church of Jerusalem did separate
these. S James (as some d ^^^ affi me) g^ue only one kind to the people of
Jerusalem. What then? the word of God is plain and manifest, eat and drink.
This is to be heard of us, and preferred before all James's, and words of the
Church. So clear and confessed then it is, that James the Apostle, and the
Church of Jerusalem in his time administered the Communion under one kind, that
no other Answer is left to this Protestant, then only to make the Scriptures
and the Apostles practice, one contrary to the other: then which, what more
impious and absurd?

SECT. VI. That Protestant writers do believe, and teach the lawful use of
Administering the Eucharist under one kind to the Laity.
John Calvin in his Commentary upon the Acts, interprete^h the for-alledged
place thus, Although (says he) breaking of bread did sometimes signify a
domestical banquet amongst the Hebrews, yet in this place I do Interpret it
of the holy Supper, moved thereto by two reasons: for whereas it is easily
gathered by the sequel that no small multitude of men was there gathered
together, it is not probable that a Supper could be prepared in a private
house. Again, Luke afterward declares, that Paul, not at time of Supper, but
after midnight, last of all to have taken Bread, to which may be added, that he
does not say, that he took meat for refection sake, but only that he might
taste

John Husse was so far from judging the receiving under both kinds, to be
absolutely necessary, or a Divine precept, as that he writes to a friend of
his in this manner: Ep. 48.
Concerning the Sacrament of the Chalice, you have written what I wrote at
Constance; If it may be, endeavor, that at least it may be permitted by a Bull
to them who shall of devotion desire it, Circumstances annexed. John Perzibrane
a Bohemian Prot. after endeavor to prove Communion under both kinds, yet
concludes saying, In profess. fidei Cath. c. 19.
Here fearing God, and taking heed of the evil Customs of others, I do
confess that I do not intend to condemn or censure for heretics any such
persons of the Church, as do impugn the Communion of the faithful under both
kinds; which yet of necessity he must, if he had thought that Christ had
commanded it.

Luther affirms that, Ep. ad Bohem. and in Declar. Euch. and in Ser. de Euch.
Although truly it were an excellent thing to use both kinds in the Eucharist,
and Christ in this thing has Commanded nothing as necessary; yet it were
better to follow peace and unity which Christ has Commanded us to follow, then
to contend about the kinds. And again, De Capt. Babyl. c. de Euch.
They sin not against Christ who use one kind, seeing Christ has not
commanded to use it, but has left it to the will of every one, saying, As
often as you shall do these, you shall do them in memory of me. He teaches
further, that it is only a matter of indifferency, L. ad Christianam Nobil.
I am no author (says he) that the Bohemians be compelled to the one part of
the Sacrament, but that they be left to that manner which they will themselves:
Let the Bishop only take care, that discord rise not by the manner of
receiving, but let him instruct them familiarly: that neither is joined with
error, even as it is free from error, that Priests use a different habit
from the Laity. And elsewhere. Tom. 2. Germ. f. 100. and in alia Edit tom. 7.
fol. 360. l. de vtraque specie Sacram.
If thou shall come to a place in which one only kind is ministered, take only
one, as they there receive; if two be offered, take two, neither bring in any
thing singular, or oppose thy self to the multitude. And further, In Declar.
in ser. de Euch.
Further I have not said or counsatled, neither is it my intention, that one or
more Bishops by their proper Authority, may begin to minister to any both
kinds, unless it should be so ordained, or Commanded by some General Council.
Hospinian alleges Luther saying, Hist. Sacram part. 2. fol. 12.
It is not needful to give both kinds, but the one alone suffices: the Church
has power of ordayning only one, and the people ought to be content therewith,
if it be ordained by the Church. Lu^her here teaches as much in this behalf,
as any Catholic can require.

Hospinian further reports, that certain Ib. fol. 112.
Prot. answered that, they believed and confessed whole Christ to be really
present, exhibited and received under either kind, and therefore under the only
form of Bread, neither did they judge those to do evil who communicated under
one kind. And both In Confess. Wittemb. art. de Euch. Chemnit. in fin. Disp. De
vtraque specie.
Brentius and Chemnitius do likewise teach, that whole and entire Christ is
received under either kind. And the same of necessity must all they teach, who
believe the vbiquity of Christ's humanity: for if Christ be whole every where,
then is he whole under the form of Bread, and whole in the Chalice.

Melancthon thinks it a matter of indifferency, and would have the use free,
which supposes no Precept of Christ for both: he writes thus, Centur. Ep.
Theol. ep. 74. p. 251. 252.
Concerning both kinds of the Lords Supper, we see many tumults to have been
renewed etc. but the Pope without any hurt might easily help these
inconveniences, if taking away the prohibition, he would leave the use free.
And this liberty etc. would nothing hurt any, and the whole business is in the
Popes hands. Again he compares the indifferency hereof, with our liberty of
eating, or abstayning from swines flesh, In 2. Edit loc. com. impress Argent.
Anno 1525 fol. 78.
He erreth (says he) that thinks it impious to eat swynes flesh; as also he
erreth who thinks it impious to abstain from swines flesh; these things are
indifferent and placed in our power, and so I judge of the Eucharist, that they
sin not, who knowing and beliuing this liberty, do use either part of this
sign And whereas M. Harding alleges this last saying of Melancthon, as also
Bucer, aduising and wishing that the holy Church would give free power of
receiving this Sacrament under one or both kinds etc. M. Reply p. 108. 109. 110.
Jewel cannot deny these testimonies so alleged by M. Harding, but
acknowledges them for truly alleged: and further he confesses that
Melancthon and Bucer accounted it indifferent.

Amongst the Articles of the Conference at Ratisbone, which Bucer allowed, one
was that, for decyding of the Controversy of one or both kinds, it would
chiefly avail if the holy Church would give free choice of receiving this
Sacrament, under one, or both kinds: which referring the matter to the Church,
does evidently suppose that Christ our Savior had given no absolute Command
thereof. And the like Confession might be showed from others of their Brethren;
but from hence will I infer two things. First, that Communion under one or
both kinds, being a thing confessedly of it self indifferent, that then the
use thereof under one, or both, cannot possibly be censured of Sacrilege, in
reguard of Christ's Institution, or of any hurt or prejudice to the faithful
receyuers. The second, that then also, was it lawful for the Church of God
upon just occasions, absolutely to determine or limit the use thereof.

SECT. VII. Objections from Scripture against Communion of the Eucharist under
one kind by the Laity, answered.
THe chief cause of the difficulty in this question, and that which gives our
Adversaries the best color for impugning the truth, and persisting in their
error, is, as they pretend, certain texts of Sacred Scripture: wherefore I
will endeavor by sundry forcible reasons to lay open the true sense, scope,
and understanding thereof, and thereby to discover the insufficiency and
weakness of all such their grounds as they mainly insist on. First then, are
urged those words of Christ, Io. 6.53.
Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you shall
not have life in you. And Mat. 26.27.
taking the Chalice, he gave thanks, and gave to them saying, drink you all
of this. 1. Cor. 11.23.24.25.
I received of our Lord, that which also I have delivered unto you, that our
Lord Jesus etc. took Bread, and giving thanks, brake and said, take ye and
eat, this is my Body which shall be delivered for you; this do ye for the
Commemoration of me. In like manner also the Chalice, after he had supped
saying, This Chalice is the new Testament in my blood, this do ye, as often as
you shall drink, for the Commemoration of me: from these texts Prot. infer
three things: first, that we are not commanded only to eat, but likewise, and
that expressly, to drink. Secondly, that this command of drinking, is not
given only to Priests, but extended to all, it being plainly said, Drink ye
all of this. And thirdly that the Institution by Christ was under both kinds,
which we are bound not to alter, but straightly to imitate. Answ. Touching those
words of Christ, Io. 6.53.
unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink^ his blood, you shall
not have life in you: I affirm, that seeing, according to the Doctrine of
sundry Luth. de Capt. Babyl. c. 1. Zwingl. l. de vera and falsa Relig. c. de
Euch. Chem. 2. part. Exam. p. 657. etc. 1. Sess. 21. Conc. Trid. Calu. Instit.
l. 4. c. 17.. 33. Pet. Mart. l. l. cent. Gardener. part. 1. ad solutionem. 32.
Object.
Protestants, nothing in the said sixth Chapter of S. John, concerns the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, but all there said of eating and drinking is only
to be understood of believing in Christ, that therefore according to them
nothing can be produced from thence, for Communion under one or both kinds,
seeing nothing therein concerns the same: Yet according to the true Doctrine
and General opinion of Catholics teaching, the said words, and sundry other
of the said sixth Chapter, truly, and properly to concern only the Eucharist; I
answer secondly, that the words of S. John objected, do not necessarily import
or contain a Precept: concerning which we are to note, that not always in the
doctrine of Christ, that byndeth of necessity and under sin, which seems to
have the mark or badge of a Precept, but in sundry cases, for the attaining of
the true sense and understanding, we are to make recourse to the intention of
the speaker. So our Savior himself having cured two blind men Mat. 9.30.31.
he threatened them, See that no man know it: but they went forth and bruted him
in all that Country, and yet none houldeth that either hereby they sinned, or
that Christ intended any such bond. The Bill of divorce which Moses permitted,
Christ expressly calls a Command, and Mar. 10.4.5.
Precept; he likewise told his Apostles that they ought to John. 13.14.
wash one another feet, and yet neither by them, nor by us since was it
houlden for a matter of necessity: and sundry other such like.

But supposing for the present, that it includes a Precept, yet the Precept
therein employed, is not in the manner of receiving, but in the thing received,
for therein was cotayned one of the principal means or remedies for
preservation of our spiritual life obtained by Baptism: which means and
remedy consist not in the forms of receiving, or manner of eating and
drinking, but in receiving of the Body and Blood of Christ, which in either
kind we do (as is formerly proved) no less then in both; and so accordingly
our Savior declared himself saying, Io. 6.57.
He that eats me, the same also shall live by me: which also further may be
illustrated by heedfull consideration of the circumstances following. As 1. the
occasion of the words objected, which was the incredulity of the Capharnaits,
whose doubt was not whether the Sacrament was to be received under one or both
kinds, but as Protestants still doubt, whether he could give us his flesh to
eat. The second, is the manner of his speech, which was not by making mention
of either form or kind in the said words, but only of the things themselves,
all which are contained in either kind: yea in other places of the said
Chapter, where he makes mention of either kind, it is only of the bread, and
none at all of the wine; and whereas sometimes he makes mention both of eating
and drinking, yet much more often does he mention eating. The last thing to be
considered is the conclusion of his speech which was that Io. 6.58.
He that eats this bread, shall live for ever: from all which it follows
that, the Jews not doubting of the manner of receiving under one or more
kinds, but of the possibility of the things to be received, and Christ out
Savior thereupon asseuering, not only the possibility, but also the necessity
thereof to our spiritual life, did therefore intend no other thing, but the
instruction of the Jews, and declaration of the need and profit thereof: all
which is performed, no less by receiving one, then both kinds of the Sacrament.

It is also usual in sacred Scriptures for the Conjunction copulative ( and,
and) to be taken for a disjunctive; So it is said, Exodus 2^.15.
He that shall strike his father and mother shall dye; Also, Act. 3.6.
Gould and silver I have not, and sundry other such like; wherein it is
manifest, the sense is disjunctive, to wit, he that shall strike his Father, or
Mother shall die; and Gould, or silver I have not. And as Saint Paul speaking of
this very Sacrament, said 1. Cor. 11.29.
He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Judgment to
himself; so also he said, Ib. ver. 29.
whosoever shall eat this Bread, or drink the Chalice of our Lord unworthily
etc.

And we are also further to observe, that the particle (nisi, unless) including
in it a negation, as, unless, you shall eat, is all one to say, as if, you
shall not eat, that the said Negation put in the beginning of a proposition
copulative, does deny both parts: and according to the Hebrew phrase (which not
only the Latin Interpreters do imitate, but even S. John who wrote in Greek,
is noted by his Expositors often to follow) is understood twice, to wit, as
repeated in both parts; so according to the Hebrew it is said, Ps. 1.5.
The wicked shall not rise in Judgment, and the sinners in the Council of the
Just, which yet by the Latin Interpreters is truly and properly translated, Ib.
The wicked shall not rise in Judgment, nor sinners in the Council of the
just; as also, Act. 3.6.
Gould and silver I have not, that is, neither Gould, nor silver I have. So in
the present, Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
Blood, you shall not have life in you; is all one with, If you shall not eat
the flesh of the Son of Man, or, if you shall not drink his Blood, you shall
not have life in you: according to which sense, he is only excluded from life,
who shall neither eat his flesh, not drink his Blood: and from this negative
copulative proposition, does directly follow this affirmative disjunctive, he
that shall eat the flesh, or drink the Blood, shall have life: and that this
is the true sense of the words, it is manifest by these textes precedent: I am
the living Bread that came down from heaven, if any shall eat of this bread
he shall live for ever: and these subsequent, He that eats me, the same also
shall live by me: He that eats this Bread shall live for ever: By all which
places it is evident, that the receiving under the form of Bread is sufficient
to life. Besides it is plain to the Reader, that in this whole Chapter, Christ
takes for the same bread, his flesh, his flesh and blood, and himself, and
promises to every one of them the same reward, to wit, ly^e everlasting, and
so to eat bread, to e^te flesh, and drink blood, is nothing else but to eat
Christ, seeing whether he be received under one or both kinds, nothing gives
life but Christ. And so I may lastly infer, that the said sayings were
plainly false, if the forsaid words, Unless you shall eat etc. were to be
taken copulatiuely, not disiunctiuely, or which is all one, if Christ had given
thereby a Command of both kinds. And thus we see, this first Objection according
to the doctrine of Protestants altogether impertinent, and according to the
truth for sundry reasons most insufficient.

Concerning the second, taken from these words of Christ, Mat. 16.27.
Drink ye all of this; from whence Rogers Def. of the Art. art. 30. p. 180.
Prot. would likewise infer an universal Command, not only of eating, but
likewise of drinking: I answer, the word (all) is not always taken in
Scripture most universally for all men, or all things, but often for all of
some certain kind, otherwise that of S. Paul, Phil. 2.21.
All seek the things which are their own, should include the most just; and
that, Romans 3.23.
All have sinned, should comprehend Christ; and that, Mat. 27.22.
All cried Crucify him, and the like, should belong to the Apostles, which yet
are most untrue: and so if in the words objected, the word (all) should be
taken universally for all, then the Sacrament were to be given to Turks,
Jews, Heathens, Infants, and such as cannot drink wine, these being men; all
which Protestants exclude: wherefore the word (all) being to be restrained, it
is clear it concerns here the twelve Apostles, who as then only sat with
Christ at the Table, for so says S. Mark, Mar. 14.17.18.
And when evening was come, he comes with the twelve, and when they were
sitting at the table, and eating etc. And further S. Mark says of the
Apostles, Mar. 14.23.
that they drank all of it. And this sense also do all circumstances of the
place convince, as Mat. 26.30.
When it was evening, he sat down with the twelve Apostles etc. And whilst
they were at Supper, Jesus took Bread, and blessed, and brake, and gave to his
Disciples and said, Take ye and eat etc And taking the Chalice, he gave
thanks, and gave to them saying, Drink ye all of this etc. And an Hymn being
said, they went forth unto Mount Oliuet, then Jesus said unto them, All you
shall be scandalized in me in this night. All which places jointly conspire in
proving the word (all) to concern here only all the twelve Apostles. Now from
the Example, or fact of the Apostles drinking or receiving under both kinds, to
infer a necessity for the Laity to do the like, no Argument will be of force,
as shall be hereafter clearly convinced.

But though this Explication be most literal and agreeable with the Scriptures,
yet Prot. object sundry things against it, as first that Christ forseeing, that
some would deny the use of the Chalice to all, did therefore say, Drink ye all
of this; whereas he said not of the other kind, Eat ye all of this. But the
answer is easy, ^or though not by the written word, yet by Apostolical
Tradition, the Church places in the Canon of the Mass these words, Eat you
all of this. And so S. Amb^ose setting down the Institution of this Sacrament,
L. 4. de Sacram. c. 5. See the like in Paschat. de corpore Christi c. 15.
brings in our Savior saying to his Apostles, Take ye and eat ye all of
this. And though it were certain that Christ had not said so, yet it avails
nothing, the disparity being manifest, for Christ giving one and the same
Chalice, that all of them might drink thereof, he might well say, drink ye
all of this, that so the first might know he was not to drink all, but was to
leave so much as might suffice for all the rest; which form of speech he used
most plainly a little before in the Supper of the Pasche: for as S. Luke says,
C. 22.17.
Taking the Chalice he gave thanks, and said, take and divide among you:
whereas breaking the bread himself, and giving to every one his part, not the
whole to be divided among them, there was no such necessity of the said words.

But Luther further argues, that to whom it is said, eat, to them it is
said, drink; wherefore the whole Sacrament is either to be given only to
Priests, or also to the Laity; if also to these, then to all it is said, eat
and drink; if only to Priests, then it is not lawful differently from the
Institution of Christ to give any part thereof to the Laity, and of this
Argument he thus insulteth, I confess my self to be overcome with this
unanswerable reason, neither have I read, heard, or found what to say against
it. But that you may see the weakness of Luther so easily overcome, and how
small and superficial his reading, hearing, and fynding has been; I answer:
Admitting, that to the same was said, eat, to whom drink, viz. to the
Apostles; as also I grant that the whole Sacrament is to be given not only to
Priests, but also to the Laity; but that which is inferred hereof is most
false, to wit, that if the whole Sacrament be to be given to the Laity, then
they are to drink: for I already have demonstrated, that the whole Sacrament
is truly and essentially under either kind. Neither did it further follow, that
if the whole Sacrament under both kinds was given only to Priests by Christ,
and not to the Laity, that then it may not now be given to them under one, for
though Christ himself did not give it, yet did he no where prohibit it, yea
elsewhere he commanded it, when he said, Luc. 22.19.
Do this; which words immediately follow the Consecration of the bread, and no
where repeated by any of the Evangelists after Consecration of the Chalice; and
though S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.25.
This do you as often as you shall drink etc. yet these words are not
absolute, but with this restraint, viz. As often as you shall drink, thereby
signifying not the necessity of drinking, but the manner and end thereof, viz.
in Commemoration of Christ; so easily might Luther have found what to have said
against his so unanswerable a reason.

But yet not satisfied, he further replyeth, that seeing Christ said, This is
my Blood which shall be shed for you, and for many, that therefore it is to be
given to all for whom it was shed, in which number no doubt the Laity is
contained, and of this reason he thus triumphs, This of all chiefly urges,
and altogether concludes me: and so it may indeed for a singular ass; for if
the Blood were to be given to all for whom it was shed, then were it to be
given to Jews, Turks, Heathens, Infants, and most abominable sinners, for
all whom no doubt Christ spent his most precious Blood; Wherefore the words
objected only conclude, (and that most manifestly against Prot.) that in the
Chalice was truly Blood, seeing Christ said thereof, This is my blood which
shall be shed for you, and for many.

Lastly some reply, that though it be true, that Christ spoke unto his Apostles
when he said, Drink ye all of this, yet the Apostles as then representing all
the faithful, all the faithful did therefore drink in them, and therefore now
are to do it in themselves. But this avails not, for besides, that it is only
but imagined and not proved, that all the faithful were as then represented in
the Apostles, yet supposing it were so, thence might we gather that now they
are not bound to the Chalice, seeing that Precept they have already either
fulfilled in the Apostles, or at the least, that sufficientty they fulfill the
same in Priests, who drink of the Chalice, and whom the Apostles as then did
indeed truly represent.

The third Rogers Def. of the Art. art. 30. p. 180.
principal Objection is taken from the first Institution of this Sacrament,
which was by Christ our Savior under both, and under the said both kinds given
to the present Communicants the 12. Apostles; Wherefore to Communicate under one
kind seems to alter the Institution of Christ, and therefore is unlawful. The
weakness of this Objection is presently discovered, if only we observe the true
natures of an Institution, and of a Precept, which of themselves are matters
most distinct, for an Institution is only a Production of a thing, whereby the
nature and substance of the thing is established and ordained: and though the
Institution in the end be referred to the use of the thing, in that every thing
is for his use; yet the Institution of it self commands nothing concerning
the use, whereas a Precept further prescribes, whether, and how of necessity
the thing is to be used. Matrimony for example is a thing ordained by God, and
yet therefore all are not bound to mary, neither yet being married, are they
bound to use the same at all times, or in all sorts, which according to Gods
Institution they lawfully might. And so all Creatures were by God ordained to
serve man, and yet all men are not bound thereby to use them all. The like is in
the present: Christ instituted the Eucharist under both kinds, but thereupon it
does not follow, that therefore every one is in such sort to receive it, no more
then because Christ instituted this Sacrament after washing of his D^sciples
feet, and after supper, and so gave the same to his Disciples not fasting,
that therefore the like Circumstances now are to be observed in the
Administration thereof: so exceeding careful are our Protestants of their Cup
of wine, and careless of the rest. In them is truly verifyed that of the
Prophet, Isa. 24.11.
Erit clamor in plateis super vino, There shall be crying for the wine in the
streets.

CHAP. XXIII. The true State of the Question, concerning the Sacrifice of the
Mass.
Whether Christ our Savior did institute a true, proper, and external
Sacrifice of his Body and Blood, to be offered to God in his Church, in
Commemoration of his Death, and Passion. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
THe richest treasure which Christ our Savior left unto his Church, was the
holy and dreadful Sacrifice of the Mass; concerning which the Catholic
Church belieueth, that Council. Trident. Sess. 22. Cap. 1.
Our Lord God, although he was once to offer himself to God the Father upon
the Altar of the Cross by death, that he might there work eternal
redemption: yet because his Priesthood was not to be extinguished by death; in
the last supper, which night he was to be betrayed, that he might leave a
visible Sacrifice to his beloved Spouse the Church, whereby that bloody one,
once to be performed upon the Cross, should be represented, and the memory
thereof should remain to the end of the world, and the wholesome virtue thereof
should be applied for the remission of those sins, which we daily commit;
declaring himself to be ordained a Priest for ever according to the order of
Melchisedech, he offered to God the Father his Body and Blood under the forms
of Bread and wine; and under the signs of the same things, he gave it to the
Apostles, whom then he ordained Priests of the new Testament, that they should
receive it, and by these words he commanded them, and their Successors in
Priesthood, that they should offer it. Do ye this in Commemoration of me etc.
And, Cap. 2.
because in this divine Sacrifice, which is performed in the Mass, the
selfsame Christ is contained and vnbloudily offered, who offered himself once
bloudily upon the Altar of the Cross; the holy Synod teaches, this Sacrifice
to be truly propitiatory etc. Wherefore according to the tradition of the
Apostles, it is duly offered not only for the sins, punishments,
satisfactions, and other necessities of the faithful that are living, but also
for such as are dead in Christ, as yet not fully purged. And, Cap. 3.
although the Church uses sometimes to celebrate certain Masses in honor and
memory of Saints, yet she teaches, that Sacrifice is not offered to them, but
to God alone, who has crowned them; whereupon it is, that neither the Priest
uses to say, Peter or Paul I offer to thee Sacrifice, but thanking God for
their victories, he imploreth their Patronage, that they in heaven would
vouchsafe to pray for us, whose memory we make upon Earth. Cap. 5.
And seeing the nature of men is such, that without external helps it cannot
easily be elevated to the meditation of heavenly things, therefore our holy
Mother the Church has ordained certain rites etc. and Ceremonies, as
mystical benedictions, lights, incense, vestments, and many other such like,
from Apostolic discipline and tradition, whereby both the Majesty of so great
a Sacrifice should be commended, and the minds of the faithful by these
visible signs of Religion and piety should be stirred up to the contemplation
of highest things which lie hid in this M^stery.

In the first Council of Nice it is said, Cap. de diuina m^nsa.
The Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world, to be placed upon
that sacred table to be sacrificed by Priests vnbloudily etc. ^his Canon is
mentioned, and acknowledged Oecol. l Ep. Oecol. etc. p. 667. Calu. inst. l. 4.
c 17 sect. 36. Iew^ll in Apol. Bills. true differ. part 4. p. 555.
by Oecolampadius, Calvin, Jewel, and Bilson. In the second Council of Nice,
we are taught, that Act. 6.
Our Lord or his Apostles, or Fathers in no place have called an Image (or
figure) the unbloody Sacr fice, which is offered by the Priest, but the very
Body it self, and Blood it self. In the Council Senonense these Articles
were condemned, In Annotation. post decreta fidei.
Mass ought to be said in the vulgar tongue; It is a manifest Error to apply,
or offer Mass for sins, for satisfactions for the dead, or for any other
necessities of our own, or others.

According to these Councels all Bellar. de Missa. l. 1. c. 5. etc. Rhem. Test
in Heb. 10.5.
Catholics believe, that Christ our Lord did at his last supper, institute a
true, proper, and external Sacrifice of his Body and Blood, to be offered to
his Eternal Father in memory of his Death and Passion by the Ministry of
Priests: and that the same is propitiatory for sin.

Points Disputable.
Some affirm See Mortons Mass. l. 6. c. 1. sect. 5.
that Elevation, and vocal Oblation do belong to the Essence of the Sacrifice.
Others, place it in the Consecration. Others in the Consummation. But none of
these are defyned by the Church.

Protestants Untruths.
Melancthon would seem to have so good liking of the Mass, that he writes
thus, In Confess. August. art. de Missa.
Our Churches are falsely accused that they abolish Mass; for Mass is retained
with us, and celebrated with great reverence: But if he mean by Mass only the
receiving and ministering of the Sacrament, then it is untrue to say, that they
are accused for abolishing the Mass; and if he mean a true oblation or
Sacrifice, then also it is untrue, that they are falsely accused; seeing it is
In Articulis Smalcaldicis.
confessed, that they have abolished the Sacrifice of the Mass.

He likewise affirms, that In Confess. August. art. de Missa, and in Apol.
eiusdem Articuli.
The Ancient (writers) before Gregory make no mention of private Mass: But
this to be clearly false, is to be seen in S. L. de Ciu. Dei. l. 22. c. 8.
Austine.

Chemnitius Exam. part. 2. p. 739. 744. 761. 766.
avouches, that the state of the Question is, whether that representation by
diverse gestures and garments, which is seen in the Mass of Catholics, be
the Sacrifice instituted by Christ: As also Ibid. p. 777.
that completnes of words, rites, gestures, actions, ornaments, garments,
which after were added to the Institution of Christ, to be the very synewes and
substance of the Popish Mass. But no Catholic ever taught this, all
confessing that these are only accidental Ornaments, and Ceremonies instituted
by the Church.

He Exam. part. 1 p 359.
also teaches that Catholics do so divide the Grace of Justification between
the Sacrifice of the Mass, and the receiving of the Eucharist, that to the
Mass they attribute ex opere operato, the remission of mortal sins, without
any labor or danger of the sinner, to whom that remission is made; and to the
receiving of the Eucharist only remission of venial sins, and that not
without great danger of the Receyuer, who if he come not pure, receives to
Judgment. And hence it is, says he, Catholics are drawn from Communion, and
are enticed to buy Masses. But all this is forgery, for no Catholic ever
wrote, that the Mass did remit mortal sins ex opere operato, without any
business or labor of the sinner: Neither is there any use in the Church to ask
or beg, much less to buy Masses for remission of sins. And indeeed we
ascribe more to the receiving of the Eucharist, which we say, ex opere operato,
to confer grace, then to the Mass, as it is offered for any sinner, which we
only teach to impetrate for the sinner some special help, whereby he may by
little and little return to himself; and not without any business or trouble, as
Chemnitius falsifyeth, but by true Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction
obtain at the length remission of sins.

He also auerreth, that Exam. ad 4. Sess. de Tradit. p. 410.
Popish writers have noted what words were added by Roman Bishops to the words
of Consecration uttered by Christ. But though they have noted what has been
added in the rest of the Canon, yet in the words of Consecration no man is
found to have added any thing since the Apostles: A truth avouched by Pope C.
cum Marthae extrade celebrat. Missarum.
Innocentius the 3. He further urges that in our opinion. Exam. ad 4. Sess. p.
420.
The whole Canon of the Mass is from Apostolical Tradition, and if any shall
but show himself to doubt thereof, he is excommunicated. But we only say, that
a great part of the Canon is from Apostolical Tradition; and we all know that
Commemoration of diverse Saints, who lived 200. years after the Apostles, was
added. He Ibid.
yet presses, that Pope Alexander ordained water to be mingled with wine in
the Celebration of the Eucharist: But Pope Alexander, words truly related are,
Ep. 1.
for there ought not (as we have received from our Fathers, and reason it self
teaches) in the Chalice of our Lord either wine alone, or water alone to be
offered. He Ibid.
also teaches, that P. Felix ordained Consecration of Aultars: but all know,
that Pope Syluester ordained that ryte. Lastly, he writes that, Ibid.
Pelagius added to the Mass the yearly memories of the dead: but Tertullian
much more anciently L. de Monogamia.
records the same, and L. de Corona militis.
affirms it to descend from Apostolical Tradition.

If you will believe Rogers, Def. of the Art. art. 1 p. 5.
The Papists give out, how sacrificing Priests are the Creators of Christ:
whereas all Papists hold that Christ is present in the Sacrament not by
Creation, but by Transubstantiation. Again, Ib. Art. 31. p. 183. 184.
The Papists deliver how the Mass is a Sacrifice etc. meritorious to all them
for whom it is offered, although they be not etc. endewed either with zeal or
knowledge, but quite destitute of faith, and that, ex opere operato: But all
Catholics do necessarily require faith as the foundation to Grace, Merit, and
Salvation. So true a Minister is false M. Rogers. But it is ordinary with
Protestants to supply by lies, what they cannot do by any Arguments of force.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Protestant Church Decrees, that Article 31.
The offering of Christ once made, is that perfect Redemption Pr^p^tiation, and
Satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both original and actual,
and there is none other satisfaction for sin but that alone: wherefore the
Sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonly said, that the Priest did
offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have remission of pain or guilt,
were blasphemous fables and dangerous deceypts. Whitaker teaches that,
Controu. 4. q. 1. c. 2. p. 522.
Now there remains no sacrifice in the Church Calvin, In 1. Cor. 9.19.
The lord has ordained no Sacrifices wherewith the holy Ministers should be
busied. Surely this Caluins Lord foresaw that these holy Ministers would be so
busied with their wives and Children, that they could not well attend to pure
Sacrifices.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
The Manichees were condemned by S. Tom 6. cont. Aduers. leg. and Proph. c. 19.
Austine for denying external Sacrifice: of whom he further says, Tom 6.
cont Faust. Manich. l. 20. c. 18.
The Manichees being ignorant what is to be condemned in the Sacrifices of the
Gentiles, and what to be understood in the Sacrifices of the Hebrews, and what
to be houlden, or observed in the Sacrifice of Christians, do sacrifice their
own vanity to the Devil. The like impugning of Mass was condemed in the
Euthymius Panopliae part. 2. Tit. 23. c. 17.
Bogomilians, and Petrus Cluniacensis Ep. 1. cont. Petrobrusianos.
Pseudo-apostles. But it proceeded originally from the Father of all
Heretics, the Devil: for so accordingly Lib. de Missa priuata. and unction
Sacerd. in Tom. 7. operum. fol. 228. Edit. Wittemb. 1558.
Luther confessed, that he was dissuaded by Satan from saying of Mass. The
truth of this is proved at large by M. Breerly in his Lyturgy of the Mass, p.
369.

S. Cyprian urged against the Heretics Aquarij, that L. 2. Ep. 3.
In the Chalice of our Lord water alone cannot be offered, neither wine alone
etc. And for the same error were the Armenians condemned by the 6. Council of
Can. 32.
Constantinople.

The Donatistes despised Aultars, for which Optatus thus writes against them,
L. 6. cont. Donatist.
What is so sacrilegious as to break, raze, and remove the Aultars of God?
etc. For what is the Altar, but the seat of the Body and Blood of Christ?
These all, your fury has razed, or broken, or removed etc. what has Christ
offended you, whose Body and Blood there resyded? etc. Yet all these old
heresies are received by new Protestants.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that our Savior instituted a True,
Proper, and External Sacrifice of his Body and Blood, to be ^ff^red in his
Church to God, in Commemoration of his Death, and Passion.
S. Austine Ep. 49. q. 5.
affirms, That in the divine Scripture several Sacrifices are mentioned,
some before the manifestation of the New Testament etc. and another now, which
is agreeable to this manifestation etc. and which is demonstrated not only from
the Evangelical, but also from the Prophetical writings. A truth so certain,
that our now Sacrifice of the new Testament is clearly proved by the Scriptures
of both, as first from the Sacrifice of Melchisedech, of whom, and whose
Sacrifice it is said, Genesis 14.18.19.
But Melchisedech king of Salem bringing forth bread and wine, for he was the
Priest of God most high, blessed him etc. And to make the figure agree to the
thing figured, and the truth to answer the figure of Christ, it is said, Ps.
109.4. Heb. 6.20. and 7.15.17.21.
Our Lord has said, and it shall not repent him, Thou art a Priest for ever
according to the order of Melchisedech; from these places will be easily proved
that Melchisedech was a Priest, that he offered in Sacrifice bread and wine,
and that therein he did prefigure Christ our Savior, and his Sacrifice daily
offered in the Church under the forms of Bread and wine.

I think no Prot. will deny, but that Melchisedech was a Priest, the Scripture
calling him, The Priest of God most high; as also they will acknowledge, that
Christ was a Priest, according to the order of Melchisedech; the same
Scriptures saying most plainly of Christ. Thou art a Priest according to the
Order of Melchisedech: The maine difficulty therefore is, whether Melchisedech
did offer in Sacrifice bread and wine, and therein he, and his Sacrifice were
true figures of Christ his Priesthood and Sacrifice; and therefore the title was
given him in respect of the Churches daily Celebration of the Sacrifice of his
Body, and Blood, under the same forms of Bread and wine, which Melchisedech
used in his Sacrifice. So that in brief, from this discourse a twofold
Argument may be drawn: first that Christ being a P^^^st, not a^^o^ding to the
Order of Aaron, who off red bl^udy Sacri^^e^, but according to the Orde^ of
Melchis^d^ch, who (...) bread and w^ne, that the (...) bloody Sacrifice, and
(...) w^ne. Mel^hisede^^ (...) w^^^ wa^ (...) (...) the world, therefore his
Sacrifice must continue as long, for he cannot be said to be a Priest, who has
not a sacrifice to offer: but the Sacrifice of the Cross was finished at once,
neither can it be reiterated, seeing Christ can dye no more, therefore some
other Sacrifice must be, which daily may be offered, but none such is, if the
Sacrifice of the Mass be not admitted: therefore the holy Sacrifice of the
Mass must needs follow.

Protestants Calu. and Chemnis.
in answer heereto, admitting Melchisedech to have been a Priest, and to have
been a type or figure of Christ, they first deny, that he offered bread and
wine in Sacrifice to God, but only brought forth the same to refresh Abraham
and his fellows, being weary returned from battle. Secondly they affirm the
Eternity of Christ's Priesthood, not to consist in the daily offering of
Sacrifice by the Ministry of Priests, but either in regard that he lives for
ever, or that the virtue of his one Oblation upon the Cross, continues for
ever.

But none of this will satisfy, being all of it barely affirmed without either
proof or reason, for though the said bread and wine was given to Abraham and
his fellows, yet were they first consecrated and offered unto God, and then
given unto them, that they might partake of the Sacrifice. So that the bread
and wine principally and primarily were brought forth by Melchisedech for
Sacrifice unto God, and secondarily and accidentally they were bestowed upon
Abraham and his souldiars for their refection; and this to be most true, may be
confirmed by these reasons following.

First, (...) that there was no cause why Melchisedech sh^^ld ^^ing to Abraham
co^porall ^ood, seeing it is there (...) from the wa ^e, and (...) which were
^^^h things a belonged ^o (...) ^^d (...) ^he, (...)
(...) necessary, that this Sacrifice should be somewhere set down, since to
sacrifice Priesthood is so ordained, that the Sacrifice being unknown, the
Priesthood is likewise unknown. Now there is no where else in Scripture mention
made of Melchisedechs Sacrifice, but only in this pl^ce: herfore it is certain
that the Sacr^fice which he offered, was of Bread and wine. Thirdly, for that
in the Hebrew, the word protulit is a word properly pertaining to Sacrifice, as
you shall read elsewhere, Iudicum 6. 18. 19.
where the same word is used in Sacrifice, intimating unto us, that as I said
before, the bread and wine were first offered in Sacrifice to God, and then
given to the people to be eaten, though they wanted not other sufficient
corporal food.

Lastly, the same is proved from the words immediately following, upon which in
Connection depends the sense of the whole, for he was a Priest of the most
high: which words can possibly bear no other sense, but that he did the
function of a Priest in the bread and wine which he brought; otherwise, if the
only cause of bringing that provision, had been to have relieved the Camp
with victuals, the reason would rather have been yielded, for he was a
bountiful King, a liberal Prince, a special friend of Abraham, as indeed he
was; but none of these reasons, or causes fitted this purpose so well, nor so
touched, or could touch the cause of his bringing forth bread and wine, as to
signify that he was a Priest, whose office is to offer Sacrifice. And here let
us join both senses, the Protestant and the Catholic, with the reason given
of the bringing forth of the Bread in those words, for he was a Priest of the
most high God. Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine to refresh Abraham and
his souldiars, for he was the Priest of the most high God; here is no
connection betwixt the precedent words and the reason given, and yet this is the
Protestant sense of this place. But to say as we do, Melchisedech brought forth
bread and wine to offer in sacrifice unto God, for he was a Priest of the most
high God; here is all connection, and the sense made perfect in the reason,
connecting the precedent the words with the subsequent.

But some reply that in the Hebrew it is not said, for he was a Priest, but,
And he was a Priest etc. so referring the said words not to the bringing forth
of wine and bread, but to the blessing of Abraham. But neither will this avail
any thing, for the learned in the Hebrew know, that this Coniunctiue particle
(and) is often taken for the causall, and the Hebrew particle is better
expressed in such places, by enim, or quia, for, or because, then by and; and
so also it must be translated if the sentence be expressed elegantly in the
Latin phrase, which S. Hierome uses to do. Besides in the Hebrew after these
words, and he was a Priest of the most high, there is an accent, which
signifies there the periode to be ended, which plainly conuinceth that the
said words are to be joined with the precedent, he brought forth wine and
bread, not with the subsequent, he blessed: which distinction is likewise found
in the Chaldee, Greek, and Latin textes; also an English Bible Printed 1552.
reads, Melchisedech king of Salem brought forth bread and wine, for he was a
Priest of the most high God: which Translation to be good Annot. in Luc. 1.42.
Beza proves by Theophilact, and sundry Examples out of the Scriptures. The
later Editions also in like places have not all of them the Copulative and, but
some other word as the sense requires, and so elsewhere they Engl. Bib. of
1578. in Genesis 20.3.
translate, Genesis 20.3.
thou art but dead, because of the woman which thou have taken: for she is a
man's wife, the Hebrew phrase is, and she is married to a husband; and the Genesis
30.27. Esa. 64.5.
like in many other places may be observed. Only I must desire the reader to
advertise, that when Prot. think it makes for their purpose, then they can be
content to change the particle, And, into, Because; as where it is said, Luc.
1.41.
Blessed art thou among women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, they
translate, Engl. Bib. of 1578.
Blessed art ^hou among women, because the fruit of thy womb is blessed. And
in the Margent it is said, It shows the cause why Mary was blessed; thereby to
insinuate, that the B. Virgin was blessed, not for any intrinsecall virtue or
goodness in herself, but only because her son was blessed. So kind are Prot.
to the Blessed Virgin.

To come now to the second Evasion: that for Christ to be a Priest for ever, is
not required a perpetual Sacrifice by the Ministry of Priests, but that
himself lives for ever, and the virtue of the Sacrifice of the Cross
continues for ever. But this avails nothing, for otherwise the Leuiticall
Priests, and all other Priests after the resurrection, should be called Priests
for ever, because they were Priests, and shall live for ever; Neither is the
perpetuity of the virtue of the Sacrifice upon the Cross sufficient to make
Christ a Priest for ever, no more then the effect of Noes Sacrifice Genesis 8.
offered after the Deluge, which was that the world should never be drowned
again, make Noe a Priest for ever. And in like sort should Christ's birth,
passion, and death, be said eternal, and Christ himself to be ever borne,
suffer, and dye, because the effects of these remain for ever: wherefore S.
Paul requires more, saying Heb. 8.3.
Every high Priest is appointed to offer guiftes and Hosts, wherefore it is
necessary that he also have some thing that he may offer. Wherefore if Christ
should not have something ever to offer, he should not be said to be a Priest
for ever. Now, the Sacrifice of the Cross was finished at once, and cannot be
iterated, seeing Christ can dye no more, therefore some other daily and
perpetual Sacrifice must be admitted, and none other was ever heard of, or
imagined, but the Sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood, under the forms of
Bread and wine.

Neither may it be said, that Christ is a Priest for ever, by any offering of
himself in heaven to God the Father, by his daily representing to him his
Passion for us, for his Representation is not properly any Sacrifice, yea any
lay man may daily present and offer to God the Passion of Christ, and yet is
not he therefore said to be a Priest for ever.

No less insufficient is that which D. Fulke pretends, that he Against Rhem.
Test in Heb. 8. sect. 5. fol. 409.
exercises his continual Priesthood in presenting his Church before God, and
making continual Intercession for us: for neither is this Intercession any
proper Sacrifice, as is clear by the Examples of lay people, as also of Angels
and Saints who make Intercession for the Church: Neither is this according to
the Order of Melchisedech, who offered Bread and wine; whereas Christ's
Priesthood for ever is according to that order.

The second proof from Scripture for the Sacrifice of the Mass, may be taken
from the great Correspondence between the Dedication and Celebration of the Old
Testament and the New. The Old Testament was established by Moses, with a
solemn Sacrifice and sprinkling of Blood, with these words, Heb. 9.20. Exodus
24.
This is the Blood of the Testament which God has Commanded unto you: Christ
in Confirmation of the New Testament said, 1. Cor. 11.25.
This Chalice is the New Testament in my Blood: and according to S. Matthew,
Mat. 26.28.
This is my Blood of the New Testament which shall be shed for many. Now the
Blood of the Old Testament which Moses sprinkled, was the Blood of an Host
already offered, and truly and properly sacrificed. Therefore the Blood of the
New Testament with Christ, was the blood of himself truly sacrificed, himself
saying, This is my Blood.

Thirdly the Prophet Daniel speaking of the times of Christians, foretells,
Mat. 24.15. Dan. 12.11. and 11.31.
That the daily Sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abominable desolation set
up; which is to be performed by Antichrist. Neither can this be understood of
spiritual Sacrifices, for never in Scripture is any called absolutely a
Sacrifice, and especially in the singular number, but only that which is truly
and properly a Sacrifice: as also with the Hebrews, Exodus 29.38.39. Number.
28.3.4.
the daily Sacrifice was a proper Sacrifice, viz. two lambs, which were
offered daily in Holocaust, one in the morning, and another in the evening.
Mat. 24.15.


And whereas Chemnitius Exam. part. 2. p. 156. 157.
answers to this, that it was spoken literally of Antiochus, who was before
Christ's time, and is not referred to Antichrist, but by Allegory, which kind
of Argument is but of small force; I must needs reply, that the accomplishment
of this Prophecy was prefigured, rather then fulfilled by Antiochus: and so
according to the literal sense thereof, the forsaid Chapter of Daniel is
explained by Apoc. 1^ 14. and 11.3. and 13.5. Compare these with Dan. 12.7. and
7.25.
S. John, and 2 Thessalonians. 4 Compare this with Mat. 24.15.
S. Paul, as concerning the time of the New Testament: as also by our Savior
himself, by the very words of Daniel Dan. 12.2
which concern the Consummation of the world, by the Exposition of Fathers
Aug. de ciu. Dei. l. 20. c. 8. and 25. Hier. in Dan. c. 11 Chrysostom. opere
imperf. hom. 49.
and Marg. Notes of the Eng. Bible in Dan. c. 12.
Protestants.

But Chemnitius Exam. part. 2 p. 157.
further answers, that though this place does concern the time of
Christians, yet it is only understood of spiritual Sacrifices of prayer etc.
Or of the preaching of the word, and administration of Sacraments, which
(think Prot.) shall upon Antichrists coming, be either taken away, or
greatly corrupted. I reply, concerning Prayers, that Persecution shall rather
perfect them, then abolish them: and as for the Preaching of the Word and
Administration of Sacraments, Prot. themselves teach, that these shall
continue, Gifford upon Revel. ser. 21. p. 191. Fulk. ag. Rhem. Test. in Revel.
c. 11. sect. 4. Szeged. in Tabul. Analyt. p. 368.
during all the time of Antichrists reign: and that these are Whitak. cont.
Dur. l. 3. p. 260.
Essential properties of the Church, which Church they confess Whitak.
against Reyn. p. 34. Fulke. ag. Rhem. Test. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 5.
shall continue even during Antichrists reign. And as for the imagined
corrupting of the Word and Sacraments, our question upon the Prophets words is
not of corrupting them, but of the Sacrifice being taken away.

Lastly Chemnitius and others betake themselves to this desperate and wicked
refuge, that this taking away of the daily Sacrifice is not meant of
Antichrist, but of our Savior In the Engl. Bible of 1576. in the Marg. notes
in Dan. 12.11. Chemnit. Exam. part. 2. p. 157.
Christ, who by his Sacrifice, shall take away the Sacrifice and Ceremonies of
the law. But this Answer is dangerous, as will appear by the Text it self,
Dan. 12.11.
The continual Sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination to desolation
shall be set up: or as the same Prophet says yet more plainly, Dan. 11.31.
they shall take away the continual Sacrifice, and they shall give
abomination into desolation, which to apply to our Saviors Passion were great
blasphemy. To such gross and impious euasions does obstinacy bring an
Heretic.

Fourthly, God said by the Prophet Malachy, Malach. 1.10.11.
I have no will in you etc. And gift I will not receive of your hands, for
from the rising of the Sun, even to the going down, my name is great among
the Gentiles, and in every place there is Sacrificing, and there is offered to
my name a clean Olation, because my name is great among the Gentiles. This to
be spoken of the time of Christians is evident by all Circumstances, and Prot.
do not deny it, but they Bilson in his true Difference etc. part. 4. p. 517.
Fulk. ag. Heskins p. 121. Whitak. cont. Dur. l. 9. p. 753.
answer that the Prophet speaks not peculiarly of our Priests, nor of a
Sacrifice to be offered only by them, but of all Christians in general, and
their spiritual Sacrifices prayer, thanksgiving etc. they being therefore
called, 1 Pet 2.5.
A holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God. But
this answer is many ways defective. 1. In that the Prophet directed his
speech of rejecting the Jewish Sacrifices, not to the people in general, but
only to the Pri^ste^, beginning his discourse, Mal. 1.7.
O you Priests that despise my name etc You offer unclean Bread upon my
Altar. And ^herupon then foretells the rejecting of their Sacrifice, and the
allowance in^tee^ ^herof of the new and pure Oblation: by which opposition he
must in all due proportion be thought to mean, that as in rejecting the
Priests of the Old Law, and their Sacrifice, he spoke not of all the people in
general, but only of Pri^stes in special, and their external Sacrifices so
rejected; so likewise in his prediction of a pure Oblation to succeed in place
of the other, he meant an External worship or Sac ifice to be offered. A truth
so clear, that Crastouius acknowledges the same, saying, L. 1. de opif. Miss.
sect. 132. p. 60.
Truly the Opposition of the Priests does require in this place a Sacr^fice
properly taken. Yea he further acknowledges Malachies Prophecy Ibid. sect.
139. 144. 127.
to be meant of the Eucharist. And Calvin speaking of this place of Malachy,
grants that thereby, Calu. in Buxderfius Synagoga Iudaica. p. 555. And see the
same in Calu. Latin Epistle. p. 683.
A change of external worship is plainly and clearly foretold, sub Christo
regnante, to be in Christ's time. Now that this change was to be made into the
Sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood, S. Austine plainly teaches in these
words, De Ciu. Dei. l. 17. c. 20.
It belongs to the participation of this Table which the Priest himself the
Mediator of the New Testament offers according to the Order of Melchisedech
of his Body and Blood: for that Sacrifice has succeeded all those Sacrifices
of the Old Testament, because instead of all those Sacrifices, his Body is
offered, and given to the Communicantes.

Secondly the P^ophet foretelling by whom this clean Oblation is to be offered
in the time of the Gospel (as Prot. Reynolds Confer. p. 546. Engl Bible of
1476. in the contents and marg. notes of Mal. c. 3.
understand it) affirms and says, Mal. 3.3.
He shall purge the sons of Leui, and will streine them as gold and as
silver, and they shall be offering Sacrifices to our Lord in Justice. Now, that
by the sons of Leui is not understood all the people, but a peculiar sort
chosen to sacrifice, who therefore are figuratively termed the sons of Leui,
because by their Sacrifice and Priesthood, they should abolish the Sacrifice
and Priesthood of Leui, and succeed in place thereof; it is ackowledged by
Prot. saying, Marg. notes of the Engl. Bible of 1576. in Mal. 3.3.
He begins at the Priests, that they might be lights and shine to others:
so clearly distinguishing these Priests from the other People: as also by
conference of this place with the Prophet Esaias, who likewise under the same
word foretells the Priesthood of the New Testament saying, Isa. 66.
And I will choose out of them Priests and Levites: Reyn. Confer. p. 544. Hook.
Eccl. Pol. l. 5. p. 236. Marg. notes of Bib. 1576. in Isa. 66.21.
where Leuits signify not all Christians, but only as sundry Prot. teach, (8)
Ecclesiastical Pastors. Thirdly, according to Prot. Luth. in asser. art 31.
Whitak. cont. Dur. l. 8. p. 572.
there is not in our Prayer or other best actions any righteousness, but
impurity and sin, wherefore by them cannot be understood the pure oblation to
God in Justice. Again, the Spiritual Sacrifice of prayer is understood
agreably to the Prot. Translation, by the word, Incense, according to the like
understanding thereof in other Apoc. 8.3.4 Ps. 140.2. Sap. 18.21.
places of Scripture. Wherefore the Prophet here foretelling both Incense, and
pure Oblation, as things different, it is thereby apparent, that by pure
Oblation cannot be understood spiritual Sacrifices, which are comprehended
under the word, Incense: which distinction S. Chrysostom observes, saying, In
ps. 95.
See how manifestly and plainly he has expressed the mystical Table, which is
the unbloody Sacrifice; the Incense also he calls the sacred prayers which
are offered after the said Sacrifice. And in the same place he distinguishes
also this unbloody Sacrifice yet more expressly from the spiritual Sacrifices
of Prayer, Alms etc. in that he there numbreth up these, and making this in
express terms a distinct Sacrifice from the other.

Again in the Scriptures, the word Sacrifice or Oblation is not taken
improperly, but when it has something adjoined unto it, as the Sacrifice of
Praise, of Justice etc. and so is sufficiently declared to be taken for a
spiritual Sacrifice. Neither as some others pretend, may it be said to be a
pure Oblation only, because God reputeth it for such, for therefore the
Oblation is said to please God, because it is clean, not therefore to be
clean, because God so reputeth it. Besides if the Oblation were not truly pure
in it self, it would not have been generally said, In every place is offered
up to my name a pure Oblation; for in many places do wicked Priests, even among
Christians, as much as lies in them pollute the Sacrifice, and undoubtedly
offer up many unclean and unacceptable prayers.

Fifthly, the Sacrifice of the New Testament is strongly proved by the very
words of the first Institution thereof; for our Savior said not, This is my
Body which is given to you, or, The Cup which is powered to you, but, pro vobis,
for you, to wit, to God in Sacrifice for you. And he speaks this in the
present tense, concurring agreably with his action then present, which proves,
that he then did actually offer this Sacrifice. Neither avails it to answer,
that the Vulgar Translation has Luc. 22.20.
which shall be shed, to wit, upon the Cross, or that the present tense, as D.
Fulke Against Rhem. Test. in Mat. 26. sect. 10. p. 54.
urges, is often used for the future; for the vulgar Translation uses both
Luc. 22.19.20.
tenses, the present in Consecration of the Bread, and future in Consecration
of the Chalice, and this to signify two certain truths, one that as then it
was given at the supper, another that it should be afterward given upon the
Cross: And though the present tense be sometimes taken for the future, yet
much more often for the present, and the rather here, in that the 3.
Evangelists, with S. Paul, do use the same: which also being more literal and
proper, is not to be denied without most urgent reason. Add yet hereunto that
S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.24.
giving thanks brake etc. which word of breaking must needs be referred to the
Sacrament, in regard of the outward forms, which are in time of sacrificing
broken, but not to the Cross, Joan. 19.33.36.
For when they saw that he was dead, they brake not his legs etc. that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, You shall not break a bone of him. And according
to this S. Chrysostom expounding these words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10.16.
The bread which we break etc. says thereupon, In. 1. Cor. hom. 24.
Why does the Apostle add, which we break? this in the Eucharist may be seen,
but on the Cross not but al^ogeather the contrary for a bone of him (says the
tex e) you shall not break, therefore what he does not suffer on the Cross
that does he (by way of mystery, and signification) suffer in the Sacrifice of
the last supper, when the forms are broken. Yea Calvin himself writing upon
the foresaid words of S Paul, says, In. 1. Cor. 11.24. p. 323.
Here I expound, to be broken to be put, for to be sacrificed though
improperly, yet not absurdly etc. For not simply and without addition, our Lord
does offer us his Body, but as it was sacrificed for us. Chemnitius also says
of the Sacrament. Exam. part. 2. p. 153.
There is the Sacrifice dispensed and taken, which was once offered on the
Cross for our sins. If then Christ was at his last Supper present in the
Sacrament by way of Sacrifice, and before his Sacrifice done upon the Cross,
how can it be, but that the Eucharist, then was, and yet is a Sacrifice? But of
this I have spoken more largely before.

Sixthly, whereas it is said, Do this in remembrance of me, the word, do, does
signify to sacrifice, as it is often used in other parts of Scripture, as
Leuit. 31.19.
Facietis and hircum pro peccato etc. you shall offer a goat for a Sacrifice
for sin: And Number 6.11.
faciet Sacerdos vnum pro peccato, and alterum in holocaustum, The Priest shall
offer one Sacrifice for sin, and the other for a holocaust: so also is this
word, do, used for sacrifice amongst profane authors, as Virgilius Eclog. 4.
Cum faciam vitula profrugibus ipse venito, when I sacrifice heyfers for
fruits come thou. In the same sense do Varro, Cicero, Plautus, Macrobius, use
the word, do, for Sacrifice.

The last proof our of Scripture for the Sacrifice of the Mass, is that of S.
Paul, 1. Cor. 10.16. etc.
The Chalice of Benediction which we do bless, it is not the Communication of
the Blood of Christ? And the Bread which we break, is it not the participation
of the Body of our Lord? for being many we are one Bread, one Body, all that
participate of one bread etc. they that eat the hosts, are they not partakers
of the Altar? the things that the heathen do immolate, they do immolate to
Devils etc. you cannot be partakers of the Table of our Lord, and of the Table
of Devils. We have an Altar, whereof they have not power to eat, which serve
the Tabernacle. Here S. Paul compares the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, and the
Aultars of Christians, with the Sacrifices and Aultars of the Jews and the
Gentiles, which comparison were impertinent, if we had not true external
Sacrifices and Aultars, as the Jews and Gentiles had.

But here some Engl. Bib. of 1562.
Protestants think to help themselves by falsely translating the words thus:
1. Cor. 9.13.
Know you not, that they which wait of the Temple, are partakers of the
Temple, 1. Cor. 10.18.
And are not they which eat of the Sacrifice, partakers of the Temple? In both
which places, the Apostles words in Greek is (...), which signifies Altar,
and not Temple. So that if no other Answer will serve their turn, they will
rather corrupt the Scriptures, then yield to the truth.

SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers expound the Scriptures agreably with
Catholics in Confirmation of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
S. Clemens Alexandrinus applies Melchisedech his Sacrifice to the Sacrament
of the Eucharist thus, L. 4. Strom. verse. fin.
Melchisedech King of Salem, Priest of God most high, gave wine and bread
sanctified nutriment in type of the Eucharist.

With whom agrees S. Cyprian, saying, Ep. 63. ad Caecilium.
Christ is Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech, which Order
is this, coming from that Sacrifice, and thence descending, that Melchisedech
was Priest of God most high, that he offered Bread and wine, that he blessed
Abraham; for who is more a Priest of God most high, then our Lord Jesus Christ,
who offered Sacrifice to God the Father, and offered the same which
Melchisedech had offered, bread and wine, viz. his own Body and Blood. And a
little after, That therefore in Genesis the blessing might be rightly celebrated
about Abraham by Melchisedech the Priest, the Image of Christ's Sacrifice
consisting in bread and wine went before, which thing our Lord perfecting and
performing, offered bread, and Chalice mixed with wine, and he that is the
plenitude, fulfilled the verity of the prefigured Image. S Cyprians sayings are
so clear for Sacrifice, that Fulke says, Against He^k^ns. etc. p. 1. 0.
It is granted that Cyprian thought the Bread and wine brought forth by
Melchisedech to be a figure of the Sacrament, and that herin also Melchisedech
resembled the Priesthood of Christ. The Centurists recite this special saying
of Cyprian: L. 2. Ep. 3.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, says Cyprian, l. 2. Ep. 3. is the high Priest of God
the Father, and first offered Sacrifice to God the Father, and commanded the
same to be done in remembrance of him; and that Priest truly executes Christ's
place, that does imitate that which Christ did, and then he offers in the
(...) among us, and taught a new Oblation of the New Testament, which Oblation
the Church receiving from the Apostles, throughout the whole world offers to
God, to him who gives us nourishment, the first fruits of his guiftes in the
New Testament, of whom amongst the twelve Prophets, Malachy has thus
foretold: I have no will in you, says our omnipotent Lord, and I will take no
Sacrifice at your hands, because from the rising of the Sun, to the setting
thereof, my Name is glorified amongst the Gentiles, and in every place Incense
is offered to my Name, and a pure Sacr fice, because my Name, is great amongst
the Gentiles, says our Lord Almighty, manifestly signifying by these things,
because the former people indeed ceased to offer to God, but in every place a
Sacrifice is offered to God, and this pure, for his Name is glorified amongst
the Gentiles. The Centuristes say thereof, Cent 2. c. 4. Col. 63.
Irenaeus etc. seems to speak very incommodiously, when he says, He taught
the new Oblation of the New Testament, which the Church receiving from the
Apostles, offered to God over all the world. S. Hierome upon this place of
Malachy writes thus, Comment. in 1. Malach.
And that they may know not in Iudaea one Province of the world, neither in one
City of Iudaea called Jerusalem, but in every place an Oblation to offered,
not unclean, as was offered by the people of Israel but a clean one, as in
the Ceremonies of the Christians; for from the rising of the Sun to the
setting thereof, the name of our Lord is great amongst the Gentiles, our Savior
saying, Father I have manifested thy name to men. And immediately after he
adds, And therefore of you, Priests and Princes of the Jews, in every place
a clean Oblation is offered unto me, and my Name is great among the Gentiles.

Eusebius Caesariensis writing obiter upon this place says, L. 1. Demonst.
Euang. c. 10.
We sacrifice therefore to our highest Lord a Sacrifice of praise: we sacrifice
to God a full, odoriferous, and most holy Sacrifice, we sacrifice after a new
manner, according to the New Testament, a pure host.

S. Chrysostom expounds the same place thus, Ad ps. 95.
The Church which every where carries about Christ in it, is prohibited from
no place, but in every place there be Aultars, in every place doctrine; these
things God foretold by his Prophet, for both declaring the Churches sincerity
and bringing into obloquie the ingratitude of the other people, he speaks
unto them, I have no pleasure in you etc. mark how clearly, and plainly he
interprets the mystical Table, which is the unbloody host, and the pure
perfume he calls holy prayers, which are offered after the host. Thou see
how it is granted that, that Angelical Sacrifi^e should every where be known,
thou see it circumscribed with no limits, neither the Altar, nor the song:
In every place Incense is offered to my Name, therefore the mystical Table,
the heavenly and exceeding Venerable Sacrifice is indeed the prime pure host.

S. Cyprian affirms that, L. 1. cont. Iudaeos c. 16.
The old Sacrifice is abrogated, and the new celebrated, with Malachie; and
then repeateth at large the place of the Prophet. And elsewhere De coena Dom.
repeating our Saviors words, This is my flesh, This is my Blood, says
thereupon, So often as with these words of this faith it is done, this bread
substantial, and this Cup consecrated with holy blessing, profits to the
health of the whole man, being both a medicine and Sacrifice to heal
Infirmities, and purge sins.

S. Austine avouches, that, L. 18 de Ciu. Dei. c. 35.
Malachias prophesying of the Church, which we see by Christ now propagated,
speaks plainly to the Jews in the person of God, (I have no pleasure in you
etc.) This Sacrifice by the Priesthood of Christ according to the Order of
Melchisedech, seeing we now see it to be offered up in every place, from the
Sun rising to the setting thereof, but the Sacrifice of the Jews to whom it
is said, I have no pleasure in you etc. they cannot deny to have ceased etc.
This is so clear In T^act. Theol. Caluini. p. 389.
in the Fathers that Calvin says, It is ordinary to those knaves (meaning
Catholics) to scrape together whatsoever is read faulty in the Fathers: when
therefore they object the place of Malachy to be expouned by Irenaeus of the
Sacrifice of the Mass, the Oblation of Melchisedech to be so handled by
Athanasius, Ambrose, Augustine, Arnobius, let it be briefly answered, the self
same writers elsewhere do interpret Bread, the Body of Christ, but so
ridiculously, that reason and truth compels us to dissent.

Crastouius reproves S. Gregory Nissen saying, De Opificio Missae. l. 1. sect.
164. p. 81.
Does he not know that the opinion of Nyssen is of it self absurd etc. He
says, when therefore Christ gave to his Disciples his body to eat etc. then
latently etc. unspeakably, and inuisibly the Body was sacrificed etc.

S. Denis Eccl. Hier. c. 3.
setting down how the Bishop comes to (...) hours the Irons did without any
outward help, fall loose from the said imprisoned persons. And afterward they
being set at liberty, and returned home, it fell out upon observation and
account of time, that as S. Bid says of the one, His hands were loosed
specially at those times when Mass was celebrated for him: And as S. Gregory
says of the other, his wise calling to memory the days and hours,
acknowledged him to be loosed even then when for him she remembered the
Sacrifice to be offered. S. Bid mentions the names of the party, and of the
Priest, and the place of his abode, affirm^ng that it was told him by credible
persons, who heard it from the party himself, whereupon (says he) having so
good proof, I thought good to insert the same without any doubt into my
Ecclesiastical history. And the other was so certainly known, that S. Gregory
beginning to speak thereof says Dearly beloved, I am persuaded that many of
you do know that whereof now I will remember you. Other like to these are
recorded by L. 4. Dial. c. 57.
S. Gregory and Symeon In vita Joan. Eleemosynarij. apud Surium. Tom. 1.
Metaphrastes. As also of the vision of Angels in time of the Sacrifice
adoring, reported by De Sacerd. l. 6. c. 4. Pallad. Hist. Sanct. c. 20. and 71.
Sozom. Hist. l. 6. c. 29.
S. Chrysostom, Palladius, and Sozomene: which vision was also made to S.
Chrysostom Nilus Monachus. in ep. ad ^uastasium Episcopum.
himself, and by him declared in private to his special spiritual friends.
These miracles are so forcible for our Catholic doctrine, as that instead of
all other answer, Humfrey thinks it Jesuit. part 1 p. 134.
Dotage to believe that Angels be there present: and of the other mentioned by
S. Bid, Fulke says, Against Purg. p. 333.
I weighe not worth a fly that tale you tell out of Bid, of him that had his
Chains fallen off in Mass time, that credulous and superstitious age had many
such feigned miracles. Against Rhem. Test. in Heb. 10.11. p. 416.
And the like fable (says he) tells Gregory, hom. 37. in Euang. So
profanely and contemptuosly do Heretics, having their hearts hardened,
think and speak of undoubted miracles: and so basely do they think of S.
Chrysostom, S. Gregory, and S. Bid, men reverenced by all Christian posterity
for their Learning, Judgment and Sanctity. Lastly S. Austine relating, that, De
Ciu. Dei. l. 22. c. 8.
A house being haunted with evil Spirits etc. a Priest went and offered there
the Sacrifice of Christ's Body, (for which the English Translation most
corruptly says, one went, prayed, and ministered the Communion) praying very
earnestly that the vexation might cease, and by Gods mercy it forthwith ceased.
This miracle is confessed by the Centuristes Cent. 5. c. 6. Col. 684. Hosp.
Hist. Sacram. part. 1 p. 389. 591.
and Hospinian, as also by De spectris. part. 3. c. 10. p. 254.
Lauatherus, who reciting the story verbatim, infers that it is clear that
Superstition began etc. as also to Pray, and Sacrifice for Souls. And Moulin
acknowledges this Miracle, Defense etc. art. 9. p. 208.
of the house haunted with Spirits, and cleared by the Priest saying Mass in
it.

D. Reinolds confesses. Conference etc p. 552.
The Relation and mutual dependence in which Altar and Sacrifice are by
nature linked together. But Zepperus more particularly teaches that, Politia
Eccles. l. 1. c. 18.
Aultars of stone and Hosts do confirm the Sacrifice of the Mass for the
mutual relation of Aultars and Sacrifices. Now it is evident that the Ancient
Fathers erected Aultars, and sacrificed upon them. S. Austine says, De Ciuit.
Dei. l. 22. c. 10.
We erect Aultars upon which we Sacrifice to the one God. Ser. 11. d^ Sanctis.
Upon the Altar the Body of our Lord is offered. Cont. Faust. Manich. l. 20.
c. 21.
We build Aultars to the God of Martyrs, although in memory of Martyrs; for
what Bishop etc. standing at the Altar, has any time said, we offer to thee
Peter, or Paul? S. Gregory Nazianzen affirms, that, In Iulianum.
Aultars take their name from the most pure and unbloody Sacrifice. Optatus
asks, L. 6. cont. Parmen.
what is the Altar, but the seat of the Body, and Blood of Christ? And in
reguard of this Relation, In Enchyr. c. 210. de cura pro mort. c. 18. Greg. in
Luc. hom. 37.
Saint Austine and S. Gregory do call it, The Sacrifice of the Altar. This was
so certainly the belief and practice of the Ancient Fathers, that they are
therefore in general reproved by sundry Pet. Mart. in his Com. pla. in Engl.
part. 4. p. 225. Carthwright in his 1. R^ply. the last. part. p. 264.
Protestant writers.

SECT. IV. That sundry Protestants do teach, and allow a true, and external
Sacrifice in the time of the New Testament, even the Sacrifice of the Mass.
Having proved before from Scriptures and Fathers, that Melchisedech was truly
a Priest, and that the Sacrifice which he offered was in bread and wine, and
that therein he was a true type of Christ his Priestood, and of the Sacrifice
which he was to offer under the forms of bread and wine; I will now examine
what sundry Prot. think heerof: And first, I find John Husse to affirm, Ad
Ps. 109.
That Christ is a Priest according to the Order of Melchised^ch who first
offered bread and wine: and Christ consecrated bread and wine into his Body and
Blood, the similitude of which Sacrifice Melchisedech sent before etc:
Melchisedech offered bread and wine Genesis 14. and Christ consecrated bread and
wine into his Body and Blood offered it to God the Father, and committed it to
his Disciples to be offered. He also calls it, Act. Mon. p. 209.
The Sacrament of the Altar, and being a Priest said Mass, as John Johnson
acknowledges, even to his dying day; to which his Mass the people during his
last restraint resorted, at his Hosts house in Constance, as is witnessed by a
Citizen Huldericke Reichental. histor. Teuton. de Council. Constan.
of Constance, who lived in that time: And we do not any where find him charged
for impugning the Mass. So Papisticall was John Husse in the very Sacrifice of
Mass.

To come now to Wiccliffe, Perzibrane records that, Cap. 28.
Wiccliffe in his Book de Apostasia c. 18. approves all the rytes of the
Mass, from the beginning almost to the end, affirming that it is excellent and
excellently declared, and concluding of all that ryte, and saying: It is
certain, that all such things are so far forth laudable, as they do stir up,
that Christ may be more loved. Thus he etc. Wiccliffe celebrated his Masses,
after the rite, and form of the Church etc.

But no man speaks more plainly then Martin Luther, who avouches, that, Ad
Ps. 110. Tom. 8. fol. 197.
Melchisedech was a King, and a Priest, he offered bread and wine also for the
Patriarch Abraham and his family etc. But what is the Oblation of bread and
wine for Abraham? this expresses the Priestood of Christ, from this time to
the end of the world, in which time the Church offers the Mystical Sacrament
of the Altar, of his precious Body and Blood.

Here Luther acknowledges Melchisedech to have been a Priest, to have
offered bread and wine for Abraham, and therein to have exercised the
Priesthood of Christ, and the Sacrament of the Altar of his precious body and
Blood: which is the very same that Catholics teach.

Andreas Crastouius a learned Caluinist De opificio Missae Cont. Bellar. l. 1.
p. 18. sect. 9^.
acknowledges the Fathers general opinion of Melchisedechs Sacrifice of Bread
and wine, and in reguard of that their Harmony (as he terms i^) or general
consent therein he professes to be of their opinion: his words in the place
before cited are, It is not lawful for Christian Pastors to cast away the
consent and Harmony of Interpretation, and that both for the neernes of the
Apostles age, as also for the singular concord of all, which is had in all
places etc. with the consent as it were of all: the sacred Oblation of
Melchisedech is proposed, that not only for Abraham and his Souldiars, but also
to God the unbloody Sacrifice may seem to be offered Symbolically: And
immediately after he answers the Protestants common objection, saying. But if
some Doctors affirm, Melchisedech to have given to Abraham bread and wine,
yet they do not deny that primary Oblation which was made to God. So that
according to this Caluinist, all Fathers generally do interpret, that
Melchisedech offered Sacrifice, and that his Sacrifice did represent the
unbloody Sacrifice of Christ.

The Lord Cobham calls the Eucharist, Act. Mon. p. 265.
The Sacrament of the Altar, Ib. p. 267.
the Sacred Host, and is no where charged with the contrary doctrine; but as M.
Fox witnesses, Ib p. 273.
His opinion, as the Papists thought at that time, was perfect concerning the
Sacrament. And it is evident that King Henry the 8. and the Church in his time
did publicly maintain the Mass, Act. Mon. p 586.
punishing the impugners thereof; and yet nevertheless, the Prot. gladly
acknowledge him for a Fulke ag. He^kins, Saunders. p. 563. sect. 78.
Member of the Catholic Church of Christ, and Ib. p. 564.
the Church in his time for a true Church.

Jewel acknowledges that, Reply in Engl. p. 7.
Melchisedech by his bread and wine signified the Sacrifice of the holy
Communion: so that with M. Jewel, the Prot. Communion is now a Sacrifice: or as
M. Morton calls it, the Mass of Christ. According to Melancthon, In Council.
Theol. part. 2. p. 373.
Melchisedech receives Abraham returning from the war, and admits him to
the Sacrifice, and blesses him. Vrbanus Rhegius testifyeth that 1. part.
operum de Missae negotio. fol. 65.
Many there are who think a Sacrifice to be proved by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10.
where he dehorteth from the society of such as sacrifice to Idols by Arguments
taken from the belief of the Sacrifice used by the Jews and Gentiles for he
seems to compare Sacrifice to Sacrifice as Chrysostom teaches, and his
Comparison so to stand, that by it is gathered, Christians in the Lords Supper,
to have a certain peculiar sacrifice whereby they are made partakers of our
Lord, as the Idolaters by their abominable Sacrifice, are made partakers of
Devils: which thing if it be so, it seems it may be answered, that in the
Supper of Christians are the Body and Blood of Christ, which are a holy a
Sacrifice, but commemoratiue: So plainly does he acknowledge the Eucharist to
be no less truly and properly a Sacrifice, then were the Sacrifices of the
Jews, which were true Sacrifices, though they were commemoratiue, in respect
of Christ's Passion then to come, as ours is now a true Sacrifice, and yet
Commemoratiue, in reguard of his Passion already past.

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture against the Sacrifice of the Mass answered.
D. Against Reynolds. p. 84. 85.
Whitakers urges from S. Paul, that Christ Heb. 7.24.
Continues for ever, and has an everlasting Priesthood, wherefore no Priests
do succeed him, and consequently no Priesthood, no Sacrifice: for therefore in
the Old law, were Priests Heb. 7.23.
multiplied, because that by death they were prohibited to continue. Answ. We
do not teach that Priests do succeed to Christ, but only that they are his
Vicars or Ministers, and that he by them does truly offer Sacrifice, which does
no more derogate from Christ his Priesthood, then it does from his being our
Mat. 23.10. Isa. 9.7. Luc. 1.3. Mat. 26.31. Io. 10.11.14. Luc. 4.18. Ephesians. 2.17.
Master, King, Pastor, Preacher; that others also are Masters, and Kings,
Pastors and Preachers: Yea therefore is he said to be a Priest for ever, (as is
showed before) because though not by himself, yet by other Priests as his
Ministers, he sacrifices for ever. And as for S. Paul objected (in proof of
the many prerogatives of Christ's Priesthood and Sacrifice before that of Aaron)
he does only exclude the multiplicity of Priests in the same dignity and
power; for in the old Law by reason of Aarons death succeeded Eleazarus, and to
him Phinees etc. and so, as if Aaron had n^uer dyed, none had succeeded him,
and yet he living there were many other inferior Priests: so Christ never
dying, none succeeds him, which yet does not hinder the being of the other
true, yet inferior Priests. Again, according to D. Whit^kers own
Exposi^ion, Against Reynolds page 83.
that property is (...), (everlasting) that p^sseth not away from one to
another: But who of us ever affi^^ed Christ his Priesthood to have departed
away from him? Yea we all acknowledge that he is a Priest for ever, according
to the Order of Melchisedech.

Secon^ly, it is urged that the Sacrifice of the Cross is of infinite value,
therefore all others are injurious to it and supe^fluous I answer, this no more
proves the Sacrifice of the Mass to be injurious to the Sacrifice of the
Cross, then it does the l^ke of all the Sacrifices of the old Testament, all
which depended upon the virtue of the Sacrifice of the Cross, Christ being
therefore called, Apoc. 13.8.
the lamb slain from the beginning of the world; it being therefore of
infinite value, does only prove, that there is no need for another, or the
same Christ to dye again, which makes nothing against the multiplicity of
Sacrifices, representing the said Sacrifice of the Cross, and applying the
fruit thereof to us: in one word, the Sacrifice of the Mass being no other but
the same in substance with the Sacrifice of the Cross, though in different
manner offered under the forms of bread and wine, which are truly turned into
the Body and Blood of Christ, whereupon it is called, Hostia incruenta, an
unbloody Sacrifice; I say, the Sacrifice of the holy Mass, can be no ways
injurious to the Sacrifice of the Cross.

But because this Objection is much insisted upon, in further Explanation
thereof, I say; 1. that the Catholic belief is, that our Saviors Passion and
death is in it self the sufficient and most accomplished price of our
Redemption: And that the benefit thereof is imparted to us (as Prot. Chemnit.
Exam part. 2. p. 21.
also teach) by special means in that behalf subordinate, as not only by
faith and preaching of the word, but also, as many Prot. Whiteg. Def. p. 527.
Carthw. ib. p 532. Hook. Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 57. Couel. in Def. of Hook art.
14. p 96 Bilson, true Diff. r. part. 4 p 539. Chem. Exam. part. 1. p 17.
acknowledge, by the Sacraments, and so most especially by the Sacrifice of the
Mass in our opinion, which we affirm Christ to have instituted to be to us
not any new Redemption; with which some Protestant falsely charge us contrary to
our Bellar. de ^issa. l. 2. c. 4.
writings, and contrary to the Confession had of us by sundry Vrsinus
Commonefactio etc. p. 289.
Pro^. in this behalf; but only as chief means appointed to continue the
memory of his Oblation upon the Cross, and the application of the general
virtue thereof to our particular necessities: to which very Doctrine sundry
Prot. do also assent. Sigwartus says of this Sacrament, Disp. Theol. disp. 16.
p. 146.
It is the organ, means, and instrument, by which the benefits of Christ may
be conferred and applied. If you will believe Fulke, Ret^ntiue. p. 24.
Every Prot. does acknowledge the Ministration of the Sacrament to be a
dispensation of the Sacrifice of Christ's death. Calvin affi^meth, that by the
S^crament, I^ 1. Cor. 11.24.
we are partakers of Redemption, and the benefit of the Sacrifice is applied to
us. And if some reply to this, that howsoever the Communicant may apply by
Faith Christ's dea h to himself, yet it seems hard, that the Priest should in
his Oblation make application of the benefit thereof, to, or for any other. I
answer, that the efficacy which we attribute as proper to the Mass, being not
any new Redemption, is not hard but easy to be conceived, the same being (in
reguard of the like peculiar effect) semblable (though in a far transcendent
sort) unto Prayer; which profits not only the party praying, but Job. 41.8
Philem v. 22. Romans 15.30. Iac 5.16.
others also for whom it is made. Yea S. Paul speaking of Sacrifices, says
most clearly that, Heb 5.1.3.
Every high Priest etc. is appointed for men in those things that appertain to
God; that he may offer Guiftes and Sacrifices for sins etc. and therefore he
ought, as for the people so also for himself to offer for sins. So many
ways is this common Objection ansred.

The Rogers Det. of the Art. art. 31. p. 184.
third Objection is that of the Apostle Heb. 9.25.
Nor tha^ he should offer himself often, as the high Priest enters into the
Holyes every year in the blood of others. And again, Ib. c. 10.12.
We are sanctified by the Oblation of the Body of Jesus Christ once. And yet
thirdly, I^. ver. 14.
By one Oblation ha^h he consummated for ever them that are sanctified. And
lastly, Ib. 18.
Now there is not an Oblation for sins. Answ. These places are understood of
the Sacrifice of the Cross, and so in the first place it is said, Heb. 9.26.
Otherwise he ought to have suffered often from the beginning of the world: so
that they do not exclude all Sacrifice^, but only the iteration of the
Sacrifice of the Cross by Christ's often suffering, for no more do the words
import. And though by that one Sacrifice of the Cross, remission of sins be
obtained, that is, our Redemption wrought, and due satisfaction made to Gods
Justice for sin; yet this nothing more excludes such Sacrifices as
represent, and apply unto us the Sacrifice of the Cross, then it does exclude
Baptism, the Euchariste, preaching, prayer, and other means and Instruments,
whe^by the fruit and profit of the Cross is applied unto us. Besides that
understanding impugneth Christ's Priesthood for ever; for which Heb 8.3
it is necessary that he also may have something that he may offer, and for
this express reason, because every high Priest is appointed to offer. Yea
Prot. contrary to this their own Objection do confess, that as now also in
heaven Bulling. in Decad. in Engl. Dee. ^. Se^. 7. p. 707.
Christ our Lord sacrifices for us: and offers a Sacrifice for sins unto
the living God, (even) himself, always an effectual Sacrifice, and
continuing still Ib. p. 707.
our Priest, executes his office (of Priesthood) before God in heaven. And
some Prostants tell the Lutherans that, Vrsinus in Commonsfact. p. 290.
Wheresoever Christ is present, there does he offer himself in the fight of
his Father to obtain us remission for his Sacrifice once offered upon the
Cross etc. But according to Lutherans, in the Mass he is corporally present,
therefore in the Bread he presents himself to his Father for our Salvation no
less then in heaven. And, the Real Presence but admitted, the Sacrifice of
Christ's Body does thence necessarily follow. In like sort says Altkircherus,
De Myst^co etc. Sacrificio. p. 2.
From this foundation (of corporal presence and eating) as well Adoration as
Oblation of the Body and Blood of Christ in Sacrifice must necessarily follow,
and be granted. And he cites Melancthon to say, Ib. p. 3.
If Christ be contained in the Bread, why is he not to be adored and offered?
By all which it is clear, that our unbloody Sacrifice does nothing derogate
from that one Sacrifice of the Cross.

Others object that we do not find in all the Scriptures that Christ or his
Apostles said Mass. Answ. Christ himself said Mass at his last supper, when
he said, Luke. 22.19.20.
This is my Body which is given for you: This is the Chalice the New T^stament
in my Blood which shall be shed for you: from which words we have formerly
proved Sacrifice. And seeing Christ at the same time commanded his Apostles
saying, Do this in remembrance (...) lick Church teaches, that, 1. Council.
Trident Sess. 14. Cap. 1.
Our Lord did then chiefly ordain the Sacrament of Penance, when rising from
death, he breathed upon his Disciples saying, Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose
sins you shall forgive they are forgiven them and whose you shall retain, they
are retained By which so notable act, and words so plain, the consent of all
Fathers has always understood, power of remitting and retayning sins to
have been communicated to the Apostles, and their lawful Successors. The
Church further Cap. 3.
teaches, the form of the Sacrament of Penance etc. to be placed in these
words: I absolve thee etc. The acts of the Penitent himself, to wit,
Contri^ion, Confession, and Satisfaction, are as it were the matter of this
Sacrament etc. Cap. 4.
Contrition is sorrow of mind and detestation of sin committed, with purpose
to sin no more etc. Cap. 5.
From the Institution of the Sacrament of Penance etc. all the Church has
ever understood, entyre Confession of sins to have been also ordained by our
Lord, and to be necessary by Gods Law to all that have fallen after Baptism
etc. Concerning Satisfaction, the Church Cap 8.
declares, that it is altogether false and different from the word of God (to
affirm) the fault is never forgiven by our Lord, but all the punishment is
also pardoned etc. And therefore she further teaches, that, Cap. 9.
so great is the bounty of Gods munificence, that we may not only satisfy God
the Father through Christ Jesus with punishments voluntarily by our selves
^^dertaken for the revenge of sin, or imposed by sentence of the Priest,
according to the measure of the fault: but also which is she greatest argument
of love, by temporal punishments inflicted by God, and by us patiently
suffered.

In the Council Cabilonense it is thus decreed, Can. 8.
Concerning the Penance of sins, which is the Cure of the Soul, we judge it
profitable to all men; and that Penance be appointed to Penitents by Priests,
Confession being made etc. In the Council of Florence it is defyned that,
Decret. Eugenij PP.
Penance is the fourth Sacrament whose as it were matter are the acts of the
Penitent, which are distinguished into three parts, the 1. Contrition of the
heart etc. the 2. Confession of the mouth etc. the 3. satisfaction for sins
according to the sentence of the Priest etc. The form of this Sacrament are
the words of Absolution, which the Priest utters, when he says: I absolve
thee etc. The Minister of this Sacrament is the Priest, having authority to
absolve, either ordinary, or by Commission of Superiors.

According to these Councels all Bellar. de Poenitent. l. 1. c. 8. etc. Rhem.
Test. in Joan. 20, 22.23.
Catholics generally believe, that the Sacrament of Penance is truly and
properly a Sacrament: that the Priest has Authority from God therein to
forgive sin: and that Confession of sins is therefore necessary.

Points Disputable.
All Catholics believing that Contrition is a Cause of remission of sin, yet
Capreol. in 2. Did. 40. q. vnica. Dom a Soto: l 2. de Not. and Gra. c. 4.
some teach, that it causes as a disposition, not as truly deserving the same:
But Magister. Sent. 2. l. Sent. Did. 27. S. Tho in 1. Did. 27 q. 4.
others more probably teach, that it is not only a Disposition, but truly
deserving of congruity Justification. Scotus in 4. Did. 16. q. 1.
Some place the essence of this Sacrament only in the Absolution. Durand. D^st.
14. q. 1. 3. Gabr. did. 14. q. 1. art. 1.
Others in Absolution and Confession. Sotus. Did. 14. q. 1. art. 1.
Others generally in Absolution, Contrition, and Confession as essential, and
in Satisfaction as a part only integrall.

Some Scotus in 4. Did. 18. Nauar. in Man. c. 26. n 20.
think, that the Penient is not bound to accept the Penance imposed by the
Priest, but may refer himself to Purg^tory: but if he do accept thereof,
then is he bound to perform it. Caiet. q. 2. de Satisfas^.
Others, that neither is he bound to accept thereof, and if he do, yet is he
not bound to perform it. But Magist. Sent. in 4. Did. 16.18. S. Tho. eadem
Did. q 1. art. 3.
others more generally teach, that the Penitent is both bound to accept, and
perform his Penance imposed by the Priest.

Protestants Untruths.
Luther blusheth not to avouch that, L. de Captiu. Babyl. Cap. de Foeuis.
Our Babylon (meaning the Catholic Church) is not content with this, she has
also so extinguished faith, as that with shamles forhead she den^^th it to be
necess^ry in this Sacrament, yea with Antichristian impie^^ she defyneth it
Heresy, If any shall affirm faith to be necessary, But this to be most untrue,
Lu^her himself does acknowle^ge in ^hese words. Aduersus execrab. Antichristi
Bullam, de sexto Art.
This I have done by that Doctrine, Penance to be of no waig^t, unless it be
done in Faish and Charity, which themselves also teach, only that they neither
know or teach, what is Faith, or what is Charity. So clearly does Luther prove
himself liar.

He also accuses us to teach that, L. de Captiu. Babyl. cap. de Foenit.
Contrition goes before the faith of promise, and is much more profitable, as
not being a work, but merit of says. But all Cathol^ckes teach, that
Contrition follows faith, and that faith is so the gift of God, as that it
cannot be gained by Contrition, or any other work, as of merit.

He In Comment. Epist. ad Gal.
affirms likewise that we make no mention in the Sacrament of Confession of
the merit of Christ, but only inculcate humane Satisfactions; which he proves
by the form of Absolution which Catholics use. But this is so absurdly
false, that in the very form of Absolution which Luther himself sets down
in the same place, and which Heshusius recites out of Luther, the f^^st words
are, L de Error. Pontif. loc. 9. n. 57.
The merit of Christ's Passion etc.

Melancthon In Confess. August. art. 12. and in Apol. ad art. 12.
in sundry places affirms us to teach. sins to be forgiven not by faith,
but by Charity, works, and satisfactions: whereas we teach that sin is to be
forgiven by Absolution, God applying the merits of Christ by the Ministry of
Priests, and this gratis, not for any merit, or work of Contrition, of other
works of ours.

Calvin Instit. l. 3. c. 4.. 1.
affirms, that we make Penance to consist in external Exercises, But of the
interior renouation of the mind which draws with it true amendment of life,
a strange silence. But himself presently after in the same place make^^
himself a liar, by these words, with them there is much speech of Contrition
and Attrition. He also introduces Catho^^ckes to say, In Antid. art. Paris.
art. 3.
For as much as concerns Confession it is to be observed, that the matter is
by Gods Law, but the form by Positive Law. But no Catholic eue^ writ, that
the form of Ab^olu^ion was by Positive Law. He also falsely avouches that, De
necess. reform. Eccl. p. 60.
The Adversaries do not show any necessity of Confession to have been imposed
upon the faithful before Innocent the 3. But Innocent the 3. only declares
that none have power to administer this Sacrament by Gods Law, bu^ only such as
have Jurisdiction over others. Che^nit^us aff^^meth that Exam. 2. part. p. 955.
Lombard first made of Penance a Sacrament. But this to be most untrue may be
seen in S. Ep 180. ad Honor.
Austine.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Prot. Church decrees, that Art. 25.
There are two Sacraments ordained by Christ etc Baptism, and the Supper of
the Lord. Those commonly called Sacraments, that is, Confirmation, Penance
etc. are no^ to be counted for Sacraments of the G^ospell etc. for that they
have not any Ceremony or visible sign ordained by God. And ^eereup^n Prot.
teach, that, Willet. Synop. Controu. 5. q. 4.
Ecclesiastical Ministers have only power granted to them to declare and
pronounce Remission of sin^es according to the will ^f God, and do not properly
in their own power absolve or release sins: Ib p. 211.
They do not reconcile men to God, but pray them to be reconcyled.

Calvin thinks that, In refut. Cathol. p. 384.
The Law established for auricular Confession is diabolical. Jewel, Defense of
the Apol. p. 132.
We say, that it is neither ordained by Christ, nor is necessary to salvation,
that private Confession be made to the Minister. So that Prot. deny the
Sacrament of Penance, and all necessity of Confession.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
S. Ambrose affirms of the Nouatian Heretics, that, L. 1. de Poenit. c. C.
7. See Cypr. l. 4. Ep 2.
They say they give the reverence to God, to whom alone they reserve the power
of forgiving sins, but none do greater injury unto him, then those who will
break his Commandments: for seeing our Lord himself in his Ghospel has
said, Receive you the Holy Ghost, whose sins you shall rem t they shall be
remitted, who does more honor him, he who obeys his Commandments, or he who
resists? And to omit the like censure given by Ep. 1. ad Sympron.
Pacianus against Sympronianus the Nouatian, Socrates relates the Heretic
Acesiu^ to have s^yd, that Hist. tri. part. l. 2. c. ^3.
Sinners were to be invited to Pe^nance, but the hope of remission they were
not to have from Priests, but from God alone, who has power to forgive
sins: which when he had spoken, the Emperor said. O Acesius, set up a
ladder, and if thou can ascend alone to heaven. T^is History is so true, that
it is confessed by Cent. 4. p. 119. Chem. Exam part. 1. p. 188. and part. 2. p.
193. Cent. 4. Col. 653.
Osiander, Chemnitius, and the Century writers. And M. D^llingham grants
that, Disp. de natura Poenit. p. 12.
The Nouatians did reserve to God alone, the power of forgiving sins. The
Montanists are also reproved by S. Ep. ad Marcell.
Hierome, for denying Confession; as also the Messalians by S. L. de haer. c.
80.
Damascene.

And as concerning Penance enioined after Confession by the Priest, Theodoret
reproves the Heretics Audiani, for that, L. 4 haeret. Fab. de Audianis.
They give remission to such as are Confessed without prescribing time for
Penance, as the laws of the Church command. The Iacobites were condemn^d Anno
600. for affirming that, Alphons. de Cast. aduer. haer. l. 4 c. de Confess and
the Prot. Author of Catholic Traditions. p 126.
We are to confess our sins to God only: and that Confession of sins to a
Priest is not needful. So fully ^o Protestants symbolize with Ancient
Heretics.

Protestant Errors.
Danaeus affirms that, Controu. 4. c. 9. p. 195.
Christ the Son of Man, and conuersing then upon Earth, forgave sins, but
not as he was man, but as he was true God: even as in the same divine nature he
wrought miracles, not as he was man. Yea says Perkins In Gal. 3.5.
Christ himself as he was Man could not work a miracle. It is no m^ruayle
then if Prot. deny to Priests power to forgive sins, when they deny it to
Christ, as man.

According to Luther, Ep. ad Senatum Pragensem.
Priests by no right, but damnable abuse, do use in Confessions and
Excommunications the office of bynding and loosing; for all we who are
Christians, have the Common office of the keys. And elswere he affirms, Art.
13 a Leon. decimo Damnato.
that a woman or Child as well as a Bishop or Pope, may absolve in the Sacrament
of Penance: wherein he follows the Pepuzian Heretics condemned by S.
Augustine, L. de haer. c. 17.
for that they gave to women the Privilege to be made Priests. Bu^ Luther
proceeds yet further, directing us thus, L. de Capt. Babyl. fol. 86.
Be now certain, and let him acknowledge himself whosoever knows himself
to be a Christian that we are all Pri^stes alike, that is, have the same power
in the word and every Sacrament. So that every Shoemaker may a^well administer
any Sacrament, as any Bishop or Priest.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures that Christ gave to his Apostles, and in
them to Bishops and Priests, true authority to forgive and retain sins, in
the Sacrament of Penance: And that Confession of sins is necessary.
CHrist our Savior claymed and received as being man power and authority to
remit sin here upon Earth, in so much that when certain of the Scribes
blasphemed against him (as Prot. Ministers do now calumniate Catholic
Priests) saying, Mar. 2.7.
who can forgive sins but only God?) he did therefore miraculously cure the
man sick of the Palsy, Mat. 9.6. Mar. 2.10.
that they might know, that the Son of man has power in Earth to forgive
sins: Whereupon Mat. 8.9.
the multitudes etc. glorified God, that gave such power unto men. Neither is
it probable or any way possible, that he received this power only for himself,
or for his own abode here with us upon Earth, but to communicate the same over
to his Church, to which end he accordingly said to his Apostles, Io. ^0.21.
As my Father sent me, I also send you.

Now, that Priests have power from Christ to forgive sin, it may be proved
from the promise and performance of our Savior unto the Prince of the Apostles
S. Peter, that from him it might be derived to all the rest. Mat. 18.19.
I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bynd upon Earth, it shall be bound also in the heavens; and whatsoever thou
shall loose in Earth, it shall be loosed also in the heavens: the like power also
is promised to the rest of the Apostles, even by our Savior himself saying,
Mat. 18.^8.
Amen I say to you, wha^soeuer you shall bynd upon Earth shall be bound also in
heaven, and whatsoever you shall loose upon Earth shall be loosed also in heaven.
Now that by bynding and loosing is meant forgiving, and not forgiving of
sins, it is proved by another place in which Christ after his R^surrection
repeated again and confi^med the same power, saying unto them, Io. 20.22.23.
Peace be to you, as my Father (...) and an Egg to be an Oyster.

A second proof for this power in Priests to forgive sins, may be the
Common practice of the Church, and Christians in S. Paul his time, confessing
their sins, for it is said, Act. 19.18.19.
And many of them that believed, came confessing and declaring their deeds.
And many of them that had followed curious things, brought together their
books, and burnt them before all. Here it is evident, that they confessed
themselves not only in general to be sinners, but their deeds in special,
amongst which was their following of curious things, to wit, curious and
unlawful sciences, as witchraft, negromancy, and other means of divination,
by soothsaying, figure-casting, interpretation of dreams, and the like, for
which cause they burned their books of Curiosity, being enjoined so to do by
S. Paul, who had heard their Confessions. Neither may it be said, that they
confessed some of their mortal sins, and not all, for besides that no cause
can be assigned, why they should be bound to confess some sins and not
others, whersoeuer the Scripture speaks absolutely of sins, it is, and
ought to be understood of all, as Dan. 4.24.
Redeem thy sins with Alms, that is, All thy sins. Again, Mat. 1.21.
He will save his people from their sins: Lastly, Luc. 7.48
Thy sins are forgiven thee, and the like, where to understand the word
sins, of some, and not of all, were absurd. This place is so clear for
Confession of sins, that Calvin acknowledges, that In Act. Apost. c. 19. 18.
p. 199.
Of their own accord they Confessed the sins of their life past: But as
Calvin cannot prove that they confessed their sins only of their own accord;
so may every one judge that neither they not others, would make Confession of
their secret sins, if there were not a just necessity therein, Confession
being a thing so contrary to man's natural inclination: Howsoever, Calvin here
is enforced to acknowledge, that they confessed the sins of their life paste.

This Confession in particular was prefigured in the old Testament: for whereas
several Sacrifices were appointed to be offered for several sins, as you
shall read in diverse places of Scripture of the Leuit. 4.2.3.5.14. and 6 11.15
and Number. ^5 22.23.24.25.
old Testament, for which the Priest was appointed to offer and make atonement
Leuit. 4.3.20. and 5.6.13. and 6.7.
. This the Priest could not do, unless the party offending conf^ssed his
several sins unto him: Yea it was expressly Commanded, Number. 5. 6 7.
That man or woman when they shall do any of all the sins, that are went to
chance to men, and by negligence have transgressed the Commandment of the
Lord, and have offended, they shall confess their sin, and restore the
principal it self.

M. Morton to euade the force of this Argument, alleges Lira as saying,
Appeal p. 393.
The people of the old Testament did not make Confession to the Priest of their
particular sins; in proof whereof he cites Lyra in Leuit. c. 16. 21. as
saying of the people, In veteri lege non omnia explicabant. But this is M.
Mortons vonted forgery and abuse of Authors, for Lyra speaks not there, with
explicabant, as in the plural number, or of the peoples own confessing, but
only of the Priest and his general Confession made to God for the people
saying, Confiteatur omnes iniquitates non explicando omnia particulariter: let
him confess all iniquities, not expressing all things particularly: because he
could not then have either time to recite the peoples many sins, or memory to
retain each man's offenses in particular. Read but Lyra in the place cited, and
you will see just cause ever to look to M. Mortons fingers.

Answerably to this practice of the old Testament it is said of S. John
Baptist, Mat 3.3.6. Mar. 1.5.
then went forth to him Jerusalem and all Iewry, and all the Country about
Jordan, and were baptized of him in Jordan confessing their sins. For the
holy Baptist being a foreunner of Christ, did prepare the way to Christ and his
Sacraments, not only by his Baptism, but by inducing the people to Confession
of their sins, which was not to acknowldge themselves in general to be
sinners, but also to utter in particular every man his sins.

Calvin much troubles himself, but cannot avoid the force of this place in
his answer thereto, and thereupon acknowledges, that In Harm. in Mat. 3.6. p.
52.
Before Baptism Confession of sins is required, and that Baptism ought not
to be administered to them of years, nisi examine prius habito, but after
examination of Consc^ence. So confessedly is it, that the Sacrament of Penance
and confession of sins, was prefigured in the Old Testament.

Besides these pregnant places of Scripture, reason does convince, that no
worldly power or Policy of man could have introduced Confession into the
Church, for if Confession had been man's Invention, and not the Institution
God, then doubtless the same would have been earnestly contradicted at the
first, seeing thereby even the greatest Princes and Kings are forced to lay
open to Priests their secretest, fowlest, and most enormous sins, and to
undergo and perform all such penalty as shall be by the Priest imposed upon
the^ for the same, which certainly being a thing so repugant to man's nature, is
the heauiest burden in the Catholic Church. Neither is it probable, that the
Pastors of the Church durst ever have endeavored the enacting of so
burde^some a law, or that the people of the world could have been persuaded
and brought ther^unto, if this Sacrament of Penance had not been i^st^^uted
by Christ, and put in execution by the Apostles, and the Primitive Church. Add
lastly, that seeing Priests are thus appoin^ed by Christ as Judges, that
therefore particular Confession of sins is to be made unto them: Otherwise
their Judgment would be no other then of a blind man's, concerning colors, or a
deaf man's, touching music.

SECT. III. That the Fathers expound the Scriptures in proof of Priests
authority to ret^yne or remit sin: And for the necessity of Confession unto
Priests.
THe Fathers do most clearly expound the Scriptures in this behalf, so S.
Au^tine aduising incontinent persons says, L. 50. homiliarum, ho. 40. c. 3.
See ho. 12. and 41.
If you have layn with any others besyds your wives, do penance such as is
done in the Church, that the Church may pray for you. Let no man say to
himself, I do it secretly, I do it to God, God who pardons me, knows that
I do it in my heart. Therefore without cause is it said, Mat. 18.18.
what things you shall loose upon Earth, shall be loosed in heaven? Then without
cause are the keys given to the Church of God? we make frustrate the Gospel
of God, we make frustrate the words of Christ, we promise to you what he
denies? Again, L. 2. de visit. imfirm c. 4. See Tract. 49. in loan. c. 11 and
ix ps. 101. con. 1.
There are some who think it suffices them to salvation, if they confess
their sins to God alone, to whom nothing is hidden etc. for they will not,
or are ashamed, or scorn, to show themselves to Priests, whom yet our Lord
appointed by his Lawgiver to discern between Leaper and Leaper. But I would
not have thee deceived with that opinion, that thou should be confounded to
Co^f^sse before the Vicar of our Lord, languis^^ng for ^hame, or stubbo^^e for
Anger: for his Judgment is humbly to be undergone, whom our Lord does not
disdain to be his Vicar. Therefor ask the Priest to come unto thee, and make
him wholly partaker of thy Conscience. Let not that superstition of dreamers
seduce thee, which in visiting avouches, that Confession of sins to God does
save, the Priest not consulted withal. But we do not deny, but that Confession
of si^nes is to be often made to God etc. But we witness, and sound Doctrine
does testify it etc. that first thou need the wholesome sentence of the
Priest, who may be a Mediator to thy God; otherwise how should the divine
Answer be perfected, both under the law, and vndergrace, Leuit. 14. 2. Mat 8.4.
Go and show your selves to the Priests? how should be fulfilled, Iac. 5.16.
Confess your sins one to another? Therefore let the Priest be called, in
Gods place to Judge of thy wounds, and make known to him thy ways, and he
will give thee the Preservative of Reconcil^ation. As also, In Joan. Tract. 22.
and de vera and falsa Poenitentia. c. 10.
Before he conf^ssed he was hidden, but when he confess^th he comes forth out
of darkness to light; And when he has confessed what is said to the Ministers?
That which was said at the Grave of Lazarus. Loose him and let him go: how? It
is said to the Apostles the Ministers, whatsoever you shall loose upon Earth,
shall be loosed also in heaven. By which it appears, that Saint Austine
expounding sundry Texts of Scripture, teaches Confession to God alone is not
sufficient, but that it must be also made to Priests, to whom God has given
power to absolve from sin.

S. Ambrose reports the Nouatian Heretics to say accordingly as Prot. still
say, L. 1. de Poenit. c. 2.
They reserve the honor to God, to whom only they attribute power of
remitting sin: But none do him greater injury, then they who etc. dissolve
the charge committed, for seeing himself said etc. whose sins you forgive
they are forgiven, who therefore more honors him, whether he that obeys
his Commandment, or he that resists? S. Hierome teaches that, In Mat. 6.16.
The Bishop or Priest according to his office when he has heard the variety of
sins, knows who is to be bound, and who is to be loosed.

S. Chrysostom speaking of the great dignity of Priesthood affirms, that, L.
3. de Sacerd.
who dwell upon Earth, and are conversant therein, to them is committed the
dispensing of those things which are in heaven: to them is granted that power
which God would not give to Angels or Archangels; for to them it is not said,
Whatsoever you shall bynd upon Earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever
you shall loose upon Earth, shall be loosed also in heaven. Earthly Princes have
indeed power of bynding, but the Bodies only; but this binding of Priests which
I speak of, touches the soul it self, and reaches to the heavens: In so
much, that whatsoever the Priests do upon Earth the same God allows in
heaven. And again, Ho. 5. de verbis Isaiae. Vidi Dominum
To the Priest a Throne is placed in the heavens, and he has authority to give
sentence of heavenly matters. Who says so? The King of heaven himself,
Whatsoever you shall bynd upon Earth, shall be bound also in heaven, and
whatsoever you shall loose upon Earth, shall be also loosed in heaven. What can
be compared with this honor? Or what can be spoken more plainly against
Protestants?

According to Pacianus, Ep. 1.
Never would God threaten him that does not repent, unless he would pardon the
Penitent: Only God (thou say) can do this; but what he does by his Priests,
is his power: for what is that which he says to his Apostles whatsoever you
shall bynd on Earth etc. wherefore this, if it were not l^wfull for men to bynd
and loose? Was this only lawful to the Apostles alone? then to them alone is
it lawful to baptize, and to give the holy Gh^st etc.

S. Basil belieueth that, In regulis Breuioribus. Interrog^t. ^88.
Sins of necessity are to be opened to them, to whom the dispensing of ^he
Myst^r^es of God i^ committed: for we see these ancient to have followed this
so me^n Penance, when it is written even in the Gospel Mat 3.6.
that they confessed their sins to John, and in the Acts, Act. 19.18.
to the Apostles themselves etc. The Fathers Doctrine herein is so clear,
that the C^nturists speaking of those ancientest times of Cyprian and
Tertullian affirm that, Cent. 3. c. 6. Col. 127. and Cent 4. c. 6. Col. 4.25.
They gave Absolution from sins thus, If any did Penance, they should first
conf^sse their sin, for so does Tertullian in his Book, De Foenitentia,
greatly urge Confession. And it appears by certain places of Cyprian, that
Private Confession was usual, wherein they Confessed their sins and wicked
thoughts, as in Ser. 5. de lapsis. and l. 3. Epist. ep. 14. and 16. where he
expressly says of lesser sins also, which are not committed against God, it
is needful that Confession be made, and this also he often commands to be,
l. 1. Ep. 3 etc. That Satisfaction also was accustomed to be imposed according
to the offense, it appears Ser. 5. de lapsis. And whereas M. Morton affirms
against this Confession of the Centuristes, that Appeal l. 1. c. 14. p. 254.
Cyprian mentions not sins of thought; this shows M. Morton to be either
very ignorant, or very false: for if he but read Ser 5. de laps^s, he shall
find him say, But because they have but thought hereof, let them confess this
sorrowfully and simply to the Priests of God etc. They disburden their minds,
they seek for whol^ome cure, though but for little and small wounds etc. I
beseech you Brethren that every one Confess his sin etc. whiles satisfaction
and remission, made by the Priests, is grateful with our Lord. M. Morton if he
please, may here see that S. Cyprian mentions even sins in thought: and
though he had not, what would this diminish from the forsaid Confession, made
by the Centuristes of S. Cyprians cleerest doctrine for Confession.

Now as Concerning Penance and Satisfaction, whereas the 4. Carthage Council
decreed, that Cap. 76.78.
He who in his sickness desired Penance etc. should be reconciled by Imposition
of hands etc. If he recovered etc. he should be subject to the appointed laws
of Penance, as long as the Priest who gave him Penance shall think good:
this Canon is confessed by Cent. 5. l. 1. c. 1. p. 15.
Osiander, and approved.

The great Penance and corporal Austerities used in ancient times, is also
acknowledged, and disliked by the Centuristes, who heerin reprove Cent. 4. Col.
254 and see Col. ^31.
the Fathers of the fourth age, and the other ages precedent. Calvin houldeth
Inst. l. 4. c. 11 n. 8. and l 3. c. 4. sect 38.
Inexcusable the immoderate A^sterity of the Ancient Fathers etc. And, Exam.
part. 4 p 68.
I am not ignorant, says Chemnitius, that the Ancient do sometimes commend
that Canonical discipline over largely, and with over great words. Whereof
also says Melancthon, Li^^^i aliquot. fol. 11.
All ^he Nicene Council being overcome with the consent of the multitude and
time, approved the Canons of Penance. Whitaker says plainly, that, Cont.
Camp. rat. 5. p. 78.
The Fathers thought by their external Discipline to pay the pains due for
sin, and to satisfy Gods Justice. And that, Ibid.
Not Cyprian only wrote some things concerning Penance very incommodiously and
foolishly, but almost all the most holy Fathers at that time were in that Error
etc. So confessed are the Fathers for the Sacrament of Penance.

SECT. IV. That Protestant writers do teach that Priests have authority to
retain, or to forgive sins: and that Confession of sins in particular is
to be made to Priests: And that Penance is truly a Sacrament.
THough the practice of Penance be little pleasing to Prot. yet they spare not
to preach and teach the great necessity even of the Sacrament of Penance and
Confession. Lobechius Doctor and Professor in the University of Rostocke,
writes thus confidently heerof, Disp. Theol. etc. disp. 13. art. 11. p. 295.
We defend out of the Scriptures Absolution and Private Confession against the
Caluinistes. And another says, Theolog. Christiana Scripturae, Patrum etc. c.
de Bap. p. 491.
There be some who take away auricular Confession, as not commanded in the
Scripture, but nevertheless all Godly men, do with Great Luther so greatly
magnify it, that they had rather loose certain millions of worlds, and
whatsoever, then to take this from the Ministry, which they neither may nor
will want.

Luther gives this wholesome counsel, De praepar. ad Mortem.
A man being at the point of death, let him call the Priest unto him, when he
may confess all his sins. If the Priest absolve me, I rest with his
Absolution, as the words of God, and upon this I dye: for thou ought as firmly
to believe the Absolution of the Priest, as if God should send unto thee a
special Angel, or Apostle, yea as if Christ himself shall absolve.

In like manner other Prot. affirm, Antichristus five Prognost. fin. Mund. p.
140.141.
Confession and Private Absolution to be necessary. In reguard whereof others of
their Brethren name them Ibid.
Nostri noui Papa, Our new Popes. But some proceed so far herin, that they
reprove Heisbrunerus l. Schwenckfeldio. Caluinismus. p. 55. Lobech. Disp.
Theol. p. 295. 301. A libamerus in Council. loc. Script. pug. ^. ^4. fol. 218.
the Caluinistes for contemning private Absolution, and believing that the
Minister of the Church cannot forgive sins, but only God.

Calvin expounding those words of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 5.20.
We are Legates for Christ, acknowledges, that the Inst l. 4. c. 1.. 22.
Embassage of Reconciliation is left with the Ministers of the Church. And a
little before, when Christ gave to his Apostles command and power of forgiving
sins he did not only mean, that they should loose those from sins, who
should be converted from Impiety to the faith of Christ; but rather that they
should continually use this function among the faithful. And more particularly
concerning Confession he says, Instit. l. 4. c. 19.. 14.
I think that old observation whereof Cyprian makes mention, to have been holy
and profitable to the Church, and I should desire, that it were at this day
restored. This later though I dare not disprove it, or at least more sharply
impugn, yet I think it less necessary. And having said, and confirmed from
the Testimony of S. James, that, Inst. l. ^. c. 4.. ^2.
The Scripture does approve that form of private Confess^on, that Iac. 5.10.
we confess our sins one to another, he gives this his Interpretation
thereof: Although James by naming none into whose bosom we should di^burden our
selves, permits us free choice to confess to him who of the flock of the
Church seems most fit; yet because Pastors for the most part, are to be
thought more fit then others, they are therefore chiefly to be chosen by us. And
a little after, Therefore let every one of the faithful remember, that it is his
duty, if he be so privately vexed and afflicted with the feeling of his sins,
that he cannot free himself, but by the help of another, not to neglect the
remedy which is offered him by our Lord, to wit, that for his help he use
private Confession with his Pastor. Again,. 13.
That the sheep present themselves to the Pastor so often as they communicate,
I am so far from gaynsaying, that I greatly wish it were every where
observed. As also, Inst. l. 3. c. 4.. 17.18.
Thou will say, what then, is not every sin to be confessed? Then no
Confession is acceptable to God, but that which is included in these words,
Peccator sum, I am a sinner? But truly we are rather to use diligence, that as
much as is in us, we power out our whole heart before the Lord; Neither let us
only in one word confess our selves to be sinners, but as such, let us truly
and from our heart acknowledge our selves. Let us remember withal our thoughts,
how great and diverse are the spots of sins; not only that we are unclean,
but of what sort, how great, and in how many parts our impurity is; not only
that we are debtors but with how great debts we are burdened, and by how many
names we are bound; not only (...) whereby is promised sin to be forgiven,
the key absoluing. And the same is acknowledged by the Cent. 1. l. 1. c. 4.
Col. 53.
Centuristes.

Husse affirms that, Tract. de P^enit.
There are three parts of perfect Penance, to wit, Contrition, Confession and
Satisfaction. Again Ibid.
The second part of Penance is Confession, which is a recounting of sins
before God and the Priest, which ought to be plain and eutyre: Plain, that
the Priest may understand: entyre, lest he that confesses wittingly hyde any
sin, for he that hydeth his sins shall not be directed etc. Rokzana says,
De Sacram. c. 17.
The second part of Penance is Confession it self, which is made to Priests,
and unless this Confession should have Efficacy, is should seem that Christ had
superfluously given the power of the Keys to the Apostles and Priests
succeeding. And the same is taught by the In Confess. fidei exhibita Anno 1508.
Waldenses.

Perkins speaking of Confession grants, that the want thereof, Vol. 3. p. 446.
Is a great fault in our Churches. A speech most true, seeing the want thereof
causes amongst all Protestants a general inu^dation of enormous sins. But
by the premises all men may see that all sorts of Protestants, Hussites,
Lutheranes and Caluinistes, do acknowledge and teach the Sacrament of Penance,
and Confession of sins.

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture against the power given by Christ to
Priests for the remitting of sins, answered.
IT is ordinarily objected by Protestants now, as formerly it was by the
Scribes against Christ, saying Mar. 2.7. Esa. 43.25. and 44.42. Ier. 32.34.
Who can forgive sins but only God? But in best answer herto S. Matthew
reports Christ himself to say: Mat. 9.6. Mar. 2.10.
That you may know that the Son of Man has power in Earth to forgive sins,
then said he to the sick of the palsy; Arise, take up thy bed, and go into
thy house. And he arose, and went into his house. And the multitudes seeing it
etc. glorified God that gave such power to men: Yet in more Explanation hereof,
it is to be observed, that sundry things are attributed to God as proper to
him, which are nevertheless in a secondary respect communicated also to
creatures; so it is said, Luc. 18.19. Mat. 19.16.
None is good but only God; Yet our Savior as being Man was good, and so also
are Luc. 6.45. Mat. 7.18.
others. God Ps. 72.18. and 136.4.
only does miracles, and yet also Moses Deuteronomy. 34.11 12.
did Miracles, and so likewise are Eccl. 48.4.14 Io. 14.12. Mat. 7.22.
others said to do them; the very power Mat. 10.1.
of healing every sickness, and casting forth of unclean Spirits being in
express terms given to his twelve Disciples, and thereby so truly in them,
that S. Peter said to the lame man, Act. 3.6.
That which I have, the same I give to thee, In the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, Arise and walk etc. And he went walking and leaping, and praising
God. In like sort it is said, that, 3. Reg. 8.39.
God only knows the hearts of men, yet 4. Reg. 5.26.
others also knew the secrets of the heart. Lastly, D. Whiteguift does prove,
and explain, how that Defense. p. 300.
Names proper to God may in some respect be attributed to others, for as he
teaches, they belong to God properly, and to man but in respect he is the
Minister of God, and so God only by his proper power and authority forgiueth
sins, and yet also men do actually and truly, yet ministerially forgive
sins, for to them is 2. Cor. 5.18.
given The Ministry of Reconciliation. This Objection is of so small force,
that it is answered according to the Premises by the Protestant Disp. Theol.
p. 301. Altham. in Conciliat. locor. etc. loc. 194. fol. 218. Hailbr. in
Suenckfeldio-Caluin. p 55.
Lobechius, who repeating the same says, Only God can absolve from sin, but
s^, that he does this somtymes immediately (or by himself) and sometimes
mediatly, by his Ministers, pardoning our fault etc. The Caluinists therefore
err, who etc. take away that efficacy from the Absolution of the Minister of
the word etc. contending that the Minister does absolve only as a Messenger.
And the like is answered by Althamerus and Hailbrunerus: and Sarcerius
avouches that Loc. com. de Confess fol. 28^.
It is false, that Confession which is made to God, does take away private
Confession. So impertinent and weak is this so often repeated Objection, being
cleared by other most plain Scriptures, and rejected by Protestant writers.

CHAP. XXV. The true State of the Question, concerning punishment to be
suffered after Remission of the fault.
Whether the fault of Sin, being pardoned by the Sacracrament of Penance,
the punishment due to sin, is also always pardoned therewith: or whether the
said punishment is not afterward to be paid, or satisfied by Prayer, Fasting,
and Alms, and the pains in Purgatory? SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
THE liberty of the new Gospel extending it self so far as to the taking
away of all punishment after the forgiveness of the fault: in condemnation
thereof the Catholic Church teaches, that In the Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Cap.
14.
Penance of a Christian, there is not only contained cessation from sins,
and detestation of them etc. but also Sacramental Confession etc. and Priestly
Absolution; as also Satisfaction by Fasting, Alms, Prayer, and other pious
Exercises of spiritual life, not for the Eternal pain which together with
the fault is remitted by the Sacrament, or the desire thereof, but for the
temporal punishment, which as the Scriptures teach, is not always wholly
forgiven them, as it is in Baptism etc. And therefore she further Decrees,
that, Sess. 6. Can. 30.
If any shall say, that after the Grace of Justification received, the fault
and guilt of eternal punishment is so remitted to every Penitent sinner, that
no guilt of temporal punishment remains to be paid either in this world, or
in the next in Purgatory before he can come to Heaven, Anathema.

In the Council Senonense it is decreed, that, Decret. 12.
The fault by Penance taken away, there does often remain the guilt of
temporal punishment, as certain relickes of sins remaining, which are to be
purged by fruits worthy of Penance; so that the iniquity and fault of sin
forgiven, the sinner yet remains subject to temporal punishment.

Agreably to these Councels, Bellar. de Poenitent. l. 4. c. 2. 3. Rhem. Test.
in Hebr. 12.6.
Catholics with one consent teach, that after the remission of the fault,
there often remains the guilt of temporal punishment to be paid: And that
the same may be satisfied by the good works of Prayer, Fasting, Alms, and the
like.

Points Disputable.
Some Tapperue in art. 6. Louan.
teach that the temporal punishment so remaining is the selfsame in kind with
that which should have been paid in hell, and so is to be paid in Purgatory, if
it be not redeemed in this life. See Valent. Tom. 2. Disp. 6. Quaest. 17.
Punct. 5.
Others think it a pain of a different kind, which also may be paid in this
life, according to the order prescribed, and appointed by Gods Providence.

Some Palud. in 4 Did. 15 q. 1 Conc. 7. Capreol. ead. Did. Syluester verbo,
Satisfactio.
think, that satisfaction done by a man that is not in state of grace, if the
satisfaction be such as leaves any effect behind it, as Alms, Fasting, and
the like, that then it begins to be of force, when a man returns to the
grace of God. Others Caiet. q. 2. de satisfact.
think, that when satisfaction is imposed by a Priest by virtue of the keys,
that then it reuiueth, when the Penitent recouereth grace. But A^rian in 4. q.
1. de satisfact. Sotus Did. 19. q. 1. art. 5.
others more probably teach, that, Satisfaction done in the state of sin,
does never after revive, or be of force, whether the satisfaction be imposed by
a Priest, or leave any effect behynd it.

Some S. Tho. Durand Palud. in 4. Did. 15.
teach, that Satisfaction is not duly made by works otherwise due: But Adrian
tract. de Poenit. Caiet. q. 1. de satisfact.
others not improbably think the contrary. Some Scotus, Gabriel.
think, that the Penitent is not bound under sin to accept the Penance
imposed by the Priest: but the common S. Thom. and most others.
opinion is to the contrary.

Protestants Untruths.
Protestants pretend that our Catholic Doctrine of Satisfaction is neither
taught by the Scriptures, nor the Ancient Fathers. Luther says, In Assert.
Art. 5.
Wherefore I said true, that this Arbitrary Satisfaction is neither found in
Scriptures or Fathers etc. Melancthon following Luther affirms, Apol.
Confess. August. Art. de Confess. and Satisfact.
That all this of Satisfaction is false, and lately feigned without authority
of Scriture, and Ancient Ecclesiastical writers: And not Longobarde does
speak thus of Satisfaction etc. But that both Scriptures and Fathers do teach
our Doctrine of Satisfaction, the two next Sections will abundantly prove. And
as for Longobarde, Melancthon does so fowly belie him, as that he having proved
from Scriptures and Fathers Satisfaction, he concludes thus, Lib. 4. Sentent.
distinct. 16.
To do Penance it suffices not, to amend our manners, and to depart from
evil deeds, unless for these which are done, God be satisfied by the sorrow of
Penance, by the groans of humility, by the Sacrifice of a contrite heart,
Alms working therewith. And this saying Longobard took from Lib. 50. homil.
ho. 50. c. 15.
S. Austine: so that we have both Longobard and S. Austine for Satisfaction to
God. And by this may also Calvin be confuted, who affirms, that, Instit. l.
3. c. 4.
What Catholic writers bring from the Fathers for Satisfaction, is for the
most part Canons, out of the absurd fooleries of Monks. Melancthon also
avouches that Catholics, In loc. com. tit de satisfact.
do obscure the Gospel, because they faigne eternal Death to be abolished by
our Compensation: yea the unlearned do easily transfer Satisfactions also to
the Remission of the fault. But this is so false, that this forgetful liar
does confute it himself in the same place saying, The Monks (meaning
Catholic writers) here defyne Satisfaction to be works not due, wherewith
they will have the pains of Purgatory to be redeemed, or certainly some other
temporal punishments, for so they teach: God seeing he is merciful does remit
the fault: but seeing he is Just and a Revenger, does change the pain
Eternal, into the temporal of Purgatory: Then they add, part of these
punishments to be remitted by the Power of the keys; Part to be redeemed with
Satisfactions. So that according to our Doctrine, Eternal punishment is
remitted by Christ's mercy and merits, and the temporal, by our Satisfactions,
which also have their virtue and value by the Grace of Christ, and his mercy
and merits.

Protestant Doctrine.
The Protestant Church is in so great dislike of Satisfaction and doing of
Penance, as that the very name thereof is hateful unto them. Luther says, In
assert. art. 5.
I do much hate, and would have the word Satisfaction taken away, which not
only is not found in the Scriptures, but has a dangerous sense, as though man
could satisfy God for any sin, when he forgiueth all gratis. The Papists,
says Instit. l. 3. c. 4.. 15.
Calvin, assign the third place of satisfaction in Penance, whereof whatsoever
they babble may in one word be overthrown. They say, it suffices not a
Penitent man to abstain from sins past, unless he satisfy God for them which
are committed: and that there are many helps whereby thou may redeem
sins, as tears, fasting, works of Charity etc. To such lies, I oppose the
free remission of sins, then which nothing is preached more clear in the
Scriptures.

Beza, In Mat. 6.12.
The opinion of the Sophisters thinking sin to be forgiven, the pain
reserved, is not only false, but idle and foolish. And the same is taught by
many other Protestants.

Protestant Errors.
Bullinger, De Iustif. sermon. 6. fol. 17.
What had Christ bestowed upon us, if (temporal) punishment should be yet
exacted for our sins? as though Remission of the fault, and of the eternal
punishment were not great benefits bestowed by Christ.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that temporal punishment often
remains to be paid after the fault is remitted: And that the said Punishment
may be taken away by the good works of Prayer, Fasting, Alms, and the like.
THe Scriptures do afford us several Examples, where death it self has been
inflicted upon sinners for punishment of their sins; the fault being
pardoned: so to Adam God said, Genesis 3.17.19.
Because thou etc. have eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou
should not eat, cursed is the Earth in thy work; with much toyling shall
thou eat thereof all the days of thy life etc. In the sweat of thy face shall
thou eat thy bread, till thou return to earth: whereof says S. Paul, Romans
5.2^.
As by one man sin entered into this world, and by sin death, and so unto
all men death did pass, in which all sinned. Here Prot. do not deny that Death
is a Punishment of original Sin, and yet many dye to whom Original Sin is
forgiven; wherefore punishment remains after the fault is remitted. Some
reply, that death is inflicted not for punishment, but for the Exercise of
virtue. But this is clearly false in Infantes, that dye presently after
Baptism, to whom Original sin is forgiven, and yet by reason of their
Infancy, they cannot practice any virtues, and yet in punishment of sin they
are taken away before they come to years of Discretion. And not only death,
but also sickness and pains Children often endure, which are also punishments
of Original sin, which can nothing profit them to prevent sins to come, or
for the Exercise of virtue. When the Children of Israel had sinned, and Moses
prayed for them, whereupon our Lord said, Numer. 14.20.22.
I have forgiven it according to thy word; yet he adds withal their
temporal Punishment, saying, But yet all the men that etc. have tempted me
etc. neither have obeyed my voice, they shall not see the land for the which I
swear to their Fathers: but Ver. 32.33.34.
your Carcasses shall lie in the wilderness: Your Children shall wander in the
Desert 40. years, and shall bear your fornications etc. 40. years, you shall
receive your iniquities, and shall know my revenge. Again, although at their
first passage out of Aegipt they committed horrible Exodus 3^.1.4.8.
Idolatry, and were pardoned Exodus 32.11.14.
thereof at the Instance of Moses, their Punishment yet of the said sin is
signified in these worde^: Ver. 34.35.
I in the day of revenge will visit this sin also of theirs: our Lord
therefore smote the people for the fault concerning the Calfe: So likewise Deuteronomy.
32.51.52. Number. 20 24.
Moses and Aaron, though their incredulity was pardoned, yet were they
afterward punished with death before the Israelites entrance into the land of
Promise. Here the sins are said to be forgiven, and yet the Sinners after
punished for the same. Though David so repented him 2 Reg. 12.13.14.
of his Adultery and murder, that the Prophet said to him, Our Lord has taken
away thy sin: but yet it was added, Nevertheless because thou have made the
Enemies of our Lord to blaspheme, for this thing the Son that is borne to
thee, dying shall dye. And though David's 2. Reg. 24.10.12.13. 1. Paral.
22.8.10.12.
heart stroke him after the people was numbered; and David said to our Lord, I
have sinned very much in this fact, but I pray thee Lord transfer the
iniquity of thy Servant: yet for punishment he was to make choice of famine,
war, or Pestilence. Add yet hereunto that the same K. David expresses this
answerable concourse of Gods Justice and mercy in pardoning, and withal
punishing the sins of the Elect, saying, Ps. 88.37.33.34.
If they shall profane my Justices, and not keep my Commandments: I will
visit their iniquities with a rod, and their sins with stripes; But my mercy
I will not take away from him.

Calvin and Fulke answer to the forsaid Examples of Gods punishments, that,
Inst. l. 3. c. 4. sect. 31. 35. Fulke ag. Pu^gat. p. 41. 49
God did them not to revenge or punish, but rather to teach and admonish us to
be more wary afterward, in avoiding sin to come. But this Evasion is idle,
for first in the Example of Adams punishment by Corporal death, the same was
inflicted upon him, not only for his admonition against sin to come (for how
could the Admonition against sin to come take place with him after his
death?) but as punishment before hand appointed in penalty of his offense
afterward committed, accordingly as it was said, Genesis 2.17.
In what day soever thou shall eat of it, thou shall dye the death. And, Genesis
3.17.
because thou have eaten of the tree, cursed is the Earth for thy sake. In the
Example likewise of David, his punishment is said to be, Because thou have made
the Enemies of our Lord to blaspheme, for this thing thy son shall dye. Also,
the Israelites punishment was first conceived in Ex. 32.10.12.
fury and anger and their sin threatened to be afterward. Ex. 32.34.
Visited in the day of revenge etc. for the fault concerning the Calfe which
Aaron had made. Lastly Moses and Aaron who both dyed in Gods favor, for their
Incredulity being punished by death, and so prevented for entering the land of
Promise, could not have this Punishment for any Admonition after their death,
but it was done in Justice and Judgment, as the Prophet expresses saying, Ps.
98.8.
God thou wast propitious to them, and taking vengeance upon all their
Inventions.

S. Paul speaking of the Incestuous Corinthian, 1. Cor. 5.3.
appoints to deliver such an one to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. These words
cannot be referred to remission of the fault, but to some temporal punishment,
to be paid, the fault remitted; for not by death but by Penance we obtain
pardon of our deadly sins: Also in that he further says, 2. Cor. 2.10.
Whom you have pardoned any thing, I also, for my self also that which I
pardoned, if I pardoned any thing for you in the person of Christ: these words
cannot concern the remission of the fault, seeing that was pardoned 2. Cor.
2.7.
before by his great sorrow; but only of the temporal punishment which was
imposed in the name of Christ. This truth In 2. Cor. 2.
Calvin dares not deny, nor Beda Ib.
Beza, who confesses that the pardon of this rigor, was afterward called
Indulgence.

Now, that this punishment may be taken away by works of Satisfaction and
Penance, it appears clearly by sundry Textes of Scripture; as where it is
said, Dan. 4.24.
Redeem thy sins with Alms, and thine Iniquities with the mercies of the
poor. Prou. 26.6.
By mercy and truth iniquity is redeemed. Here the word Redeem, is certainly
equivalent to satisfy; and Redemption does as much belong to Justice as
Satisfaction: wherefore if it were untrue or absurd to say, we satisfy by
works, then the like were to be said of Redeeming by works. And doubtless all
Prot. would take it more hainously to have men called in any sense Redeemers,
then Satisfiers; Wherefore seeing the Scriptures affirm that sins are
redeemed by works, in the like sense we may say, that they are satisfied by
works.

Neither will it avail to say with Calvin, Instit. l. 3 c. 4.. 30.
that this Redemption was of the debt due to men, as to restore what he had
unjustly taken away: for it is clear by the text, that the chief sin for
the which he was to be punished, was pride, for having said, Dan. 4.27.
Is not this Babylon the great City which I have built to be the house of the
kingdom in the strength of my power, and in the glory of my beauty? Immediately
it follows, And when the word was yet in the kings mouth, a voice came down
from heaven etc. Thy kingdom shall pass from thee, and from men they shall
cast thee out etc. till thou know, that the High one rules in the kingdom of
men, and to whomsoever he will, he gives it. And so accordingly when he was
restored to his senses, he Dan. 4.31.
presently praised and glorified God. Besides though the king sinned in
Injustice toward men, yet certainly he had many other sins, all which Daniel
advised him to redeem with Alms, according to that elsewhere, Tob. 4.11.
Alms delivers from all Sin and from Death. And, Luc. 11.41.
give Alms, and behold all things are clean unto you.

This place of Daniel is so clear, that Prot: for their last shift corrupt the
Text, translating it thus, Engl. Bib. of 1578.
Break of thy sins by righteousness, whereas the Greek has most literally,
(...), redeem with Alms: And the Chaldee, as Munster confesses, signifies
rather and more principally to redeem: And lastly, that which they translate
righteousness, in the Scriptures signifies also Alms, as the Greek
Interpreters translate it, and is most plain, where our Savior says, Mat.
6.1^
Beware you do not your Justice before men, which is in other Greek Copies
(...), alms: Yea Beza himself teaches, that, Annot. in Mat. 6.1.
by the name of Justice with the Hebrews, is also signified beneficence, or
beneficialnes to the poor: and that in this place of Daniel it is specially
taken for Alms.

God himself speaking of a perfect clensing from all sin says, Isa
1.16.17.18.
Wash you, be clean, take away the evil of your cogitations from mine eyes,
cease to do peruersly, learn to do good, seek Judgment, succor the
oppressed, judge for the Pupil, defend the widow; And come and accuse me,
says our Lord, If your sins shall be as scarlet, they shall be made white as
snow; and if they be red as vermilion, they shall be white as wool. Here this
full remission is not granted to those that only repent and believe, but
withal they must exercise themselves in many good works.

Lastly all such textes as teach, that the works of the just are meritorious
of life everlasting do confirm this truth, for if they have that Efficacy
truly and properly to merit life Eternal, it cannot be denied but that they
are also Efficacious to satisfy for temporal punishment. Glory eternal being
a far greater matter then the remission of temporal punishment. But of this
I shall hereafter have occasion to speak more at large.

SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proof of Punishment
remaining after the fault pardoned: And that the said Punishment is paid by
works of Penance.
THe forsaid Scriptures are answerably expounded by the Ancient Fathers: so
Blessed David (says S. Cyril) Catech. 2. Hilar. in ps. 118.
forbeared not from Penance although he had heard that our Lord had
transferred his sin: but instead of Purple he used Sackcloth, and in place of
a golden throne, the king sat upon the Earth, and in ashes: neither did he
only sit in ashes but also did eat them, even as himself says, I did eat
ashes as bread: he revenged with tears his coveting eye, saying, I will every
night wash my b^d and I will water my Couch with tears: when the Princes
entreated him to eat bread, he would not be persuaded, and continued his f^st,
even until the seventh day.

S. Chrysostom expounding S. Paul, says, Ho. 42. in Math.
Hearken to Paul saying, If we would judge our selves we should not be judged.
But thou will say, how may I exact account and punishment of my self? power
out great floods of tears, afflict thy self with labors and watchings,
remember thy sins of all kinds. The wounds, says Epitome divine. Decr. c. de
Poenitentia.
Theodoret) which are made after Baptism, are curable; but curable, not pardon
given by only faith, but by many tears, weeping, sorrow, fasting, prayer, and
labor answerable to the greatness of the sin committed.

S. Hierome teaches that, Ep. 30. ad Ocean. c. 2.
Peter blotted out his threefold denial, by his threefold Confession. Aarons
Sacrilege etc. his Brothers prayers corrected. Seven days hunger amended
David's etc. murder and Adultery; he lay upon the Earth, he was rolled in Ashes,
and forgetful of his kingly power he sought light in darkness, and looking only
upon him whom he had offended, with a crying voice he said, To thee only have I
sinned.

But none is more full herin then S. Austine, Ho. vlt. inter 50. bo. c. 5.
It is not sufficient to amend your manners, and to give over evil deeds,
unless for these which are done God be satisfied by the grief of Penance, by
the groaning of humility, by the Sacrifice of a Contrite heart, Alms
cooperating. For blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. It is
not said, that ye only abstain from sins, but for Eccles. 21.1.
the sins past pray our Lord that they may be forgiven thee. Again, Ad ps.
50.
ask mercy, but attend justice: mercy is, that he pardon a sinner, Justice is,
that he punish sin. What then? thou seek mercy, will thy sin remain
unpunished? Let David answer, let those which are fallen answer, let them
answer with David, that they may deserve mercy as David, and let them say, my
sin, O Lord shall not be unpunished, I have known his justice whose mercy I
seek, it shall not be unpunished: but therefore I will not that thou punish me,
because I punish my sin.

With S. Austine agrees S. Gregory saying, Mor. l. 9. c. 17.
Our Lord does not spare the sinner, because he leaves not the sin without
revenge; for either the man penitent punishes it in himself, or God revenging
it with man stryketh etc. So David after his Confession deserved to hear, Our
Lord has transferred thy sin, and yet afflicted afterward with many
punishments, and flying, he paid the guilt of fault which he had committed.
God endeavors with temporal affliction to wype from his Elect the spots of
their sins, which he will not revenge in them for ever. According to S.
Cyprian, Sermon de opere and ^leemos.
the holy Ghost speaks in the Scriptures and says, with Alms and faith
sins are purged, not those sins which were contracted before (Baptism) for
those are purged by the Blood and Satisfaction of Christ.

But the Fathers are so clear for Satisfaction and Penance, as D. Whitaker
affirms, that they Cont. Camp. rat. 5. p. 78.
Thought by their external Discipline of life to pay the pains due for
sins, and to satisfy Gods Justice. And that, Ibid. rat. 5. p. 78.
Not Cyprian only, but almost all the most holy Fathers of that time were in
that Error. The Cen^uristes speaking of the third Age, relate that, Cent. 3.
Col. 1.7.
Of those who so confessed little sins, their life also was looked into, and
judged, whether they had done just Penance, as it appears in the third Book
and 16. Epist. of Cyprian: that also accustomed Penance was imposed upon them
according to their fault, is to be seen in his 5. Sermon de lapsis. Tertullian
also mentions the same in his Book de Poenitentia. And, Ibid. Col. 81.
Most of the writers of this age did strangly deprave the Doctrine of Penance.
Calvin also does so much dislike the Fathers Doctrine of Satisfaction, as that
he writes thus, Inst. l. 3. c. 4.. 38. Chemnit. in Exam. part. 2. p. 1082. and
p. 306.
Little do those things move me, which every where occur in the writings of
the Ancient concerning Satisfaction: I see some of them, I will speak simply,
Almost all whose Books are extant, either to have erred in this, or to have
spoken over sharply and severely. So Confessed it is, that the Ancient Fathers
taught our Doctrine of Satisfaction and Penance.

SECT. IV. That Protestants do agree with Catholics, in teaching that
Punishment often remains to be paid for sin, the fault being remitted: and
that the same punishment may be satisfied by good works.
THe great Divine of Scotland John Knox co^testeth, and collecteth from the
forsaid Scriptures, that the sins of such as are Elect, and therefore freed
from Hell punishment, are nevertheless yet temporally punished, and that not for
Admonition only against sin to come, but in Gods Justice and hatred to the
said sins already past: to this end he says, Answ. against the Adversaries
of Gods Predest. p. 215.
We protest and acknowledge, that sin is so odious to God, that he never
suffers the same unpunished, in any of his Elect Children. And, Ib. p. 216.
we preach, write and maintain, that sin was so odious before God, that his
Justice could do no other, but inflict upon Adam and his Posterity the penalty
of Corporal Death, the punishments and plagues, which daily do apprehend Gods
Children: that upon David he did execute his just Judgment, which in these
words he pronounced, Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thy house;
with sundry other Scriptures by him alleged to the same effect. And yet it is
certain, that the fault of Adam, and David's sins were forgiven them.

Gaspar Oleuianus affirms that, In symbolum Apost. p. 8.
God is so just, and sin so great an evil, that he does not then approve
sins when he has pardoned them, and that he may show this, he also after the
remission in those that are converted, punishes them with most sharp whippes,
as in David etc. Melancthon Acta Colloq. Regenspurg. p. 111.
in the name of all the Protestants, Ib. p 82.
who stood to the Confession of Auspurg, teaches that, Ib. p. 130.
The offenses of the converted persons are punished with certain peculiar
pains, as was David's Adultery: and that these pains are Ib. p. 133. And see
Melancth. loc. com. de bonis oper. p. 158. In Council. Theol. p. 547. And loc.
com. de Satisfac. p. 241.
mitigated through good works.

Sarcerius teaches not only Loc. com. Tom, de Poenit. fol. 276.
temporal pains, but also the mitigation of them by good works. And here
withal agrees the Confession of Auspurg teaching that, Harm. of Confess. p.
219.
Sins are punished even by Temporal punishment in this life, as David,
Manasses, and many others were punished: and we teach that these punishments
may be mitigated by good works, and the whole practice of Repentance, as Paul
declares, If we would Judge our selves, we should not be Judged of the Lord.
And repentance deserved (that is obtained) that God should alter his purpose
touching the Destruction of Niniue. And, Ib. p. 124.
We are of that mind, that the calamities of this life may be assuaged by good
works, as Esaias teaches, Chap. 58, Break thy bread unto the hungry, and the
Lord shall give thee rest continually.

The Confession of Saxony does distinguish between Harm. of Confess. p. 235.
eternal Punishment, and the Punishment of this life: affirming further that,
The temporal punishments are mitigated even for the very Conuersions sake. Of
the like Judgment also is Peter Com. plac. in Eng. part. 3. c. 4. p. 114.
Martyr. And the Confession of Wittemberg does upon this ground acknowledge,
Harm. of
that the Saints have

CHAP. XXVI. The true State of the Question, concerning Indulgences.
Whether the Church of Christ has Authority to grant Indulgences or Pardons
for the temporal punishment due to Sinnne, the fault being formerly pardoned
by the Sacrament of Penance. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
PROTESTANTS denying any punishment to remain the fault being pardoned, do
consequently affirm all Indulgences to be superfluous: as also that the Church
has no authority to grant them: But in Confutation heerof the Church has
Decreed, that, Council. Trid. Sess. 25. Decret. de Indulgentijs.
Seeing the power of giving Indulgences is granted by Christ to the Church; and
this power given her by God she has used in most Ancient times; The Sacred
Synod teaches and commands that the use of Indulgences most profitable to
Christian people, and approved by the authority of holy Councels, be ever kept
in the Church: And it accurseth them who either affirm, that they are
unprofitable, or deny that in the Church there is power to grant them. Yet in
the granting of them, it desires moderation to be used according to the
Ancient and allowed Custom in the Church; lest by overmuch facility
Ecclesiastical Discipline be weakened. And desiring that the abuses which have
crept in them, and by occasion whereof this worthy name of Indulgences by
heretics is blasphemed, may be amended and corrected; by this present Decree
it generally desi^eth, that all wicked gains for the obtaining of them, from
whence much cause of abuses in Christian people has flowed, be utterly
abolished. And the rest which have come by superstition, ignorance,
irreuerence, or otherwise howsoever, seeing for the manifold corruptions of the
places and Provinces where these are committed, they fitly cannot be
particularly prohibited, it commands all Bishops that every one diligently
gather the abuses of his Church, and that he make them known in the first
Provincial Council: that being tried also by the ^udgment of the other
Bishopt, they may forthwith be made known to the B. of Rome, by whose authority
and wisdom that may be ordained, which will be expedient for the universal
Church: that so the benefit of holy Indulgences may piously, godly, and purely
be bestowed upon all the faithful.

It was ordained in the Council of Arles: Conc. 2. Arelat. cap 10.
Of those who have transgressed in persecution, if they have voluntarily denied
their faith, the Nicene Council has Decreed this of them, that they shall
spend 5. years among the Catechumens, and 2. amongst those that do Communicate
etc. yet it shall be in the power and liberty of the Bishop, that if he see them
bewail their error from their heart, and do Penance, by Ecclesiast^call
favor he may receive them to Communion. In the fourth Laterane Council it is
granted, that, Conc. 4. Lateran. Cap. 3.
Catholics etc. who shall prepare themselves for the banishment of Heretics,
shall enjoy that Indulgence etc. which is granted to them that go to the aid
of the holy land, which is a Plenary. And it is evident, that Indulgences have
been actually given by several General Conc. Claramont. test S. Anton. 1.
part. Hist. tit. 16. c. 1. Conc. Lateran. Constantiense. Trident.
Councels. And Bellar. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 1. etc. Rhem. Test. in 2. Cor. 2.10.
Catholics now believe that to remit the temporal Punishment or chasticement
due to sinners after the offense it self and the guilt thereof be forgiven of
God, is an Indulgence or Pardon: And that God has given to the Pastors of the
Church power and authority to give the same.

Points Disputable.
Some Durand. in 4. Did. 20. q. 3. Palud in. Ib. q. 4. Antonin. in. 1. par.
Sum. tit. 10. c. 3.
Catholic writers teach, that Indulgences are only a payment or recompense of
punishment taken out of the treasure of the merits of Christ, and his Saints,
and applied by authority of the Pope. Dom. Soto in 4. Did. 21. q. 1. art. 2.
Bonauent. in 4. Did. 20. p. 2. q. 5.
Others think, that it is not only a payment, but likewise a Iuridicall
Absolution. Some Pet. a Soto, lect. 2. de Indulg.
teach, that Indulgences are granted only for punishments imposed. Tho. in 4.
Did. 20. q. 1. art. 3. Syluest. verbo Indulg. q. 2. n. 1.
Others better think, that they do extend to all punishments due in the sight
of God.

Some Dom. a Soto. in 4. Did. 21. q. 1. art. 4. Nauar, de Iubil. notab. 21. n.
2.
think that a general Council without the Pope may give Plenary Indulgences:
But Bellar. l. 1. de Indulg. c. 11.
others more probably deny it, and ascribe the same only to the Pope.

Some S. Tho. in 4. Did. 20. q. 1. art. 3. Antonin. 1. part. tit. 10. c. 3.. 1.
think, that no proportion is required between the Indulgence, and the Cause,
for the grant thereof, so that the cause be truly pious, and not merely
temporal or vain. S. Bonau. in 4. Did. 20. par. 2 q. vlt. Caiet. tract. de
causa Indulg. Nauar. de Iubil. notab. 5. n. 3.
Others more probably think, that the Indulgence is not of force, if there be
not observed proportion, as if for the smalest cause, the greatest Indulge^ce
should be granted.

Some Caiet. tract. 10. q. 2. tract. 15. c. 9. Pet. a Soto. ^c^ (...) de Indulg.
teach, that to gain an Indulgence a man must be in the state of grace, not
only when he receives the Indulgence, but also when he performs the
satisfactory works imposed for the same. Others S. Antonin 1. part. tit 10. c
3.. 5. Palud. in 4. Did. 29. q. 4. art. 3.
think, that the state of grace is only required when the Indulgence is to be
received.

Some Dom. a Soto in 4. Di^t. 21. q. 2. art. 3. Nauar. de Iubil. notab. 22. n.
20.
teach, that Indulgences profit the dead of Justice, and of condignity. Caiet.
tract. 16. q. 5. Pet. a Soto. lect. 3. de Indulg.
Others only of Gods bounty and congruity. But these and sundry such like, are
not defyned by the Church.

Protestants Untruths.
Calvin very bouldly says of Catholics, Instit, l. 4. c. 9. n. 41.
Let them acknowledge whether these be their Decrees; Martyrs by their Death to
have performed more to God, and merited, then was needful for them: and so
great plenty of merits to have abounded to them which might redound to others:
Lest therefore so great a good should be in vain, their blood to be mingled
with the blood of Christ, and of both, the treasure of the Church to be made,
for remission and satisfaction sins. By these imputations we acknowledge,
that Calvin was either very ignorant, or impudent, or both: for our Decrees
truly are, 1. Martyrs by their death have not performed more to God then was
absolutely needful for themselves, but more then was needful to satisfaction
for the guilt of their te^porall punishment. 2. Though we acknowledge
satisfaction in some Saints to abound, yet we deny it of their merits, or that
their merits do redound to others. 3. The Passions of Saints are not mingled
with the Passions of Christ in the Treasure, as though these of themselves were
not sufficient to take away all pain eternal and temporal, and all fault
original and actual, mortal and venial; but that thereby the excellencies
of Christ's suffering might be showed, which was able to communicate to others
the virtue and power of satisfaction for temporal punishment. 4. The Passions
of Saints not absolutely but as they are satisfactory, would be without fruit,
if neither themselves had need of them, neither could be applied to others,
though they be otherwise always of great worth in regard of Gods glory, honor
to the Martyrs, and profit or example to the Church.

Heshussius Desexcentis erroribus ^ont^ficiorum. tit. 31.
charge Popes to forgive sins, and grant Indulgences for money. But Popes
never require money for Indulgences or Pardons, but only command those who
desire to have the Indulgences, to pray, fast, and give Alms, either to the
Poor in general, or to some pious use, as building a Church, or the like.

Chemnitius Exam. part 4. p. 218.
avouches us to teach, that the temporal (...) That we man be (...) washed in
vain, (...) de (...) rem. Au^^or vitae S. Bernardi. l. 1. c. 4. Abbas Vrsperg.
in Chron. Ludgerus in vita S. Suibert.
for corruptible gold and silver (...) and works, may and will ^a^e v^, (...)
we will that ^epenta^^^ (...) of necessity unto salvation of man; for without
the same a Popi h ^don may save: But without either a Pardon from the Pope
(...) ^u^^ (...) or Absolution of a Priest, there is no salvation, by the
Doctrine of (...) Church of Rome: or else Rogers lies, as he does most ^ou^^,
Catholics houlding the direct contrary to all that he ^eer ascribes unto
them: Def. of the Art. art. 22. p. 123.
so ignorant, or maliciously wicked i^ this Minister.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Protestant Church has Decreed, that, Article 22.
The Romish Doctrine concerning etc. Pardons etc. is a fond thing, vainly
invented, and grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but rather repugnant to
the word of God. Luther affirms that, (29) Indulgences are the most wicked
deceiptes, Art. 18. a Leone 10. damnat.
and Impostures of most wicked Popes. Calvin professes, Instit. l. 3. c. 9..
39.
Indulgences even cleaned from all spot, that is, if they be defiled with no
abuse, to be nothing else but the profanation of Christ's Blood, and the
mockery of Satan, wherewith they withdraw Christian people from the Grace of
God, and from life which is in Christ Jesus, and auert them from (...)

FOr the cleerer proceeding in this Controversy, we are ^^^st to know, that
Indulgences are remissions o^ Pardons of the punishments which often remain
to be paid after forgiveness of the fault and reconciliation obtained by the
Sacrament of Penance: having proved hertofore that punishment often remains
to be paid after the fault be forgiven, I must yet before I come to the main
question confirm certain truths, which will much avail for the better
understanding thereof.

As first, that in the actions of the just a double valor or worth may be
assigned, to wit, of merit and satisfaction. Alms giving for example does
merit, seeing Christ said, Mat. 25.34. and 6.4.
Possess you the kingdom prepared for you etc. For I was hungry and you gave
me to eat etc. And it does also satisfy, in that it takes away sin, Luc.
11.41.
Give Alms, and behold all things are clean to you. Tob. 4.11.
Alms delivers from all sin. Eccl. 3.33.
Water quenches burning fire, and Alms resists sins. And so the same
work is meritorious, as it is a good work done in Charity, and it is
satisfactory, in that it is laborious and painful. The like might be
exemplified in Fasting Jonas. 3.7.10. and Mat. 6.18.
and Mat. 6.6.12.
Prayer.

The second truth is, that a good work in what respect it is meritorious, it
cannot be applied to others, but as it is satisfactory it may. The first part
is clear, for he is said to merit who does good, and by his good is worthy of
reward; but it cannot be said because one does well, therefore another does
well, or is worthy of reward. Again no man can be deprived of his own merit,
though he pray, fast, and give Alms for others, wherefore he cannot communicate
his merit with others. And this is that which the Scriptures teach when they
say, 1. Cor. 3.8.
Every one shall receive his own reward according to his own labor. The
second part is also proved, for satisfaction is a releasing of the Punishment,
or paying of the debt: now, one may so satisfy for another man's punishment and
pay his debt, that he may truly be said to have satisfied and paid. Again, he
that satisfyeth for another, cannot by the same work satisfye for himself,
therefore he truly communicates his Satisfaction with another. A friend may
with his own money so satisfy another man's debt, that it will not serve also
to pay his own: but he cannot by his own good works deserve, that another
shall be worthy of some great Office or Magistracy, which otherwise he were not
worthy of.

But in further proof that the works of the just may help others by way of
impetration and satisfaction; it is to be remembered, that as God in his
Justice, does punish some for the offenses of others, and visits Exodus 20.5.
the sins of wicked Parents upon their Children to many generations; so
likewise his mercy being answerable to his Justice, and above Ps. 144.9.
all his works, he spares some for the good deeds of others. Examples in
these kinds may be, how God said to Solomon 3. Reg. 11.11.12.
when he had sinned. I will rent asunder thy kingdom etc. Nevertheless in thy
days I will not do it because of David thy Father. So also when Abias had
offended. God was merciful unto him. 3. Reg. 15.4.5.
for David's sake etc. because David had done right in the eyes of our Lord. God
protests his mercy to Isaac, Genesis 26.5.
because Abraham had obeyed (his) voice and kept (his) Precepts. And Genesis 18.26.
If I shall find in Sodom 50. just persons within the City, I will spare the
whole place for their sake.

S. Paul persuadeth the rich Corinthians to relieve liberally the poor
Christians in Jerusalem, saying, 2. Cor. 8.14.
Let in this present time your abundance supply their want; that their
abundance also may supply your want, that there be an equality. So plainly
does he teach, that the Satisfactory Deeds of one man, may be available to
others: yea, and that holy Saints, or virtuous persons may in measure and
proportion of other men's necessities and deseruings, allot unto them, as well
the Supererogation of their spiritual works, as these that abou^d in worldly
goods may give alms of the superfluities to them which are in necessity: which
enterchange, communion, and proportion of things the Apostle does here
evidently set down.

The third truth to be proved is this, In the Church there is an infinite
treasure of satisfactions from the sufferings of Christ, which can never be
spent. Christ his Passion being the Passion of an Infinite person was of
infinite value, but the worth of Satisfaction receives its measure from the
worth of the person satisfying, even as the greatness of offense is measured by
the worth of the person offended: therefore Christ his Passion or Satisfaction
was of infinite value.

Again, Christ suffered for all men (as is proved See Hereafter chap. 30.
elsewhere) but it is more then certain, that to all those who have hitherto
lived, Christ his sufferings have not been actually applied for the pardon of
their sins, the greater part being damned; wherefore much of that price
remains, which may always be applied, though it were not infinite, as indeed
it is: And this the rather, seeing all the Satisfaction of Christ may be
applied to us, himself never sinning, needing no satisfaction for himself.

The fourth truth; To this Treasure of superaboundant Satisfactions, belong
also the sufferings of the B. V. Mary, and of all other Saints, who have
suffered more then their sins required. Supposing first, that Satisfaction
for the fault and guilt of eternal punishment is not made by the suffering of
any Saints, but only by the Blood and suffering of Christ, the forsaid truth
concerning the B. Virgin Mary is proved, in that according to the uniform
doctrine of the Church, Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 23. Ambr. ser. vlt. in ps.
118. Aug l. de Not. and Gra. c. 36 Bern. Ep. 174.
she never committed the least actual Sin, and therefore to her most aptly
are applied those words, Cant. 4.7.
Thou art all fair, O my love, and there is not a spot in thee: wherefore she
needed not any satisfaction for herself, and yet she suffered much for God,
and especially when according to S. Simeons prophecy, Luc. 2.35.
a sword should pierce her soul. The like might be showed of S. John Baptist,
who from his mothers womb was sanctified, living after most austerely, and
suffering imprisonment, and death. As also of the Prophets, who being most holy
men, yet Heb. 11.32.
suffered exceeding much: In so much as one of them said, Ioh. 6.1.
Would god my sins were weighed whereby I have deserved wrath, and the
calamity which I suffer, in a balance. As the sand of the sea this would
appear heavier. S. Paul recites 2. Cor. 11.23. etc. And 2. Cor. 1.5.8.
his many and most grievous sufferinges, and yet how little he had to satisfye
for his sins, himself testifyeth, saying, 1. Cor. 4.4.
I am not guilty in Conscience of any thing. And. 2. Cor. 1.12.
Our glory is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and
sincerity of God etc. We have conuersed in this world. And he particularly 1.
Cor. 4.9. etc.
numbreth the like sufferings of all the Apostles, who no doubt lived most holy
lives. And the like might be said of Martyrs, and holy Confessors.

These truths supposed, I am now to prove that in the Church there is power to
apply the forsaid treasure to such as have need thereof. And first that the said
treasure may be applied, it appears by the Article of Communion of Saints,
for thereby we are taught, that all the faithful are each others Romans 12.5. 1.
Cor. 12.11.
members, and as it were one lively Body: and as the lively members do help one
another, so the faithful do Communicate their goods each to other, specially
when those that are superfluous to one, are necessary, or very profitable to
another. The same is also proved from the words of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 12.15.
I most gladly will bestow, and will my self moreover be bestowed for your
souls. 2. Tim. 2.10.
I sustain all things for the Elect. Col. 1.24.
I rejoice in suffering for you, and do accomplish those things that want of
the Passions of Christ in my flesh, for his Body which is the Church. Though
these texts may be so expounded, as that S Paul suffered much for the Elect,
and the Church, because he exposed himself to many dangers and labors that he
might preach unto them, and that by his example he might strengthen the weak,
and encourage others: yet it may also be truly understood of the Communicarion
of his sufferings or satisfactions, for these senses do not impugn one
another, but may be all admitted. The Apostle desired to profit the faithful
by all ways he could, now he might greatly profit them by communicating his
Passions, which were superaboundant to him, as I have formerly showed,
therefore no doubt by this way he did, help them. And so by suffering he
fulfilled those things, which were wanting of the Passions of Christ, that is,
such as Christ in his Saints was yet to suffer for the Body of his Church.

Now, that this Treasure is to be dispensed and applied by the Churches
Pastors, it appears by these words of Christ to S. Peter, Mat. 16.19.
whatsoever thou shall loose in Earth, it shall be loosed also in the heavens;
and these also to all the Apostles, Mat. 18.18.
Whatsoever you shall loose upon Earth, shall be loosed also in heaven. These
promises are most ample, general, and not restrained only to sins, as these
others are, Io. 20.23.
whose sins you shall forgive etc. but they include all Bonds which may
hinder the attayning of Eternal Salvation, as absoluing from censures,
dispensing in laws, vows, oaths, upon just occasion.

According to this we read, that S. Paul himself gave Indulge^ce to the
Incestuous Corinthian, saying, 2. Cor. 2.10.
Whom you have pardoned any thing, I also: for my self also that which I
pardoned; If I pardoned any thing for you, in the person of Christ, that we be
not circumuented of Satan. The Incestuous Corinthian being 1. Cor. 5.3.
excommunicated, and put to Penance by S. Paul, here at the entreaty of S.
Timothy, and S. Titus (as Theodoret thinks) as also upon his own serious
repentance, was by S. Paul absolved, and the rest of his Penance pardoned:
which S. Paul professes to do in the person of Christ that is, by authority
received from him.

Reason also confirms this, for in every well governed Commonwealth, it
belongs to the Prince, and his chief Magistrates to dispense the Common
treasures or goods: And it also belongs to them to admit the satisfaction of
one for another, when they shall Judge it profitable for the Kingdom:
wherefore the like is also to be granted to the Church.

SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers do agree with Catholics in the Doctrine
of Indulgences.
M. Bell acknowledges, that Survey of Popery part 3. c. 11.
Pardons sealed with lead, called the Popes Bulls, were granted by Pope
Adrian, Anno 772. The Prot. writer M. Symonds confesses that Upon the Revel.
p. 84.
S. Gregory remitted Canonical Penance, and promised clean remission of
sins to such as frequented Churches on set days. Bale affirms that, In
Act. Romans Pont. p. 46. 47.
Gregory confirmed by Indulgences Pilgrimages to Images for the Devotion of the
people: And that he was a defendour of Pardons, yet not a seller; As also that
he first granted Pardons for set days, and to such as visited Churches. In
like manner Pantaleon avouches of him that, Chronogr. p. 48.
He first granted Pardon of sins to the people visiting Churches upon set
days, in Decret. and in 3 Psalm. Paenit. Hieronymus Mar^us thinks, tha^ In
his Eusebius Captiuus published by Pezelius, under the title of 1. Diei de
Indulg. fol. 48.
Gregory the 1 and Boniface the 8 were the chief Authors of Pardons. And the
like is confessed of Saint Gregory by other Cyprian Valera of the lives of
Popes Englished p. 32. Humfred. in Jesuit. part. 2. Rat. 5. p. 5. and 627.
Prot. writers.

But to clear S. Gregory of all Innovation in this point, the Centuristes
acknowledge that S. Chrysostom mentions C^nt 5. c. 6. Col. 692.
Days of Indulgence and Pardon. And D. Field confesses that, Of the Church.
l. 1. c. 17 p. 33.
The Ancient Bishops were wont to cut of great parts of enjoined Penance,
which Remission was c^lled an Indulgence. Yea M. Nappier affirms, that, Upon
the Revel. p. 363.
In the 10 Articles of the 1. Council of Nice are superstitious rytes, even
the observation of days, to wit, of Peace (or Indulgence) and superstitious
Pennances.

But to ascend yet higher, Tertullian in his Book de Pudicitia (written after
he became an heretic) does even by his impugning L. de Pudic prope fin.
of the Churches then practice in granting Indulgences upon the Martyrs
Intercessions, give sufficient testimony to the Churches allowance thereof:
whereto himself, in his other writings, when he was Catholic, gives also his
own L. ad Martyrs post initium
allowance. As also does Cyprian mentioning L. 3. Ep. 15 16 18. and ser. de
lapsis.
Peace, or Indulgence given upon the Intercession of Martyrs, before the
parties enjoined Penance was accomplished.

And whereas it is proper to Catholic Doctrine to have no first beginning
known thereof, unless we ascend to the Apostles and the Scriptures; Heresies
always having their first author, time and place observed, and remembered; it
is most certain that no man yet was ever able to name the first Author of
Indulgences, or the place and time wherein it was first preached: yea all,
whether Doctors, Popes, or Councels, who make any mention thereof, do speak of
it as a thing usual and received. And though Chemnitius would have it thought,
that this our Doctrine of Indulgences, Exam. part. 4. p. 73.
had it beginning not long before the year of Christ 1200. yet this is
clearly refelled by the former graunts of other Protestants, for the much more
ancient times of S. Gregory, S. Chrysostom, the Concell of Nice and
Tertullian; as also by sundry Ludgerus Ep. de S. Swiberto apud Surium. Tom. 2.
Conc. Claromontanum apud Antonin. 2. part. hist. tit. 16. c. 1. 23. Conc.
Later. apud Vsperg. in Chron. 1116.
writers and Councels much ancient to the time prescribed of 1200. years.
Whereas it is clear not only by all Catholic writers, but even by Chemnitius,
that the Waldenses who lived about the year 1170. were Exam. part. 4. p. 83.
the first that impugned Indulgences.

SECT. IV. Protestant Writers teaching Indulgences.
John Husse being accused as an Impugner of Indulgences, ex^useth himself in
these words, Tom. 1. fol. 9.
I am falsely accused to teach, that Indulgences were nothing. Yea I affirm,
that, Quaestione de Credere. fol. 170.
The Pope who is the immediate Vicar of Christ has authority to grant
Indulgences etc.

Luther himself grants, that, In Resolution^bus de Indulgentijs
Indulgences do take away punishments imposed by Bishops, and holy Fathers etc.
Bishopes and Curats are bound to admit with all reverence the Commissaries of
Apostolical Pardons. So that according to these two prime Protestants, the
Church has authority to grant Indulgences.

SECT. V. Objections against Induldgences answered.
MAny do Rogers Def. of the Art. art. 22. p. 123.
object, that our Doctrine of Indulgences does derogate from the sufficiency of
Christ's Merits, Passion and Satisfaction, as though they without the Merits
of Martyrs, Saints, and our own sufferings, were not sufficient to satisfy
for the sins of the whole world, whereas the Scriptures every where testify,
that Christ by his Blood satisfied for the sins of the whole world. Answ. All
Catholics confess that Christ has most fully satisfied for the sins of
the world; but it does not thence follow, that we are not to satisfy for the
temporal punishment due unto our sins: even as it is most true, that Christ
by his Blood merited for us grace and glory, and yet we must seek grace by
faith and the Sacraments, and glory by stryuing and running for it. The reason
hereof is, because the price of our Redemption and Satisfaction paid by Christ,
profitteth only those to whom it is applied by certain means or Instruments:
for no other cause can be alleged, why Pagans, Turks, and Jews are not
saved, seeing Christ dyed and satisfied for all. Now these means we affirm to
be Faith, Baptism, Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction: Neither do we
adioyne these means to Christ's Satisfaction, as though this of it self were
not sufficient; but because it pleased him to give us this power to satisfy,
that the Efficacy of his Blood might the more shine, when not only himself
satisfied, but that he communicated the power of Satisfaction, for temporal
punishment, to his members.

Others object, that Durand and some other Catholic writers do acknowledge
that the Doctrine of Indulgences is not to be found in the Scriptures. Answ.
Though it be not taught in particular, and express words, which is all that
Durand and others affirm, yet the grounds thereof I have formerly deduced out
of the Scriptures. And though it were not at all in the Scriptures, yet thence
it would not follow, that it were a Doctrine humane and only Ecclesiastical,
seeing many articles are believed as divine, which are no where taught in the
Scriptures, as has been proved See heretofore, chap. 7.
hertofore.

It is yet further urged that some Indulgences have been granted for 20000.
years; whereas if any were to be punished so long in Purgatory, doubtless they
were to be punished long after the day of Judgment. Answ. Some think there
were never any so granted by any Pope, but that they were forged by Officers
for their profit: for Popes do but use to grant them for so many years, as
Pennances were accustomed to be enjoined, which were for the most but for a
man's life, which ordinarily is not above 100. years. But howsoever this be, it
cannot be denied, but that according to the Canons some deserve Pennances for
some thousands of years; for if for one mortal sin, the Canons do enjoin
sometimes 3. years, sometimes 7. for punishment, who is able to number the
years, which according to the Canons were to be enjoined to such as hourly
swear, forswear, blaspheme, and frequently murder, rob etc. And therefore if
Indulgences of many thousand years have been granted by any Pope, no doubt
it was in this foresaid respect. But as in this life many years Penance may
be satisfied in one hour through the fervor of Charity and Contrition, so the
vehemence of the pain in Purgatory, may satisfy in 300, or 400. years, that
which otherwise might require 10000.

Others yet object, that some Indulgences do pardon both the fault, and the
punishment. Answ. This is only meant in reguard, that with Indulgence
Confession is ordinarily joined, by which the fault is pardoned. And therefore
when it is said, that by Indulgences sins are pardoned, it is only understood
in regard of the punishment, the fault being supposed to be formerly forgiven
by the Sacrament of Penance.

CHAP. XXVII. The true State of the Question concerning prescribed days for
Fasting, and Abstinence from certain meats.
Whether certain days prescribed by the Church for Fasting: as also
Abstinence at some times from certain meats, be things lawful, and to be
observed under sin: or rather that they are to be left free according to
every man's Devotion, and lyking. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
PROTESTANCY ever having for an individual Companion Sensuality, will by no
means admit of appointed fastes, or abstine^ce from the better meats: whereas
the Church of Christ for just reasons does command both. So in the Laodicene
Council it is ordained, that, Can. 5^.
We ought not to break fast in Lent upon Thursday in the last week, and
dishonor the whole Lent, but that it is more meet to honor the whole Lent
with strict fasting. In the Council Agathense it is decreed, that, Cap. 12.
All the sons of the Church do fast in Lent, Sundays excepted etc. In the
eight Council of Toledo it is defyned, that, Cap. 9.
whosoever without inevitable Necessity and weakness, and manifest infirmity or
impossibility of Age, shall presume to eat flesh in the days of Lent, he
shall not only be guilty of our Lords Resurrection, but also shallbe made an
alien from the holy Communion of that day: And this shall be added to his
Punishment, that for that year he shall abstain from all eating of flesh etc.
But those whom either Age has bowed, or Infirmity weakened, or necessity
urged, let them not before presume to violate the things forbidden, then they
have received license from the Priest. In the Council Gangrense it is said,
Can. ^9.
If any man shall dissolve the fastes which are commonly kept by the Church,
Anathema. And the like is taught by sundry other Conc. Triburiense. can. 35.
Conc. Carthag. 4. Can. 63. Conc. 6. Constantinop. Can. 56.
Councels.

The Common Bellar. de bonis oper. in partic. l. 2. c. 7. Rhem. Test. in 1.
Tim. 4.3.
opinion of all Catholics is, that they are bound in Conscience to observe
such days of fasts, and Abstinence from such meats, as the Church shall
command: and that the infringing of these without just cause is sinful.

Points Disputable.
Some Io. Medina q 5. de ieiunio.
Catholic writers teach that, so often as a man eats upon a day of fast
after his first refection, so often he sins. But Durand. in 4. Did. 15. q.
11. Siluest. Verbo, Ieiunium.
others think, that he only sins after the first eating. Nauar. c. 21 n. 22.
Some affirm that such as have Privilege to eat flesh upon fasting days, are
yet obliged to one meal or refection. But Azor. l. 7. c. 10 q. 3.
others deny it, and sundry such like are disputed, and not defyned by the
Church.

Protestant untruths.
Chemnitius affirms that, Exam. ad 4. Sess.
Telesphorus ordained the fast of Lent. But this is most untrue, for he In Ep.
sua.
only decreed that the Clergy should add 3. days to the customed fast of all
Christians. He also charge Calixtus to have ordained the 4. Ember weeks: but
Ep. 1.
he only added one to the former three, which we have from Apostolical
Tradition. He Exam. ad Sess. 25.
avouches Catholics to teach, that fasting of it self (and as he says) ex
opere operato, is able to appease, or satisfy God without any other help of
good works or Grace, which is a mere fiction of his own, not a Doctrine
taught by any Catholic writer.

Protestant Doctrine.
Luther teaches that, De Doctrinis hominum vitandis. Calu. Instit. l. 4. c.
12.. 20. 21.
It is erroneous and false, in that they impose a necessity of fasting at
certain times of the year, as the Vigils of the Apostles, and other Saints:
And this, under grievous sin, as a Decree and Commandment of the Church; For
fasting, for as much as concerns days and meats, ought ever to be free and
indifferent. Perkins, Reform. Cath. Controu. 12. c. 2. col. 434.
The Papists prescribe a certain choice of meats upon fasts: but we judge
that difference of meats to be foolish and pernicious. Others teach, that
Harm. of Conf. p. 481.
The fast of Lent has Testimony of Antiquity, but none out of the Apostles
writings, and therefore ought not, or cannot be imposed on the faithful etc.
And the Apostle calls the Doctrine of those, which teach to abstain from
meats, the Doctrine of Devils. But how impertinent and untrue this is, we
shall see hereafter.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
For the impugning of prescribed Fasts S. Austine Haer. 53.
and S. Epiphanius Haer. 75.
condemn Aerius: of whom D. Fulke says, Answer to a Counterf. Cath. p. 44.
45.
He taught that fasting days are not to be observed. Yea says D. Field Of the
Church. l. 3. p. 138.
He disliked set fasts etc. he was justly condemned. And according to Osiander,
he not only taught that, Cent. 4. p. 4^4.
Set fasts are not to be observed etc. but that according to liberty a man is
to fast when he will. In which he was so purely Prot. as that D. Whitaker
affirms that, Cont. Dur. l. 9 p. 830.
Aerius taugh nothing concerning fasting different from the Catholic faith,
by which he means his own Prot. Faith. S. Austine also reproves Iouinian
for saying, Haer 82.
Fasts, or Abstinence from certain meats do nothing profit. Yea he avouches
further, that. De Ec. l. Dogm c. 68.
To believe, that such as abstain from wine and flesh have no greater merit,
is not the part of a Christian, but of Iouinian. This Censure of S. Austin is
confessed in him Exam. part. 4. p. 142.
by Chemnitius. Doctor Humphrey, Ad rat. 3. Camp p. 263.
We grant it to be true what Sanders has of the Iouinianists and us, Fast and
Abstinence from certain mea^es to profit nothing. And Iouinian is further
defended herein 3. Part. of his Defense of the Ref. Cath. p. 60. Willet. in
Antilog. p. 13. Dan. 1. part. alt part. p. 938.
by Abbot, Willet, and Danaeus.

And whereas our purest Prot. do keep their strictest fasts upon their Sabothes,
S. Epiphanius witnesses that the Haer. 75.
Aerians desired rather to fast upon Sunday, and to eat upon wednesday and
friday. S. Austine affirms, that Ep. 86.
To fast on the Lords day is a great offense, especially since the detestable
heresy of the Manichees etc. who appoint unto their hearers this day as lawful
to be fasted upon. This saying of S. Austine is alleged by D. Whiteguift
Defense. p. 501. Cent. 4. Col. 401.445.
and the Centurists, and the like of S. Ambrose by Against Symbolyzing part. 2.
p. 38.
Parker.

Luther, Tom. 4. in Ionae. 3 fol. 422.
The fasts and haircloathes of Beasts are in as great esteem with God, as of
men, and of the contrary. Perkins, Reform. Cath. Controu. 6. c. 4.
Fasting of it self does no more profit to gain the kingdom of Heaven, no
more I say, then meat or drink.

SECT. II. It is proved by the Scriptures, that days pr^scribed by the Church
for Fasting; as also Abstinence at some times from certain meats, be things
lawful, and to be observed.
THat it is lawful to use Abstinence from certain meats not condemning the
creatures as though they were of their own natures unclean and unlawful to
be eaten, may be proved by the Example of Daniel, saying, C. 10. 2. 3.
I Daniel mourned the days of three weeks, desiderable bread I did not eat,
and flesh and wine entered not into my mouth etc. S. John Baptist abstained from
all meats, saving Mat. 3.4.
Locustes and wyldhony. The Centuristes report of S. I^mes the Apostle, that he
abstained Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10. Col. 581. and Aegesip. apud Eusebius. hist. l. 2.
c. 21.
from wine and flesh. The abstinence of Timothy, though then being sickly is so
certain, that S. Paul therefore advises him in reguard of his health to 1.
Tim. 5.23.
Drink not yet water, but use a little wine for thy stomach, and thy often
infirm^ties. Now none will say, that these holy persons, did forbear these
mea^es and drinks, as thinking them of their own natures to be unclean, or
unlawful.

And that this Abstinence and fast may be limited by the Church to certain
appointed and prescript days, appears first, in that the thing in general
being it self lawful and commendable (in so much as it is oftentimes in the
Scriptures Luc. 2.37. Mat. 17.21. Mar. 9.29. Act 13.2. and 14.23.
matched in mention with Prayer) the people may be bound thereto at set times,
even as they are to prayer. 2. Sundry examples are hereof in the Scriptures:
Ionadab Hier. 35.14.
commanded his sons not to drink wine: and they have not drunk until this
day because they have obeyed the Commandment of their Father. In C. 8.19.
Zachary mention is made of 4. Fasts, which were called Fasts of Months, of
the 4. 5. 7. and 10. which were not commanded by God himself, but by them who
governed the commonwealth of the Jews, being brought in upon several
occasions. Mardochaeus appointed a new Hest 9.21.
fe^tiuall day to be celebrated for ever Ver. 31.
with fasts and prayer.

Chemnitius Exam. part. 4. p. 437. 438.
has no better answer to these so plain Textes, then to reprehend these
observations of the Hebrews, and to ascribe it to (...), a naughty zeal. But
in this he manifests intolerable boldness, and impudency, seeing the
Scriptures do not reprove but commend these laws of fasts, greatly praising
Mardochaeus and Ionadab, and auouching that those fasts mentioned by Zachary
should be changed into joy and great solemnities.

In the New Testament we have the Apostles commanding the Gentiles converted,
and all Christians to Act. 19.29.
Abstain from things immolated to Idols, and blood, and that which is
strangled. And that this was a Command, and of Necessity to be kept, appears
by these textes, Ver. 28.
It has seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us, to lay no further burden upon
you then these necessary things. Act. 15.41.
Paul commanding them to keep the Precepts of the Apostles, and the Ancients.
And Tertullian In Apologet.
reports, that the Christians would rather dye then taste blood in those
firster times. Now if the Magistrates in the old Testament, and the Apostles in
the new might make laws for good ends of Abstinence from certain meats, and
upon certain days, which yet were not commanded by God, and these laws to
bynd in Conscience, the Necessity thereof yet not resting in the thing, but in
the Commandment; no doubt the like power cannot be denied to the Church,
prescribing the same for other good ends; Especially seeing it is certain, and
might easily be proved, that the Church of Christ has authority to make Laws,
which do bynd in Conscience.

SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures, in proof of the
lawful Abstinence from certain meats, and the appointed days for fasting.
S. Austine affirms, that fasting in general is commanded by the Scriptures:
Ep. 89. ad Casulanum.
I pondering (says he) that in my mind, do see fasting to be commanded in the
Evangelical and Apostolical letters, and in the whole Instrument, which is
called the New Testament. But what days we ought not to fast, and what to
fast, I do not find it defyned by command of our Lord or the Apostles. Wherefore
concerning this last he further teaches that, Ibid.
In these things whereof the divine Scripture decrees nothing certain, the
custom of the people of God, or the Ordinances of our Ancestors, are to be
kept for a law. And when the custom of the people is different, then says he,
Ibid.
The Custom of them are to be followed to whom the Government of the people is
committed. Yea, Ep. 118. ad Ianuarium. c. 2.
There is no better discipline in these things for a grave and wife Christian,
then to do so, as he sees the Church to do, where he comes. And then
relating how that for the satisfaction of his Mother he demanded of S. Ambrose
what was to be done, when the custom of fasting was various, he reports S.
Ambrose his Answer to be this, To what Church thou shall come, keep the
Custom thereof, if thou will not give scandal to any, or any to thee: when I
had told this to my Mother, she willingly embraced it. And I often thinking of
this his sentence, I did ever so esteem it, as if I had received it from a
heavenly Oracle. S. Ambrose applies those words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.32.
Let us eat and drink, to morrow we shall dye, to our modern Epicureans that
take away fasting, and deny the merit thereof: L. 10. Epist. ep. 82.
How can we be saved (says he) if we wash not away our sins by fasting,
seeing the Scriptures say, Fasting and Alms deliver from sin? What are these
new Masters then that exclude all merit of fasting? Is not this the very voice
of the Heathen saying, Let us eat and drink, to morrow we shall dye?

Concerning the fast of Lent, S. Austine affirms that, Ep. 119. ad Ian. c. 15.
The fast of Lent has authority both in the old books, from the fast of
Moses and Elias, and in the Gospel, because our Lord fasted so many days,
showing that the Gospel does not differ from the Law and the Prophets. And of
the bond thereof he avouches that, Ser. 62. de Temp.
to fast other days is a remedy or reward, in Lent not to fast is sin. He
that fasteth another time shall receive Indulgence, he that fasteth not in
Lent, shall be punished. Yea, says S. Ambrose, Sermon. 25. de Quadragesima.
It is no light sin to violate the Lent appointed by our Lord for the
faithful etc. therefore if thou will be a Christian, thou must do what Christ
did. He that sinned not, fasted Lent, wilt not thou who sinnest, fast Lent? And
again, Sermon. 36. de Quadrag.
some days ago preaching the Devotion of holy Lent, I brought forth Examples
of holy Scriptures, whereby I might prove, this number of forty, not to be
ordained by men, but consecrated from heaven, nor to be invented by Earthly
thought, but commanded by heavenly Majesty etc. These Commandments are not so
much the Priests, as Gods. And therefore he that despyseth (them) despises not
the Priest, but Christ, who speaks in his Priest.

Lastly S. Hierome speaking of the practice and obligation of his times says,
Ep. 54. ad Marcellam.
We in the whole year fast one Lent, according to the Tradition of the
Apostles, at a time fitting for us. The (Montanistes) make 3. Lents in the
year, as though three Saviors had suffered. Not that it is not lawful to
fast all the year, excepting Pentecost, but that it is one thing to offer a
gift of necessity, another freely. And Ad c. 58. Isaiae.
our Lord fasted 40. days in the desert, that he might leave to us the solemn
days of fasting.

The Fathers of the Council Senonense do Decree that, Decret. 7.
As concerning the choice of meats, although etc. now nothing is to be said
commune or unclean, yet nothing cold be ordained more holy or profitable etc.
then that upon the days of fasting and Abstinence ordained by the Church,
forbearing the eating of flesh, we should only eat dry meats: for truly the
Authority of our holy Mother the Church is no less with us then with the
sons of Rechab the Command of their dying Father, who lest they should
infringe the Ordinance of their Father, did perpetually abstain from wine.

Prescribed fastes were so generally used in the Primitive Church, that Calvin
says, Inst. l. 4. c. 12. n. 19 20.
I cannot altogether excuse the Ancient (Fathers) in this respect, but that
they laid some seeds of superstition etc. The observation of superstitious Lent
was then every where in force. Chemnitius acknowledges, that, Exam. part. 1.
p. 89.
Ambrose, Maximus, Theophilus, Hierome, and others do affirm the fast of Lent,
to be an Apostolical Tradition. And the very same is confessed by Scroderus.
Opusc. Theol. p. 71.
And whereas S. Austine teaches, that, Ser. de Temp. Ser. 77. and 62.
Not to keep Lent at all is Sacrilege, and in part to break it is sin,
this is confessed and disliked in S. Austine by the Centuristes Cent. 5. c. 6.
Col. 686. 687. Ham. de Tradit. A^ost. part. 3. ^. 3. Col. 824.
, and Hamelmanus. Scultetus (to use his own words) affirms, Medulla Theol.
p. 440.
The superstition of Lent and fasting to have been allowed and commanded by
Ignatius who was scholar to S. John. So ancient and approved is our Catholic
custom of observing prescript fastes and Abstinence from certain Meats.

SECT. IV. That sundry Protestant writers do teach our Catholic Doctrine of
Abstinence from certain meats, upon Prescribed days.
THis Catholic truth is so clear, as that M. Hooker undertakes special
proof thereof, and doubts not to say, Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 72.
We are etc. to make it manifest in all men's eyes, that set times of fasting
appointed in spiritual Considerations to be kept by all sorts of men, took
not their beginning either from Montanus, or any other whose heresies may
prejudice the credit and due estimation thereof, but have their ground in the
law of nature, are allowable in Gods sight, were in all ages hertofore, and may
till the worlds end be observed, not without singular use and benefit. Again,
Of public enjoined fasts, upon causes extraordinary, the 1. Paral. 20.3.
Ierem. 36.9. 1. Reg. 7.6.
examples of Scripture are so frequent, that they need no particular rehearsal
etc. Touching fasts not appointed for any such extraordinary causes, but either
yearly, or monthly, or weekly observed and kept, first upon the nynth day of
the Month etc. And then reckoning up the several fasts of the Jews, and the
causes thereof, he concludes. All these not commanded by God himself, but
ordained by a public Constitution of their own, the Prophet Zachary expressly
touches.

The Prot. Author of the Book entitled, Q^aerimonia Ecclesiae, does purposely
and at large a page 90. ad p. 123.
defend set fasting days, and Abstinence from certain meats, reproving his
other Brethren for rejecting the Ancient Fathers in this behalf, and
condemning Ae^ius for the now Prot. Doctrine, and undertaking a particular and
large Defense of the fast of Lent.

Calvin acknowledges thus much, that, Inst. l. 4. c. 12.. 14.
The other part of Discipline, which is not properly contained in the power of
the keys, consists in this, that according to the necessity of times,
Pastors may exhort the People either to fasts, or to solemn prayers, or to
other Exercises of humility, penance, and faith, the time whereof, or manner,
or form is not prescribed by the word of God, but left to the Judgment of the
Church. The observation of this part, as it is profitable, so was it usual to
the Ancient Church, even from the very Apostles. Neither were the Apostles
themselves the first authors, but they took example from the Law and the
Prophets: for we see that as often as there hapened any great business, the
People were assembled, Prayers appointed, fast proclaimed. M. Trig professes
to defend and urge against his other Prot. Brethren, In his true Catholic. p.
601.
the fast of Lent, and solemn weekly fast of wednesday and friday. So free are
our appointed fasts from any Doctrine of Devils, or Superstition.

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture against Abstinence from certain meats,
and Prescript fasting-daies, answered.
THe Ancient Heretic Iouinian urged against S. Hierome, as Prot. do now
against Catholics, that God created all things for man, whereas hens, geefe,
and some other Creatures are nothing for his use, unless they be eaten. Answ. S.
Hierome L. 2. cont. Iou^^.
to this Argument of Iouinian answerth, that no living Creatures were made only
for that end, that they should be eaten, but either for physic or other uses,
or at least for the Ornament of the world. This he proves in that before the
Deluge no man did eat flesh; as also, in that otherwise Owls, Toades,
serpents, spiders, and the like were to be eaten, they being not in other
respects useful for man: besides the forsaid Creatures are eaten upon certain
days, though they be abstayned from upon days of Abstinence.

Others object that, Mat. 15.11.
Not that which enters into the mouth defyleth a man. Answ. If this in all
respects were true, then gluttony and drunkenes should not defyle a man:
wherefore it is to be said, that though meats of themselves, or their own
nature, do not defyle the Soul, yet accidentally in that they make a man to
sin by gluttony or disobedience to God, or our Superiors, they do defyle; And
thus is this expounded by De moribus Eccl. c. 33.
S. Austine. Again, as these words do not import that the Jews then might
have eaten of those meats which God forbad them, no more do they now that are
Christians, eat of those which the Church forbids: Neither they then, nor
we now abstain, for that any meats are of their own nature abominable, or
defyle the eaters, but they for signification, we for Obedience and
Chasticement of our Bodies.

Some argue, that Christ said to his Apostles, Luc. 10.7.
In the same house tarry you, eating and drinking such things as they have.
And that of S. Paul 1. Cor. 10.25.
All that is sold in the shambles eat, asking no question for Conscience.
Ergo, this liberty is not to be taken from us. Answ. Christ only commands
that when we are entertained, we seek not sumptuous meats, but be content
with such as are set before us: And so is this place understood by S. Ambrose.
In hunc locum.
Neither is it ques^ionable, but that he spoke only of such meats as according
to place and time were lawful and profitable, for as then he would not have
had swynes flesh, or poison eaten, if it had been placed before them. In like
sort S. Paul only freed the faithful from enquiring whether the flesh had
been offered to Idols or not, for otherwise we have seen before, that he
commanded that the Decree of the Apostles against eating that which was
strangled, and blood, and offered to Idols, should be observed.

Again, that is generally urged of S. Paul, 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3.
In the last times certain shall depart from the faith attending to spirits of
Error and Doctrine of Devils etc. forb^dding to marry, to abstain from meats
which God created to receive with thansgiuing for the faithful. Answer. The
Apostle condemns all Heretics, who forbid meats as of themselves unclean;
and for that very cause (as S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. and Ambr. in hunc locum.
Hier. l. 2. cont. Iouin. c. 11. and l. 1. c. 1, 2, 3. Aug. l. cont. Adimant. c.
14. and l. 3. cont. Faust. Man. c. 5. 6.
S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, and S. Austine teach) the Marcionistes, Eucratites,
and Manichees.

In so much, that S. Austine purposely answers this Objection saying, Cont.
Faust. Manich l. 30. c. 4.
See I beseech you, if this be not greatest madness, to think that Paul said,
that all abstinence of meats, and forbidding to marry, is the Doctrine of
Devils. And, Ib. c. 6.
He forbids, who says this is evil, not he who prefers to this good,
another thing better. And again, There is great difference between those who
Abstain from meats for some holy representation, or for punishing of the
Body; and those who Abstain from meats which God has created, saying, that
God did not create them. Therefore that is the Doctrine of Prophets and
Apostles, this of lying Devils. And, Cont. Adimant. c. 14.
The Apostle most plainly signifies the (Manichees) when he says, In the last
days there shall be some forbidding to marry, abstayning from meats which God
has created. These he properly designeth, who do not therefore Abstain from
such meats, that they may bridle their Concupiscence, or yield to the
Infirmity of another, but because they think flesh unclean, and deny God to
be the Creator of them. Which Error of the Manichees the Catholic Church
has condemned in Conc. Tolet. 1. in assertione fidei. Bracar. 1. Can. 14.
several Councels.

But not only S. Austine, but even Prot. themselves answer this. M. Hooker
says, Eccl. Pol. l. 5 sect. 72.
Against those Heretics which have urged perpetual Abstinence from certain
meats, as being in their very nature unclean, the Church has still bent
herself as an Enemy: S. Paul giving charge to take heed of them, which under
any such opinion, should utterly forbid the use of meate^, or drinks. The
Apostles themselves forbad some etc. but the cause of their so doing we all
know. And the like Answer in our behalf is given by Jacob Defense of the
Church and Minist. of Engl. p. 59. 65.
the Puritan, saying, The place of Paul 1. Tim. 4.3. is understood of Marcion
and Tatianus; who did absolutely condemn Marriage and certain meats: and so
are in no comparison with the Papists, if they erred in nothing else.

Neither do these words, In the last times, prove that they are to be
understood of some Heretics which shall come long after the Apostles times:
for by last times, the Apostle understands the whole time from the coming of
Christ until the end of the world, which time he calls 1. Cor. 10 11.
The ends of the world. And S. Peter expounds of his own time, that which
the Prophet Joel foretold should be Act. 2.17 Joel. 2.28.
in the last days. And he affirms of Christ, that he was 1. Pet. 1.20.
Forknowne indeed before the Constitution of the world, but manifested in the
last times for you. Finally S. John said, 1. Io. 2.1^.
Sons, it is the last hour.

D. Fulke and other Prot. do commonly urge that, Against Rhem. Test. in Mat.
15. fol. 2^. Aretius loc. com. p. 272.
Montanus the Heretic was the first that appointed laws of fasting. But M.
Hooker their Brother does answer them, that the Mantanistes were reprehended
only, for that they Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 72.
brought in sundry unaccustomed days of fasting, continued their fastes a
great deal longer, and made them more rigorous etc. Whereupon Tertulian
mayntaining Montanisme, wrote a Book in Defense of the New fast etc. And
another Prot. explaining this, affirms that Montanus Quaerimonis Ecclesiae.
p. 11^.
abrogating the fastes of the Church, introduces a new manner of fasting etc.
So weak and impertinent are the objections made by Prot. against prescribed
days of fasting, and abstinence from certain meats.

CHAP. XXVIII. The true State of the Question concerning Concupiscence.
Whether Concupiscence remaining after Baptism, is truly and properly sin,
though not imputed to the faithful: or only, that it is an Effect of Original
Sin; And a corruption of Nature inclining men to Sin. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
THE Error of Concupiscence being properly Sin; being a sink from whence
many others are deryued, the Council of Trent therefore has Decreed that,
Conc. Trid. Sess. 5. Decret. de peccato orig.
The Catholic Church never understood (Concupiscence) to be called Sin, as
though truly and properly it were sin in the regenerate but because it is (or
aryseth) from sin, and enclyneth to Sin. If any shall think the contrary,
Anathema.

In the Council of Moguntia it is Decreed, that, Cap. 11.
Concupiscence which is left in us after Baptism, for our Combat, not for
fault, is not now sin in the true nature of sin, but therefore called Sin
because it was caused by Sin, and still enclyneth to Sin. In the Council
Senonense this Article was condemned, In Annot. post Decret. fidei.
Concupiscence, although there be no actual sin, does hinder a soul from
entering into heaven: But this it could not do, except it were original sin
it self.

Agreably to these Councels, all Bellar. de amiss. Gra. and statu pe^. l. 5 c
7. etc. Rhem. Test. in Romans 6.12.
Catholics believe, that the Corruption of nature, or Concupiscence which
remains after Baptism, is not original sin; not only because it is not
imputed, but because it cannot be imputed, being of it self, and its own
nature, no sin at all: but only an effect, occasion, and matter of Sin, and
as it were an Infirmity inclyning to Sin, but not sin it self without
Consent.

Points Disputable.
Some Lombar. 2. Sent. Did. 31. ^. 2. 3. Henriq. quodlib 2. q. ^2 Greg Arimin.
2. Did. 30. q. 1.
teach, that Concupiscence is a positive quality in the Soul ever stirring up
wicked desires: But Bellar. de pec. l. 5. c 15.
others better, that it only proceeds from the want of Original Justice,
which did cause the sensuality to be perfectly subject to reason.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Protestant Church Decrees, that, Articles of Relig. art. 9.
Rogers Art. 9. p. 46.
Although there is no condemnation for them that believe, and are baptized: yet
the Apostle does confess that Concupiscence and lust has of it self the
nature of sin: And so by other Luther in Assert. Art. 2. Calu. Inst. l. 2. c.
1.. 8. Calu. Inst l. 4. c. 15. sect. 10. Willet Synopsis. p. 558.
Prot. it is most generally houlden to be truly sin.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
S. Epiphanius Haer. 64.
condemns the Heretic Proclu^ for teaching, that sin did always remain
in the Regenerate, and that Concupiscence was truly sin, not taken away by
Baptism, but brought a sleep by faith. And the same Error was afterward
condemned in the Messalians, by L. 4 de baer. Fab.
Theodoret.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that Concupiscence remaining after
Baptism, is not truly and properly Sin.
TO examine this by the sacred Scriptures, first, al such Se^ chap. 20.
textes as prove that not only debt of punishment is pardoned, but even the
fault or spots of sin are washed, purged, and taken away by Baptism, do
convince that Concupiscence remaining after Baptism is not sin properly
taken; But of this I have spoken hertofore.

Secondly, the same is clearly taught in these words of S. James, C. 1. 14. 15.
Every one is tempted of his own Concupiscence, abstracted, and allured;
Afterward Concupiscence when it has conceived brings forth Sin; but
sin when it is consummate engenders Death. Here 4. things are
distinguished, Concupiscence, that is a power of coveting prone to evil, and
her 3. motions, Suggestion, Delectation, and Consent. Concupiscence and her
first motion S. James does not call Sin, but a Temptation to sin. Delight,
but not fully deliberate, he calls sin, but not mortal: which only full
Consent causes.

Thirdly, Concupiscence is the effect and Punishment of Original sin. Ergo
it cannot be the Original sin it self; for although one and the same thing
may be sin, and the punishment of sin, yea and the cause also, yet this is
ever in diverse respects; for it cannot be conceived that one thing may be
sin, and the punishment and effect of the same sin, because it should be
punishment and effect of it self, and, by this, be before, and after it self.
Now that Concupiscence is the punishment and effect of sin original,
appears by S. Paul, saying, Romans 5.12.
By one man sin entered into the world, and by sin Death; and so unto all
men Death did pass in which all sinned. Here Death is said to be the
punishment and effect of original Sin: now Death is part of the corruption
of Man's nature, the other part of the same corruption is Concupiscence, with
Ignorance, and other wounds infl^cted upon our nature: so that the same reason
is of Concupiscence, and Death: whereas Death is a Punishment and effect of
Original sin, so likewise is Concupiscence. And so in express words S.
Austine says, L. 5. in Julian. c. 3.
Concupiscence is the punishment of Sin.

Fourthly, if Concupiscence be taken for the inuoluntary act, that is, for the
first motions of Concupiscence to which the mind resists, it is no sin, as
is clear in Children, Madmen, and Sleepers, in whose power it is not, not to
have the Acts of Concupiscence. Ergo much less it is sin if it be taken for
the pronesse and inclination to sin. But neither is it in the power of wise
and aged men not to have the first motions of Concupiscence: Ergo, neither is
it sin in them. Besides Gods law is not only possible, but easy to those who
are endued with Gods grace: but it is impossible, without particular Privilege
from God, for even the Just not to have the first motions of Concupiscence
resisting the law of their mind, as experience teaches, and S. Paul himself
proved, when he said, Romans 7.22.23. 2. Cor. 12.7.8.
I am delighted with the law of God, according to the inward man: but I see
another law in my members, repugning to the law of my mind, and captiuing me in
the law of sin, that is in my members. The same also is confirmed by those
words of S. Paul, Romans 7.17.18.
But now, not I work it any more, but the sin that dwells in me, for I
know that there dwells not in me, that is to say in my flesh, good. These
words are spoken of S. Paul himself, or any other just person, in whom
Concupiscence cannot properly be sin, because here it is said that the motion
of Concupiscence is not his work, and therefore cannot be imputed to him to
sin, seeing it is not his. Again, he affirms that this evil is not in
him, but in his flesh, whereas it is certain that the flesh is not capable of
sin properly taken.

Neither will it suffice to answer with Calvin, Inst. l. 2. c. 1.. 9.
that by flesh, is understood here the whole man, as he is according to Nature
corrupted. For if it were so to be understood, then S. Paul had not truly said,
not I work it, for how did not he work that, which the whole man, body, and
soul works? But if reason resisting, which is the chiefest part of man, the
only inferior part does work, then it may be truly said, not I work it.
Secondly, to what end should he have said, as it were by way of Correction, I
know that there dwells not in me, that is in my flesh good, if that evil
were in the whole man? Thirdly, S. Paul distinguishes in express words, the
flesh from the mind, saying. I see Romans 7.23.
another law in my members, repugning to the law of my mind, therefore Ib. ver.
25.
I my self with the mind serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of
sin.

All this is yet further established by these other words of the Apostle Romans
8.1.
There is now therefore no damnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; for
having in the former Chapters spoken much of Concupiscence, he at length
concludes, that the just in Christ need not to fear, though they feel in
their flesh that Concupiscence, resisting the law of their mind. But Luther,
Calvin, and others do reply, that the Apostle said, There was no damnation to
the regenerate for Concupiscence, not that it did not deserve damnation, but
because God forgave the guilt thereof by Baptism. If this answer were solid,
then these Prot. affirming the guilt or fault to be forgiven in Baptism, must
needs consequently confess, that there is nothing in the regenerate, which is
truly and properly sin; Calu. Inst. l. 3. c. 3.. 11.
themselves teaching the guilt or fault to be that which is properly sin:
according to that of S. Austine, L. 1. de Nupt. and concup. c. 26.
This is not to have sin, but to be guilty of sin.

SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures, in proof, that
Concupiscence remaining after Baptism, is not properly sin.
SAint Cyril expounding the words of S. James, affirms, that, Cyr. l. 4 in
Joan. c. 51.
A certain pleasure goes before all sin, and a burning Concupiscence uses
to entice to sin, which is before the act of sinning, and it draws the
consent of mind, persuading that this way we may easily come whither we desire:
which to be true the Disciple of Christ shows saying, No man who is tempted,
let him say, that he is tempted from God, for God tempts no man: But every
one is tempted of his own Concupiscence, abstracted, and allured: Then
Concupiscence after it has conceived, brings forth sin, but the
Consummation engenders death.

S. Austine alleging the same words of S. James says, Lib. 5. cont. Iul. c.
5.
Truly in these words the brood is distinguished from that which breeds. For
Concupiscence is that which breeds, the brood is sin: But Concupiscence
begets not, unless it conceive; it conceyueth not unless it induce, that is,
gayneth the assent of the will to commit evil. When therefore it is striuen
against, this comes to pass, that it may not conceive or travail with sin.

I will omit other Fathers, seeing Calvin confesses that, Inst. l. 3. c. 3..
20.
Neither it is needful to labor much in searching what old writers have
thought therein, seeing only Austine may be sufficient for it, who has
faithfully and with great diligence gathered all their opinions. Therefore let
the Readers gather out of him, if they will have any certainty of the Judgment
of Antiquity. But between him and us there seems to be this difference, that
he when he grants that the faithful, so long as they dwell in a mortal
body, are so houlden bound with Concupiscences, that they cannot but covet (or
lust) yet dares he not call that disease Sin: but being content to express
it by the name of weakness, he teaches, that then only it becomes Sin, when
either deed, or Consent is added to conceiving or apprehension; that is, when
the will yields to the first desire. But we account the very same for sin,
that man is tickled with any desire at all against the Law of God: yea that
prauity it self which begets those desires in us, we affirm to be Sin.
Therefore we teach that there is always Sin in the holy (or just) until
they have put off the mortal body, because in their flesh that prauity of
desiring resideth, which fights with that which is right. So directly (though
most impudently) does Calvin oppose his Prot. Doctrine of Concupiscence, to the
Catholic Doctrine of S. Austine, and all Antiquity.

Agreably says Chemnitius, Loc. com. part. 3. in his theses thereto annexed.
fol. 18.
Austine began to dispute that it was not properly Sin, but so called by a
figure etc. which (if we will believe Chemnitius) was spoken incommodiously.
But by this it appears, that S. Austine, and Antiquity did hold
Concupiscence without consent, not to be Sin.

SECT. IV. That Protestant writers do teach, that Concupiscence without Consent
is not properly Sin.
SZegedine affirms that, Loc. com p. 229. And see p. 223. 224.
Sin ryseth, and is perfitted by 3 degrees, Suggestion, Delight, and full
Consent etc. He that does not Consent, but resists delight, and temptation,
yea refuses delight, is not infected with the impurity of Sin.

SECT. V. Objections taken from Scripture, in proof that Concupiscence is
properly sin, answered.
SOme object these words of S. Paul, Rom 6.12.
Let not sin therf^re reign in your mortal Body, that you obey the
Concupiscences thereof. The Apostle does not say, let not sin be in your
mortal Body, but let it not reign, therefore sin is always in us, though it
does not always reign, and this sin he names Concupiscence. Answ. The word
Sin in Scripture is taken in diverse senses, sometimes properly for the fault
sometimes for the Deuteronomy. 9.21. Zach. 14.19. Thren. 4.22.
punishment, which is the effect of the fault, sometimes for the Romans 7.7.
cause of sin, and sometimes for Sacrifice 2. Cor. 5.21 Ose. ^.8.
of sin. Again it is evident by the Scriptures, Esa. 44.22. Io. 1.29. Act.
3.19.
that sin properly taken, is taken away in our Justification. And it is no
less clear by the Scriptures, Romans 7.22.
that Concupiscence is not taken away in Justification. Ergo, according to the
Scriptures, Concupiscence is not properly sin. But S. Austine shall give the
Answer, saying, L. 1. Retract. c. 15.
This sin whereof the Apostle so speaks, is therefore called sin, because
it is made by sin, and is the punishment of sin: for it is spoken of the
Concupiscence of the flesh. Again, L. 1 cont. duas Ep. Pelag. c. 1^.
Though Concupiscence be termed sin, yet it is not so called because it is
sin, but because it is caused by sin, even as a writing is said to be a
man's hand, because the hand made it. Moreover sin properly taken cannot be
said to be, or reign in the Body, but in the mind, for sin being Injustice,
it must needs have the same place that true Justice has: but no man ever
placed Justice in the Body or flesh, but in the soul or mind.

Others urge that of S. Paul, Romans 7.7.
Sin I did not know but by the law: for Concupiscence I knew not, unless the
law did say, Thou shall not covet. Here S. Paul affirms, that he knew Sin
by the law, and that, that sin was Concupiscence, and that the law by which
he knew it, was the Commandment, Thou shall not covet. Answer, Sin is here
taken properly for the Transgression of the law, but Concupiscence is not here
taken for only pronesse to sin, but for the voluntary act of Coveting, which
is forbidden by the law, Thou shall not Covet. And this appears in that, when
the Apostle had said, the law was not sin, that is the cause of sin, but
the cause of knowing sin, he thereby proved it, in that men did not know the
interior Acts of desiring other men's goods, or wynes to be sin, unless the
law had said, Thou shall not Covet. And so accordingly Christ himself said,
Mat. 5.28.
You have heard that it was said to them of old, Thou shall not commit
Aduoutry; but I say to you, that whosoever shall see a woman to lust after her,
has already committed Aduoutry with her in his heart. This he spoke against the
Pharisees, who still thought internal evil thoughts not to be sin: and the
same was Antiquit. l. 12. c. 13. David Kimhi in ps. 66.17.
taught by Josephus and David Kimhi; of this Ignorance S. Paul speaks when he
said, Romans 7.7.
Concupiscence I knew not, unless the law did say, Thou shall not Covet. So that
Concupiscence here is taken for actual Sin consented unto, and so nothing
helps the cause of our Adversaries.

Many Chem. Exam. p. 506. P^t. Mart. in Comment. ep. ad Romans
urge that, whatsoever is not conformable to the law of God, but differreth
from it, is sin, according to that of S. John, 1. Io. 3.4.
Sin is iniquity: but the deprauation of man's nature is not conformable to
the law of God, but differs from it; Ergo, it is Sin. Answer. If Sin and
iniquity be taken improperly or materially, then as every fault, not only in
manners, but in nature, or are may be called Sin, so likewise may
Concupiscence: but if Snne be taken properly, as S. John does, for the
transgression of Gods law, then Concupiscence is not Sin or iniquity. Neither
is every thing that differs from the rule of the law, or that fights with
it, properly Sin and iniquity; for the Devil tempting, man sinning, the will
consenting, the action performing, do all of them differ from the rule of the
law, and fight with it, and yet none of them are sin it self, which properly
consists in the deuiation or departing from the rule of the law. Now though
Concupiscence does resist the law of the mind, yet it is not the formal
resistance, nor the action departing from the rule of the law, nor as a power,
or person which is bound to follow the law, but as a tempter, or inciter to
break the law, as I said of the Devil.

CHAP. XXIX. The true State of the Question, concerning the distinction of
Sin into Mortal, and Venial.
Whether all Sins be of their own nature mortal and damnable; and only
venial in the Elect by Gods not imputation: Or rather that there be some
mortal, others venial, which of their own nature do not deserve eternal
punishment, even in the wicked, and reprobate. SECT. 1.
Catholic Doctrine.
AS in the former Chapter we have seen the endeavor of Prot. to make the
inuoluntary Motions of Concupiscence to be sin: so in this we shall see their
like laboring to make all sins, even the least idle word, to be mortal and
damnable. Against which the Church declaring, that, Cont. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 5.
All mortal sins ought to be recited in Confession by Penitents etc. And
that, Venial sins though they may be rightly and profitably spoken in
Confession, yet without sin they may be concealed, does herby clearly
distinguish the different natures of sin Mortal, and Venial.

In the Council Senonense this Article was condemned for heretical: In Annot.
pos^ Decreta fidei.
Those who teach venial sins, to be distinct from mortal, do wretchedly
endeavor to draw men's Consciences to Madness.

The Bellar. de amiss. gra. and statu pec. l. 1 c 9. Rhem. Test. in Romans 1.12.
general belief of the Church now is, that Venial sin of its own nature
is distinguished from Mortal; and this without any relation to Predestination,
or Gods mercy, or the state of the Regenerate, or the like: And that the said
venial Sin does deserve punishment, but not eternal: And does offend God,
but not to the loss of his favor and grace.

Points Disputable.
Some S. Tho. q. 72. art. 5.
teach that Sin Mortal and Venial, if they be formally considered, as they
do in different manner offend God, and cause different guilt of punishment,
that then their difference is not essential, but accidental, as of the
subject into accidents. Nauar. in Manual. Praiud. 9. n. 6.
Others think, that the division of sin into Mortal and Venial, is a
division of Sin into diverse species, or kinds of sin, and so a small
Venial theft to differ specie, from Mortal theft: but this Opinion is less
probable.

Protestants Untruths.
Rogers affirms that, Def. o^ the Art. art. 12. p. 53.
Allowed was both whordome and unclean pollutions by the Carpocratians etc.
and is of the Jesuits and Papists. But this is a manifest untruth forged by
Rogers.

Protestant Doctrine.
Protestants teach, that, Fulke ag. Rhem. Test. in Mat. 5 sect. 6. fol. 9.
All sins of their own nature are Mortal: and yet Ibid. and in 1. Ep. 10.
sect. 5. fol. 447.
all sins are pardonable (or venial) to the faithful: for Ibid. sect. 5.
They are not imputed to the Elect. Calvin explaineth this Doctrine thus.
Instit. l. de poen. c. 5. p. 178.
We affi^me the sins of the faithful to be venial, not for that they do not
deserve death, but because that by the mercy of God, there is no Condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus. Beza. In. 1. lo. ^.16.
Hereof it follows, no sins to the Elect to be mortal, nor venial to the
reprobate. And so according to these men, the difference of sins is not in
their own natures any, but only in regard of the Persons sinning, according to
their Predestination, or reprobation.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
Cicero reports that with the Stoickes, In Paradoxis.
All sins are alike. And Cont. Pelagianos Dial. 1. and 2.
S. Hierome and S. Austine Haer. 58.
reprove Pelagius for teaching that by every sin Justice is lost, and so
every sin to be Mortal. Hier. cont. Iouin. l. 2. c. 15. 16. Aug. Hae^. 82.
They likewise impugn Iouinian, for affirming, All sins to be alike. And the
same Error was afterward condemned in Tho. Waldens. Tom 2. de Sacram. c. 54.
Wiccliffe.

Protestant Errors.
David (according In the Towers Disp. 2 days Confer.
to Fulke) when he committed Adultery, was, and remained the Child of God: And
as Beza Ad acta Colloq. Montisbelg. p. 44.
thinks, By his Adultery and murder did not loose his faith, or the holy
Ghost.

Luther teaches that, Loc. com. class 5. c. 27. p. 68. And see Act. Mon. p.
1337.
As nothing justifies but faith, so nothing sins but unbelief. And that,
L. de Captiuit. Babyl. Treatise ag. the Defense of the Censure. p. 198. and in
Whitak. cont. Dut. l. 8. p. 639.
A Christian or baptized man is so rich, that although he would he cannot loose
his Salvation by any sins how great soever unless he will not believe. Wotton,
Answ. to the Papists Artic. p. 92.
Sin is forthwith remitted when it is committed, or rather before it is
committed, full remission of all sins present and to come being obtained by a
man once justified. Paraeus. De Iustif. l. 4. c. 1. p. 935.
Where faith is, no sin can hurt, what more true? Paraeus denies that either
David by Adultery and murder, or Solomon by Idolatry, or Peter by denying of
Christ, De Iustif. l. 3. c. 14. p. 871.
fell from Justification.

Luther, Tom. 5. in Cap. 3. Gal. fol. 335.
A Christian is at the same time Just and a Sinner, a Friend and Enemy of God.
No Sophisters admit these contraries, because they do not understand the true
reason of Justification. Calvin speaking also of the same thing says, Cont.
Franciscan. libert. p. 471.
Behold how contraries may be in the same subject. For life is begun, and
somewhat of death remains.

Luther, Tom. 5. in Gal. 4. fol. 404.
True knowledge of Christ, or faith does not dispute whether thou d^st good
works to Justice, or evil to Damnation, but plainly so decrees. Whether thou
do good works, thou art not therefore justified. Whether thou lost evil,
thou art not therefore condemned. And Tom. 1. Epist. fol. 345.
Be a si^ner and sin strongly Sin will not take us away from Christ,
although we should commit fornication, or murder a thousand times in one day.

Whitaker, Controu. 2. quaest. 5. c. 7. p. 514.
We say if any man have an Act of faith, sins do not hurt him, Luther
affirmed this, and the same we all say. And therein you s^y m^^t im^iously, that
murder, adultery etc. do not hurt a man, if he only believe.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that all sins are not of their own
nature Mortal, but some Mortal, some Venial.
THat Sins of their own natures are some Mortal, others Venial, our Savior
teaches saying; Mat. 5.23.
Whosoever is angry with his Brother shall be in danger of Judgment, whosoever
shall say to his Brother, Raca, shall be in danger of a Council: And whosoever
shall say, Thou fool, shall be guilty of the hell fire. Here are set down 3.
degrees of Anger, the first is internal, when it does not burst forth, which
ordinarily is less; the second when it is uttered, but without reproach: the
third when it tends to infamy: of the first it is said, that he is in danger
of Judgment, that is, (according to S. Austine) L. 1. de ser. Dom. in Monte c.
9.
to be called in question or trial, whether he have offended or not: of the
second, that he is in danger of a Council; that is, his fault being certain,
but yet it being doubtful what punishment it deserves, the Judges therefore
are to meet in Council to determine the same: of the last, whose fault and
punishment is certain, and known, it is said, that he is guilty of Hell fire,
Now this last being known to deserve Hell fire, and the other only making the
offender guilty of Council, that is, to be tried, whether he deserve Hell or
lesser punishment; it hence follows, that some sins there are which deserve
not hell, and so not mortal.

Christ also compares great and little sins to Camels and gnats, saying, Mat.
23.24.
Blind guides that strain a gnat, and swallow a Camel. Between which, of
their own natures there is scarce any proportion. Also to a moate and a beam;
Luc. 6.42.
Hipocrite cast forth the beam out of thy own eye, and then shall thou see
clearly to take forth the moate out of thy Brothers eye. A moate may easily be
carried, but the beam being importable would not only destroy the eye, but even
depresse the whole body, if it were laid upon it. Also Venial Sin is
compared to a myte or farthing, Luc. 12.59.
Thou shall not go out thence until thou pay the last myte, or Mat. 5.27.
the last farthing.

S. Paul compares Venial Sin to wood, hay, stubble: 1. Cor. 3.12.14.15.
If any man build upon this foundation Gold, silver, precious stones, wood,
hay, stubble, the work of every one shall be manifest. Here by gold, silver,
precious stones, are understood (according to S. Austine L 21 de Ciu. Dei. c.
26. Ambr ser. 20. and in ps. 118. Hieron. l. 2. cont. Iouin. Greg l. 4. Dial.
c. 39.
and other Fathers) perfect and commendable works, which examined in Gods
Judgment, shall receive reward: By wood, hay etc. are understood unprofitable
works, for which the offender shall suffer detriment, but yet shall be saved:
which cannot be meant of mortal sins, which bring Damnation, and which were
more fitly compared to iron, brass etc. as S. Gregory Ibid.
thinks.

Christ our Savior compares clensing of venial sin to the washing of the
feet, Io. 13.10.
He that is washed, needs not but to wash his feet, but is clean wholly:
here by foulenes of the feet, when all the rest is clean, is signified
manifestly, not our grievous sins, but imperfections of less importance.

S. James exemplifyeth this in Concupiscence, C. 1.14.15.
Every one is tempted of his own Concupiscence, abstracted and allured:
Afterward Concupiscence when it has conceived, brings forth Sin, but Sin
when it is consummate, engenders Death. Here 3. motions of Concupiscence are
set down, the first inuoluntary, when one is incited to Sin, but without all
consent, and this is not Sin, but the cause of Sin, when Consent follows.
The second is imperfectly voluntary, and sin, but yet but venial, as being
not fully deliberate, and for such distinguished here from the last, which
being with full Consent, is said to be consummate, and to engender death, and
so mortal.

And whereas D. Fulke replyeth that, Ag. Rhem Test. in Iac. 1. sect. 6. fol.
426.
Our Savior condemns lust of the eye for Adultery, and Anger for murder,
Matt. 5. I have showed before, that our Savior expressed there the several
degrees of Anger, making only the last Degree guilty of Hell fire. And as for
the lust of the eye, the words of the Text do only concern the sight of the
eye, and the lust of the heart, for the words are, Mat. 5.39.
Whosoever shall see a woman to lust after, has already committed aduoutry
with her in his heart; for though the Body were free from act, yet was the heart
defiled with Consent, and this Consent we affirm to be mortal.

Some Ezech. 18.24. 1. Cor. 6.9.10. Ephesians. 5.5.
Sins are such, as do not stand with sanctity and Justice, but do deprive a
man of Grace, and exclude him from heaven: other sins there are which are
found even in the just, and therefore such as may stand with Grace and
salvation, Prou. 24.16.
The just man falls seven times in the day, and rises again: our Savior
has taught all to say, even the most just, forgive us our trespasses: and
Saint James, and Saint John, who doubtless were just men, affirm of
themselves and others that, Iac. 3.2.
In many things we offend al, and that, 1. Ep. Io. 1.8.
If we shall say that we have no sin, we seduce our selves, and the truth is
not in us. These texts cannot be understood of mortal Sins which deprive men
of Gods Grace and favor, and deserve eternal punishment: for S. James and
Saint John, were doubtless men just, and who lived in the favor of God, and
not in the state of Damnation.

Some would euade all this, by teaching, that to the Predestinate all sins
are Venial by reason of Gods not imputing them unto them, and to reprobate all
mortal. But it cannot be denied, but that Adam, David, Peter, Paul, and sundry
others were Predestinate, and yet that they committed heinous deadly sins, it
is most manifest. And I would demand, whether these sins of theirs could
stand, or rem^yne in them with justifying faith? If not, then they are mortal,
seeing according to their own grounds, such sins are mortal which deprive a
man of justifying faith; but if the said sinnnes may stand with justifying
faith, then a man once justified may freely commit murder, Adultery, deny
Christ with perjury, and the like without offense to God, or damnation to
himself, seeing God does not impute any sin to those that are once
justified: All which is Doctrine most absurd and pernicious. Besides it further
also follows, that a man Predestinate, and once Justified, needs not to
pray for remission of his sins, or of any pain due unto them, seeing the
same are never imputed by God, but at the same time are forgiven in which they
are committed.

SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proof of the
difference between Mortal and Venial sins.
SAint Chrysostom expounding these words of Christ, Ho. 24. in Math.
What do thou see a moate in thy Brothers eye? says: Here, as it appears,
he does not generally forbid all sins to be judged, neither does he take from
all the power thereof: but only from these who when they abound with many
Crimes, rashly condemn others of every little Sin. He seems also to me, to
note the Jews, who being most bitter accusers of their Neighbors for little
Sins, themselves nevertheless do not refrain the greatest crimes. Which also
our Lord in the end of the Gospel vpbrayded (unto them;) They bynd heavy
burdens and importable, and put them upon men's shoulders, but with a finger of
their own, they will not move them.

S. Hierome alleging the same words, why see thou a moate etc. says, Ad.
c. 7. Math.
He speaks of those who being guilty themselves of mortal Crime, do not
permit lesser Sins in their Brethren, strayning the gnat, and swallowing the
Camel: these therefore by counterfeiting of Justice are rightly called
Hypocrites who through the beam of their own eye, do behold the moate in
their Brothers eye. Cassianus having spoken of Capital sins, advises that
Collat. 20. c. 11.
From those little sins into which the just man falls seven times, as it is
written, and ryseth again, let repentance never be wanting.

Concerning the former different degrees of Anger made by Christ our Savior,
S. Hierome says to Iouinian, Cont. Iouin. l. 2. c. 17. And see. c. 16.
In that thou endeauourest to prove that reproach, and murder, Raca, and
Adultery, and idle words and impiety, are to be repayed with one punishment; it
is formerly answered, and now I will briefly answer. Either thou will deny thy
self to be a sinner, that thou may not be guilty of Hell, or if thou be a
sinner, even for a little fault thou art taken to Hell. Sap. 1.11.
The mouth, says he, which lies kills the Soul: I imagine that being a man
thou have somtymes lied, for every man is a liar etc. Therefore either thou art
no man lest thou be a liar, or if thou be a liar because thou art a man, thou
shall be punished with Parricides and Adulterer, for there is no difference
amongst Sins; and they will not thank thee so much whom from below thou
liftest on high, as they will be angry, whom for light and daily Sins thou
thrustest into utter darkness.

The same S. Hierome writing upon these words of Christ, Thou shall not go out
thence until thou pay the last farthing, expounds them thus, In Ma^h. 5.26.
Cyp. l. 4. ep. 2. post med. Ambr. in Comment. ad c. 12. Lucae.
This is that which he says, thou shall not go forth of Prison, until thou
shall pay the least Sins: and the same Exposition is given by S. Cyprian, and
S. Ambrose.

The former words of S. Paul are thus expounded by S. Austine, Ser. 41. de
Sanctis.
With that transitory fire (whereof the Apostle said, he shall be saved, yet so
as by fire) not capital (or deadly) bu^ little sins are purged etc. by which
sins though we do not think the Soul to be killed, yet they make it
deformed etc. To the same purpose writes S. Gregory, Dial. l. 4. c. 39.
Seeeing Paul affirms Christ to be the foundation, and adds, if any shall
build etc. he shall be saved, yet so as by fire: Although this may be understood
of Tribulation given us in this life, yet if any understand it of the fire of
the purging to come, i^ is carefully to be considered, that he whom he
affirms to be saved by fire, is not he who upon this foundation builds
Iron, brass, or lead that is, greater Sins, and therefore harder, and then
insatiable: but wood, hay, chafe, that is, little and lightest Sins, which
the fire may easily consume.

Agreably heereto says Origin, Ho. 14 in Leuit. and ho. 15 in Number. and ho. 2.
in Ps. 38. and ho. 6 in Exodus Basil. in c. 9. Isaiae.
we may yet further ad, that the nature of Sin is like to a matter
combustible; which S. Paul affirms to be built by sinners, who upon the
foundation of Christ, do build wood, hay, stubble, wherein is manifestly
discovered, that there are some sins so light, that they are compared to
stubble, to which indeed as soon as fire is brought, it cannot long continue:
and other sins are like to hay, the which are with no great difficulty
consumed by fire; yet in these the fire abides longer then in stubble: and
lastly there are other sins which are compared to wood, in which according to
the quality of the offenses, the fire may find long and store of food. So
therefore every sin according to the quality and quantity thereof, shall pay
due punishment.

S. Austine teaches us how to satisfye in this life for these little sins,
saying, Enchyr. c 71. And Council. Tolet. 4. Can 9.
For daily, short, and light sins, without which this life is not passed, the
daily prayer of the faithful does satisfy: for it belongs to them to say,
Our Father which art in heaven etc. This prayer does wholly blot out the least,
and daily Sins. Yea he instanceth some of these little sins, saying, Enchyr.
c. 22.
Sometimes we lie for the good of others, a sin therefore is it, but venial.
Also he calls, Ser. 41. de Sanct. and Enchyr. c. 78. 79.
Minuta peccata, little sins, as often as a man eats and drinks more then
is necessary, or speaks more then is meet, or is more silent then is
expedient: with many more such like. In so much that Peter Martyr acknowledges
that, Com. plac. part. 3. c. 4. sect. 81.
S. Austine in his books de Spir. and Lit. c. 28. says, Even as there are
certain venial Sins, without which every just man cannot live, and yet they
hinder us not from Salvation: So are there etc. Lastly, by the foulnes of the
feet whereof our Savior spoke, he understands, In Io. Tract 56 and see him
ep. 29. ad Hieron.
The humane affections without which in this mortality we live not. But the
Fathers confessed Doctrine hereof, is more plainly seen in their Doctrine of
Purgatory.

SECT. IV. That Protestants teach the true difference of Mortal, and Venial
Sins.
BVllinger confesses, that when our Savior spoke, as before, of the several
degrees of Anger, that he thereby expressed, Dec. 3. Ser. ^0. p. 508.
The difference of Sins: he also by foulnes of the feet, understands, Dec.
4. Ser. 10. p. 771.
The infirmity and imperfection which remains after Regeneration. Council.
Theol p. 546.
We add (says Melancthon) the difference of Sin, mortal, or reigning, by
which Grace is lost; and of Sin, not reigning, or venial. Acta Council
Regensp. p. 151.
The Princes and Prot. Estates (in their Answer to the Emperor penned by
Melanctho^) affirm that, Ib. p. 165.
Because in the Saints in this life there abide sins, there must be put the
difference of those Sins, for the which Grace is not left, and of other
Sins, which do clean cast out Grace, and exclude the Holy Ghost.

The Protestant Deuines of Saxony in their public Confession teach in like
manner, that, H^rmony of Confess. p. 80.
seeing it is said, that Sins remain in the Regenerate, it is necessary to
have a difference of sin delivered etc. And it is manifest, that some who are
regenerate do grieve, and shake of the holy Ghost, and are again rejected of
God, and made subject to the wrath of God, and eternal Punishment etc.
Therefore it is necessary that those Sins which remain in holy men in this
mortal life, and yet do not shake of the holy Ghost, be distinguished from
other Sins, for the which man is again made subject to the wrath of God, and
to eternal punishments. Again, Ib. p. 81, 82, 290. Melancth loc. com. de
discrim. pec. mort. ac ven. p. 108. 169.
There be also other Sins in the regenerate, who keep faith, and a good
Conscience, which do not corrupt the foundation etc. but are the relickes of
Original Sins, as darkness, doubting, carnal security etc. Again, when we
do after this sort withstand that corruption, which as yet remains in the
Regenerate, these evils are covered, and it is called Sin that does not
raygne, or venial Sin, and the holy Ghost is not shaken of. It is evident,
that this doctrine concerning the difference of Sins, is true, plain, and
necessary for the Church.

If now there be such difference of Snnes, that in one and the same regenerate
person, some sins do shake of the holy Ghost, and some not; what else then is
this, but to affirm, that in one and the same man, some sins be mortal, and
some venial?

Others expressly teach that, Adamus Francisci in Mar^ar. Theol. p. 469. 1^1.
Some Sin of the just is mortal, other venial: it is mortal, whereby faith
is lost, that so they cease to be just: it is venial, wherewith the Holy Ghost
and faith can continue: and the same is taught by Centur. Exercit. Theol Cent.
3. p. 663. 6^4.
Bachmanus, who in proof thereof alleges S. Austine in Enchyr. c. 71.
produced in the last Section. Iacobus Andraeas avouches that, Resp. Bezae ad
Act. Colloq Montisb part. alt. p. 63. 69.
Venial Sins are the falls of humane infirmity; whereas says he, it is said,
Prou. 14.16.
The Just man falls seven times in the day by these the holy Ghost is not
lost; but mortal sins are abominations committed against the law of G^d.
Wherein, and sundry other his sayings, his m^aning is so manifest, that Beza
does therefore reprove him saying thereof, Resp. Bezae. p. 71. and see part. 1 p.
15. ^3. 24.
This diff^rence which Andrae^s m^keth between venial and mortal sins, is
vain.

Husse also acknowledges, as Fox confesses, that some sins be Act. M^n. p.
220.
deadly, others Ib.
Venial, which do not utterly expel, or put away the habit of virtue. Husse
his own words are, John the Evangelist sometimes speaks of grievous or
mortal sin, as 1. Io. 3. You know that he appeared, that he might take away
sins, and sin is not in him. Every one who abides in him, Ad ps. 118.
sins not, and every one that sins, sees him not. Behold here he
speaks of grievous Mortal sin, or of Crime. But there, 1. Io. 1. If we
shall say, that we have not sin, we seduce our selves, and the truth is not
in us, he speaks of light sin, which is called by us venial.

Lastly M. Jacob a great Precisian, though in words he will not grant venial
sin, yet does he in sequel of Doctrine clearly acknowledge the same, saying,
Defense of the Church and Ministry of Engl. p. 88.
There are sins against the foundation, and there are sins that stand with
the foundation, wherein men living and dying ignorantly, without particular
repentance may be saved. But what is this else but to say, some sins are
Mortal, and others Venial?

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture against the difference of Mortal and
Venial sin, are answered.
SOme object that, Ezech. 28 10.
The soul that sins shall dye: And ^h^t, Romans 6.23
The reward of sin is Death: And that, Mat. 3.20.
He that shall break one of these lea^t Commandementes etc. shall be called the
least ^n the kingdom of heaven. And, Iac. 2.10.
He that offends in one, is made guilty of all. But the former Scriptures
which prove the diversity of sins, do sufficiently explain these and such
like, to be understood, not of that degree of sin, which is but conceived,
but of sin consummate, which brings forth death: neither of such forsaid
sin, as makes us in danger but of Judgment, or Council, but of that which
m^keth us guilty of Hell fire. Ezechiel speaks of enormous ^innes which he
there recites: S. Paul Romans 6.12 13.16, 19.21.22.
speaks of such sins as will not stand with Grace and Justice, and the true
service of God; Our Savior speaks not of such as in any reguard break the
Commandment of God, but of the Scribes and Pharisees who by false
Interpretation depraved the same; so comme^ding love of our Neighbors, as
withal comm^nding hatred of our Enemies; so condemning Adultery, as allowing
Concupiscence only in heart consented unto. N^^ther are they here called the
least, because the Transgression thereof is inded little sin, but because in
respect of the other, they are little, it being a less sin to desire, then to
commit Adultery, and to say, Thou fool, then to murder. S. James explicateth
himself to speak of great sins, for immediately he says, for he that said.
Thou shall not commit Adultery, said also, Thou shall not kill etc. Now the
reason why he says, He that offends in one is made guilty of all, is given
by E^. ^9, ad Hieron.
S. Au^tine to be this, Because all Commandments are reduced to this one of
Charity, as S. Paul Romans 3^.^.
teaches, from whence it follows, that who transgresses any one
Commandment, violateth Charity, and thereby the whole law. In which Aut^. oper.
imperf. in Mat. ^0 33.
he is not unlike to that man who leaving one part or member of his Body
unarmed, receives therein a deadly wound, though the rest be armed and fenced.
Lastly as S. James said, he that offends in one is made guilty of all, so
likewise he said of himself and other just men, C. ^.2.3.
In many things we offend all, which doubtless cannot be understood of damnable
sins.

CHAP. XXX. The true State of the Question, concerning the Author, and Cause
of Sin. Whether God does Will, Decree, Predestinate, Counsel, or Compel
men to sin, or to be damned, or only permits the same; and that man
himself is cause of his own Sin, and Damnation: And whether Christ dyed for
all men, or only for the Predestinate?
SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
SO blasphemous and abominable is the Doctrine of sundry Protestants making
God the Author and Cause of all sins that men commit, that for an Eternal
Condemnation thereof the Catholic Church has Decreed, that, Council. Trid.
Sess. 6. Can. 6.
If any shall say, that it is not in man's power to make his ways evil, but
that God works as well evil deeds as good, not only by permission, but
properly and by himself, in so much that the treason of Judas is no less his
proper work, then the calling of Paul, Anathema. And, Can. 17.
If any shall say, that the grace of Justification does not happen but to those
who are Predestinate to life: and that all others who are called, are indeed
called, but do not receive grace, as by Gods power being Predestinate to evil,
Anathema.

In the second Council Arausicanum it is defined that, Conc. Araufi^an. 2.
cap. 23.
Men do their own will, not Gods, when they do that which displeases God.
And, Cap. 25.
Any to be Predestinate to evil by Gods power, we do not only not believe, but
if there be any that will believe so great an Evil with all detestation we
denounce Anathema against them.

In the Council of Valence it is taught that, Conc. Valent. sub Leone P. 4.
Cap. 2.
Gods foreknowledge does not impose necessity to any that he cannot do
otherwise: but that which he was to be of his own will, he, as God, who
knows all things before they be done, forknoweth by his own Omnipotency and
immutable Majesty etc. Neither do therefore evil men perish, because they could
not be good, but because they would not be good, and remained through their
own fault, in the mass of damnation, either by Original desert, or also
actual. And, Cap. 3.
we confidently confess the Predestination of the elect to life, and the
Predestination of the wicked to death: but in the Election of those that are to
be saved, the mercy of God did go before the good desert, but in the damnation
of those that perish, the evil desert goes before the just Judgment of God
etc. But any by Gods power to be Predestinate to evil, as though they could
not do otherwise, we do not only not believe, but if there be any who will
believe so great an evil, with all detestation according to the Council of
Arausicanum, we denounce Anathema against them.

According to these Counsels the Catholic Bellar. de ami^^. Gra. and statu
Pe^. l. 2 c. 8. Rhem. Test. in Mat. 13.15.
Church still reaches, that God does not Predestinate, Command, Counsel, o^
Compel men to Sin, but only permits Sin: the true Causes whereof are the
Devil, and Man himself.

Points Disputable.
Some S. Tho. q. 6. de veritate art. 1. Alex. Halens in 1. p. Summae. q. 28.
number 2. art. 1.2.
Schoolmen teach, that Predestination formally consists in the act of Gods
understanding, whereby the Predestinate are efficaciously ordained to a
supernatural end by supernatural means. Scotus in, 1. Did. 40. q vnica. S.
Bonauent. ead Did. art. 1. q. 2.
Others place it essentially in the act of the Will, whereby the Predestinate
are chosen by God.

Some Durand. 1. Did 41. q. 1 n. 10.
teach, that the effect of Predestination is only the means whereby the
Predestinate attain to beatitude, but not the attayning of the end it self.
Occam. 1. Did. 41. q. vnica Gabr. 1 Did. 40. q. vnica. art 1.
Others teach the direct contrary: And Communis Theologorum.
others most probably make both the means, and the attayning of the end, the
effect.

Some Tho. de Argent. in. 1. Did. 41. q. vnica. ad. 2.
though very untruly, make the meritorious Cause of Predestination according to
all the effects thereof, such good moral works as go before the Grace of
Justification. Apud Durand. 1. Did. 41 q. 2.
Others deny this of those moral Works, but grant it of such as follow
Justification. Heuric. Gandau. quod lib. 4. q. 19. and quodl. 8. q. 5.
Others deny it of works following Justification, if they be considered as
proceeding from the freewill of man, but not as they proceed from the grace of
God. S. Th. 1. p. q. 13. art. 5. Ale. Halens. p. 1. q. 28. mem. 3 art. 3. and
others.
But the most probable opinion is, that it Predestination be considered,
according to all the effects thereof, there is no meritorious cause at all in
him that is Predestinate, but all is to be referred to the mere Will and Grace
of God, though also it is most true that God ordinarily does Predestinate only
those of years of discretion, whom he forknoweth from all eternity to
cooperate with his divine grace, even to the end.

Some Magist. 1. Did. 40. Durand. ib. q. 2.
teach, that in the reprobate, there is not any meritorious cause of his
reprobation, in reguard of all the effects thereof, to wit, Gods permission of
his Sins, and his eternal Punishment. S. Bonau. 1. Did. 41. art. 1 q. 1.
Heruaeus 1. Did. 40. q. vnica art. 2.
Others affirm those sins wherewith a Reprobate departs out of this life,
to be the meritorious cause thereof.

Protestant untruths.
D. White demands, Way to the true Church Pref. to the Reader n 12
Who will believe that any can be so impious that houldeth there is a God, as
to make him the Author of Sin, and yet they shame not to say we do it: Nor
it seems that M. White shameth to deny it, but he shall see it plainly in the
next Paragraph of Protestant Doctrine.

M. Rogers writes Def. of the Art. art. 21. p 183.
The Savior of men is Jesus Christ a man, and came into the world to save no
women but men, say some Papists: And redeemed the superior world only, which
is man, said Postellus the Jesuit: and yet not all men neither, for S. Francis
has redeemed so many as are saved since his days, say the Franciscan Friars.
The Savior of women, from her time till the end of the world, is S. Clare,
affirm some other Papists: as Postellus says, It is one Mother Jane. The
Savior of men and women is S. Mary through her Virginitity, say some; is S.
Christina by her Passion, say other Papists etc. Christ has satisfied, and was
offered only for Original Sin, an error of Thomas Aquinas. Thus lowdly
lies Rogers: for in this one Sentence, there is not one Proposition, which is
not a pure lie, framed by himself, in hatred of Catholics and their Religion,

Protestant Doctrine.
Calvin teaches, that, Iustit. l. 3. c. 23.. 6.
God does by his Decree ordain that among men some be borne devoted from their
mothers womb, to certain perdition, who by their destruction may glorify God.
Ad acta Collo. Mont. part. alt. p. 212. 215. 216.
Beza endeavors to answer such clear Scriptures as teach that Christ dyed
for the Sins of the whole world. And as concerning our Sins, Swinglius
teaches that, Tom. 1. de Prouid. Dei. fol. 365.
When we commit Adultery or murder, it is the work of God: God being the
mouer, the author, and the incyter. Calvin and Beza maintain that, our sins
are not by Gods permission only, but also by his Decree and will. Inst. l. 1.
c. 4. sect. 3. 4. etc. c. 18. sect. 1. Beza in the Display of Popish Practices.
p. 76. Fulk ag Rh. Test. in c. 6. Mat. sect. 6. and in. 3. ad To. sect. 4. and
in. ^. ad To. sect. 2. and in Art. 28. sect. 2.
I have now (says Calvin) showed clearly enough, God to be called the Author
of all those things, which those censurers will have only to happen by his idle
permission, which are Sins: And, 1. Instit. c. 14.. 3.
I do acknowledge this to be my Doctrine; Adam to have fallen, not only by Gods
permission, but also by his secret Counsel etc. De Prou. p. 73^.
Though Adam destroyed himself and others, yet it is necessary to ascribe the
corruption and guilt to the secret Judgment of God Ib. p. 738
I confess I have written, the fall of Adam to have been ordained by the
hidden Dec^ee of God. Zanchius grants that, De Praedest. c. 3. ^o. 7. Col.
1^3.
There are not vulg^r (Prot.) nor unlearned men, which do easily grant this,
that some are Predestinate by the Lord to Sin. And ^bid. c 4. Col. 318.
It cannot be denied, but that some are Predestined to induration and
execration. This Part. 2. Th^ss p 167.
Doctrine of Predestination (as Polanus thinks) is the foundation, and
chiefest part of the Gospel, to wit, of Protestants.

Calvin Inst. l 1. c. 17.. 11. etc. 18. de Pro. p 739 746. Beza in abst. Calu.
Hethu^i^ p 317. 324. 382.
and Beza do in sundry places expressly teach that, God does not only permit,
but command Satan to lie and deceive men. And heerof Beza says, Ib. p. 318.
In this Doctrine is placed the Sum of our Salvation, and comfort.

Calvin, Inst. l. 1. c. 18. 4. and de Praed. p. 717. Beza de Praedest cont.
Cast p 401. Pe^. Mart. in c. 9. Rom p. 363. and in c. 1. p. 37.
Beza, and Peter Martyr, do in several places defend that, God does enforce,
and compel men to sin, and the Devil to tempt them. And of this Doctrine
Peter Martyr says, In loc. class. 1. c 15. 9
That we can less understand, how it does not fight with Gods Justice to
punish sins, and yet by tempting to enforce them to them, it is no marvel,
for God can do more then we understand.

Calvin, Beza, and other Prot. teach, that, Inst. l. 3. c. 23. 9. Beza de
Praed. p. 391. Swingl. de Prouid. c. 6. fol. 366.
God does necessitate and compel men to sin: and yet, that men so
necessitated shall be damned for the same. Yea (says Calvin) Inst. l. 3. c. 23..
3.
that I may a hundred times confess God to be the Author (of damnation) which
is most true. And, In Romans 7.14.
that God electeth some, reprobateth others, the cause is not elsewhere to be
sought for, then in his intention. Beza avouches that, De Pred. vol. 3. Theol.
p. 438.
God of his mere will, and therefore no respect had of worth or indignity, has
predestined to hatred and destruction those whom he thought good etc. This he
calls Ib p. 406
The foundation of our faith. Grinaeus and other Prot. teach that, Apud
Schlusselb. l 4. Theol. Calu. Art. 8. p. 76.
Sins are not the Cause that men are damned. In reguard of the premises Beza
is enforced to say, De Praedest. cont. Castal. p. 340.
We think it a question inexplicable to man's sense, how God is not in fault,
if he ordain the Causes of Damnation. And let all Prot. who believe this
Doctrine, tremble to think in what miserable case they are, seeing D. Whitaker
says, Cont. Camp. rat. 8. p 215.
If Calvin, Peter Martyr, Melancthon, or Luther, or any of ours affirm God to
be the Author of sin. I will not deny, but that we are all guilty of horrible
blasphemy and wickedness. A large and desperate offer.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
Vincentius writing against this Error, says, L Cont. Haer post med.
Who before Simon Magus etc. durst affirm God the Creator, to be the author
of our wicked deeds etc. And who before Nouatianus, that God would rather the
death of him that dies, then that he should return and live? Hereof also says
S. Austine, Ad Articulos sibi falso impositos, art. 10.
It is an hateful and abominable opinion to believe, that God is the author
of any evil will, or action. And the same Error Haer. 66.
he condemns in Florinus. And the like does L. 1. c. 29. Tertul. cont.
Marcion. l. 1. c. 2.
S. Irenaeus, and Tertullian in Marcion.

There were also certain Prateolus, verbo Praedestinati. Genebrar^ in Sozimo.
Sigebert Anno 415. Baron. Anno 490. n. 17.
Heretics called Predestinates, who taught that neither good deeds would
profit the good, nor evil deeds hurt the wicked, but that all things depended
only of Gods absolute Predestination, or Reprobation; whereupon they auerted the
good from doing good deeds, and incited the bad to do worse. Yea it is related
amongst the Sand. haer. 125. ex Cedreno in Heraclio.
Errors of Mahomet, that he taught God to be the Author of all evil.

Protestant Errors.
No Error can be more gross and impious, then the Protestant Doctrine related
before; only add herunto the great crime that Danaeus imputes to Bellarmine,
saying, Controu. 1. quaest. 14. p. 30.
Bellarmine says, Christ is predestinate the Son of God, which is
Arrianisme. And the same is taught by L. 1. de Praedest.. 70.
Affelmannus.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that God does not Predestinate, will,
Decree, Counsel, or compel men to sin, or to be damned, but only
permits the same: And that Christ dyed not only for the Predestinate, but
for all men whatsoever.
TO confute these blasphemies by the sacred Scriptures, they teach us that god
wills not sin, or the death of a sinner, but that he convert and live; as
also that he hates and forbids sin. Ezech 18.32.
I will not the death of him that dies, says our Lord, return ye and live.
Ib c. 33. 11.
I will not the death of the impious, but that the impious convert from his
way, and live. Convert convert ye from your most evil ways. And, why will
you dye o house of Israel? Isa. 5.3.4.
Judge between me and my vineyard, what is there that I ought to do more to my
vineyard and have not done to it? whether that I looked it should yield grapes,
and it has yielded wild grapes? Thou Ps. 5.3.
art not a God that wills iniquity. Because these words, Ps. 5.5.
Thou art not a God that wilt iniquity, do prove that God does not will sin,
therefore the Anno 1568.
Geneuians instead hereof do translate, Thou do not love iniquity. And, Thou
Anno 1588. 1610.
do not delight in iniquity, that so they may defend their Error, that God
wills iniquity for some end; although he neither love it, nor delight in it.
And the same corruption is made by In sua versione lat. Anno 1603.
Tremellius and Apud Vorstium in Paras^eue. c. 3.
Piscator. Ps 5.7.
Thou hate all them that work iniquity Sap. 14.9.
The wicked man and his wickedness are hateful to God. Eccles. 15.21. And see
Ierem. 19.5.
He has commanded no man to do ungodly. Iac. 1.13. Eccl. 15.11.12.
Let no man when he is tempted say, that he is tempted of God; for God is not a
tempter of evils, and he tempts no man. These textes are most clear to
prove, that God does not will, command, or tempt men to sin, but wishes
their Conversion and hates sin.

Because these words of Ezechiel, Ezech. 33.11.
I will not the death of a sinner, but that he convert from his way and live,
do prove that God wills not the death of a sinner, Musculus instead thereof
translateth thus, In loc. tit. de veritate Dei. p. 452.
I do not delight in the death of a sinner; and the same is used by In hunc
locum.
Tremellius and Piscator, In These. l. 2. p. 187.
that so God may be thought to will the death of a Sinner, though he do not
delight therein. Other places attribute sin and damnation to our selves, and
all our goodness to God, Ose. 13.8. Ezech. 24.19. Isa 65.12. Prou. 1.24. Mat.
23.37.
Perdition is thine o Israel, only in me is thy help. Io. 8.44.
When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, because he is a liar and the
Father thereof. 1. Io. 3.8.
He that commits sin is of the Devil etc. For this appeared the son of
God, that he might dissolve the works of the Devil. So that by these places
it appears that sin proceeds not from God, but from the Devil and the
sinner himself.

All such places as convince that Christ would have all saved, and dyed for
all, confirm the same, 1. Tim. 2.4.6.
God will all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, who
gave himself a Redemption for all; 1. Io. 1.29.
who took away the sins of the world. Who was 1. Io. 2.2.
the reconciliation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole world, and sundry 2. Cor. 5.15. Romans 8.32. Heb. 2.^. Io.
4.42. 2. Pet 3.9. Apoc. 3.10. Isa. 5.3.4. Ezech. 18.32.33.11.
such like.

To these places Prot. answer, That they are only understood of the Elect, and
not of all in general. Beza, In Colloq. Montisbel. p. 442. and part. 2. resp.
ad acta illius colloq. p. 231.
It is clear that Peter speaks only to the faithful Zanchius, L. 5 de Not.
Dei. c. 2. col. 564.
It is only understood of the Elect. In Mat. 6. p. 169.
Bucer, It is understood of them only whom he has chosen to this purpose, that
they may be converted and live: so restrayning universal Propositions to
particular; which herin they do so unjustly, that Iacobus Andraeas In Mat. 6.
p. 1^9.
In colloq. Montisbel p. 422.
in dislike thereof says, This sentence of Peter is so plain, that it can by
no means admit this false Interpretation. Yea, In Colloq Montisbel. p. 419.
it is m^n^fest impiety and abominable doctrine, against the express letter
of a Promise universal, to make a particular. And, P. 411.
It is horrible to be heard, so plain and universal vocation, to devise ^o be
particular. Agreeable also says Gerlachius, Tom. 2. Disp. 24.
Whenever in Scripture there is an universal proposition, it is to be
limited by no distinction, v^les the same be grounded upon certain and clear
words of Scripture otherwise every doctrine may be shifted of with the subtili
y of distinstions. So little helps this Evasion, even in the Judgment of
Protestants.

Yea the Scriptures teach that Christ dyed even for the reprobate, and those
that are damned: 1. Tim. 4 10.
We hope in the living God, which is the Savior of all men, especially of the
faithful. 2. Pet. 2.1.
In you there shallbe lying Masters, which shall etc. deny him that has
bought them, the Lord; bringing upon themselves speedy perdition: 1. Cor. 8.11
Romans ^4.15.
through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish for whom Christ has
dyed? Heb. 10.29.
How much more think you does he deserve worse punishment which has trodden
the Son of God under foot, and esteemed the Blood of the Testament polluted,
wherein he is sanctified. Here the wicked man, who, as Prot. affirm, See the
Marg. notes of the Engl. Bible of Anno 1576. in Heb. 10.29.
commi^teth sin against the holy Ghost, being therefore a reprobate, is yet
said to be j,:ncl:jyed in thehlrud of Christ, which could not be, unless it had
been shed for him. Here Prot. are enforced to corrupt the Scriptures: for
because these words, 1. Tim. 4.10.
Who is the Savior of all men especially the faithful, do show Christ to have
redeemed all men, Beza Ibid.
instead of Savior, places a Preserver. saying, Because the name of Savior
has troubled some, in reguard that it somewhat favors life eternal to be
gained in Christ, therefore that I might eschew the doubtful signification of
the word I rather call him, Preserver. Wherein Tremellius also follows him.

Beza Display of Popish Practices. p. 186. 190. 191. and in colloq. Montiab p.
1. p. 182. 183. and part. 1. p. 173. Danaeus Isagog. part. 4. l. 3. c. 38. p.
204. Kinnedoncius in his redempt. of mank. p 170. 162. Willet. Synop. p. 7^6.
Luther de ser. Arb. Tom. 2. f. 450.
and sundry other Prot. in answer to all the former places do affirm and
teach. A double will in God; the one secret, fearful, and unsearchable; the
other, the revealed will of God in his word. Affirming herupon that, he will
not the death of a Sinner in his will revealed in his word, but wills it by
his unsearchable will. But if God would not the death of a sinner by his will
revealed in his word, why then do Prot. urge from his said word, that he
wills the death of a Sinner, as of Esau, Pharao etc. And if that other
unknown will be not revealed in the Scriptures, from whence then have they
knowledge of such a will in God, unless it be from their own vain
Imaginations? Besides, if God by his forsaid revealed will, would seriously and
in truth the Conversion and Salvation of a sinner, and yet by his forsaid
secret will, would it not; then he does plainly will contraries, which to
think, were absurd. And if to avoid this contrariety in God, Protestants only
mean, that by his said revealed will, he would not seriously and indeed the
salvation of the said sinner, but only makes outward show by promise in word,
as though he willed the same: this then were his revealed dissimulation, rather
then his revealed will, which to say were blasphemous: so insufficient every
way is this answer, either to satisfy the former plainest textes of Scripture,
or to vphould this so impious doctrine of the Caluinistes.

But because some Kinnedon. in his redempt. of mank. p. 161.
demand, why all are not saved, if God would have them so indeed, seeing, Ps
113.3.
He does whatsoever he will? I answer with sundry Hiper. Meth. Theol. l. 1. p.
156. Muscul. loc. com. de volunt. Dei. p. 415. Piscat. Vol. These. Theol. p.
174. Heming. de universe. great. p. 16. A mandus Polanus partition. Theol. l. 1
p. 10. 12.
Prot. that God wills some things absolutely, and those do evermore
accordingly come to pass; other things he wills both seriously and truly,
and yet but conditionally, if we our selves will, as our Conversion,
Repentance, and the like: so it is said, Ezech. 18.21.23. and 33.11.19.
The wicked man shall live, if he will turn from his ways And Apoc. 3.20.
If any man will hear my voice, and open the gate, I will come into him In
these things God does not enforce our wills, but gives us condition of Deuteronomy.
30.19. Eccles. 15.17.
Choice, as 1. Cor. 10.23.
not suffering us to be tempted above our power: And therefore though these
things come not always to pass answerably to Gods foresaid will, the cause
thereof yet is through want, not of Gods will, but of our own will not
assenting to his: which our default, contray to Gods foresaid Conditional will,
himself plainly yet further signifies, as where it is said, Ezech. 24.13.
I would cleanse thee, and thou art not cleansed from thy filthiness but Marg.
notes of the Eng. Bibles, in Ezech. 24.13.
would not Prou. 1.24.
I called and you refused. Isa 65.12.
I called and you have not answered: I spoke, and you have not heard etc. and
you have chosen the things that I would not. And to Jerusalem, Man. 23.37.
How often would I etc. and you would not. And hence it is, that the wicked are
said to Act. 7.51.
resist the holy Ghost: So clearly are we taught by the sacred Scriptures,
that God does not decree or will the Sin or damnation of men, but that he
desires their Salvation, and dyed for all men.

SECT. III. That the Fathers expound the Scriptures in proof that God does not
will or command Sin: And that Christ dyed for all.
THe Ancient Fathers were so careful and zealous in clearing God from being
the Cause or Author of sin, that S. Eusebius. l. 5. hist c. 19.
Irenaeus writ a whole work against that Heresy; S. Basil a whole Oration;
Theodoret Ser. 5. ad Graecos.
confirms the same at large with the testimonies of Plato, and other
Philosophers; S. Austine writ three books of freewill, chiefly to prove, that
God is not the cause of Sin: and S. L. 1. ad Mominum.
Fulgentius in a whole book disputes this questions, whether sins be done
by Gods Predestination, which is the selfsame we argue now with Prot. and he
concludes with us negatiuely.

S. Cyprian affirms that, L. 4. Ep. 2.
Seeing it is written, Sap. 1.13.
God made not Death, neither does he rejoice in the perdition of the living,
that he that would have no man perish, desires sinners to do Penance etc.
evil deeds come not from the holy Ghost but from the instinct of the Adversary
etc. Haer. 66. quae est Manich. prope init.
It is absurd (says S. Epiphanius) to ascribe malice to God, and the Character
of divine and Ecclesiastical Scripture does confess, that God is far etc.
from Evil. For God made nothing evil, but all things very good as being good
by nature etc. neither therefore was evil always, nor was it made by God.

S. Ambrose demands, L. 1. Examer^n. c. 8.
how God can beget malice, seeing the Prophet cries, Cease from your malice?
and especially S. David says, Cease from evil, and do good: How therefore do
we make our Lord the beginner thereof? But this brutish opinion is theirs, who
would have the Church troubled.

S. Hierome expounding those words of the Apostle, Who made all things
according to the Counsel of his will, says, Comment. in c. 1. ad Ephesians.
Not that all things which are done in the world, are done by his will and
Counsel, for then evils (or sins) should be impu^ed to him; but that all
things which he does, he does by Counsel, and will. In like sort upon those
words, God created man right, he Comment. in Eccl. c. 7.
wri^eth, Lest he should seem to make God the Author of Evil, he wisely
forwarned, and affirms, that we are created good by God, but because we are
left with freewill, by our own fault we slide to worse.

S. Austine avouches that, De spir. and lit c. 31.
We no where read there is no will (or desire) but from God, and it is well not
to be written, because it is not true; for otherwise God is the Author of
sins, which God forbid. And in another place, De lib. arb. l. 3. c. 16.
I do not find at all neither that it can be found, nor indeed is, I do
confirm, how our Sins can be ascribed to our God, when as in them I find him
praysworthy, not only because he punishes them, but also, that they are then
done, when his truth is left. Yea yet further, Ad Art. sibi falso impos. Art.
10.
It is a hateful and abominable opinion to believe, that God is the Author of
any ill will, or Action.

Of the Fathers belief in this point Calvin says: Instit. l. 2. c. 4 sect. 3.
The Ancient Fathers were sometimes over religiously fearful to confess the
truth in this matter etc. not Austine was free sometimes from that
superstition, as where he says, That induration and execration pertain not to
the working of God, but to his foreknowledge. If Prot. had that religious fear
which they reprove in the Fathers, they would not so execrably blaspheme,
making God the Author of sin.

SECT. IV. That Protestant writers do teach the same doctrine with Catholics,
against God being the author of sin, or Damnation.
MAny of the learned Prot. both Lutherans and Caluinistes do join with us in
this Doctrine against Calvin and Beza; A thing so evident, that Perkins wrote a
special Treatise, De Praedestinationis modo and ordine Ep. ad Lect.
Vt criminationes etc. that he might do away the blame imposed upon the truth:
or says he, as they call it, the Caluinian Doctrine and appease the displeased
minds of certain brethren. Willet also confesses and disliketh that, Synop.
p. 784. 808.
Universality of Grace seems to be much approved even of some of our own
Country men, and has already gotten some Patron in our Church: the Doctrine
whereof was preached by D. Harsnet at Paul's. Couell teaches that, Def. of
Hook. p. 81.
God has a general inclination to save all. And that Ibid. p. 62. 63.
with a Conditional will, he wills all men to be saved, who therefore that
they are not, is not his Decree, but their own fault. Sutcliffe charge
Cartwright Examinat. of Cartwright. Apol. fol. 19.
with blasphemy, for that he said, that God does blast men's pens with a lying
spirit, attributing the wicked action to God. Nappier teaches that, Upon
Revel. c. 15. p. 190.
Temtation and evil is only from the permission of God. Fox says, In Apoc.
p. 473.
Seeing the benefit of Redemption, which takes away the sins of the world,
is an universal thing; it is demanded whether the Grace of this Redemption do
appertain equally to all the Posterity of Adam, or be restrained to a certain
number? I answer says he, that the incredulity of men, and no default of the
Lamb makes this restraint: which restraint, says he, comes to pass, not
through any defect of the Re^eemer but through the fault of men, who receive
not the Grace of Redemption. Yea this Doctrine of Reprobation taught by some
Prot. is according to Kinnedoncius, Redempt. of mank. l. 1. c. 11. p. 31.
Satanicall Frantic; to Melancthon, Loc. com. de causa pec. and conting.
Hurtful to manners; to Christmanus Di^g^aphe Electi nis p. 94.
wicked; to Rungius Disp. 15. ex Ep. Pauli etc. disp. 14. These. 10.
Blasphemous; to And^aeas Epit. Colloq. Mon^t^b p. 54.
a horrible doctrine.

Beza is for his contrary Doctrine publicly reprehended by Andraeas, In resp.
Bezae ad acta Colleq. Montisb p. 251.
and Haffenrefferus: And Calvin, Beza and Z^nchius are reproved by Theol. Calu.
l. 1. art. 12. fol. 39. 40. 41.
Schlusselburge. And Calvin by Gesnerus, Disp. pro sancto. lib. concor. disp.
3. c. 3. p. 60. 61. 62.
Lobechius, Disp. Theol. disp. 1. p. 14. and disp. 21. p. 507. 508 509.
and Haffenrefferus. Loc. Theol. l 3. p. 112. 188.
Also Hemingius, Enchir. etc. class. 3. p. 220. 221. 222.
Hiperius, Meth. Theol. l. 2. p. 431. 435. 436. 438.
Manlius, Loc. com. p. 104.
Chemnitius, En^hyrid p. 158.
and Brachmanus Cent. exercit. Theo. q. 223 p 316. q. 14. p. 319.
do allege many Scriptures to prove, that God does not ordain any man to
damnation, but that he would all men saved, and that he dyed for all.

Paraeus affirms, that, In Colloq. T^^ol. 1. disp. 13.
The Cause of positive reprobation is the wickedness of the reprobate, because
as God does punish no man in time but only for sins, so also he has decreed
from eternity to punish no man.

Snecanus (though otherwise a great Ib. p. 182. 525. 649.
admirer and follower of Calvin and Beza) is nevertheless so full and Ib. p.
182. 525. 649.
evident, that Willet reprehendeth him, calling him therefore, Synop. pa. 18^.
80^.
A Patron of universal Grace, Bullinger teaches in like manner that, Upon
the Apoc. ser. 28 f. 7^.
The Lord has dyed for all, but that all men are not made partakers of this
Redemption, is through their own fault, for the Lord excludes no man. And of
the like Judgment is M^rg^rita Theol. page 277. 285. 283. 296. 298.
Adamus Francisci alleging many Scriptures in proof of his opinion.

M. Hooker is so plain in affirming that, Eccl. Pol. p. 104.
Gods general inclination is, that all men might be saved, that he is
therefore specially reproved by the Christian letter to Hook. p. 16.
Puritanes. M. Gibbens m^keth a special discourse hereof, affirming that
Questions upon Gen q ^. p 103.
Surely there was no cause in God either in his will, or in his knowledge or
Decree, that man should fall. And that, Ib. page 109. 100.
God wills or decrees things that are evil, not to do, or cause them to be
done, or will them, but permit, or suffer them etc. God only willing to permit
them. And the same is taught by Amandus Partit. Theol. l. 1. p. 75. 76. and 10.
11. 11. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. Col. 348.
Polanus, and the Centurists.

Melancthon and others do allege Scriptures to prove Meth. discript. p. 410.
that, Lo^. com. de causa pec. and conting. and in Consil. Theol. part. 2 p.
111. 112. Keckerman. in System. Th^ol. p. 102. Brach. Cent Exer^. p. 319. 320.
God wills not our Sin: and that Pharaos heart was hardened by Gods
permission, not by his will. And Melancthon says concerning Saul, Loc. com. c.
de causa peccati.
God foresaw the sins of Saul, but he willed them not, neither does he force
his will, but permits, that the will of Saul may so rage, and he does not
force that he do otherwise. And many texts of Scripture are alleged to the
same end by Loc. com. Tom. 1. de Praedest. f 31. 32. 79. 80. Snecan. Meth.
descript. p. 621. etc. Bulling. in Dec. in Engl p. 492.
Sarcerius, Snecanus, and Bullinger. Yea Willet himself affirms that, Synop
p. 789. 799.
God decrees not, but only forseeth sinful works: and that Ib. p. 800.
God forseeth, but wills not Sin.

Christmanus has published a whole Diagraphe Electionis etc.
Book of this matter directly against Calvin, and other Prot. that join with
him; wherein the title of the eight Chapter is, De Caluinianorum absoluto
decreto. Of the ninth Chapter, De obiectionum pro absoluto Decreto refutatione.
And of the tenth, Rations immotae contra Caluinianorum absolutum Decretum, and
quod Deus vult omnes homines saluos fieri.

Hemingius has written a special De gratia universal etc.
Treatise of this Argument, for which Willet Synep. p. 784.
reprehendeth him, for that therein he teaches that it is in man's power to give
assent to grace offered, and to believe. And himself avouches that, Caluins
De Great. universe p. 111.
opinion fights with the word of God, calling and inuiting all to repentance
etc. And, that many are brought into despair, whilst with that opinion the
Doctrine of universal grace is overthrown. Yea Ib p. 77.
he charge his Brethren with ten several Errors in this matter, all which
he does there particularly set down.

Marbachius also has written a Treatise, the title whereof is, Disputatio
Theologica de universally Dei voluntate erga totum genus humanum, aduersus eos
qui ad solos Electos and Credentes eam restringere conantur. Conra^us
Schl^sselburg affirms that, Theol. Calu. l. 1. c. 6. de redempt. Christi.
The Divinity of Caluinistes teaches Christ to have dyed only for the Elect:
Yea, he affirms that the merit of Christ cannot be opposed to the Judgment of
God etc. Are not these Revelations upon the Revelation, as D. Luther was
acc^stomed to say of new and obscure worms, and tryfles of Fanaticall men etc.
The words of John the Apostle are clear enough, for he has said Christ to
have dyed not only for the sins of the Apostles, and the Elect, but he
adds, to have satisfied for the sins of the whole world.

In brief, Castalio L. ad Calvin. de Praedest.
writes herin against Calvin, and Andraeas Epitom. Colloq. Montisb. p. 49. 53.
against Beza: and after many Scriptures alleged against Bez' as forsaid
doctrine, he concludes that it is, Ib p. 47.
Horrendum auditu, fearful to be heard. Yea the Prot See the letters Senatus
Bern^nsis ad Ministros etc. Anno 1555.
Magistrates of Berna made it penal for any of their Territory to preach
Caluins forsaid doctrine, or for the people to read any of his Books
containing the forsaid doctrine. And yet such is the inconstancy of Calvin, as
that sometimes he affirms, that, In. 1. Joan. c. 2.
This common opinion of the Schools is true, Christ suffered sufficiently for
the whole world, but efficaciously for the Elect alone.

SECT. V. Reasons to prove that God does not will, command, or enforce men to
Sin, or to be damned, but that he only permits the same.
1. Whosoever does Command or enforce a man to do any thing, is the Principal
Author of the same thing, and is so reputed by all, neither does the natural
light of reason suffer us to deny it. Besides the wicked man when he sins
(according to Prot.) is the Instrument of God, but he that uses the Instrument
is the Principal author of that work, which is wrought by the Instrument.
Ergo.

Some answer heerto, that though God command or enforce men to sin, yet the
said sins, are not sins, as they proceed from God so enforcing, but as they
proceed from the wicked mind and wicked intention of man: In so much that God
in those actions does propose to himself a good Calu. Inst. l 1. c. 17.. 5.
Swing. loc. de Prouid c. 6.
end, to wit, the manifestation of his mercy and Justice, by showing mercy to
some, and condemning others, whereas man does propose his own lust or pleasure.
But this does not satisfye, for first it is not lawful to Romans 3.8.
do evil, that there may come good; as to steal, for to give Alms, or to
commit fornication, to beget Children. Besides I would know, whether the evil
intention of man, which causes it to be sin in man, is commanded and
forcibly caused by God or no. If it be, then is God plainly the author of
sin, that evil Intention being it, which causes the action to be evil, and
to be sin. And that he is this Author, according to them it is evident, for
sin is not sin (as they teach) but by reason of the evil Intention,
wherefore if he force them to sin, he forces them to the evil Intention. And
if God to show his mercy and Justice decreed from all Eternity, that man should
sin, and sin is not sin except it be done with evil Intention, it
follows clearly, that God decreed that man should work with evil intention.
And because the Decree of God cannot be uncertain, not depending of the
freewill of man, it further follows; that God did forcibly procure, that man
should work with evil intention, and so be no less Author of the Evil
Intention, then of the work it self.

Others seek to euade by affirming, that, God does not will sin in that
formal respect as it is Sin, but for some other end: But so neither the
Devils themselves do will sin, for as so, it is a mere privation of Good,
whereas the reason or object of willing, must needs be in some respect good.

Aretius further replyeth saying, Loc. Com. p. 130. and Zwingl. loc. de Prouid.
c. ^.
We answer, God having no Superior, can have no law prescribed him, and sin
has only place, where there is a law; and that hence it follows, that in the
Actions of God there is no sin: And so in the same work the will of man
transgresses the law, and is evil, and the will of God transgresses not the
law, and is not evil. But though God has no law imposed upon him by any
Superior, yet his wisdom and nature is as a law unto him, wherefore no less
is he bound not to impugn his own wisdom, then man Gods law: And so if God
should force men to commit those things which are contrary to his Eternal law,
and so to his divine wisdom, as to commit adultery etc. then should his will
be evil, being contrary to the right rule of his divine wisdom, which were
God to deny himself, which is impossible. Again, if God command a man to
sin, man is bound to obey his Command, and so a man committing Adultery,
sins against one of his Commandementes, and sins not in executing Gods
will and Decree, and so God enforcing him, will have him to sin, and will not
have him to sin. Lastly, though God having no Superior can have no law
imposed upon him, other then his own wisdom, and so thereby cleared from sin
in himself, yet this avails nothing to clear him from being the author and
cause of sin in us, which is the only point here in question. Add yet
herunto, what an impiety it is to teach, that God damneth men for doing those
things, which himself commands and compels them to do.

2. If God does intend, decree, command, and compel men to sin, it further
follows, that he is not only the Author and cause of sin in us, but that he
himself truly sins, which is extreme blasphemy to avouch: for therefore are
men said to sin, because they are free and particular causes of such actions,
as are contrary to reason, and the Eternal law of God: But according to Prot.
God concurreth to the forsaid actions, not only as an universal cause (as
Catholics teach) but even according to Calvin, Instit. l. 2. c. 4.. 2.
as a particular Cause, willing, and commanding them as they are such in
particular, which is nothing else but truly and properly to sin. Yea In
Aphorism. 22.
Beza teaches, that God does not only move and compel his Instruments to such
actions, which in reguard of the Instruments are sin, but also that he
creates the said Instruments, that is, men to that end, that they should
perform those actions which he intended and decreed from all Eternity: whereof
it necessary follows, that the said evil actions, as they are such in
particular, were intended by God, and so to be attributed to him as the
principal cause, and so consequently, that he truly and properly sins: This
necessary Consequence enforced Beza to say, De Praedest. ont. Castal. p. 3^0.
We think it a question inexplicable to man's senses, how God is not in fault,
if he ordain the Cause of damnation.

Calvin Instit. l. 1. c. 17.. 3.
would euade by affirming, that as the sun does cause in a dead Carcass
noisome smells, and yet the beams thereof contract no impurity, so may God be
cause of sin in us, and yet not sin himself. But this is many ways
impertinent; for first before all concourse of the sun, it is supposed, that
the Body is already dead and disposed to corruption, for in a sound body the
sun beams cannot produce any such effect: but according to Prot. God moved
Adam and Satan to sin, when they were in perfect and innocent state.
Secondly the sun is only an universal cause, which intends not corruption,
but heat, which heat of it self is indifferent to produce different Effects,
and is limited and determined by secondary and particular causes to produce
rather one effect then another, as might be exemplifyed in an Apple, or
perfume, and a dead Carcass, whereas according to them, God concurreth
particularly, intending, comma^ding, and forcibly procuring such actions as are
sin. Thirdly, the Sun concurreth necessarily not having free choice or
will, and that by an action not immanent, or remaining in it self, but passing
from it self into that wherein it works: whereas God concurreth freely, and
at his own will, and with such a will and desire as still remains in
himself, and therefore cannot corrupt another with sin, but must needs
remain corrupted himself, seeing that will wherewith he wills another to
Sin, is in himself, and not in another.

Thirdly, it yet further follows of this forsaid doctrine of Prot. that God
alone does only sin and not man: for it is most clear and certain, that no
man can sin in that which he cannot possibly eschew, but of necessity is
forced to do: But according to De Prouid. c. 6. Calu. Instit. l. 3. c. 23.. 7.
9. and de Praedest. p. 906.
Zwinglius and Calvin, our first Parents even in their Innocence could not
eschew Sin, but of necessity committed the same.

Fourthly, from all the Premises we may gather, that if it be intolerable
blasphemy to affirm God to be author of sin, or him only truly to Sin,
that seeing man does but that which God Commands and inforceth him to do, and
God himself being the chiefest goodness, can do no evil; that, therefore there
neither is, nor ever was any sin at all, and so by necessary seq^ele, no
Judgment, no hell, and in vain C^rists Incarnation and death for the
Redemption of Mankind: into such Atheistical blasphemies do Prot. fall.

SECT. VI. Objections from Scripture, in proof that God is the Author of
Sin, and decrees the sin or damnation of man, answered.
SVch places are objected as seem to affirm that God caused sin, Isa.
45.6.7.
I the Lord, and there is none other, that form light and create darkness, make
peace and create evil. Michae. 1.12.
Evil is descended from our Lord, into the gate of Jerusalem. Amos. 3.6.
Shall there be evil in the City which our Lord has not done? and such like.
But this is purposely answered and explained by sundry Fathers, amongst which
writes Tertullian, Cont. Marcion. l. 2. c. 14.
At all occasions God is ready, he striking and curing, killing and reviving,
humbling and exalting, creating evil and making peace, that I also may here
answer the heretics: for behold, they say, he professes himself the
Creator of evil, saying, I am he that creates evil etc. But we using a
distinction of both kinds, separating the evil of sin, and the evils of
punishment, the evils of fault and the evils of pain, do allot, to every part
their own author, the Devil the maker of the evils of sin and fault, God
the maker of the evils of Punishment and pain, that, that part may be deputed
to malice, this to Justice, creating evil Judgments against the evils of
sin. And the like Answer is made by Origin L. c. cont. Celsum.
and by S. Basil in his Hom. 9.
Homily, that God is not the author of Evils; as also by S. John Damascene
Orthod. fidei. l. 4. c. 20. Cass. Collat. 6. c. 5.
and Cassian. But S. Austine explaineth this more fully in his Dialoge with
Euodius, saying: De lib. Arb. l. 1. c. 1.
Euod. Tell me I pray thee, whether God is not the Author of Evil? Aug. I
will, If thou will make known of what evil thou demaundest. For two several
ways we use to call evil: one when we affirm any man to have done evil,
another when he has suffered evil. Euod. I desire to know of both. Aug. But
if thou know and belieuest God to be good (neither is it otherwise lawful)
he does not evil. Again, if we confess God to be just (and to deny this, it
is sacrilegious) as he gives rewards to the good, so he gives punishment to
the evil, which punishments are evils to the sufferers; Wherefore, if no man
is punished unjustly, which is necessary that we believe, seeing we believe the
whole world to be governed by divine providence, of that first kind of evils
(to wit Sins) God by no means is the Author, but of the second (to wit
punishment.) Thus clearly S. Austine. Agreably to this Engl. Bible of Anno
1576. in Esaias 45.7.
our own English Bybles in their marginall notes do expound this place of
Esaias, of the evil of punishment, as namely of war and adversity; which also
appears, more plainly by opposition of the word Peace, there next precedent.
And Nappier Upon Revel. c. 15. p. 190.
answers that of Amos 3.6. and Mat. 6.13. Pet. Mar. in loc. com. in Engl.
part. 1. p. 210. Fulke ag. Rhem. Test. fol. 12. sect. 6.
commonly objected by Caluins followers. Piscator answers that these sayings
are to be understood, Vol. 1. These. Theol. p. 175. 176. 202.
De malo non culpae, sed poenae, of the evil not of sin, but of punishment.
And the like answer is made out of S. Austine by Meth. Theol. p. 435. Bulling
Dec. p. 493.
Hiperius, and Bullinger.

Other places also are objected which seem to affirm that God decreed from
all eternity that Sins should be. Act. 4.27.28. And see act. 2.23.
There assembled in this City against thy holy Child Jesus, Herod and Pontius
Pilate etc. to do what thy Hand, and thy Council decreed to be done. But this
forces nothing, for in evil deeds it often happens, that the action is
evil and the passion good, as in the death of our Savior, his betraying and
crucifying were damnable Sins in the Jews, and his patient and charitable
suffering was meritorious and good in him. God therefore when he decreed the
death of Christ, decreed those virtuous actions which shyned in his Passion,
the wickedness of the Jews he decreed not, but only foresaw and permitted it,
which forsight and permission were sufficient to make Gods decree of Christ's
death infallible. To this purpose writes S. Epiphanius, Cont. Caianos haer.
38. Eusebius. Caesar. de Praepar. Euang. l. 6. c. 9.
Although the Scriptures say that Christ would be crucified, or that
absurdities are to be committed by us in the last days, yet none of us who do
evil, shall find excuse producing the Testimony of Scripture fortelling these
things to be hereafter; for we do them not because the Scripture has said it,
but because we were to do them, the Scripture fortelled by the forknowledge of
God etc. So also of the Cross, not because divine Scr pture said it, the Jews
crucified and Judas betrayed our Savior, but because Judas was to betray him
and the Jews to cruc^fy him, therefore the Scripture fortould in the old
Testament, and our Lord in the Gospel. The Prot. Sitzlinus also answers
this saying, In Disp. Theol. de Prouid Dei. sect 244.
The worde^ Hand, and Council, signify the good and healthful end, for which
God permitted that wicked facts of the Jews, which he did neythe^ assist nor
allow: Even as Joseph said to his Brethren, Genesis 50.20.
Ye^ thought evil against me, God disposed it to good, that he might and save
much people.

Such textes also are urged, as seem to teach that Go^ created the wicked to
that end, that in their punishment h^ might manifest his power and Justice;
Prou. 16.4.
Our Lord ha^^ wrought all things for himself, the impious also to the evil
day. Romans 9.21.
Has not the Potter of Clay, power, of the same mass, to make o^ vessel unto
honor, and another unto Contumely? Romans 9.17.
The Scripture says to Pharao, that to this purpose have I raised thee, that
in thee may show my power, and that my name may be renowned in the when Earth.
Answ. God creates not the wicked but only materially, that is, he creates
those, whom he forseeth through their own default, will be wicked, that so he
may use their iniquity, which he caused not or decreed, but only forsa^ to the
manifestation of his Justice and power. And so by that of the Proverbs is
understood, that God who worke^^ all things to his glory, has created those
whom he forsaw would be wicked, if they were created; that so in their deserved
punishment he might manifest his Justice. In like sort (as S. Austine Ep. 105.
ad Sixtum. and Ep. 106. ad Paulin.
observes) God made not of matter, which was good or indifferent, vessels unto
contumely, but of matter which was naught, contumelious, and damnable, he made
some vessels, such as the said matter required, that was to contumely, and
others of his own will and mercy to honor: Even as the Potter, of clay, being
a base matter, may make some vessels for base uses and others for noble: so
that the vessels made to contumely, have of God, that they be vessels, but of
the matter, that they be to reproach, and the other made to honor, have both of
God. And indeed, if God of matter good or indifferent, that is, if God from all
Eternity should have decreed some to damnation not forseeing their sins, it
is plain, that he could not be excused from iniquity and greatest cruelty. And
as to the last place, I say with Rupertus, In Romans 9.17.
that God forseeing Pharaos obstinacy, whereas he might have prevented him both
of life and Kingdom, did notwithstanding give him both, that so he might use
his malice to the exercise of his people, and manifestation of his own power
in his punishments. Lastly, these objections are so little forcing, that they
are all of them explained and answered by Bullinger, Dec. 3. Ser. 10. p. 493.
494. Hiper. Meth. Theol. l. 2. p. 435. 438. Snecan. Meth. descri. de Praedest.
c. 6. p. 514. 515. 520. 525. 701. Pisc. vol. 1. These. Theol. 7. p. 202. 176.
Hiperius, Snecanus, and Piscator, all of them Caluinistes. Add yet, that the
long patience mentioned in the text, wherewith God suffered the vessels of
wrath, argues, that, as Hiperius says, M^th. Th. l. 2. p. 438.
They were created good, and afterward became evil of their proper will,
being made vessels of wrath, because that voluntarily they were to become
evil. Otherwise if God had willed and decreed their destruction without
respect of their sin, how could it be said that he suffered them in long
patience? Yea the same Apostle speaking elsewhere, 2. Tim. 2.20.21.
Of vessels unto contumely, says, that if any man shall cleanse himself from
these, he shall be a vessel unto honor.

Others further object such places as seem to affirm that God moves,
compels, or comma^deth men to sin, or uses them as his Instruments of
sin. 2. Reg. 24.1.
The fury of our Lord added to be angry against Israel, and stirred up David
among them saying, Go number Israel and Judah. 2. Reg. 16.10. And see the like.
3. Reg. 22.11. Ps. 43.18. and 118.36. Mat. ^.12.
Our Lord has commanded him to curse David. Answ. The true meaning of these
and such like places is, that God permits the will to sin: and so
accordingly do other Scriptures explain them, as where it is said, Mat.
19.7.8. And see Deuteronomy. 24 1.2.
Why then did Moses command to give a bill of Divorce, and to dismiss her? He
says to them, because Moses for the hardness of your heart permitted you to
dismiss your wives, but from the beginning it was not so. So also David's
numbering of the people, is attributed to the Devil. 1. Paral. 21 1.
And Satan rose against Israel, and moved David to number Israel. Wherefore God
is only said to move David thereto, because he permitted the Devil to do it,
without which permission he had not done it. And this understanding of these
and such like places is made by S. Austine, Tract. 52. in Joan. and de Gra. and
lib. Arb. c. 20. and l. 2 ad Simpl. q. 2. and ep. 89. q. 2.
and S. John Damascene Orthod. fidei. l. 4. c. 20.
. Yea S. Austine speaking of those words of S. Paul. 2. Th^ss. 2.11.
God will send them the operation of Error to believe lying, expounds them
thus, De ciuit. l. 20. c. 19.
God will send, because he will permit the Devil to do these things.
Agreably says Ag. the Adu. of Gods Praed. p. 374.
Knox, Neither to Pharao, neither to Semei, nor yet to any other Reprobate,
does God give either wicked Commandment, or evil thought etc. Yea God
himself mentioning the sinful action of the people, explaineth this point,
saying, Hier, 19.5.
I commanded it not, nor spoke it, neither came it into my mind.

Others yet object, that God hardens the hearts of Sinners. Ex. 7.3.
I will indurate his heart, with sundry such like in Ios. 11.20. Job. 12.24.
Isa. 63.17. Io. 12.40. Romans 1.28.9.18.
other places. Answ. The same Scriptures do explain this saying, Exodus 8.15.
and 9.34.1. Reg. 6.6.
Pharao seeing that rest was given, he hardened his own heart, and heard them
not, as our Lord had Commanded. S. Austine also expounds it, that God hardened
Pharaos heart, Ep 105. ad Sixtum. and l. 1. ad Simpl. q. 2. cir. med. and in Io.
tra. 53.
not by giving him malice, but by not giving him mercy. And for this exposition
are the Fathers rejected by Inst. l. 2. sect. 4. c. 3.
Calvin. And that by Gods hardening of his heart is understood his suffering it
to be hardened; it is further taught by the Prot. writers Dec. p. 492. 493.
Hiper. Meth. Theol p. 438. Vrsin. Catech. p. 331. 332. Abeitz. Rudiment. art.
Dial. p. 540. Marbach. Disp. Theol. de Prouid. sect 164. etc. Harm. of Confess.
p. 61.
Bullinger, Hiperius, Vrsinus, Paulus Abeitzen, Marbachius, and the Confession
of Heluetia: In so much that Conradus Sclusselburge answers directly heerto
in these words: Theol. Calu. l. 1. c. de Praedest.
God is not by any means the cause of Sin, neither does he will sin, or
approve sin. As concerning the phrases of Scripture, I will harden the heart
of Pharao, He has given them into a Reprobate mind etc. it appears by the
word of God, that those sayings are to be understood of Gods permission,
whereby he suffers man to rage in Sin, by the just Judgment of God,
wherewith he punishes sins with sins, yet does he not cause them nor
approve them. Melancthon also gives the like answer saying Loc. com. c. de
cause. pec. and conting.
Neither do those figures of words offend, I will harden the heart of Pharao,
and the like: for it is certain that in the Hebrew phrase they signify
permission, not an efficacious will. Another Prot. agreably writes, Corpus
Doctr. Chris. p. 618.
Let the studious know, the Hebrew phrase in those words, I will harden the
heart of Pharao, to signify permission etc. And examples every where concur,
which testify by this Hebrew Phrase very often, Permission to be signified.
Anthony Maxey Chaplayne to the late Kings Majesty says, In his 2. Sermon
printed. 1607.
It is well known unto the learned, that where it is said, God hardens, the
Hebrew Dialect does signify, a permission, not an action.

So that God hardens not the heart of a sinner positiuely, but only
negatiuely, that is, by permitting, forsaking, and not taking pity: wherein is
no injustice, seeing God forsakes not but being first forsaken, and it is but
just, that those who forsake, be forsaken. And according to this as S. Paul
said Romans 1.24.
God has delivered them up unto the desires of their heart into uncleanness: so
elsewhere he explicateth this saying, Ephesians 4.19.
Who despayring have given up themselves to impudicity, unto the operation of
all uncleanness. And so where God is said, Job. 1.11. and 2.3.4.
to have afflicted Job, it is evident by the story, that he only Job 1.11. and
2.5.
at the instance of Satan, permitted him to afflict Job. Esaias also says C. 6.9.
make the heart of this people fat, and shut their eyes: which S. John alleging
says, Io. 12.40.
He has blinded their eyes and indurated their heart: B^t this our Savior
himself and S. Paul explain, saying, Mat. 13.15. Act. 28.27.
their eyes they have shut. And K. David most plainly saying, Ps. 81.11.12.
My people would not hear my voice, and Israel would none of me, so I gave
them up to the hardness of their heart.

Others greatly insist upon these words of S. Paul, To. 9.11.
When they were not yet borne, nor had done any good or evil (that the purpose
of God according to Election might stand) not of works, but of the caller, it
was said to her, That the Elder shall serve the younger, as it is written, Jacob
I loved, but Esau I hated. Answ. This saying of the Apostle being taken, the
first part thereof from Genesis 25.23.
Moses, the later from Mal. 1.^ 3.
Malachie, is (as the Protestants Christmanus Diagraph. p. 76. Kinned. in his
Redempt. of mankind. p. 294.
and Kinnedoncius do acknowledge) spoken of the several posterities of Jacob
and Esau: which also is plainly signified by the whole context of Malachie; for
whereas Esau was called Genesis 25.30. and 36.1.
Edom, Malachie understands Esaus Posterity, Cap. 1.4.
If Idumea shall say, we are destroyed etc. as also by these other evident
words of Moses, Genesis 25.23.
Two Nations are in thy womb, and two peoples shall be divided out of thy womb,
and etc. the Elder shall serve the younger. And like as by Gods forsaid love to
Jacob is signified the temporal felicity of his Posterity Genesis 15.23.
above the other; so likewise by Gods forsaid hating of Esau, is in like manner
understood the temporal infelicity of his Posterity and Nation, as Malachy
conuinceth saying, Mal. 1.2.3.
I loved Jacob, but hated Esau, and I laid his mountains into a wilderness, and
his Inheritance unto the Dragons of the Desert. And though it appear by this
Epistle of S. Paul, that the Jews having indeed some Romans 3.1.2.
Pre-eminence above the Gentiles, because the words of God were (first)
committed to them, did thereupon over much extol themselves above the other, as
being Romans 3.29. and 9.8.
persuaded, that the Promises of Grace were peculiar to themselves and their
carnal succession. In further Confutation whereof, though also the Apostle in
the place objected, do by application thereof, transfer the forsaid Example of
Jacob and Esau being twins; and so under the resemblance or type of them,
does show, that like as Jacob being the younger Brother, was nevertheless by God
loved, and preferred to the promised land of Canaan, before his elder Brother
Esau; that so likewise in the promises of Grace and the Gospel, the Jews
forsaid external Prerogative does not so prevail, but that the Gentiles,
being in reguard thereof, but as it were the younger Brother to them, are
nevertheless in the Grace and riches of the Gospel Romans 9.24.
equalled, if not preferred See Romans 9.30.31.
before them: Gods Election and mercy so showed, depending upon his own
purpose and determination, and not restrained to any Nation, family, or people:
yet all this avails nothing to establish Gods absolute Decree of eternal
hatred and reprobation; for if the forsaid words, I have loved Jacob, and
hated Esau (being hertofore proved to be spoken not of their persons, but of
their posterity and Nations) should be urged in this sense; then as Christmanus
Diagrapha. p. 78.
answers, it would follow, that all the posterity of Jacob were Elect, and
none of them reprobate, and all the posterity of Esau reprobate, and none of
them Elect, which were absurd to hold.

Secondly I further answer, that though the forsaid words of Gods hating Esau,
should concern the person of Esau, and withal were not to be understood of
his temporal infelicity, but otherwise; yet this hatred of God is not to be
taken positiuely, but as Christmanus Vbi sup. Snecan. Meth. de scrip. p. 517.
and Snecanus do explain the same, negatiuely, that is to say, for, not to
love, or nor to have mercy, according to other like examples hereof in the Io.
12.25. Luc. 14.26.
Scriptures.

Thirdly, though it were to be taken positiuely, yet should it be so referred,
not to his Creature Esau, Which he made, for, Genesis 1.31.
All that be made was very good, and, Sap. 11.25.
Thou love all things that are, and hate nothing of those which thou have
made: for thou did not ordain or make any thing hating it: but to the
sin of Esau, which he foresaw, and never made. And agreably to this says
Beza; Display of Popish practices. p. 17.
We confess God hates nothing in man but sin. Now that Gods forsight and
hatred of Esaus sin, does not of necessity impugn free will in Esau, or
prove his real reprobation, appears most evidently by the example of Adam,
whose sin before his fall, God both forsaw and Ps. 45.7. Zachar. 8.^7.
hated; and yet as Prot. Bulling. Dec. 3. Ser. 10. p. 490 Hip. Meth. Theol. l.
1 p. 214. 219. Sne^an. M^th. descript. p. 123. 126. 778.
confess, the same notwithstanding, Adam before his fall had free will, and
was also one of the Elect, as S. Austine L. de haeras. haer. 25.
proves against the Tacianistes.

Fourthly, whereas S. Peter forwarned us that in S. Paul's 2. Pet. 3.16.
Epistles there are certain things hard to be understood, amongst the rest
this his forsaid discourse upon Jacob and Esau, has ever been taken for one of
the Principal, wherefore it is altogether unequal, that this so obscure
saying or discourse should be alleged against so many and so clear texts, as
I have formerly produced. Lastly this very Objection is at larg answered by
Meth. descrip. 1. p. 55. p. 537. Heming. de Great. vniuer. p. 34. 37. Christm.
Diagr. p. 73. etc. Gesn. Disp. pro lib. concord. p. 620.
Snecanus, Hemingius, Christmanus and Gesnerus, all of them Protestant writers.

Others yet object that, 1. Pet. 2.8.
Christ is to those that believe, honor; but to them that believe not etc. a
stone of offense etc. to them that stumble at the word, neither do believe,
wherein also they are put: whereupon it is inferred, that they were ordained by
God not to believe. Which sequel if it hold, how then is God excused from
being author of their not believing, and so of their sin? I answer therefore,
that the sense hereof (is most directly against Protestants) that they were put
or ordained to believe, but did not; which sense is acknowledged by Snecanus,
Meth. descrip. p. 701 Cast. Defens. Transl p. 152. 153 etc Illic. G^ost. in 1.
Pet. 1.8. Luth. in 1. Pet. 1.8.
Castalio, Illiricus, and Luther.

Fulke urges those words of Christ, Mat. 6.15.
Lead us not into temptation: whereby (says he) is proved, not only a
permission, but an action of God: and that, He not only permits, but also
leads into temptation: Yea, says Peter Martyr, Com. pla^. in Engl part. 1.
c. 18. p. 210.
God tempts, Ag. Rh. Test. in Mat. 6.13. sect. 6,
and Ibid. p. 211.
drives men unto sin by temptation: But though this be sufficiently answered
in the Objection of Induration: yet in further clearing thereof, I say, 1. that
the Scriptures themselves do explain this. Let Iac. 1.13.14.
no man (says S. James) when he is tempted, say that he is tempted of God, for
God is not a tempter of evils, and he tempts no man: but every one is tempted
of his own Concupiscence etc. S. Paul teaches that God is so far from
leading us into temptation, that to the contrary he delivers us from
temptation: 1. Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you
are able, but will make also with temptation issue, that you may be able to
sustain. 2. S. Austine says, Ep. 89. q. 2.
And do not lead us into temptation, it is understood do not permit us to be
led, by forsaking. S. Cyprian reads, Do not suffer us to beled. 3. The Prot.
Nappier answers this saying, Upon Revel. in c. 15. p. 190.
It is said in the Lords prayer, lead us not into temptation etc. not that the
Lord tempts us etc. but only that the temptation and evil does flow from the
permission, and sufferance of his Majesty etc. And agreably says Bullinger
Decad. p. 949.
Suffer us not to be led by a Deuilish and wicked temptation. And the same
Exposition is made by Loc. com. cap. de Causa pec. etc.
Melancthon, and Catechesis. p. 105.
the Divines of Wittemberge. So insufficient are all objections made by Prot.
in proof of their blasphemous Doctrine.

CHAP. XXXI. The true State of the Question concerning Freewill.
Whether man after Adams fall has freewill with Gods grace, to do such things
as belong to Salvation, and not to do them: or whether the Will concurreth only
as a natural Instrument of God, and not as a free Cause. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
FReewill (according to S. Gregory In Ecclesiast. ho. 2. and ho. 4. Cant.
Nissen) being of all things that are in man the best and the most excellent;
and a thing so manifest that whosoever denies it, is not a Catholic, says
L. de Gra. and lib. Arb. c. 2.
S. Austine: In defense therefore thereof against Heretics, the Catholic
Church decrees that, Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 4.
If any shall say, the Freewill of man moved and stirred by God to cooperate
nothing by assenting to God moving and calling, whereby he may dispose, and
prepare himself to obtain the grace of Justification, neither that he can
dissent if he will, but as a thing without life to do nothing at all, and to
bear himself merely passiuely, Anathema. And, Can. 5.
If any shall affirm man's freewill to have been lost and extinguished after
Adams sin etc. Anathema.

In the fourth Toletane Council it is decreed that, Conc. Tolet. 4. Cap. 57.
de Iudaeis.
As man by his freewill obeying the Serpent perished; so the grace of God
calling, by conversion of his own mind, every man by believing is saved:
Therefore not by force, but by the freewill of the mind, they are to be
persuaded, not enforced to be converted. In the Council Senonense it is thus
defyned, Cap. 15. de lib. Arb.
This heresy wholly taking away the liberty of the will, we do not so much
condemn, being already long since condemned by the Church and sacred Councels,
as we do declare it to be contrary to the common Counsel of men, and to the
plain Testimonies of Scripture.

All Catholics Bellar. de Great. and lib. Arb. l. 6. c. 10. Rhem. Test. in Io.
1.12. and in 1. Cor. 3 5.
believe, that the Will of Man concurreth with Gods Grace actiuely, and freely
to the works of Piety; in such sort, that it is in man's free Choice to
cooperate with Gods Grace, or to resist the same: And that this freedom is not
only from Coaction, but from Necessity.

Points Disputable.
All Schoolmen granting Freewill, Pet. Lombar. in 2. sent. Did. 24. lit. E.
Some place the same in the conjunction of 2. Acts, to wit, of the Judgment
of Reason, and Election of the Will: But S. Tho. 1. p. q. 83. art. 3. ad 2.
others better, place it only in the Will.

Some Heruaeus quodlibet. 1. q. 1.
make it consist in Act. S. Bonau. 2. Did. 25. art. 1. q. 2.3.4.
Others in a certain natural habit arysing from Reason and the Will. Alex.
Halens. 2. p. Sum. q. 72. Mem 1. art. 3.
Others make it a particular faculty distinct from the reason and the will.
Durand. 2. Sent. did. 24. q 3.
Others, to be the very faculties of reason and will. Others S. Tho. 1. p. Sum
q. 83. Art. 1.2.3. and in 1.2. q. 13.
most probably teach, that it is one particular faculty, to wit, the Will it
self.

Some Palud. 4. Sent. did. 49. q. 3. Caiet. 1 p. q. 80. art. 2.
teach, that the will of Man is partly active, partly passive. Others Scotus 2.
did. 15. Henric. quodlib. 10. q. 9.
better, that it is absolutely active.

Some Lombar. l. 2. Sent. did. 35. Occam. and Gabr. 1. Sent. did. 38.
think, that the will is not free in regard of actions present. Greg. Arimin.
1. Sent. Did. 39.
Others think the beginning of the action to be free, but the continuation
necessary. But Scotus. 1. Sent. did. 2. Capreol. 2. did. 25.
others best, make not only actions future free, but also present, and that
either in regard of their beginning or continuation.

Some Caiet. 1. p. q. 22. art. 4.
think it inexplicable in this life to accord Freewil with Gods Providence.
Almainus in Mor. c. 1.2.
Others teach that God with his concurse does determine the actions of man's
will, and that put, the Will cannot but work, yet absolutely is free in
several respects. G^eg. Ar^min. Scotus, Gabr. in 2. Sent. Did. 37.
Others more probably, accord the^, in that Gods concurse does not determine
the Will, or work any thing in it, but immediately flows into the effect, and
produces in the same moment wherein it is produced by the Will. S. Tho. 1. p q.
10^. art. 5. and l. 3. cont. Gent. c. 70.
Others most probably, do acknowledge, that Gods cooperation does so concur
with the will, that it does not only give, and preserve in it the power of
working, but also does move, and apply it to work: which divine influxe or
virtue, wherewith the will is moved and applied, is received in the second
causes, according to their disposition. Sundry other such like differences
there are, not defyned by the Church.

Protestant Untruths.
Luther teaches that, In Colloq. Latinis. cap. de lib. Arb.
The name of Freewill was most hateful to all the Fathers, although we our
selves grant, God to have given to Man freewill. But this will be proved to be
false by the third Section following. If you will believe Swinglius, Tom. 1. de
Prouid. c. 6. fol. 371.
Freewill or merit cannot indeed be affirmed, although no man denies their
names and mention to be found in the Scriptures, but truly no otherwise, then
that they be names of those things, which are proper only to God. But I refer
the reader to the next Section, wherein he shall see, that the Scriptures do
abundantly ascribe Freewill also to man.

Protestant Doctrine.
Luther, De serve Arb. Ca^uin. l. 2. Inst. c. 3. 7. Willet. Synop. p. 808. 810.
Calvin, and other Prot. teach that, the forknowledge and omnipotency of God do
directly fight with our freewill. And that, Luth in Assert. art. 36.
Freewill is but a fiction in things, or a title without Substance: because
(say they) it is in no man's power to think any thing evil or good, but all
things etc happen by absolute necessity. According to Whitaker, L. 2. de pec.
orig. c. 3. p. 6^5.
In our conversion to God which is made by grace, our freewill has no strength
in it, but we carry our selves in this business merely passiuely. Perkins says,
Tom. 8. in Apoc. 3. col. 114.
Hence I gather the Papists to dote, in that they affirm, in Regeneration man
to have freewill, and the use thereof, and that he can dispose himself in
Justification.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
S. Hierome avouches that, Proo^m. l. cont. Pelag. fin.
It is proper to the Manichees to condemn man's nature, and to take away
Freewill, and the Assistance of God. The Manichees ( says S. De file cont.
Manich. c 9. and Chrisost. ho. 45. in Joan.
Austine) bark against these with wonted blindness, and when they are convinced
that nature is not an evil thing, and that it is in the power of man to do
well or evil, they say that the soul has not freewill, and they see not
their blindness. Herupon it is, that Hemingius De universally Gratia p. 109.
charge his other Prot. Brethren denying Freewill, with the Doctrine of the
Manichees and the Stoickes. For the same Heresy of denying freewill, Simon
Magus is condemned by S. Clement, L. 3. Recognit.
the Bardasanes by S. L. de haer. c. 35.
Austine, the Priscillianists by S. Austine, Ib. c. 70. S. Leo Ep. 91. ad
Turbium. Conc. Bracar. 1. Can. 10.
S. Leo, and the Council Bracarense.

Protestant Errors.
Abaylardus Tho. Waldens l. 1. Doctrinalis fidei, c. 10.
taught that God cannot make any other but those things which he makes.
Luther in Assert. Art. 36. Wiccleuus in Trialogo. c. 10. 11.
Luther thinks Wicliffes opinion good, which is, that all things happen of
absolute Necessity. And Bucer L. de concordia Doct. c. de lib. Arb. See Calvin.
Inst. l. 1. c. 10.. 3.
avouches that, whatsoever God does, he does necessarily, and cannot do
otherwise. Luther is of opinion that, Postil in die Not. fol. 62.
No otherwise then if God should convert some dry stock, into a new, green,
and flourishing tree, does the Grace of God renew man: so making man a mere
stock. And others believe, that we concur no more to our Conversion, then to
our Riuellus in Contro^s. tract. 3 sect. 27.
Creation, and L. Concordiae c. de lib. Arb. p. 680.
Resurrection.

Some Prot. further teach, that man has not freewill so much as to sin.
Calvin, Instic. l. 2. c. 3.. 5.
It is strange, if it seem to any a hard speech, that I say, the Will being
without liberty, is necessarily either drawn or moved to evil. And, Ib.
The sensual man does necessarily yield himself obedient to every motion of
Satan. And therefore Calvin Instit. l. 2. c. 1.. 4.
wishes that the Name of Freewill might be quite taken away.

Danaeus, Controu, 6. p. 1224.
This is false, sins to be the acts of freewill. They are indeed the acts
of spontane (or not compelled) not of freewill. Paraeus thinks, that Every
Colloq. Theol. 1. Disp. 3.
sin is not voluntary. So that according to these Prot. whatsoever God does,
he does necessarily: and that all things happen of absolute necessity: Man
concurring to his own Conversion to God, no more then a stock: and that he
has not so much as freewill to sin. Then all which, what more blockish and
impious?

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that Man after Adams fall, has freewill
with Gods Grace to do good, and eschew evil.
TO examine now the Doctrine by the Sacred Scriptures, Ge. 4.6 7.
Our Lord said to (Cain) why art thou angry? If thou do well, shall not thou
receive again: but if thou do ill, shall not thy sin forthwith be present
at the door? But the lust thereof shallbe under thee, and thou shall have
Dominion over it. This text is so clear for freewill, that some Prot. Bible of
Anno 1576. And see the Marginall Notes thereof upon Genesis 4.7. See Call. in Genesis
4.7. and Inst. l. 2. c. 5 n. 16.
for their best evasion, do Translate, not over it, but over him, to wit, over
his Brother Abel: but this satisfyeth nothing, for by congruity of
construction, the word Sin, being the Antecedent next before mentioned, the
Relative illius, must be referred unto it: the coherence also of sense argues
the same, for to read Sin lies at the door (to torment thy Conscience as
Ibidem.
Prot. do expound) and thou shall have rule over him, thy Brother, is in sense
dissolute and inconsequent: whereas on the contrary to read. Sin lies at the
door, and thou shall have rule over it, is direct plain and consequent: yea
the former Translation is so corrupt, and absurd, that other Prot. in their
Translations The great Engl. Bible of Anno 1577. and in 4. of Anno 1584. and
see the marg. notes there, Castalio in his Bible.
and Hip. Meth Th. l. 2. p. 478. Luth. Tom. 6. Wittemb. f. 62. Wigandus in
syntag. col. 489.
writings, do follow our vulgar, rejecting this other.

Freewill is also proved by such places as teach that it is in man's free choice
to do good or evil. So Moses appointed by God said unto the Children of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 30.11.14.15.16.17.18.19. See also Ios. 14.15. Eccl. 15.12.16.17.
And 31.11. And. 1. Cor 7.36.37. 2. Cor. 9 7. Dan. 13.20. 2. Reg. 24.12.3. Reg.
3 5. Ps. 83 11. and 118.30.173. Prou. 8.10. Isa 66.4. Dan 13.22. Mat. 11.14.
Mar. 10.36.51. Luc. 10.42. Io. 6.67. Heb 12.24.
This Commandment that I command thee this day is not above thee etc. But the
word is very near thee in thy mouth, and thy heart to do it etc. Consider that
I have set before thee this day life and good, and contrariwise death and
evil, that thou may love our Lord thy God, and walk in his ways, and
keep his Commandments etc But if thy heart be auerted, and thou will not hear
etc. thou shall perish etc. I call for witnesses this day heaven and earth that
I have proposed to you life and death, blessing and cursing: Choose therefore
life that th^^ may live. Here God gives free choice to men to do good or
evil.

But D. Fulke answers, that this is understood Defens. of the Engl. Transl.
p. 326.
of the knowledge of the law, and not of the strength that men have to keep
it: but the words of the text are directly against this, to do it, to walk in
his ways, keep his Commandments, choose life: In so much, that Hiperius
acknowledges this saying of Deutronomy to be understood Meth. Theol. l. 2. p.
479. 480.
Of the fulfilling of the Commandementes, as some words next before (says he)
seem to import. And then himself would further euade by affirming, that it
was spoken, To men regenerate: whereas it is evident to the contrary by the
circumstances Ver. 1.17.18.19.
of the same place, that it was spoken to the promiscuous multitude in
general, containing in it both good and evil.

Such places also confirm Freewill, as show that it is man's fault why he does
not good, and eschew evil: so God complains by his Prophet Isay, C. 5.3 4.
Judge between me and my vineyard: what is there that I ought to do more to my
vineyard, and have not done to it? whether that I looked it should yield
grapes, and it has yielded wild grapes? So likewise Christ reproves
Jerusalem, saying. Mat. 25.37.
How often would I gather together thy Children etc and thou would not. And
S. Stephen to the Jews, Act. 7.51.
You always resist the holy Ghost. And the like might be produced from sundry
Number. 14.43 Isa. 65.12. Hier. 7.13.13 24.26.27.28. Ezech. 18.31. Io. 6.67. Apoc.
3.20. Prou. 1.24.
other textes: from which it may be argued, that either he who sins, has it
in his power to sin, or has it not: if the first, then freewill; if the
second, then in vain should God complain of man for sinning, seeing he could
not do ot^^rwise.

But Calvin answers to these last words of S. Stephen, In hunc locum.
They are said to resist the Holy Ghost, who obstinatly reject him speak^^
(...) ^he Prophets, for it is not here treated of secret Revelations whi^^
(...) inwardly inspireth to every one, but of the external Min^stery (...)
they did obstinatly reject him speaking in the Prop^^^ (...) ^en it proves,
that they had power and will to reject him so speaking: And no reason can be
imagined, why man may not as well resist internal inspirations, as external
Ministry.

Neither will it suffice to answer, that God may well complain, though man
cannot but sin, because that his weakness proc^eded first from his own fault
and hereditary m^lice: for original sin being remitted, that hereditary
malice and weakness is not a fault, but a punishment of the fault. And therefore
as none ^ight rightly reprehend a man borne blind for stumbling, though the
said blindness proceed from from original sin; so neither ought sinners to be
blamed, if without free consent, by the only corruption of nature, which
remains in them through Adams sin, they at any time transgress the
Commandementes of God.

Christ says, Mat. ^1.33.
Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or make the tree evil, and
his fruit evil: This shows, that it is in man's freewill to be a good tree,
or an ill tree, to bring forth good fruit, or bad.

Free will also is further taught by all such texts wherein something is
promised by God with Condition, that he will coopera^^ so says God himself.
Isa. 1 19, 20.
if you be willing and will hear me, you shall eat the good things of the
Earth; but if you will not, and will provoke me to wrath, the sword shall
devour you: So also Christ our Savior, Mat. 19.17.
If thou will enter into life, keep the Co^mandments; with sundry such like.
Now if it be in our power to perform or fulfill the condition offered, then
have we Freewill, if it be not, then is it not any true conditional Promise,
but only a plain irrision, which were impious to affirm of God.

The Scriptures also testify that, 1. Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you
are able, but will make also with temptation issue that you may be able to
sustain. And S. John speaking of Christ faith Io. 1.12.
As many as received him, he gave them power to be made the Sons of God:
where the word power, is so conuincing for freewill, that In Nou. Test.
Londini. Anno 1587.
Beza translateth i^ dignity: but he is therefore forsaken by other Pulk. ^g.
Rhem. Test. in. 1 Io. 12. And the Engl. Bible of Anno 1576.
Prot. who translate with us, power: and reproved for the same by Castalio,
saying: In Defens. Transl^t. p. 18^.
In the 1. Chapter of John and the 12 verse, be depraueth a most excellent
place, and of greatest moment thus translating. But as many as received him, he
gave them this dignity, that they might be made the sons of God. For (...),
is Power, in ^o place, Dignity, or let him cite the place; but in behalf of
his own opinion, he expounded it falsely: for he would not that Christians have
this power from Christ which is nothing else but to envy Christ's benefit to
Christians etc For it is a greater benefit of Christ, and more worthy the
sons of God, to have fr^^ power then otherwise: even as it is a greater
benefit of God toward men, that they can freely speak or be silent, then if
without free power they should speak as Balaams Ass.

And whereas in common sense and reason, sin must be voluntary, not necessary;
Protestants yet answer her to, that sin must be voluntary or free from
coaction, but not from necessity, even as the Devils do necessarily do evil,
and yet truly sin, and the blessed Angels do necessarily do well, and yet
their works are truly good. But yet this nothing avails, for if liberty from
coaction would suffice, then had beasts, Children, and madmen liberty to
sin, seeing of their own accord without compulsion they work. And though
the good and evil Angels in respect of the last end have only freewill from
coaction, yet in regard of the means, they have freewill from necessity,
because they do many things which are in their power not to do, and of the
contrary; And in these do the one truly sin, and the other do well.

Freewill also is proved by such places as teach, that in our actions we are
free not only from coaction, but also from necessity, having in our selves
power and liberty. He 1. Cor. 7.37.
that has determined in his heart, being setl^d, not having necessity, but
having power of his own will, and has judged this in his heart, to keep his
Virgin, does well. Again, 2. Cor. 9.7.
Every one as he has determined in his heart, not of sadness, or of nec^ssity
for God loves a cheerful giver. And to Philemon, Ver. 14.
without thy counsel I would do nothing, that thy good might not be as it
were of necessity, but voluntary. But because the words do prove good works to
be voluntary, and free from necessity; the Protestants of Geneua in their Anno
1605. 1610.
Bibles do add the particle (quasi) and make the Apostle to say, but as it were
voluntary, which is a gross corruption. Peter also said to Ananias, Act. 5.4.
Remaining, did it not remain to thee, and being sold, was it not in thy
power? why have thou put this thing in thy heart? And S. Paul most expressly of
himself said, 1 Cor. 9.1.
Am I not free? etc 1. Cor. 9.3.
Have we not power to eat and drink? So clear it is, that man has freew^^l
from necessity.

Lastly, by the denial of freewill all these absurdities follow. 1. That there
remains no place for punishment or reward. 2. That all should either be good,
or all evil: and if all good, not one better then another, and if all evil,
not one worse then another, but all equally either good or evil. 3. That all
Exhortations, reprehensions, praise, dispraise, Commandes, Counsels, threats,
promises of reward, and the like, were in vain: then all which, what more
absurd? In regard heerof S. Austine says, De fide cont. Manich. c. 10.
Who will not cry out, that it is a foolish thing to give Commandments to him
who has not freedom to do what is commanded, and that it is injury to
condemn him who had not power to fulfill the Commandments? Agreably says S.
Irenaeus, L. 4. c. 72.
If therefore it were not in us, to do these things, or not to do them, what
cause had the Apostle, and long before our Lord himself, to counsel to do
certain things, and to abstain from others, but because man had freewill from
the beginning?

Add yet heerunto, that most certain, infallible and experimental Lecture,
written with legible letters in the book of every man's Conscience, learned and
unlearned, wherein we plainly read, and by experience know for true, that our
Soul does sometimes strugle against temptation, and happily overcome the same,
from whence follows comfort and peace of Conscience; but other times it
yields, when it might have withstood, from whence follows, fear, shame,
and repentance: none of which would follow, if we had not freewill.

SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Sciptures agreably with Catholics
in proof of Freewill.
THe former words of God to Cain, S. Austine expounds thus, De ciu. Dei. l
15 c. 7.
Thou shall rule, over what, over thy brother? not so: over what then, but
sin? S. Ambr l. 2 de Came. c. 7.
Ambrose directly confuteth the applying thereof to Abel, saying. His brother
is not given up to him, but his fault is imputed, of which he was causer to
himself. The fault, says he, is turned upon thee, which began from thee. S.
Hierome writes, Quaest, in Gen and G^eg l. 4. Mor. c. 22. Prosper. lib. 2 de
vocat. Gent. c. 13.
Because thou have freewill, I warn thee that sin have no dominion over
thee, but thou over Sin. Saint Chrysostom says, In Genesis Hom 19. c. 4.
The Lord of all things has made our nature to have freewill etc. he suffers
all to lie in the will of him that is sick, this therefore is now also done in
Cain. Aben Ezra in his Hebrew Commentaries upon Genesir, affirms it a mere
In c. 4.7.
forgery to refer the Relative otherwise then to the word Sin. And herein
the Rabins are so clear, that D. Fulke answering thereto, says, D^f of the
E^gl. Transl. p. 320.
The Jewish Rabins err in this place. etc. And Calvin acknowledges that In
Genesis 4.7.
There is scarce any Expositour who does not refer this to Sin.

In like sort the place of Deutronomy is expounded for freewill, by ancient
Lib. quod D^us sit immutabilis.
Philo, saying, God created (man) free, that being left to his proper will, he
might do whatsoever he pleased etc. that knowing what was good, what evil, and
the difference between etc. virtue and vice, he might choose the better and
fly the worse: To which sentence is extant the Oracle in Deutronomy; Behold I
have placed before thee life and death, good and evil, choose life.

S. Cyprian also says, Lib. 3. ad Qui^in. c 52. And Ambr. in ps. 40.
the freedom of believing or not believing to be placed in the will (is to be
seen) in Deutronomy; behold I have placed before thee life and death, good
and evil, choose life, that thou may live. Also in Isaias. If ye will and
will hear me, you shall eat the good things of the earth, but if you will
not, and will not hear me, the sword shall consume you. Also in the Gospel
according to Luke, the Kingdom of God is within you. S. Basil writing upon
those former words of Isay, If you will, and will hear me, says: In. c. 1.
Isaiae.
In this place especially he sets as it were before our eyes, the liberty of
the will to be given to man's nature. And according to Epiphanius, Haer. 16. ad
Hier. in c. 5. ad Gal.
It is manifest and clear to all, and not to be doubted, that God has given
freewill unto us, speaking by himself, If you will, and will not etc.
Wherefore in man it is, to work good things, or to desire evil things. And
the same Exposition is given by S. Hierome. S. Chrysostom alleging those
words of Isay, Isa. 1.10.
If you will, and will hear me etc. says: Ho. 61. ad Pop. Ant. quae est. 8.
de fato and Prou.
God has said, If you will, and if you will not, placing in our power virtue
and vice, and putting it in our will. And a little after, God says, Eccl. 15.7.
I have placed before thee fire and water, life and death, put thy hand whither
thou will. The Devil says, is is not placed in thee to stretch out thy hand,
but this is done by certain necessity and force. And the self same with the
Devil do Prot. still say.

God, says S. De Great. and lib. Arb. c. 2. and Tertul. l. 2. cont. Marcion. c.
5.
Austin, has reueyled unto us by his holy Scriptures, that in man there is
freewill: first because Gods Co^mandments themselves would not profit man,
unless he had freewill, whereby he doing them, might come to the rewards
promised etc. Eccl. 15.14.
God from the beginning made man, and left him, in the hand of his own
Counsel etc. He has set before thee water and fire, to which thou will
stretch forth thy hand. Before man there is life and death, good and evil,
what pleases him shall be given him. Behold we see most plainly expressed the
free power of man's will. Wherefore is it, that in so many places God
commands all his Commandments to be kept and done? How does he command, if
there be not freewill? And then cyting to this end, several other places he
concludes, what do infinite such other places in the old Testament show, but
the free power of man's will? If it were not in our power ( says L. 4. c. 72.
Irenaeus, to do these things, or not to do them, what cause had the Apostles,
and much before him our Lord himself, to counsel to do certain things, and
to abstain from others, but because from the beginning man has freewill?

Origin cyting this Text, And now Israel, what does thy Lord God require from
thee? adds, Ho. 12. in Numeros.
Let them be ashamed of these words, who deny freewill in man. How should God
require from man, unless Man had in his power, what he ought to offer to God
requiring? And in another place, In Mat. c. 13.
the Scriptures impugn this understanding, declaring that there is freewill,
both whilst they accuse those that sin, and allow those who do well.

But none writes more plainly then S. Cyprian, saying Ep ad Cornel. ante med.
Turning to his Apostles he said, Io. 6.67.
What will you also depart? observing indeed the law, whereby man left to his
own liberty, and placed in his own will, desires to himself either death or
salvation.

S. Hierome affirms that, In Isa. c. 55.
That which is said in the Gospel Mat. 7.18.
A good tree cannot yield evil fruit, is not referred (...) the propriety of
nature, as heretics would, but to the will of the mind lastly it is inferred,
Or make ye a good tree, and the fruit there^^ good; whereby it is plain,
that every one by his own will does mak^ to his Soul a good or evil tree,
whose fruits are different.

Theodoret avouches in general that, De curatione Infidelium Graecorum. Ser.
5. de natura hominis.
Whosoeu^^ will, may easily find many other places of that kind, both in the
Ghospels, and in the monuments of the Apostles, by which is plainly shew^^ the
absolute will, and free power of man.

S. Gregory reconcileth the concourse of Gods Grace and man's freewill in these
words, Mor. l. 16. c. 11.
Piety from above does fir^^ work something in us, without us, that our
freewill also following be may work with us the good that we desire, which
yet, by Grace bestowed, at the last Judgment he does so reward in us, as if it
had proceeded from us alone: because Gods goodness does prevent us to mak^ us
Innocents. Paul says, 1. Cor. 15.10.
By the Grace of God, I am that whi^^ I am. And because our freewill follows
that Grace, he adds, An^ his Grace in me has not been void, but I have
labored more abundantly then all they: who when he saw that he was nothing of
himself, he says, but not 1. And yet because he found that he was something
with Grace, he annexed, but the Grace of God with me. For he would not say,
with me, if with preuenient Grace he had not freewill following. That therefore
he might show himself to be nothing without Grace, he says, not I, but that
he might show that by freewill he works with Grace, he added, But the Grace of
God with me.

Finally, the Fathers are so clear for free will, that Calvin Instit. l. 2. c.
2. sect. 4. and l. 3. c. 3. sect 11 And see. Whiteg. Def. p. 472.
reprehendeth for the same the Greek and Latin Fathers in General. And other
Prot. say that, Discovery of untruths in D Bancroftes Sermon p. 23.
The Error of freewill deryued from Iustine Martyr and Irenaeus, was at the
time of the Nycene Council in some rypenes etc. We know that ever since the
Apostles times in a manner it flourished every where, till Martin Luther took
in hand the sword against it. The Centurists think that, Cent 2. c. 4. Col 58.
Scarcely there is any point of Doctrine which began so soon to be darkened as
this of freewill: And Ib. col. 59.
After the same manner Clemens every where affi meth freewill, that it may
appear, that not only all the Doctors of that age were in such darkness, but
also that the same increased afterward in the later ages. And the like is
confessed by Def. p. 472. 473.
Whiteguift. By all which we see, that the Fathers did not only believe
Freewill, but also proved the same from several clear Tex^es of the sacred
Scriptures.

SECT. IV. That sundry Protestant writers do teach, and defend our Catholic
Doctrine of Freewill.
John Husse teaches that, I^. 1. Cor. c. 7.
Though grace, which makes a man grateful, is had by the gift of God, yet
efficiently it is had from freewill consenting; for S. Austine says, He that
created thee without thee, will not justify thee without thee. This grace is,
(or proceeds) from 3. Causes, from God as principally working, from Grace
freely given stirring up the freewill, and from Freewill as consenting.

Bullinger affi^meth that, Decades English. p. 481.
God appoints us laws, and lays before us rewards and punishments, he
commands us to embrace the good and eschew the evil to the performing whereof
he does neither deny us his Grace etc. nor despise our good will. And, Ib. p.
646.
The Lord requires our endeavor, which notwithstanding is not without his
assistance and grace.

Willet having reproved Heminglus a Lutheran, and Sneca^u^ a Caluinist, for
their Doctrine of freewill, affirms of them and their followers that, Synop
p. 8 8. 810.
They are more erroneous concerning Freewill then are the Papists. And whereas
S. De fide cont. Manich. c. 9.10.24. and in Actis cum Felice Manich. l. 2. c. 4.
Austine and S. In Io. ho. 45.
Chrysostom do condemn the Manichees for denying freewill, Hemingius coupleth
his Prot. Brethren with the said Manichees, saying, De universe. Great p. 209.
107.
Certain Deuines of great name and otherwise excellently deserving of the
Church of Christ, whom as Brethren in Christ I love, drawing most near to the
Manichees and Stoickes, do from the same principle build their opinion of
freewill, and other events. Hence some are not affrayde to infer, that God
ordained the Adultery of David.

Other Prot. charge Melancthon with teaching freewill, See Morgenst. tract. de
Ecclesia. p. 6. Schlusse^b. in Theol. Calu. l. 2. f. 86.
and, making our assent cooperating with the word and holy Ghost. And
Melancthon himself says, Loc. com. cap. de lib. Arb.
Three causes of a good action concur, the word of God, the holy Ghost, and
man's will assenting or resisting the word of God etc. The furies of the
Manichees are not to be admitted. The Conversion in David is not made, as if a
stone should be changed into a fig, but the freewill in David does something,
when he heard the chiding and promise, willing then, and freely he confesses
his sin, and his will does something.

Fox reports how that one Act. and Mon. p. 1533. 1605.
True, and sundry other Protestant Professors of those times taught freewill,
and were as then by their other Brethren, Ib. p. 1605.
called the Freewill men. And though M. Parkins in words impugneth freewill,
yet in consequence of truth he acknowedgeth the Doctrine, teaching that,
Reform. Cath p. 26.
Because God gives men Commandment to repent and believe, therefore they have
power to repent and believe: Ib. p. 52.
God with the Commandment giving Grace, that the thing prescribed may be done.

Calvin writing upon these words of Iosue Ios. 24.14.
Fear our Lord and serve him, etc. but if it like you not to serve our Lord,
choice is given you choose this day that which pleases you etc. expounds
them thus: In Ios. 24.15. Edit. Gal.
Not without cause gave he them liberty of choice, that being tied by their
own consent, they could not pretend, that, that which they did, shey did of
necessity, and could not but do it. So plentiful are our Prot. in teaching
from the Scriptures, the Doctrine of Freewill.

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture agay^st Freewill answered.
SOme Rogers Def. of the Art. art. 10. p. 48.
object that, 2. Cor. 3.5.
we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but
our sufficie^cy is of God. And again Io. 6 44.
No man can come to me, unless the Father that sent me draw him. Answ. We do not
defend freedom or sufficiency of our will by nature, but by assistance of
Grace, which as I have proved before, God offers to all men: which supposed,
the former tex^es m^ke directly for us, affirming our sufficiency, and only
withal teaching, that this sufficiency is not of our selves, that is, no^ by
force of nature, but of God, that is, through Grace, which is the very doctrine
we teach. This same answer will also serve for the second text, only I will
add, what S. Chrysostom says to the Manichees obiecting the sam^ text, In.
Io. ho. 45.
No man can come to me, except my Father that sen^ me draw him. Here the
Manichees rise up contending by testimony of this text, that we can do nothing
of our selves; But this takes not away our freewill, but shows that it
needs Gods help. And afterward^, Ibid. ho. 4^.
Wherefore it is evident, that it is in our choice, whether we will be saved or
damned.

It is also objected Rogers Def of the Art. art. 10. p. 50.
that, Philip. 2.13.
It is God that works in you both to will and to accomplish. Answ. True it
is, that God does work, but we also do by his Grace cooperate, accordingly as
immedia^ly before it is said, Philip. 2.12.
With fear ^^d trembling work your Salvation: And so M. Perkins confesses
that, Ref. Cath. p. 14.
Man's freewill concurs with Grace as a Co-worker. And that, Ib. p. 16.
being moved by Grace, it acts and moves it self. And thus does S. Austine
answer this very objection, saying, Tom 7. de Great. and lib. Arb. c. 9.
For not because he said, It is God that works in you, both to will, and to
accomplish according to his good will therefore is he to be thought to have
taken away freewil: for if it were so he would not have said before with fear
and trembling wo^ke your salvation; for when there is command that they work,
their freewill is called upon.

It is also further urged that we are said to be Ephesians. 2.5.
Dead by sin, and so no power in our Will, to will to spiritual actions: But
the same place likewise affirms, that we are quickened in Christ, by whose
grace (we) are saved. And therefore a^though not of our se^u^s, yet by his
quickening and preventing grace, we are sufficiently helped and enabled to work.

Some object those words of Christ. Mat. 18.7.
It is necessary that scandals do come. And, Luc. 17.1.
It is impossible that scandals should not come, and the like. Answ. S.
Chrysostom answers to these very places saying, Ho 60. in Math and ho. 27.
in 1. Cor. See S. Aug. de Ciu. Dei l. 5. c. 10.
When he calls is so necessity, he says it not, because the Will may take
away liberty, and power of Freewill, nor because it may subject man's life to
the necessity of things; but because it is certainly to come to pass, he
fortelleth it Which Luke expresses in other words. It is impossible that
scandals should not come etc. not the fortelling therefore thereof is to be
thought to bring scandals; for they do not therefore come, because he fortold
scandals would be, but because they were certainly to come, therefore he
fortould them.

Others urge those worde^ of the Parable, Luc. 14.23.
The Lord said to the Servants, Go forth into the ways and hedges, and
compel them to enter. Answ. The vehement persuasion that God vse^h both
externally by words and miracles, and internally by his grace, to bring us unto
him, is called compelling, not that he forces any against their own wills,
but that he mollifyeth a hard heart, making him willing, that before would not.
S. Austine Ep. 50. and 204 and l. 2 cont. Ep. Gaud. c. 25.
refers this compelling to the penal laws, which Catholic Princes do
justly use against Heretics and Schismatics: And so in this sense, by the
two former parts of the Parable, the Jews first, and secondly the Gentiles,
that never believed before in Christ, were invited by fair sweet means only:
but by the third, such are invited, as the Church of God has power over,
because they promised in Baptism.

CHAP. XXXII. The true State of the Question, concerning the possibility of
keeping Gods Commandments.
Whether the Commandementes of Godt, hrough his holy Grace, though not by the
only power of Freewill, are possible to be kept by just men in this life: or
rather that they are so impossible, that in every work that men do, they
transgress them. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
SAINT Austine said exceeding well that, De Temp. Ser. 61.
God who is just cannot command any thing impossible, nor he that is holy, will
damn man for that which he cannot eschew: Yea, De Temp. Ser. 191.
We accurse (says he) the blaspemy of them who affirm any thing impossible to
be commanded by God: According to which the Catholic Church decrees, that
Council. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 11.
No man though justified ought to think himself free from the keeping of the
Commandments No man ought to use that temerarious speech, and forbidden by the
Fathers under Anathema the Commandments of God to be impossible to be kep by a
man justified: for God does not command impossible things, but by commanding
does admonish to do what thou can and to ask what thou can not, and he
helps that thou may etc. And although the most holy and just in this
mortal life do sometimes fall, at least into light and daily Sins, which
also are called venial, yet they do not therefore cease to be just. And
therefore, Sess. 6. Can. 18.
If any shall say, that the Commandments of God are impossible to be kept by a
man justified, and in the state of Grace etc o^ (...). Can. 1^.
Nothing is commanded in the Gospel but faith, ot^e^ things are indifferent,
neither commanded nor prohibited but free; or that the ten Commandments do not
pertayne to Christians, Anathema.

In the second Counc^ll Arausicanum it is ordained, that, Cap. 25.
According to Catholic Faith we believe, that Grace received by Baptism, all
such as are baptized. Christ helping and cooperating may, and ought to fulfill,
if they will l^bour faithfully, those things that belong to Salvation.

In the second Mileuitane Council it is defyned, that, Cap. 4.
Whosoever shall say, that the Grace of God, does in this only help us not to
sin, because by it the understanding of the Commandments is reueyled and
opened unto us, that so we may know what we ought to desire or eschew, but that
by it is not given us that, what we know to be done, we may love, and be able
to do, Anathema.

All Bellar. de Iustif l. 4. c. 10 Rhem. Test. in 1. Io. 5.3.
Catholics with one consent teach, that the Commandments of God are possible
to be kept by just me^, not by the only power and strength of Freewill, as
heretics do calumniate; but by the help of Gods grace, and the spirit of Faith
and Charity infused in their Justification.

Points Disputable.
Some Dom a Soto. l. 2. de Just. and Iur. q. 5. art. 4.
Schoolmen think, that Christians are not only freed from the Ceremonial law,
and from the guilt and terror of the moral law, but also from all the law
written in the books of Moses, not that we are not bound to keep the law of
Moses, as it is natural, and as it is renewed in the Gospel, in the
Epistles of the Apostles, but as it is written by Moses himself: yet Bellar.
de Iustif. l. 4. c. 6.
others think that the moral law even as it was given by Moses and the
Prophets, and and so as it is written in the Books of the Old Testament, truly
to oblige Christians.

Protestant untruths.
If you will believe Luther, Ad lib. Ducis Georgij script. Anno 1533.
The Papists teach that man by his own force of nature, without Grace, may
keep the Commandments of God. My master Occam writteth, that the sacred
Scriptures do no where testify, that for the keeping of Gods commandments the
singular gift of God is necessary. Melancthon demands, In Apol. c. de
Tradit. humanis.
What difference between the Pelagians, and our Adversaries? Seeing both
think, that men without the holy Ghost may love God and keep Gods
commandments according to the Substance of the actions, merit grace and
Justification by works, which things reason it self does without the holy
Ghost. How many absurdities follovv of these Pelagian opinions, which are
taught in Schools with a loud voice. But these are mere fictions of Luther,
and Melancthon.

Protestant Doctrine.
Luther teaches, that In Confut. Rationis Latonianae.
So many Testimonies of Scripture prove the Commandments to be impossible to
us, that nothing is more manifest. And, Luth. in Resp. ad Dial. Siluestri
Prieratis.
Thou do most badly, denying our Savior to Command things impossible: but
thou do worse then most badly, in that thou dare call this a falsehood, We
cannot in this life fulfill the Commandments of God. Yea says Melancthon, Ad
c. 4. Ep. ad Romans Calu. Instit. l. 2. c. 7.
When the Law commands God to be loved, it commands a thing as impossible,
as if it should command us to fly over Caucasus. Whitaker affirms, that it is
the foundation of Christian Religion, that Controu. 2. q. 6. c. 3. p. 563.
The law of God cannot be performed, and fullfilled by us. Perkins Tom. 1. of
Bap. fol. 833.
The Papists think that men in this life may keep, and fulfill the law.
Danaeus, Controu. 5. p. 947.
Bellarmine answers, It is easy for him who has Charity to fulfill the law.
I answer, yea it is impossible for him.

Adamus Francisci: Margarit. Theol. loc. 5. p. 52.
Although men regenerate be helped and guided by the holy Ghost yet by ^he
relickes of sin they are hindered, that they cannot satisfy the law. Calvin.
In Romans 13.8.
No man fulfilleth the law, nor ever has fulfilled it. Instit. l. 3. c. 17. 13.
They cannot produce any one who has fullfilled the law, and the same is
taught by sundry others.

Luther, Luther, Tom. 5 in Gal. 3. fol. 343. Confess S^ot. art 15.
God requires that we love him with all our heart, which thing no mortal man
can do. Calvin, Instit. l. 2 c. 7. 5. Brentius ho. 1. in Dom. 13. post Trin. p
777. Danaeus Co^trou. 5 p. 973. Paraeus de iustif. l. 4. c. 11 p. 1^75.
I say, there was no Saint, who compassed with the body of Death, attained to
that end (or height) of love, that he loved God from his whole soul, from his
whole heart, from his whole power. And the same is taught by sundry others.
Wherefore according to Prot. No man has ever kept the Commandments, nor
possibly can.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
This dangerous Doctrine of the impossibility of keeping Gods Commandementes,
was condemned in certain Heretics by S. Hierome, saying, We In Expl^n Symb.
ad Damas.
accurse the Blasphemy of them who say, that any thing impossible is commanded
by God to man. And the same words uses S. De Temp. Se^. 191.
Austine. In so much that Hofman in great discontent hereof says, Comment. de
Poe ^a l. 1 fol. 55.
Hierome writes, Let him be accursed who has said. God to have Commanded
impossible things: but why is not Hierome rather accursed, who so audaciously
thinks against God? And the like dislike of this Censure of S. Hierome, is
showed by Tom. 2. Wittemb. fol 210. Cent. 4 Col. 1^48. Calu. Inst. l. 2. c. 7.
5.
Luther, the Centuristes, and Calvin. For the same error S. Haer. 33.
Epiphanius taxes Ptolomaeus.

Protestant Errors.
We In Antid. Council. Trident. Sess. 6. Can. 21. p. 2^1.
deny (says Calvin) Christ to be a Lawgiver, who gave any new laws to the
world. In Mat. 5.41.
Christ brings not new laws. And the selfsame is taught by sundry other Beza
in Mat. 19.19. and in 2 Cor. 3.6. and in. 1. Joan. 2.7. Pet. Mart. in Romans 3.
Powel. in Ep. Dedic. of things ind^ff^rent.
Protestants.

Luther writes that, In Comment ad c. 2. ad Gal.
When it is thus taught, Faith in Christ iustifyeth, but withal the
Commandments of God ought to be kept, because it is written; If thou will
enter into life keep the Commandments; there forthwith Christ is denied, and
faith abolished, because that is ascribed to the Commandments, or the law,
which belongs to God alone. Again Ibid.
Only faith is necessary, that we may be just, all other things are most free,
neither commanded more nor forbidden etc. If thy Conscience tell thee thou have
sinned, answer, I have sinned: Therefore God will punish, and damn thee? No,
But the law says so. But I have nothing to do with the law, Wherefore? Because
I have liberty. And, Tom. 5. Ger. Wit. in Comment. Exodus 20. fol.
It is altogether manifest that the ten Commandments were given only to the
Jews, not to us. Tom 1. Ger. Wit. in Gal. 5. fol. 273.
We neither ought nor will suffer one very law, or one preceept of Moses to be
laid upon our necks. In Gal. 4 fol. 215.
Be careful that thou be wise, and command Moses with his law to depart a
far off, and to go to the mischief. Be nothing moved with his terror and
threats, but always suspect him as the worst Heretic, a man accursed and
condemned, and worse then Pope, or the Devil himself. And yet in another
place he acknowledges that, Tom. 2. Ger. Ien. l. de abusu Missae. fol 39.
Moses rejected, therwithall Christ also is rejected. Again, In Collo q. sl^b
de Panaticis. fol. 369.
Let the ten Commandments of God be quite taken away, and all heresies will
cease: for the ten Commandementes are the fountain, from whence as from the
spring all heresies do flow, for the sacred Scripture is the book of all
Heretics. Now whereas Luther thus affirmed, that, Sermon. de Moyse.
The Decalogue pertains nothing to Christians, Whitaker says hereof, Cont.
Dur. l. 8 sect. 91.
This Article is truly most worthy of Luther for it contains a greatest truth
and comfort. So that the greatest comfort to a Prot. is to quite take away Gods
Commandments And the good reason hereof is given by Tyndall saying, In Caluino.
Turcis. l 4. c 22.
Thou owe nothing to God but faith, that thou may confess Christ Jesus,
and believe him to have risen from the dead: For so thou shall be saved, In all
other things God has made it free to thee, that thou may follow thine own
will. Though it be to murder, adulterate, steal etc.

M. Rogers confesses of Def. of the Art. art. 7. p. 39.
Ioannes Is^ebius and his followers the Antinomies; that they will not have
Gods law to be preached, nor the Conscience of sinners to be terrified and
troubled with the Judgments of God. Of Banister, (among our selves) who held
how it is utterly evil for the Elect so much as to think, much less to
speak, or hear of the fear of God, which the law preaches.

According to Beza. 2. Part. Resp. ad Act. Colloq. Montisbelg p. 226. See Calu.
in Act. 15.10.
God commands something, which he would not have done, and promises also
something which he will not perform. Piscator says, In these. lib. 2. p. 200.
God sometimes by his word does signifye that himself wills that which truly
he wills not, or that he wills not that which truly he wills. And, from
Ib. p 201
hence we may perceive, that there is a certain holy dissimulation, even
lawful to men, much more to God the most free agent. And in another place he
affirms, Loc. 12. p. 172.
that Christ dissembled. Not unlike to Luther, who fears not to give Christ
the lie, in these words: Tom. 6. in cap. 20. Genesis f. 244.
That which they call an officiously, is also feigned for the profit of our
Neighbor: so Christ in Luke feigned himself to go further. And thus Prot. are
content to allow of lying, and most blasphemously to ascribe it to Christ
himself, but yet according to the tenderness of their Consciences, they cannot
endure in any respect Aequiuocation in men, though upon just causes.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that the Commandments of God through
his holy Grace, are possible to be kept by man in this life.
THe Scriptures teach, that the Commandments are not only possible, but also
easy to be kept, Mat. 11.30.
My yoke is sweet and my burden light: 1. Io. 5.3.
His Commandments are not heavy. To answer that they are not heavy, because
God does not impute them, is all one to affirm, that a man at every foot
falling under a heavy burden, yet the said burden is easy, because he has a
Companion to help him up again: which is most absurd, and directly contrary to
the Apostle, affirming of the Commandments themselves, that they are not
heavy. In which sense king David said, Ps. 118.32.
I ran the way of thy Commandments when thou did dilate my heart. And the
same also is forteould by Ezechiel, 36.27.
I will put my Spirit in the midst of you, and I will make that you walk in my
Precep^s, and keep my Judgments, and do them.

The Scriptures also teach, that in this life we may fulfill the law, do the
will of God, and obey Christ, Romans 8.4.
God sending his son etc. that the justification of the law might be
fulfilled in us: these words prove, that the Law iustifyeth, and that it may be
fulfilled in us, by Christ's Grace. We are also taught to pray that, Mat. 6.20.
The will of God may be done in Earth, as it is in heaven Now it is the will of
God, that we keep his Commandments. De Iustif. Controu. 12. p. 191.
And Christ Heb. 5.9.
is made to all that obey him cause of eternal Salvation. These places are so
conuincing, that Scharpius is enforced to give this absurdest answer, From
these places nothing follows, but that the faithful fulfill the law of God:
but it follows not, that they fu fill it in this life. As though it were not
more then clear, ^a^^^^ ^o^said texts do speak of our Justification,
obedience, and fu^filling the law, and will of God in this life.

The Commandments ^^e kept by loving God and our Ne^ghbours, Io. 14. ^^ 21.23.
If you love me keep my Commandementes: And, Romans 13. 8 Gal. 3.14.
He that loves his Neighbor has fulfilled the law: But we ^l^ought, and may
love God and ou^ Neighbor, for other ^i^^ we ^n^o^ be Ch^^stes Disciples and
friends, himself saying, Io. 13.35.
In this all men shall kno^ that you are my Disciples if you have love one to
another. Io. 15.14.
You are my friends if you do the things that I command you. And, Io. 15.22.
This is my Precept, that you love one another. To answer, that none can love
as they ought and are bound, is to exclude all from being Christ's friends and
Disciples. But besides, God requires nothing else in love, but that we love
with all our hearts, which not only to be possible, but also indeed to be
practiced in the time of the New Testament, the Scriptures testify, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, that thou may love
the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy Soul. Y a they further
witness, that we may be perfect, and so perfectly love, for Charity is the bond
of Perfection, Genesis 6.9.
Noe was a just and perfect man: Genesis 17.1.
Walk before me and be perfect, and sundry such like.

The Scriptures do exemplify this in diverse who kept the Commandments: of Job
it is said, Mat. 5.48. and 29.21. Philip. 3.15.
that C. 1.18.
he was a man simple and right, and fearing God and departing from evil. Of
David God says, 3. Reg. 14.8. and 15.5. Act. 13.22.
He kept my Commandments, and followed me in all his heart, doing that which
was well liked in my sight. Of Josias it is written, 4. Reg. 23.25.
Like unto him was there no King before him that returned to our Lord in all
his heart, and in all his Soul, and in all his power, acco^ding to all the law
of Moses. Of Iosue we read that, Ios. 11.25 See Eccl. 44 ^o^
As our Lord had commanded Moses etc. so did Moses command Iosue, and he
accomplished all things: he omitted not of all the C^mmandements, not so much
as one word which our Lord had comm^nded Moses. O Z^charias and S. El z^beth
S. Luke te^ti^^yeth that, C. 1.6.
They were both just before God, walking in all the Commandments and
Iustifications of our Lord without blame. Calvin in answer to this only says,
In hunc locum.
I answer those praises wherewith the servants of God are so higly honored,
are to be taken with exception. But Calvin does not find in all the Scriptures,
that this exception is to be from keeping the Commandementes.

Because these words, Luc. 20.6.
They were both just before God walking in all the Commandments, and
Iustifications of our Lord without blame, do help to prove works to iusti^y
^eza upon the same place though he confess (...) (which Greek word S. Luke
uses) to be translated according to the word iustificationes, yet he rejects
this interpretation, that (says he) I might cut off this occasion of
calumniating Justification by Faith (alone). And for Iust^fications, he
translateth, rites. Him herein the English Protestants follow in the Kings
Bible.

S. Luke relates, Luc. 18.18.
A certain Prince asked our Savior saying, By doing what shall I possess
life everlasting? And Jesus said etc. Thou know the Commandementes: Thou
shall not kill etc. Who said, All these things have I kept from my youth. Mar.
10.21.
And Jesus behoulding him loved him etc. To answer as Protestants do, that
this young man dissembled or lied, these last words of S. Mark, Behoulding
him, loved him, will no ways permit.

But Paraeus further answers, that, Lib. 3. de Iustif. c. 12. p. 812.
The Lord remitteth him to the works of the Law, not that he thinks this way
of Salvation to be possible, but that he might confound his Hypocrisy: so
making Christ to think one thing and speak the contrary. But Brentius
proceeds yet further, affirming that, Apud Paraeum. ibid l. 4. c. 2. p. 965.
Christ answered thus, that he might rather show him the way to eternal
damnation. Which answer (says Ib. p. 967.
Paraeus) is no less true, then that sentence of the Apostle: You are made
void from Christ, who are justified by the law. So making Christ to direct the
young man to Hell, who desired to learn of him the way to heaven. Luther also
answering to the same place, says, Tom. 5. in Gal. 3. fol. 347.
I understand this place in general, that this saying of Christ, Do this and
thou shall live, is a certain mocking and scoffing. Hereof also says Paraeus,
De iustif. l. 4. c. 2. p. 967.
Luthers scoffing may be defended. And Ib. p. ^69.
It was indeed a serious conference, but that nothing hinders a scoff to be
mingled by the Lord. And whereas Christ said, Yet one thing is wanting ^o thee,
sell all that thou have, and give to the poor: Beza In h^^^ locum.
answers to the contrary; Yea all things (are wanting) seeing no man can
observe one Commandment so, as the law prescribes. Christ therefore speaks
with a certain holy Ironia, or s^^fing. So impudent are these Heretics to
make Christ a scoffer: And so unanswerable is this text for the keeping of the
Commandments.

Reason also conuinceth this truth; for first we may do more then God
commands, (as is proved See hertofore Chap. 1^
hertofore) therefore much more that which he commande^h. 2. If the
Commandments were impossible to be kept, they could not bynd, and consequently
were not precepts, for it is not imaginable, that any can sin in that which
he cannot eschew. 3. God herby is made more cruel, and unwise then any tyrant,
who should exact such a tribute of his very friends, as they could not possibly
pay, and would enact such laws under greatest penalty, as he certainly forsaw
were impossible to be kept. 4. Christ teaches us to pray, Mat. 6.10.
Thy will be done as in heaven in earth also: here we desire grace to fulfill
the will and Commandments of God, which if it were impossible, the Prayer were
fruitles, and idle.

SECT. III. The Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proof, that the
Commandments are possible to be kept.
SAint Basil having alleged these words of S. Paul. Ephesians. 5.1.
Be ye therefore followers of God as most dear Children, and walk in love
etc. teaches that, In Regulis breu. Resp. 176.
without d^ubt he who is good and just would not have commanded this, vn^es he
had given power wherewith we should do it. And upon these words o^ Moses;
Attend to thy self, he affirms that, Hom. in illud Moses, Attend.
It is impious to affirm the Commandments of the holy Ghost to be impossible
to be kept.

S. Hierome writing upon that saying of Christ, Love your Enemies, says, Ad.
c. 5. Mat.
Many measuring the Precepts of God by their own weakness not by the strength
of holy men, do think those things to be impossible which are commanded etc.
But we are to know, that Christ does not Command things in poss^ble, but
perfect, which David did in Saul and Absalom. Steven t e Martyr prayed for his
enemies stoning him: And Paul desired to be accursed for his Persecutors.

S. Austine teaches tha^ De Not. and Gra^^ ^9.
In that it is firmly believed, that God who is just and good, could not
command things impossible, hence we are admonished what to do in easy things,
and what to ask in hard things, for all things are easy to Charity to which
alone Christ's burden is easy, or that alone is the burden it self which is
easy: according to this it is said. His Commandementes are not heavy. Again,
Ser. 61. de Temp.
But some may say, I can by no means love my Enemies. In all the Scriptures
God tells thee, that thou can. Thou of the contrary answerest, thou can
not. Consider now whether God, or thou art to be believed. And therefore because
truth cannot lie, let humane frailty leave of her vain excuses: because he can
neither command any thing impossible, who is just; nor damn man for that which
he could not eschew, who is good. And, Ser. 191. de Temp.
This is the belief of our Fathers, we believe in God the Father Almighty etc.
We accurse the blasphemy of them who say, that God has commanded any thing
impossible to man, and that the Commandments of God cannot be kept by every
one, but by all in common. This very saying being used by S. Hierome, is
therefore reproved by Tom. 2. Wittemb. fol. 216. Calu. Inst. l. 2. c. 7. sect. 5
Cent. 4. c. 10 Col. 1243. Hamel de Tradit. Apost. col. 96. Hof. comment. de
poen fol. 55.
Luther, Calvin, Centuristes, Hamelmannus, and Hofman. S. Austine also
pondering those words of the Psalm 108. Non dominetur mei omnis iniquitas,
having alleged diverse textes of Scripture, he adds, L. 2. de pec. mer. and
remiss c. 6.
By these, and other like innumerable testimonies I cannot doubt, neither God
to have commanded to man any thing impossible or any thing to be impossible for
God to work and help, whereby that which he commands may be done; and so
herby man helped by God, may be without sin if he will. But S. Austine is so
clear herin, that Melancthon confesses, and reprehendeth L. 1. Ep. p. 290.
Imaginationem Augustini de impletione legis, Austines imagination of
fulfilling the law.

S. Chrysostom affirms that. Ad ps. 111
Not the nature of the Commandments, but the sloth of many does use to make
difficulty. Therefore if any undertake them with love and alacrity of mind, he
shall see that they are light and easy. Wherefore Christ said, Mat. 11.30.
My yoke is sweet and my burden light. The Centurists reprove Tertullian
saying, Cent. 3. Col. 240.
No law would be imposed upon him, says Tertullian, who had not in his power
due obedience to the law: With the same Error he inclyneth every where to the
possibility of the law. Again, Ibid. Col. ^^5.
Origin maintains the possibility of the law etc. and says, that the
Baptized may fulfill the law in all things. So clearly do the Fathers expound
the Scriptures in proof of the possibility of keeping the Commandments.

SECT. IV. Protestants teach, that the Commandments of God are possible to be
kept.
M. Perkins confesses that, Ref. Cath. p. 51. 52.
Whatsoever God commands in the Gospel, that a man must, and can perform
etc. The Commandments of the law show us what we must do, but minister no
power to perform the thing to be done: but the Doctrine and Commandments of
the Gospel do otherwise, and therefore they are called spirit and life; God
with the Commandment giving Grace that the thing prescribed may be done.

M. Hooker affirms that, Eccl. Pol. l. 5 p 285.
Distributiuely at the least, all great and grievous actual offenses, as they
offer themselves one by one, both may, and ought to be avoided: wherein he is
so plain, that he is therefore reprehended by certain Christian letter to M.
Hook p 15. W^llet upon the Is 122. p. 91.
Puritanes, saying, Here we demand to be informed, that if all offend in many
things etc how your say^ng can be true, that it is possible to avoid all great
and grievous sins? Castalio so clearly De perfect obed. leg. Dei.
teaches the same doctrine, that he is therefore namely contradicted by D 2.
Conclus annex to his Confer. p 697.
Reynolds.

Luther in this agrees with Catholics saying, Defens. contra Ec^^m.
The Commandments of God, even the l^ghtest and least are impossible to man by
himself; bu^ with the Grace of God they are most easy: As the Apostle (says)
I can do all things in him that strenghteneth me. Therefore Hierome said w^ll
Let h m he accu^sed who shall sa^ the Commandments of God to be impossible,
but he denied not, they were impossible to us, to wit, without Gods Grace.

Paraeus avouches that, The moral law, seeing it is thee ternall Rule of
Justice, Colloq. Theol. 1. Disp. 8.
and summarily requires the love of God and our Neighbor (which are temporal
duties of Man) cannot be said to be abrogated, or ever to be abrogated. And the
same is taught by Hom. in Circumcis. c. 67.
Brentius. Wherefore according to these Prot. the Commandments are possible to
be kept.

SECT. V. Objections from Scriptures in proof, that it is impossible to keep
Gods Commandments, answered.
IT is objected, that Saint Paul says of himself, Romans 7.18.
To will, is present with me, but to accomplish that which is good, I find not.
Answ. The Apostle (according to S. Tract. 41. in Joan. and l. 6. in Julian c.
11 and l. 1. ad Bonif. c. 10.
Austine) speaks of Concupiscence, which often is felt, though it be not
consented unto: in which Case though it be not sin, yet is it troublesome to
a chaste mind.

Others urge those words of S. Peter, Act. 15.^0.
Why tempt you God, to put a yoke upon the necks of the Disciples, which
neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear. Answ. The discourse of the
whole Chapter plainly shows, this to be spoken only of the Ceremonial law of
Moses, which yet neither was so importable, as was impossible to be kept, for
before we heard of sundry that had kept it, but because it was not kept but
with great pain and difficulty.

Again it is urged, that, Iac. 3.2. and 1. Io. 1.8.
In many things we offend all: whereas whosoever fullfilleth the Law, sins
not. Answ. This is spoken of venial Sin, which is S. Tho. 1. 2. q. 88. art.
1.
not simply and absolutely Sin, but imperfectly: neither is it altogether
against, but besides the law: so that the fullfilling of the law may stand
therewith.

CHAP. XXXIII. The true State of the Question, concerning the best works of
the lust, being Sin.
Whether all the works of the Just, even the best, are in th^mselues and of
their own nature truly sins, and deserving damnation: or rather that they
are truly, and properly just and good. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
SEEING no impediment can be greater to the promoting of virtue, or sput more
sharp to incyte men to vice, then for men to persuade themselves that
notwithstanding all care and diligence to the contrary, yet the very best
actions are stained with Sin and those mortal: therefore in Confutation of
this so pernicious Error the Catholic Church decrees that, Conci^. Trid
Sess. 6. Can. 23.
If any shall say that in every good work the just does Sin at least
venially, or which is more intolerable, mortally, and so to deserve eternal
punishments; and only therefore not to be damned, because God does not impute
those works to damnation, Anathema.

In the Council Senonense it is expressly defyned, that, Decret. 16.
All works are not sin. And this Article is there condemned. In Annot. post
Decreta fidei.
The just man sins in every good work: Every good work even the best is
venial.

Answerably herunto all Bellar. de Iustif. l. 4. c. 15.
Catholics believe, that the works of the Just, by the help of Gods Grace,
are not only not sin, either mor^all or venial, but truly just, virtuous,
and pleasing to God.

Points Disputable.
Some See Suarez in. 1. 2. Disp. 19. sect. 1. 2. 3.
Schoolmen teach that every work we do in particular, is either good or evil.
Others think that there are some indifferent, neither good nor evil.

Protestant Doctrine.
Protestants teach that, Calu. Instit. l. 3. c. 24.. 9. and l. 3. c. 12.. 4.
No work can come from the just, which does not deserve just reward of
reproach. And, In Antidoto Concilij Sess. 6. c. 11.
Good works if they be censured with exact rigor, are rather worthy of
eternal Damnation, then the reward of life. Calu. Instruct. cont. Libertinos.
c. 14.
No other thing can we choose desire, or do, but evil. Whitaker, Inherent De
pec. orig. l. 2. c. 3. p. 656.
Concupiscence causes, that we sin in every action of ours, even good. And
we teach, that the Just, according to the nature of the thing, and their
actions, do always sin mortally. A fearful and desperate opinion.

Protestant Errors.
Luther Extat Tom. 1. oper. Lutheri. fol. 196. Edit. Wittemb. 1558.
wrote a whole Book entitled, Q^od iustus etiam inter been operandum, peccet:
That the just man sins even when he does well, that is, as he through the
whole Book expounds himself, in all his actions. In so much, that to use
Luthers own words, Argumento. 10. ex 24.
All things that he does are the works of the Devil, the works of sin the
works of d^rknes the works of folly And, Sermon. de Ascensione Domini.
We constantly affi^me, the lust man to sin by praying.

Beza proceeds so far, that he affirms virtues to be sins his words are.
Tom. 1. oper. p. 665. q. 95.
Q^estion. But Philosophical virtues certes are not sins Answer Yes sins,
If sin be (...), that is, whatsoever declineth but the least from the law of
God. But good God, what times are these, wherein virtues are called sins? What
would Aristotle say if he were now living, if he should hear men professing
learning and virtue, to avouch, that it is sin to do prudently in our
actions: that it is sin to be temperate and sober, in eating and drinking:
that it is si^ne to be valiant and courageous in dangers and adversities: that
it is sin to be liberal and bountiful in giving our goods dul^: lastly that
it is sin to give every man his own, and to embrace Justice. But what shall
I say against ^hese, but that which is thundered upon their head by the Prophet
^say, C. 5.20.22.23.
Woe unto you that call evil good, and good evil, putting darkness light and
light darkness; putting bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter etc. Woe to you
that are mighty to drink wine and stout men in drunkenes; which justify the
impious for guiftes, and take away the Justice of the Just from them: Which
certainly none would do, but madmen or drunkards.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that all the works of the Just are not
Sin, nor deserving Damnation.
THe Sciptures expressly teach, that some works of the Just are not sin,
Job. c. 1.22.
In all these things Job sinned not with his lips. And that he sinned not in
heart it is further said, C. 2.3.
Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is not the like to him in the
Earth, a man simple and right, and fearing God, and departing from evil, and
yet retayning Innocence? In like sort King David says of himself. Ps. 7 9.
Judge me O Lord according to my Justice, and according to my Innocence upon
me. Ps. 16.3.
By fire thou have examined me, and there is no Iniquity found in me. Ps.
17.11.22. and 118.101.
Our Lord will reward me accord ng to my Justice and according to the Purity of
my hands he will reward me. Because I have kept the ways of our Lord; neither
have I done i^p ously from my God. In these places he avouches his works to
be Iu^tices, Innocence, Purity, and without Iniquity: Yea he confide^tly hoped
that they might stand in the Judgment of God; otherwise desiring to be judged
according to his Justice, instead of pardon, he should ask Damnation.

The Scriptures distinguish between good and evil deeds, Iac. 2.8.
If you fulfill the Royal law according to the Scriptures, (Thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self) you do well but if you accept persons you work
sin etc. And, whosoever shall keep the ^hole law, but offend in one, is made
guilty of all. So also S. Peter. 2. Pet. 1.10.
Labor the more, that by good works you may make sure your Vocation and
Election. For doing these things you shall not sin at any time. These textes
prove a distinction of good and evil works, so that all are not sin.

According to Calvin, Inst. l. 3. c. 12.. 1.
Nothing is acceptable to God, but what in every part is entyre and absolute,
and defiled with no impurity: and yet Scriptures teach that, Act. 10.36.
He that fears (God) and works Justice is acceptable to him. Philip. 4 13.
I was filled after I received of Ephaphrodites the things that you sent, an
odor of sweetness, an accept^ble host pleasing to God. 1. Pet. 2.5. See 1. Io.
3.22.
To offer spiritual hoasts acceptable to God. Now to say that good wo^kes are
not acceptable, but only Christ's imputation, is indeed to affirm, that deadly
and enormous Crimes are acceptable and pleasing to God by his imputation, which
is most absurd.

Again, if in all our best actions we cannot but sin, to what end are we so
much dehorted from Sin, Io. 5.14.
Sin no more. 1. Cor. 15.34.
Awake ye Just, and sin not. Ps. 4.5.
Be angry, and do not sin. And see the like in 2. Pet. 1.10. 1. Io. 2.1.
other places.

But the works of the just are expressly said to be good, Mat. 5.17.
Let your light shine before men, that they may see your good works: 1. Tim.
6.17.18.
Command the rich of this world etc. to do well, to become rich in good works.
Tit. 3.8.
They which believe in God be careful to excel in good works. Now seeing
that (according to S. De divine. Nem. c. 4.
Dionysius) is said to be evil, which in any thing is wanting, and that only
to be good, which is entirely and absolutely good, therefore seeing the holy
Ghost calls the works of the just, good, they are truly and absolutely good,
and consequently not sin.

If all our best actions be Sins, then all these absurdities follow. 1. That
the works of faith, whereby a man is justified, and Charity, were sin, and
so we justified by Sin. 2 When we say, forgive us our Sins, by Sin we
seek to obtain remission of Sin. 3. For sins we should expect a 2. Tim.
4.8.
Crown of Justice. 4. When we are commanded to pray, fast, give Alms, preach,
read the Scriptures, we are commanded to Sin. 5. Seeing Philip. 2.13.
God it is who works in us all good deeds, God sins. 6. Then Christ did
not Tit. 1^.14.
redeem us from all iniquity, and cleanse to himself a people acceptable, a
pursuer of good works. 7. All good works are to be done, but according to
Protestants, some mortal Sins are good works: Ergo some mortal Sins are
to be done. Again no mortal Sin is to be done, but al good works are
mortal Sins, Ergo no good work it to be done.

Lastly, seeing it is said Prou. 24.16.
For the just man shall fall 7. times a day, and shall rise again: I would
demand whether the just man sins by rising again, or no? If they affirm,
then must they needs say, that to rise is the same that to fall, and to fall
the same that to rise; and so consequently a man is as much behoulding to him
that casts him into a pit, as to him that draws him out: and on the
contrary, as much injured by him that draws him out, as by him that cast him
in: and so for a full contradiction, that both these actions are injurious and
beneficial. If they deny the foresaid rising to be sin, then we have our
Intent, that all the actions of the just are not Sin.

SECT III. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proof that
the works of the just are truly good, and not sin.
SAint Gregory upon the former words concerning Job writes, If we say that Job
sinned in his words, L. 2. Mor. c. 8.
which were wickedness to think, we say that God lost the victory, in that
which he proposed. S. Au^tine expounding those words of Job, man cannot be
^u^tifyed compared with God, writes, L. ad Orofi^n cont. Priscillian, and
O^igeni stas. c. 10.
It seems to me ^ot an v^fit speech, in comparison of Gods Justice, if the
holy Angels in heaven be not said to be just, not that they should be this, are
they fallen from ^u^tce, but because they are made, and are not God, neither
can they have so much spiritual light, as he has by whom they are m^de: for
there is greatest Justice, where greatest wisdom and this is G^^ etc. By
participation of whom they are just, in comparison of him they are not just.

SECT. IV. That Protestant writers do teach, that the works of the Just are
truly good, and not Sin.
ALl such Protestants as I have See before Chap. 31.32.
formerly produced, teaching that Man has freewill with Gods Grace to do good,
and eschew evil: and that with the same Grace it is possible to keep Gods
Commandementes, and so not sin; As also such others as I shall See hereafter
Chap. 16.
afterward allege, in proof that man is justified by faith and good works:
and that the said good works do merit Grace and Glory; all these I say do, and
must needs believe, that just men may do works truly good, and not sinful.
For to say, that a man by sinful and wicked works does keep Gods
Commandementes, is justified, and does merit Grace and Glory, is most absurd
and impious.

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture in proof, that the works of the just are
truly Sin, answered.
SOme object these words of K. David, Ps. 141.^.
Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, because no man living shall be
justified in thy sight. Answ. S. Austine writing upon this place affirms,
that no man can be justified in Gods sight, because he has no Justice of
himself, but that which he has, he has from God. 2. S. Hierome, Aug l. de
Perfect. iustitiae. Greg. in hunc locum. Hieron. Ep. ad Cesiphontem.
S. Austine, and S. Gregory do likewise expound this of venial sins, whereof
none can justify himself in this world. 3. According to S. Hilary, Hill. Hier.
Arnob. Euthym. in hunc locum. Bern Ser. 5. de verbis Isatae.
S. Hierome, and others, None can be said to be justified in the Presence of
God, not that there is not true Justice in holy men, but that the purity and
worth of the Justice of God is such, that all the Justice of Angels and Men
compared therewith seems Injustice: Even as the stars in themselves most
clear, wax yet dark in the presence of the Sun. In which sense Job said, C
9.2.
Indeed I know it is so, and that man cannot be justified compared with God;
whereof see S. Austine here in the third Section.

Others object that, Isa. 64 6.
All we are become as one unclean, and all our Justices as the cloth of a
menstrued woman. Answ. The word, all, in Scripture is often Genesis ^9.12. 1. Cor
1.5. 7 8. and 1. Cor. 32.
used only for many. 2. Isay speaks not here of the just, but of notorious
Isa. 64.5 7
sinners, for whose crimes, the City and all the people were to be delivered
into the hands of the K. See Isa. 6.5.7.
of Babylon. 3. Though he had spoken of all the people, yet spoke he not of all
times, and therefore though as then they were wicked when they were given as
Captives, yet both before Ver. 11.
and after, they might be just. 4 And though he had spoken of all times, yet
spoke he not of all their works, but only of those which they thought to be
their chiefest Iust^fications, as their Sacrifices, Feasts, New-Moones etc
which because they performed not with pure intention, and in such sort as they
ought, they were compared to foul Clothes, and were hateful to God; and
accordingly it was said, Isa. 1.83.
Offer Sacrifice no more in vain: Incense is abomination to me. The
New-Moone, and the Sabbath, and other fest u^ties, I will not abide etc.

Some object Eccl. 7.21. Romans 3.10.
That there is not a just m^n upon Earth, who does good, and not sin. Answ.
These words only import, that there is none so just, that he always does that
which is good, but that all men do sometimes sin, either mortally or
venially, which we do not deny. And so it is said of Job. 1.1.8. Luc. 1.6.
Job, Zichary, Elizabeth, and such like, that they were just before God, and
yet no man denies, but that they sinned sometimes, at least venially.

CHAP. XXXIV. The True State of the Question, concerning the Infallible
knowledge of our Predestination and Salvation. Whether Man in this world,
without special Revelation from God, can have infallible knowledge of his
present Justification, Predestination, and Eternal Salvation: In so much that
every one is bound as firmly to believe his own Salvation, as he does the
Articles of his Creed: Or only that in this world a moral certainty can be had
thereof. And whether true faith, and Justice once had, may be lost.
SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
THIS desperate Presumption of being Predestinate, does so dangerously draw men
to the perpetration of all vice: as that in prevention thereof, the Catholic
Church has decreed, that, Council. Trid Sess. 6. Cap. 9.
It is not to be affirmed, that those who are truly justified, ought to
determine with themselves without all doubtfulnes, that they are Justified, and
that no man is absolved from sin, and lust fyed, but he who certainly
belieueth himself to be Absolved and Justified and by this only faith,
Absolution and Justification to be perfected: as if he that does not believe
this, should doubt of the Promises of God, and of the Efficacy of the Death and
Resurrec^ion of Christ; for as no Godly man ought to doubt of the mercy of God,
of the merit of Christ and of the virtue and Efficacy of the Sacraments: so
every one whilst he behouldeth himself, and his own infirmity, and
indisposition, may doubt and fear of his own Grace, seeing no man can know
with certainty of faith, which is not subject to falsehood, that he has
obtained the Grace of God. It likewise teaches that, Sess. 6. cap. 12.
No man in this life ought so much to presume of the secret Mystery of Gods
Predestination, as that he should certainly determine himself to be in the
number of the Predestina^e: as though it were true, that a man justified either
can sin no more, or if he sin, that he ought to promise to himself assured
repentance: for without special Revelation it cannot be known whom God has
chosen. And again, Sess. 6. Can. 13.
If any man shall say, that for the obtaining pardon of sins, it is necessary
for every man that he certainly believe, and without any doubt of his own
Infirmity and Indisposition, that his sins are forgiven him, Anathema.

Agreably heerunto all Bellar. de Iustif. l. 3. c. 3. Rhem Test. in Romans 8.^8.
Catholics do believe, that without special Revelation from God, no man in
this life can be assured with certainty of divine faith, that his sins are
forgiven him, that he is truly justified, one of the Predestinate, and
certainly to be saved.

Points Disputable.
Although all agree that none can be certain of present Grace and future
Salvation, with such certainty of fay^h as is not subject to falsehood; yet
Vega. in Council. Trid. l. 9. c. 46.
some think, that some spiritual men have such humane certitude thereof, as is
altogether void of all doubt and fear. Barth. Medina. 1.2. q 112 art. 5.
Concl. 5.
Others teach, that the Just man has not such moral certainty of Grace,
excluding all hesitation or doubt. Some See Them. apud Magistrum. in 3. Did.
13.
teach, that it is not the same numero, or individual faith, joined with
Charity and without it. But Tapperus To. 2. art. 8. p. 64. and others.
others, more truly, teach the contrary.

Protestant Untruths.
Calvin In Antidoto Council.
affirms, that the Fathers of the Council of Trent do confound Doubt with
Faith: But Chemnitius lasheth further auouching, Exam. ad Sess 6.
that they make Doubt the virtue and ornament o faith, in such sort, that Faith
without Doubt should not be true and justifying. Yea he makes the question
between us and Protestants, to be, whether Justifying faith be fiducia, an
dubitatio de remissione peccatorum, trust or doubt of remission of sins. But
all this is so untrue, that therefore rather the Council rejects the
special faith of Heretics, and affirms it to be, not Faith, but vain
confidence, seeing, that Faith cannot be certain, whereas true Faith must be
most certain.

Protestant Doctrine.
Prot. In Confess. August. art. 6 and 20. Melancth. loc. com. de Iustific.
Calu. Instit l. 3. c. 2. Chem. Exam. cap 9. Sess. 6. Whitak. cont. Dur. l. 8.
p. 635. 637. Perkin^ Reform. Cath. p. 38. 54. Willet. Synop. p. 582.
teach, that all belieuers ought no less cercertainly and infallibly to
believe, that they are already received into Grace, then that God is one in
Essence, and three in Person, or any other Article of Faith to be true. And
they think, this assent principally to be that assent of Christian faith,
which is required in Scriptures for Justification, and without which, the
belief of other Articles, is Historical, and Diabolical.

Whitaker, Concione vlt.
This one thing I say, those who deny that we are certain of salvation with
certainty of faith, do leave us no faith. Jewel affirms that men of his
sort, Def of. Apol. part. 2. c. 6 sect. 3. Perkins To. 1. of Bap. Col. 820.
Some. ibid. Col. 206.
Are as certain of the forgiveness of their sins in the Blood of Christ, as
if Christ were present, and should tell it unto them. Bucer, Apud Zanch. Tom. 7
de Persevere. c. vlt.
There is nothing more profitable then to preach, that it is impossible for the
faithful that they ever fall from Grace. Perkins, L. de desertione. col. 1026.
This Axiom is to be houlden: He that is once in the state of Grace is always
to persevere in it. And others teach, that Epit. Colloq. Montisb. p. 44. 48.
he that does once truly believe, cannot afterward fall from the Grace of God,
or loose his faith by Adultery, or any other like sins. A comfortable
Doctrine for Adulterers murderers, drunkards, and the like.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
S. Irenaeus L. 1. c. 1.
reproves the Gnostickes, for that they deemed themselves so perfect and just,
that they thought they could not be defiled with Sin.

Protestant Errors.
Christ our Savior (according to Luther) Tom 3. in Ps. 22. fol. 330.
suffered the fear and horror of a Conscience troubled, and tasting wrath
eternal etc. but what absurdity to attribute to Christ a Conscience fearing
for a small time? Yea Ib. fol. 330.
Christ at the same time to be exceeding Joyful, and exceedingly despayring.
According to Melancthon, In Mat. 26.
The third, and that the chiefest cause of Christ's fear, was a certain
feeling of Gods forsaking and anger, whereby Christ was uncertain between
Hell and life. Yea says Calvin, In Mat. 26.37.
A horrible depth of destruction with fear and anxiery did grievously vex
him. The like in sundry places teaches Beza In Heb. 5.7. and in Luc. 22.44.
and concludes, that in this deiection of Christ the sum of our comfort
consists. Lastly, Serranus blasphemeth that, Cont. Hayum. part. 2. p. 289.
he strugled with the horror of eternal death, and extremely feared the
weight of eternal punishments. Here Prot. make Christ our Savior to be
fearful and doubtful of his own Salvation: and yet every one of them is
assured by faith of their own.

Calvin, In. Mat. 17.24.
Seeing perfect faith is no more extant, it follows in part that men are
incredulous. And, Instit. l. 3. c. 2 S. ^8.
Certainty is mingled with doubt. Beza, L. Quaest. p 672.
In one and the same subject yet in diverse respects, there are vnpurity and
uncleanness, light and darkness, faith and incredulity. Peter Martyr, In loc.
Closs. 2. c. 15. 1.
It is not absurd, One and the same work to be good and wicked. Paraeus, De
Iustif. l 4. c. 17. p. 1239.
I answer. It is no absurdity, Faith to have diffidence or incredulity mingled
with it, which is sin, and so by accident Faith to be sin. Perkins, Tom. 2.
in c. 5. Gal.
True faith is always mingled with contrary incredulity, in so much that those
who believe, may feel in themselves much incredulity. Yea says Scarpius De
Just. Controu. 5.5 p. 88.
With faith may stand an Act of incredulity, but not with full force. Luther.
Postil. in die Natiu. fol. 52.
He must first be damned, before he can be damned for whom he gave himself.
Calvin, Instit. l. 4. c. 17.. 2.
We dare promise securely to our selves life eternal to be ours, neither can
the Kingdom of heaven more fall away from us, then from him (to wit) Christ.
Tindall, Act. Mon. p. 1137.
Thou can not be damned unless Christ be damned, nor Christ saved unless thou
be saved. Perkins, Conflict. of Satan. Tom. 1. Col. 1305.
I think my self as certain of Salvation, as if my Name were expressly
written in the sacred Scriptures. Zanchius, Tom. 2. l. 2. de Not. Dei. c. 2.
Every one is bound by the Commandment of God, to believe, that he is elected,
and predestined in Christ, to eternal Salvation. When we say every man to be
bound to believe, we except no man, not the reprobate, who neither will
believe, nor can believe in Christ. Who would imagine, that any man professing
Christianity, would belch out such blaspemies and absurd impieties? And yet
they are the Doctrines of Luther, Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, Tindall and Perkins;
men renowned amongst Prot. but deservedly infamous and hateful to all others.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scripture, that man in this world without special
Revelation from God, cannot have infallible knowledge of his present
Justification, Predestination, and eternal Salvation: And that true faith and
Justice once had, may be lost.
TO examine this by the sacred Scriptures, they expressly teach our Ignorance or
uncertain knowledge of our Predestination or Salvation. Prou. 20.9.
Who (says Solomon) can say, My heart is clean, I am pure from sin? And yet
it is certain, that some are clean, according to that of S. Paul, 1. Cor.
6.11 Ps. 50.11. Ps. 1^8 1.
But you are washed, but you are sanctified, but you are justified etc. Again.
Eccl. 9.1.
There are just men and wise, and their works are in the hand of God: and yet
man knows not whether he be worthy of love or hatred: but all things are
reserved uncertain for the time to come etc. In like sort prays K. David,
Ps. 18.13.
Sins who vnd^^standeth? from my secret sins cleanse me. And S. Paul
affirms of himself thus, 1. Cor. 4.3.4.5.
To me it is a thing of least account to be judged of you, or of man's day: but
I judge not my self neither, for I am no, guilty in Conscience of any thing,
but I am not justified heerin, but he that judges me is our Lord: therefore
judge not before the time until our Lord do come, who also will lighten the
hidden things of darkness, and will manifest the Counsels of the hearts etc.
These textes expressly teach, that no man can give an infallible Judgment of his
present Justification, or Salvation.

Such places also as require certain Conditions of our part for our
Justification, prove the like uncertainty of knowledge: So Moses says to the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 4.29. Isa. 1.19.20.
When thou shall seek there the Lord thy God, thou shall find him, yet so if
thou seek him with all thy heart. In like sort Ezechiel, C. 28.21.
f the impious shall do Penance from all sins etc. And shall keep all my
precepts etc. living, he shall live, and not dye etc. But if the just man shall
turn away himself from his justice, and do iniquity etc. shall he live? All
his justices which he had done, shall not be remembered etc. Yea Christ himself
says, Io. 15.10.
If you keep my Precepts you shall abide in my love. And, Io 13.14.
You are my friends, if you do the things that I command you. But, Io. 15.6.
If any abide not in me, he shall be c^st forth as the branch, and shall wither
etc. Now no man knows with certainty of faith, that he performs these
Conditions, seeing no Scripture testifies the same of any man in particular.
As also these places convince, that he that is once justified, or in state of
Grace, may afterward fall, and loose the same.

But some reply, that these works are not required as a Condition upon which
the promise of eternal life depends, but because true faith cannot be
without good works. But first the words of the text are clear conditional.
2. We do not here inquire why works are necessary, but are content that it be
granted that they are necessary, and that without them eternal Salvation
cannot be gained. For hence we conclude evidently, that without divine
Revelation no man can certainly decree himself to be of the number of the
Elect, seeing no man (as Prot. will confess) can assure himself that he does
all those good works which Christ commanded to be done: yea a little before
they clearly taught, that in our best actions we break Gods Commandments, and
sin.

Other places also show, that it is uncertain whether we obtain remission of
our sin: so Joel says of God, C. 2.14.
who knows if he will convert and forgive etc. And S. Peter said to Simon
Magus, Act. 8.22.
Do penance therefore from this thy wickedness, and pray to God, if perhaps this
Cogitation of thy heart may be remitted thee. Though these and the like places
do not prove any uncertainty in Gods promises to such as truly repent, yet they
prove the uncertainty of remission of our sins, in regard of the uncertainty
of our Disposition requisite to the same.

The same truth also is confirmed by such textes as exhort us to work our
Salvation with Fear. Philip. 2.12. Ps. 2.21.
With fear and trembling work your Salvation. 1. Pet. 1.17.
In fear converse ye the time of your sciourning. Romans 11.20.21.
But thou by faith do stand; be not too highly wise, but fear: for if God
has not spared the natural boughs, lest perhaps he will not spare thee
neither. And therefore, 1. Cor. 10.12.
he that thinks himself to stand, let him take heed lest he fall: Yea, Heb
4.^.
Let us fear therefore lest perhaps forsaking the Promise of entering into his
rest, some of you be thought to be wanting. Yea S. Paul himself was not
assured, but careful, Philip. 3.11.
If by any means I may come (says he) to the Resurrection which is from the
dead. And, 1. Cor. 9.27.
I chastise my body, and bring it into servitude, lest perhaps when I have
preached to others, my self become reprobate.

Calvin and Chemnitius answer, that these words are uttered by the holy
Ghost, not that there is any danger, that the faithful shall fall from
salvation, but only to shake of the sloth and carnal security of men
negligent in doing good works. But though it be true, that those who are
predestinate shall not fall from Salvation, and that the holy Ghost does speak
these words to stir up the Elect to care and diligence, yet they cannot be
understood of those who certainly know and believe their Predestination, but of
such as are ignorant thereof: for these who are so certain cannot fear the
loss of Salvation, yea they ought not to fear it, if they as certainly
believe it, as they believe Christ to be God: and therefore the holy Ghost
should exhort them to Infidelity, when he exhorts them to fear the loss of
their Salvation: even as he should do the like, who should exhort a Christian
to fear whether Christ were God. Wherefore seeing by these places we are
commanded to fear, we neither ought nor can firmly believe, that we are
certainly of the number of the Predestinate, and of those that infallibly are
to be saved.

And Reason conuinceth this truth: for nothing can be certain with certainty
of faith, but what is either immediately contained in the word of God, or by
evident consequence deduced from thence; but this particular proposition,
Luther is predestinate, is neither of the former ways proved from the
Scripture: for that which in this point can be deduced from thence is, that
such as believe, and repent, and so continue, shall certainly be saved, and so
are predestinate. Now that Luther did thus, is no ways deduced certainly from
Scripture: But that he did to the contrary, many strong proofs might be
produced.

The forsaid uncertainty of our Salvation is further proved, by all such textes
as convince, that true faith and Justice once had, may afterward be lost.
Moses says to God, Exodus 32.32.
Either forgive them this trespass, or if thou do not strike me out of the Book
that thou have written. To whom our Lord answered: he that has sinned to me,
him will I strike out of my book. According to which says K. David, Ps. 68.29.
Let them be put out of the book of the living, and with the just let them not
be written. Christ says, Luc. 8.13.
For they upon the rock; such as when they hear with joy receive the word:
and these have no roots, because for a time they believe, and in time of
tentation they reuolte. So likewise S. Paul, Romans 11.20.21.23.
Because of Incredulity the boughs were broken, but thou by faith do stand
etc. see then the goodness and severity off God: upon them surely that are
fallen, the severity: but upon thee the goodness of God, if tho^ abide in his
goodness, otherwise also thou shall be cut off. But they also, if they do not
abide in Incredulity, shall be grafted in, for God is able to graffe them in
again. 1. Tim. 1.19.
Having faith and a good Conscience, which certain repelling have made
shipwreck about the faith. 1. Tim. 4.1. and 1. Tim. 6.10.
In the last times certain shall depart from the faith. Heb. 6.4.5.6.
It is impossible (or rare, and difficult) for them that were once illuminated,
have tasted also the heavenly guifte, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost
etc. and are fallen, to be renewed again to Penance. And the like might be
showed out of Io 15.2.6. 1 Cor. 9 27. Gal. 5.4.2. Pet. 2.21.22.
sundry other places of holy writ. But whereas these Scriptures affirm of
some, Luc. 8.13.
that, for a time they believe, that, 1. Tim. 1 19.
They have made shipwreck about faith, that 1. Tim. 4.1.
They will depart from faith, and sundry such like; Scharpius answers De
Iustif. controu. 5. 6. 7.
^o all these, that they are not to be understood of true faith, but only of
counterfaite and dead faith. But this Exposition is directly contrary to the
express word, and sense o^ the textes, as every one may observe by the ba^e
reading of them.

Sundry ex^mples do ^lso confirm this: for first the damned Angels before
their fall, were just, as the Fathers gather from the 14. Chapter of Esaias, and
the 28. of Ezechiel. Prot. grant our first Parents to have been in dued with
faith and grace, and yet their grievous fall we all yet feel. The like might
be exemplified in 1. Reg. 9.2. and 15.26.35. Aug l. 2. ad Simpl. q. 1. Cypr. l.
^. ep. 5.
Saul, in 1. Reg. 11.4.15. Act. 13.22.
David, in 1. Reg. 7.14. and 12.34.25. Cyp. l. 1. ep. 5. Aug. l. 22. cont.
Faust. c. 88.
Solomon, in Mat. 16.17. Io 13.10. and Mat. 26.74.
Peter, in Act. 8.23.20.21.
Simon Magus, and Judas Io. 17.12. Mat. 26.24. and 27.4 5.
the traitor. The Examples of Adam, David and Peter, prove that true Justice
may be lost, and recovered; the other of Satan and Judas convince that such as
are truly just, do sometimes fall from the same, and become reprobate.

This point is yet made more evident from the Doctrine of Protestants, for
whereas they teach that, Fu^k. ag. Rhem. Test. in. 1. Cor. 13 f. ^90.
Justifying faith cannot be without Charity, no more then fire can be without
heat, it hence follows, that if a man may loose his Charity, he does also
therewithal loose his faith, and so by cons^quence loose the certain
knowledge of his own Salvation, Now that a man may loose his Charity, besides
that it was said to the Church of Ephesus, Apoc 2.4.
Thou have left thy first Charity, it may be proved by David, the chosen
servant of God, who lost the same, when he, as Bruce confesses, sl^pt Sermon.
up. the Sacram. p. 24. Knox. ag. the Aduersa^ies of Gods Pre^. p 219.
in sin of Adultery 1. Reg. 11.4.15.
and murder: for voluntary intended murder, is a Privation of Charity: to
which end S. John says, 1. Io. 3.10.
Every one that is not just is not of God and he that loves not his brother.
1. Io. 3.14.
He that loves not abides in death: therefore D^uid in his murder of Vrias,
and before his repentance was not of God, but for the time abode in death, and
so had neither Charity, nor (according to Prot.) Faith.

Some answer herunto, that David's faith was not lost, but was for the time, as
it were sleeping: but this is no answer, but the begging of the thing in
question fully confuted by the premises; for if David's Charity was lost by his
Murder, then was his faith also not only sleeping, but likewise lost, seeing
according to Prot. faith cannot be without Charity: Also if David during his
forsaid sleeping in that Sin, was thereby Io. 8.34. 2. Pet. 2.17. Romans 6.16.
the servant of sin, and 1. Io. 3.8.
of the Devil, and also (as before) not of God but abode in death, his faith
and Charity were then for the time lost. Lastly the nature of faith is not to
be sleeping or idle, but Gal. 5.6.
working by Charity, and Iac. 2.17.26.
without works dead.

Others do answer, that, Fulk. in Disp. in the Tower. 2. Days conference. c.
1.
David when he committed adultery was and remained the Child of God, and Resp.
ad acta. Col. Montisb. par. alt. p 73.
did not fail from his faith: But as Beza and Bastingius do most grossly
affirm, Beza ib. p. 37. ^asting. in Comment. of the Catechis. Englished. p.
241.
at one and the same time he sinned and sinned not. And therefore (says Beza
Ib. p. 74.
he sinned not wholly, but so far forth as not regenerate. To such absurd and
inexplicable difficulties are they driven through the cleerest words of
Scripture.

All Infants by Baptism are truly justified, yea without Baptism according to
sundry Prot. the Children of the faithful are truly holy: but how incredible
is it, that all the Children of the faithful, or all such as are baptized are
Predestinate and cannot sin: Besides hence all Catholics in their Infancies
baptized, should also be Predestinate, which I think few Prot. will admit.

Again, Pagans differ from Heretics in that they never had faith, but these
having had it, have lost it; which argues, that either faith may be lost, or
that there are no heretics. Lastly, this doctrine is the beaten path to
despair: for if none be truly just, but who is certain of his perseverance,
so that he is assured he shall never fall, or according to others if he do
fall, yet he is assured to rise again; how can any of true Judgment certainly
hope himself to be just, seeing he daily sees himself and others to fall
into diverse sins, even against their own Conscience?

SECT. III. The Sacred Scriptures expounded by the Fathers agreably with
Catholics, in proof of our uncertainty of our Predestination and Salvation:
As also in proof that Faith and Justice once had, may be lost.
Whereas Solomon most clearly avouches, that the just men's Eccl. 9 1.
wo^kes are in the hand of God, and yet man knows not whether he be worthy of
love or hatred, but all things are reserved uncertain for the time to come; S.
Hierome in his Co^mentary upon this place says: The sense is, I have found the
works of the just to be in the hands of God, but whether they be beloved of
God or not, now they cannot know etc. And his Translation here of according to
the sense of the Hebrew is, that, Man knows not whether he be worthy of
hatred or love.

S. Ambrose writing upon those words of the psalm, Ps. 118.39.
Take away my reproach which I have feared, speaks thus: He Ser. 5. in. Ps.
118.
would have his reproach taken away, which he feared, either because he had
thought it in heart, and had not done it; and though it were taken away by
Penance, yet he feared left peradventure his reproach yet rem^yned, and
therefore he prays God to take it away, because he alone knows that, which
he who did it, can be ignorant of. And he adds in proof heerof the words of
S. Paul, I am not guilty in Conscience of any thing, but I am not justified
herein.

S. Austine expounding those words of King David, Ps. 41.7.
My soul is troubled toward my self, writes: In Ps. 41.
I know that the justice of my God remains, but whether mine remain, I know
not. For the Apostle terrif^eth me saying He that thinks himself to stand,
let him take heed lest he fall. And De Ciu. Dei. l. 11. c. 12.
though holy men may be assured of the reward of t^eir perseverance yet they
are found uncertain of their own perseverance; for what man knows that he
is to persevere unto the end, in the action and progress of Justice, unless by
some revelation he be assured from him who by his just and hidden Judgment,
does not inst^uct all herein but deceyueth no man. Yea, L. de Cor. and Great.
c. 13.
who amongst all the faithful as long as he lives in this mortality, can
presume himself to be in the number of the Predestinate? Because it is
necessary that to be hid in this place, where pride is so to be taken heed of,
that even so great an Apostle was to be buffeted by the Angel of Satan, lest
he should be puffed up. Again, Ep. 107. ad Vital.
It is profitable to all or most for their sound humility, that they may not
know what hereafter, they are to be: to this end it is said he that seems to
stand, let him take heed lest he fall. And, De Praedest. Sanctorum. c. 14.
Why is it granted to some, that they be taken out of the dangers of this
life while they are just, and others that are just do live longer in the same
dangers, until they fall from Justice? Who knows the sense of our Lord?

And whereas S. Paul before pronounced himself not to be assured, but
careful, If by any means, I may come (says he) to the resurrection which is
from the dead; S. Chrysostom from hence thus infers Ho. 11. in Ep. ad
Philip.
If Paul who suffered so much, was not yet secure of that resurrection: what
shall we say? Upon these words of the Prophet Jonas, Io. 3.9.
Who knows if God will convert and forgive; S. Hierome writes, Therefore it
is put doubtful and uncertain, that whilst men are doubtful of their
salvation they may more seriously do Penance, and more provoke God to mercy.
S. Austine alleging the same place says: In. Ps. 50.
It is uncertain, seeing is is said, who knows? They have done Penance for
that which is uncertain, and have deserved certain mercy.

S. Gregory is so plain heerin, that Calvin reproves him for his teaching
that, Instit. printed Argentor. 1539. c. 8. de Praedest. and Prouid. Dei. p.
260.
We are uncertain of our Election. But I will conclude with S. Bernard, Ser.
1. de Septuag.
Who (says he) can say I am elect, I am of the Predestinate to life, I am of
the number of the Sons? Who I say, can say these things the Scripture
gaynsaying, Man knows not if he be worthy of love or hatred? We have not
certainty, but the confidence of hope comfort us, that we be not wholly
tormented with the anxiety of this doubt. Again, Ser. 2. in Octaua Paschae.
Our Lord knows who are his, but what man knows, whether he be worthy of
love or hatred?

SECT. IV. That sundry Prot. do teach from the sacred Scriptures the
uncertainty of our Predestination and Salvation: and that Faith and Justice
once had may be lost.
M. Perkins, though our Adversary in this point, yet nevertheless confesses,
as well of the Elect: that, In his 4. Treatises to be considered of Christians.
Treat. 4. sect. 14.
This testimony of being persuaded that we are adopted and chosen in Christ
etc. is weak in most men, and can scarcely be perceived: As also the
reprobate, that, Ep. to the reader.
They may do outwardly all things which true Christians do: tbat, they do
willingly subject themselves to the Ministry of the Word, are as forward as
any, and as joyful in frequenting Sermons, and do condemn them of impiety,
which be negligent hearers of the word; they are also void of Hipocrisy, and
herein dissemble not that faith which they have not, but rather show that
(faith) which they have. And all this so truly and unfeignedly, that, Ibid.
A man being in this Estate may deceive himself, and the most goodly in the
world, which have the greatest gift of discerning how they and their brethren
stand before the Lord. Mark here the best signs of an elected Puritan,
which yet according to M. Perkins a Reprobate may have.

Zanchius confesses that, Tom. 1. l. 2. de Not. Dei. c. 2.
Who those may be which are to be saved, God truly knows: but by the Gospel
he does not teach it; and this because it is not expedient. Now if God does not
reueyle this by the Gospel, Prot. either have not faith of their Salvation,
or they have it by some other means then the Gospel. What then can that be
but the Devil and Presumption, let any man judge.

Again, that faith and justice may be lost, the Lutherans teach that,
Confession of Saxony in the Ha^m in English. p. 80. and see p. 233.
It is manifest that some who are regenerate etc are again rejected of God,
and made subject to eternal punis^ment That Ib. p 293.
Justification and regeneration may be shaken of, and we loose eternal life.
The Confession of ^b. p 224.
Auspurge condemns the contrary doctrine for Anabaptisme. Lobechiu^ ^isp.
Theol p. 317. 318.
defends our Catholic Doctrine, alleging to that end the Confession of
Augusta, and a great number of particular Scriptures, charging the Caluinists
with Anabaptisme in teaching otherwise. Chemnitius affirms that, Exam. part.
2 p. 103. and see part. 1. p. 190.
True lively justifying faith may be lost, and the party made guilty of
eternal Damnation. Loc. Theol. p. 188.3.1.
Haffenrefferus reproves herein Calvin and Beza. Disp 7. ex Ep. ad loc.
poster. part. 1. These. 5.
That a man truly regenerate (says Rungius) may finally fall from the Grace of
God and perish, I have proved by undoubted test moneys, and Examples of
Scripture. Schlusselburge Theol. Calu. l. 1. art. 14 fol. 45. etc.
rejects herin Calvin. Zanchius, and the Deuines of Geneua. Adamus Francisci
concludes from the Scriptures, that Margarita Theol. p. 101 158.
A regenerate man does loose faith, and is made guilty of Eternal pain.
Wigandus proves by many Testimonies of Scripture, that, Syntagma ex nouo Test.
col. 732. 733.
Faith may be lost. And Melancthon avouches that, Consil. Theol. p. 332.
Men fall from Grace, and loose justifying faith. And the same truth is taught
and defended by sundry Andraeas in Epit. Col. Montisb. p. 47. 61. Gesnerus
Disp. 17. pro lib. concord. Disp. 16. p 155. 156. 157 650. Morgenst. tract. de
Eccl p 71. Hunnius in Co. loq. Ratisb p 433. Christmannus in Diagraphe
Electionis p. 125.
other Lutheran writers, who purposely and at large confirm from the sacred
Scriptures this our Catholic Doctrine, impugning by name many of their own
Brethren for teaching the contrary.

To come now to the Caluinistes, Musculus teaches that, Loc. com. loc de pec.
Sec 5. 29.
If he who has been made partaker of the heavenly grace, do fall from that
grace, and of a just and faithful man, do become unjust and unfaithful etc.
this man's Conscience (the purity of faith being lost) is made guilty unto
Damnation. And then signifying his dissent herin, from his other Brethren,
concludes: I know that in this point sundry are of another mind, but what my
opinion is, I tell freely, without injury to them. Rollocks admonition is this,
Lectures upon the Colloss. Lecture. 6. c. 1. p. 64.
I tell thee, that notwithstanding thou art redeemed, and by this blood of
Christ freed from sin and death, yet if thou take delight in sin, the
greater shall be thy Damnation. M. Harsnet made a Sermon in proof hereof at
Paul's Cross And of Hemingius and Snecanus Willet faith, Synop. p. 811.
These Patrons of universal Grace and Conditional Election, do consequently
hold, that men may loose their Election and faith, Hemingius p 30. The same is
also maintained by Snecanus. p. 976.

Calvin writing upon these words of the Apostle, Heb. 11.15.
By faith Moses being borne was hid 3 months by his Parents, says: In Heb.
11.13.
It is to be noted, that the faith here praised was very weak. For whereas the
fear of his death set apart, they ought to have bred him, they expose him to
danger. It is evident therefore that their faith for a short time did not only
waver, but was fallen away. Again, Instit. l. 3. c. 2.. 24.
Neither do I gainsay, what I lately said, that sometimes certain
interruptions of faith do happen, as the weakness thereof amongst violent motions
is hither and thither bended. So in the thick darkness of tentations the light
thereof is choked. And in another place, Epist. 68. cuius init. Heri vt
plurimum.
Let that of Paul be always in your mind, 1. Tim. 1.19.
That certain have fallen away from faith, because they were turned from a
good Conscience, lest that we also be Examples to others of so fearful a
shipwreck.

John Husse teaches this Doctrine distinctly saying, Ad. c. 1. poster. Epist.
D. Petri.
Here it is doubted whether any trauailer (or man in this life) can be certain
of his own Predestination. And it seems that not, by that of Ecclesiastes 9.
No man knows whether he be worthy of love or hatred: To the contrary Peter
seems here to be, saying, Make your vocation and Election certain, and so
certain Predestination. Here it is to be noted, that no man in this life
knows certainly without revelation made to him hereof, that he is
Predestinate, and so neither that he is in grace, or his work to be virtuous.

Lastly D. Luther teaches that, These. 1.10. Wittemb. Anno 1517. proposita.
No man is secure of the truth of his Contrition, much less of the obtaining
of plenary remission. Again, Ep ad Episcopum Moguntin.
Man by any office of the Bishop is not made secure of Salvation, seeing
neither by the Grace of God infused, he is made secure of Salvation: but the
Apostle commands us always to work our Salvation in fear and trembling. So
that Hussites, Lutherans, and Caluinistes do defend our Catholic Doctrine of
our uncertain knowledge in this life of our Predestination and Salvation.

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture in proof of our certainty of
Predestination and Salvation, and that faith and Justice cannot be lost,
answered.
SOme object that, We Romans 8.16.17.
have received the Spirit of Adoption of Sons, wherein we cry Abba Father, for
the spirit himself gives testimony to our Spirit, that we are the sons of
God. And if Sons, heirs also etc. yet if we suffer with him, that we also
may be glorified with him. Answ. The testimony which the spirit gives is not
by any Revelation, but by a certain feeling and experiment of internal
Comfort, and peace of Conscience, which begets a hopeful, yet coniecturall
knowledge: And though it be most true, that the Just during their present
Estate of Justice are the Sons of God, and so also heirs; yet, which is the
only point in question, that the Just may not finally fall, or that the Heir
may not for his after unworthiness be disinherited, is not so much as insinuated
in this place: And the contrary might easily be proved by the example of
Lucifer, and the other Angels who fell from heaven, Isa. 14.1^.1. Pet. 2.4.
and were during their abode there, and before their sins, the Children of
God, and yet afterward by sin fell from that state. And the same is here
plainly taught, in that these sayings are but delivered with this forsaid
annexed Condition, if we suffer with him: which like Condition to be
necessarily ever understood in all other sayings, where it is expressly wanting,
is once for ever sufficiently explained by God himself in these words, Ezech.
33.13.4.
If I shall say to the just, that living he shall live, and he trusting in his
Justice, do iniquity, all his Justices shall be forgotten, and in his iniquity
etc. shall he dye. And if I shall say to the impious, Dying thou shall dye, and
he do Penance from his sin etc. living, he shall live, and not dye.

Jewel Defense of the Apology. p. 78.
obiecteth these words of S. Paul, Romans 8.38.
I am sure that neither death nor life etc. shall be able to separate us from the
Charity of God. Answ. In the Romans 8.28.29.30. etc.
precedent verses it is clear, that S. Paul speaks of the Predestinate in
general, and so likewise is this place expounded by L. de Correp. and Gra. c.
7.
S. Austine; now of the Salvation of these in general no man doubts.
Secondly if S. Paul spoke of himself in particular, and of others like unto
himself, yet by those words, Certus sum, I am sure, Comment. in hunc locum.
Hier. Ep. ad Algafiam. q. 9.
S. Ambrose and S. Hierome understand, I am persuaded, or I trust: and the
Greek word (...), which S. Paul here uses does so certainly signify,
persuasus sum, I am persuaded, that Translation of the New Test. in Latin,
printed Londini 1587 Kinned. in his Redempt. of mank^nd. p. 365.
Beza, Kinnedoncius, and our English Bibles of Anno 1576. and 1590. do
accordingly so translate it: and so the certainty which this text affoardeth,
is not of faith, but of pe^suasion or hope; in respect whereof, in the same
Chapter it is said, Romans 8.24.
We are saved by hope. Thirdly, though this certainty were of knowledge and
faith, yet it is impertinent to that particular knowledge which Prot. pretend,
which according to Beza Annot. in Nou. Jest. in ep. ad Romans 11. c. 2.
them, extends to every man for himself only, but not concerning any other:
whereas, though Jewel corrup^ly for his purpose translateth, shall be able to
remove me; S. Paul yet said, shall be able to remove us, thereby professing to
know as much of others, as of himself which in s^ndry other verses he there
explaineth to be the Elect in general. Lastly S. Paul elsewhere says, And Romans
25.14.
I my self ^lso, my brethren, am assured (certus sum) of you, that you also
are full of love, replenished with all knowledge etc. And yet no man will say,
that he believed with certainty of faith, that all the Romans were full of
love, and of all knowledge: and the same phrase and sense is used in Luc. ^0.9.
Heb. 6.9.
other places of Scripture.

Others further object that, 1. Cor. 2.12.
We have received not the Spirit of this world, but the Spirit that is of God:
that we may know the things that of God are given us. Answ. This is not spoken
of the knowledge of those benefits which belong to this or that man in
particular, but of those which are bestowed upon true belieuers in general, in
this time of Grace, as to know Christ's Incarnation, Passion, and the joys of
heaven, which Pagans, Jews, and Heretics being ignorant of, do deryde.

Some urge those words of S. Paul, 2. Cor. 13.5.
Try your own selves if you be in the faith: prove ye your selves: know you
not your selves that Christ Jesus is in you, unless perhaps you be reprobate.
Answ. Though a man might know or feel the act of faith to be in himself
(because it is an act of our understanding, which is all that this place
affords) yet that this faith may not be afterward lost, which is the point
questionable, remains heerby unproven. 2. As concerning the Corinthians
knowledge, that Christ was in them, the sense is not of Christ's being in them,
according to his grace of Justification (for then would not S. Paul so
grievously have reprehended and threatened them as in In this and the three
precedent Chapters.
several places of the same Epistle he does) but of his being in them 2. Cor.
12.12.
in signs, wonders, and mighty deeds, which if they did not aknowledge, they
were reprobates.

Lastly, suppose it were understood of Christ's being in them by his grace of
Justification, yet this only argues for the time present, but as concerning
their future knowledge of their final perseverance in that estate, and not
falling afterward from thence, this place yields no color. And ever
remember these words of the same Apostle, Heb. 3.14.
We be made partakers of Christ; yet so if we keep the beginning of his
substance (or faith) firm unto the end.

Again it is urged that, 1. Io. 3.14.
we know that we are translated from death to life because we love the Brethen.
1. Io. 4.13.
In this we know that we abide in him and he in us, because he of his Spirit
has given to us. 1. Io. 5.13.
These things I write to you, that you may know that you have eternal life
which believe etc. Answ. The word (know) does not necessarily import infallible
knowledge by faith, but likewise that which is gathered by hopeful signs and
conjectures. But in particular to the two former places, I say, that though the
Apostle speaks in the first person, because he co^fidently hoped himself to
be one of them who loved the brethren and had the Spirit of God, yet his
sayings are general, signifying these to be translated from death to life, who
love their brethren, and those to abide in God and God in them who have the
Spirit of God. Now those are said to love the brethren, or, 1. Io. 2.2.
the Children of God, who love God and keep his Commandments; which seeing
Protestants think impossible, instead of certainty of their Salvation, they
were rather to believe the impossibility thereof. To the third place, to omit
that by life eternal, S. John may be said to mean the knowledge of God, which
true belieuers have, according as elsewhere he writes, Io. 17.3.
This is life eternal, that they know thee etc. I further answer that those
who believe, have eternal life, not in deed (not being actually in heaven) but
in hope only, according as it is said, Romans 8.^4.
We are saved by hope; for to the obtaining of it actually, is requisite our
perseuera^ce in faith, which none can promise to himself: and I have formerly
proved, that true Faith may finally be lost.

Others yet urge that, Romans 8.30.
whom he called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them also he
glorified: therefore he who is once Justified, is Elect and so cannot finally
fall. Answ. This proves no more of him that is justified, then of him that is
called, for the words respect both a like: Now that every one who is called, is
not elect, appears in that, Mat. 2^.14.
Many are called but few elect; the words therefore are to be understood not of
every one who is called or justified in general, but only (as Romans 8.33.
is signified) of the Elect, whom in his forknowledge, he Ver. 29.
foreknew, to be Ver. 28.
according to purpose called: and of these we grant none do finally fall out
who these are who can know? For Romans 11.34.
who has known the mind of our Lord? or who has been his Counsailour?

Willet Synop. p. 556.
obiecteth these places, Romans 11.29.
Without repentance are the gifts and vocation of God; Io. 13.1.
whereas he had loved his etc unto the end he loved them. Io. 10.19.
My father that which he has given me is greater then all, and no man can
pluck them out of the hand of my Father: therefore he who is once in Grace
shall persevere unto the end. Answ. Though God does not for his part repent him
of his goodness in bestowing his guiftes upon us, yet in regard of our abuse of
them, it is said (according to our capacity) that he does Genesis 6.6. 1. Reg.
15.11.
repent him: Also the benefit of our calling here mentioned, which (as before
is proved) may be cast off, argues and explayneth, that his other guiftes
likewise here mentioned, may in like manner also be lost. As to the second, it
is most true, that Christ for his part loves to the end: and so he Mar. 1^.21
12. and see Mat. 19.22.
loved the rich man who went away from him, and yet this argued not that man's
Election. And it may not be imagined, that God is wanting in his love to all
sinners, as they are his Sap. 11.21.
Creatures, though he hate their Sin. To the third, Christ said, Io. 17.1.
Whom thou gave me, have I kept, and none of them perished, but the Son of
Perdition: whereby is clear that all whom God gives, do not persevere: the
meaning therefore only is, that neither the Devil, nor his Instruments can
perforce take them away, but only their own voluntary asse^t to fall 2. Admit.
that the place objected were to be understood of the Elect in general (whose
final perseverance God forknoweth) of whom, we confess none does perish, for
God is Aug. de Correp. and Great. c. 7.
not deceived in his forknowledge, and yet as Hier. in c. 26. Hier. Aug. To. 7.
de Praedest. and Great. c. 15. de ciu. Dei. l. 5. cap. 9 Tom 1. de lib. Arb. l.
3. c. 4. Tom 7. Hypog. l. 6.
Fathers, and Hiper. Method. Theol. l. 1. p. 319 Amand. Polan. partit. Theol.
l. 1. p. 8. and in Disp. de Prouid. Dei. sect 38. 39. 40.
Prot. teach, things are not, because God did forknow them, but because they
are, God therefore does forknow them. This I say does not prove, either that
every one who is once faithful or justified is Elect, or that such as are
Elect, should know themselves in particular to be Elect.

Willet Synop. p. 557. Kinned in his Redempt of Mank. p. 74.
and others further urge that S. Paul says, 2. Tim. 4.7 8.
I have consummate my course etc. there is laid up for me, a Crown of Justice,
which our Lord will render to me in that day, a just Judge. So assured was S.
Paul of his own salvation. Answ. M. Perkins confesses, that both Catholics
and Prot. do Refor. Cath p. 38.
hold that a man may be assured of his Salvation through extraordinary
revelation, as Abraham and others were. But this is impertinent to Prot.
pretended knowledge by Perk. ib. p. 39.
ordinary faith: and that S. Paul's knowledge here urged was extraordinary,
appears by his like foresaid knowledge signified in this very same place of
the time of his resolution (or death) being at hand: As also (by like
revelation) he said in like manner to the Ephesians, Act. 20.25.
Behold, I do know that you shall no more see my face, all you. To omit then,
that this place does more clearly convince merit and reward of good works, it
makes no more for our certainty of Salvation by ordinary faith, then it does
for the certain knowledge of the time of our death, for it concerns both
these a like, and therefore proves either both, or neither.

Kinnedoncius Redempt of Mank. p 382.
obiecteth, that S. Peter advises us thus, 2. Pet. 1.^.
Labor the more that by good works you may make sure your vocation and
Election. Answ. 1. Omitting how forcible this text is for Iustifica^ion by
works, I demand, Be not the faithful already cetaine of their Election by
their faith, but are they yet to seek for this certainty thereof from their
works? If so: What more plain against Protestants pretended certainty by
faith, or to prove that the certainty of Gods Promise depends but upon our
works, and therefore is to us but conditional, as the text there yet further
explayneth, 2. Pet. 1.11
for doing these things you shall not sin. This text objected is so little
favoring to Prot. that In his Translat. against the Rhem. Test. and the
English Translat. of Anno 1576. and Beza of 1587.
Fulke and others do purposely omit this rehearsal of good works, though they
be translated as parcel of the text by other Kinned. in his redemp. of mank p.
382.
Protestants, and in all Latin Copies, and some Greek also, as Beza
confesses. In so much that the other foresaid omission is most weakly excused,
not defended by D. Against Rhem. Test. fol. 441.
Fulke.

D Against Purgat. p. 15.
Fulke urges, that the Ephesians Ephesians. 1.13.14.
were signed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the pledge of our
Inheritance. And, Ephesians. 4.30.
Grieve not the Spirit of God, in which you are signed unto the day of
redemption. Answ. By the Spirit here is only meant the holy Ghost, Luc. 14.49.
promised, and Act. 1.4.
given to them in Act. 19.2.6.
their Confirmation. 2. By the foresaid signing and pledge of Inheritance,
there can be no further urged, but the conuention or promise made upon Gods
part, the performance whereof is on his behalf most certain: but that the
Ephesians were heerby assured to perform the condition required on their part,
is not so much in this place as intimated; but they rather in regard of the
contrary are here premonished not to grieve the Spirit; and so accordingly it
is elsewhere said, Esa. 63.10.
they provoked to wrath, and afflicted the Spirit of his holy One: they Act.
7.51.
resisted the holy Ghost: and Heb. 6.4.6.
some who were once illuminated, have tasted also the heavenly gift, and were
made partakers of the holy Ghost etc. are fallen etc. So weak are the
Objections made by Prot. from Scripture for their infallible knowledge of their
Predestination and Salvation.

CHAP. XXXV. The True State of the Question, concerning the formal Cause of
Justification.
Whether the formal Cause of man's Justification is any Virtue, or Grace
infused by God, and inherent in the Soul: or that it consists only in
Christ's not imputation of Sin, or in the only remission of Sin without any
infusion of Grace. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
THe Catholic Church Decrees, that Council. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 7.
Justification is not only remission of sins, but also Sanctification and
renouation of the interior man, by the voluntary receiving of grace and
guiftes, whereby man of unjust, is made just, and of an Enemy a friend etc. The
Causes of this Justification are; The final, the Glory of God and Christ and
life eternal; The efficient, our merciful God etc. The meritorious the most
beloved only begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ etc The isntrumental, the
Sacrament of Baptism etc. The only formal cause is the Justice of God, not
wherewith himself is just, but wherewith he makes us just, by which we, being
bestowed upon us by him, are renewed in the spirit of our mind, and are not
only reputed, but truly called, and are just, every one receiving Justice in
us, according to his measure, which the Holy Ghost deuideth to every one as he
will, and according to the proper disposition and cooperation of every one. For
although no man can be just, to whom the Merits of the Passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ are not communicated: yet, that is done in this Justification of
the wicked, whilst by the merits of the same most sacred Passion the Charity
of God by the Holy Ghost is powered into their hatts who are justified, and
inhereth in them: Whereupon in the Justification it self, with remission of
sins, man by Jesus Christ, to whom he is ingrafted, receives all these
things together infused, Faith, Hope, and Charity. And therefore, Can. 10.
If any shall say, men, without the Justice of Christ by which he merited to
us, to be justified, or that by it they are formally just, Anathema. Can. 11.
If any shall say, men to be justified, either by only imputation of Christ's
Justice, or by only remission of Sins, excluding grace and Charity, which by
the holy Ghost is powered into their hearts; or that grace whereby we are
justified, is only the favor of God, Anathema.

In the second Mileuitane Council it is decreed, that, Cap. 3.
Whosoever shall say, the Grace of God wherein we are justified by our Lord
Jesus Christ, to be of force only for remission of Sins already committed,
but not to the help that they may not be committed, Anathema.

All Bellar. de Iustif l. 2. c. 2. Rhem Test. in Mat. 6.11.
Catholics with one consent teach, that the formal cause of man's
Justification is not Gods justice whereby himself is formally just, nor
Christ's Justice imputed to us, nor only remission of Sin, or Gods not
imputation of it; but it is Gods Justice whereby he makes us truly just by
infusing into our souls the sacred virtues of Faith, Hope, and Charity.

Points Disputable.
All agreeing, that man is justified by Grace infused: S. Tho. 1. q. 110. art.
3. Dom. Soto. l. 2. de Not. and Gra. c. 17.18.
Some teach that this Grace is a habit really distinct from Charity, having for
her subject the Substance of the Soul, as Charity the Will. Alex. Halens. in
Sum p. ^. q. 69. mem. 2. art. 4.
Others distinguish them not really, but formally. Durand. 1 Did. 26. q 1. 8.
Others think them to differ in nothing but only in name.

All also teaching, that according to the ordinary course, mortal sin cannot
be forgiven but by the gift of grace: yet some Scotus 2. Did. 28. q 1. and 4.
Did. 1. q. 6.
think, that God by his absolute power may remit sin without all Grace. But
others probably teach, that without justifying grace, sin cannot be remitted
by Gods absolute power.

Protestants Untruths.
Caiet 1. 2. q. 113. art. 2.
Chemnitius tragically complains, that we take away the force of Justification
from the merits of Christ, and ascribe it to our virtues and qualities. But
truly we ascribe it to the Grace of God as the formal cause, and to the merits
of Christ as the meritorious cause.

Calvin affirms, that according to our Doctrine, In Antid. ad Sess. 6.
Our Justification consists partly upon imputation partly upon quality. But
we Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Cap. 7.
teach that there is only one formal cause of Justification, which is the
Justice of God, infused and inherent in us.

Protestant Doctrine.
Calvin sets down the Prot. Doctrine in these words, Instit. l. 3 c. 11..
2.
We simply do expound Justification to be acceptance, whereby God houldeth us
received into his Grace for just: And we affirm, that it consists in
remission of sins, and the imputation of Gods Justice. The same is taught by
In Mat. 12.37. Zuing. in Luc. 1. Zanchius tom. 2. li. 2. de Not. Dei. c. 2.
Beza, and sundry others.

D. Humphrey sets down the English reformed doctrine thus, Ad rat. 2. Camp.
p. 142.
That which we say and teach of Grace infused, that is of Inherent Justice; in
us there is no habit got^en, no virtue ingraffed, no quality infused no justice
wherewith we may be justified before God inherent in us; but all iniquity, all
rebellion contumacy of the flesh is ingraffed and inherent. So that in a
perfect Prot. justified, regenerate, predestinate, there is no virtue infused
by God, or inherent in his Soul, but still it remains stained and stored
with all iniquity, all rebellion and contumacy of the flesh, these only being
ingraffed and inherent in her.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
The denial of Inherent Justice was condemned in Julian the Pelagian by S.
Austine, saying. Cont. Iul. Pelag. l. 6. c. 11.
Thou do not depart from thy opinion wherein thou affirmest, the Grace of God
to consist in the only remis^ion of Sins. And the same error was rejected by
Cae^estinus Ep. 1. c. 10. Conc. Mil. c. 3. Aug. l. 1. Retract c. 13. and ep.
106.
and the Mileuitane Council. And for the same was censured Epiph. haer. 64.
Proclus, and the Theod. l. 4. de haer. Fab.
M^ssalians.

Protestant Errors.
The French Hugonots teach that, Confess. Gal. Art. 11.
Even those who excel in Sanctity are defiled with many sins as long as they
converse in this world. Calvin Lib. de coena. p. 2.
Let us certainly know, that although we be wicked and impure, yet the Lord to
acknowledge and receive, yea and to esteem us for just. Whitaker Ad rat. 8.
Camp. p. 38.
We affirm our Justice to be the hyding of the Sin. And, L. 3. de pec. Orig.
Remission pardons the punishment (but) does not actually take away, or
remove all the fault. Piscator, In These. l. 1 p. 428.
forgiveness of the fault is nothing else, then not to punish for the fault.

Hence also Luther teaches that, Tom. 7. in Mat. 7. fol. 96.
A Christian is as good and holy as Peter and Paul, neither is any man greater
or better then he. Postil. in Dom. 24. fol. 346.
S. Peter is not better then the thief upon the Cross: Mary the Mother of God
does not excel Mary the sinner. In Fes^. Natiu. Mariae. fol. 436.
We are as holy as Mary and other Saints. Paraeus De Iustif. l. 2. c. 7. p.
470.
By Christ's justice imputed to us we are accounted no less just then Christ
himself, proportion at least being kept of the members and the head. So that
every faithful Prot. is as holy and just, as S. Peter, S. Paul, the B. Virgin,
yea as Christ himself, a little proportion being observed.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures, that the formal Cause of man's
Justification is true virtue and Grace inherent: and that it does not consist
only in Christ's not imputation of Sin, or in the only remission of Sin.
TO make trial of the truth in this question by the Sriptures, S. Paul
writes, Romans 5.17.
For if in the offense of one, death reigned by one: much more they that
receive the abundance of Grace and of donation and of Justice shall raygne in
life by one Jesus Christ. Therefore as by the offense of one unto all men to
condemnation: so also by the Justice of one unto all men to Justification of
life. For as by the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners: so also by
the Obedience of one many shall be made just. Here we are said to be made lust
by Christ, no less then we were made unjust by Adam, which was not only by
Adams Injustice imputed unto us, but by Injustice truly and really inherent in
our selves. Again, 1. Cor. 15.49.
As we have borne the Image of the earthly, let us bear also the Image of the
heavenly: but the Image of earthly Adam we have truly borne by internal Sin,
therefore we must ^^uly bear the Image of Christ by internal Grace. Also,
Ephesians. 4.
Be renewed in the Spirit of your mind: and put on the new man, which according
to God is created in Justice and Holiness of the truth: here New man is not
said to be imputed to us, but put on us, and that not only to the sight of the
world, but according to God, and this in Justice and Holiness.

But what more conuincing then that Tit. 3.5.
God according to his mercy has saved us by the lauer of regeneration and
renouation of the holy Ghost, whom he has powered upon us abundantly by Jesus
Christ our Savior: that being justified by his Grace, we may be heirs
according to hope of life everlasting: here we are said by Baptism to be
regenerated and renewed, which cannot be, but by some mutation in our selves,
whereby of hated Enemies, we become beloved Sons.

Such texts also confirm this, which teach, that Sins are not only covered
by Gods not imputation, but are truly taken or blotted out of the Soul by
Grace. So K. 1. Paral. 21.8.
David prayed, I beseech thee take away the iniquity of thy servant Isa. 44.22.
I have clean taken away thine iniquityes as a cloud, and thy sins as a
most. Ezech. 36.25.
I will power out upon you clean water, and you shall be cleansed from all your
contaminations. Ps. 50.9.
Thou shall sprinkle me with byssope, and I shall be cleansed; thou shall wash me,
and I shall be made whyter then snow. Ps. 102.1^.
As far as the East is distant from the West, has he made our iniquities far
from us. Ps. 9.5.
His sin shall be sought, and shall not be found. Prou. 15.27.
By mercy and faith sins are purged. Mich. c. 7.19.
He will return and have mercy on us: he will lay away our iniquities: he will
cast all our sins into the bottom of the Sea. Cant. 4.7.
Thou art all fair, O my love, and there is not a spot in thee.

The like phrases are used in the New Testament, Io. 1.29.
Behold the Lamb of God, behold him that takes away the sins of the
wolrd. Act. 3.19.
Be penitent and convert, that your sins may be put out. And the like may be
seen in 1. Io. 1.7. Act. 22.17. Heb. 1.3.1. Cor. 6.11. Ephesians. 5.8.27.
sundry other places

Reason also confirms this, for doubtless the same justice is restored unto us
by the merits of Christ, which he lost in Adam, according to that of S. Paul,
Romans 5.21.
Where sin abounded, grace did more abound. And S. Austine affirms, De
Spir. and lit. c. 21. and de Genesis l. 6. c. 21.
In the inward man renewed by the Grace of Christ, that Justice to be written,
which fault had cancelled: But all confess, that Adams Justice before his fall
was not imputative, but inherent and true Justice, which made him grateful in
the sight of God,

Again, the Justice wherewith Children baptized are endued, is not the
extrinsecall justice of Christ, apprehended by actual faith, which they,
wanting reason, cannot have, but the habits of Faith, Hope, and Charity: so
likewise then are we justified.

Besides, one and the same thing can never be the efficient, and formal cause
of the same effect: but the Justice of Christ is the Cause of our
Justification, producing Justice in us, for Io. 1.^^.
Of his fulness we all have received, according to the measure of his gift:
which cannot be understood of imputative Justice, which without proportion of
measure is equally referred to every one, therefore of inherent: whereof Christ's
Justice being the efficient, cannot be also the formal cause.

In like sort, the Grace wherewith we are here justified upon Earth, is the same
which shall be Crowned in heaven, for the reward of glory is proportioned to the
small or great measure of Justice and grace which here we have. Now, that which
is crowned in heaven is certainly inherent, wherewith the Soul is truly
beautified for all eternity.

Further, as none can be truly the Object of Gods hatred and worthy of
Damnation, by mere imputation of fault, unless he be faulty indeed; so none can
be the object of his love and worthy of heaven, by extrinsecall imputation,
unless he be truly free from Sin, and endued with Grace. And as none can live
by the life which is in another, so neither can he be formally just, by the
justice which is in another. Again the denomination of a subject is more truly
and properly taken from the inherent quality, then from the outward form;
therefore if sin does still in here in us, for all Christ's imputation, we
cannot be truly termed just, holy, innocent, immaculate, the Children of God,
the heirs of heaven, as we are styled by the Scripture; but rather defiled and
wicked sinners, slaves of the Devil, and worthy of hell. Lastly Christ
himself had upon Earth, and has still inherent Justice, and so likewise his
holy Angels; but the members of one mystical Body partake of one life with the
head, Gal. 4.^.
Because you are sons (says S. Paul) God has sent the spirit of his Son
into your hearts. Thus clearly do the Scriptures make for inherent Justice.

SECT III. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proof of Inherent
Justice.
S. Austine writing upon those words of the Psalmist, ^s 98.4.
Thou have done Justice and Judgment in Jacob exalt ye the Lord our God,
says: ^n Ps. 98.
Truly exalt ye well exalt ye, let us pr^ise and exalt him, who made the
Justice which we have. He made it in us; for who made in us justice, but he
that iustifyeth us? We therefore ungodly, he the iustifyer, seeing he made that
justice in us, wherewith we may please him. Again, Ser. 15. de verb. Apostoli.
He that shall believe in him, shall not have his own Justice which is from
the law, although the law be good, but he shall fulfill the law, not by his
own, but by Justice given from God; for Charity is the fulness of the law. From
whence is that Charity powered into our hearts? not truly from our selves, but by
the holy Ghost which is given us.

S. Hierome speaking of Baptism, says, L. 3. cont. Pelagianos.
Now thou art made clean in the lauer, and of thee it is said, who is she that
ascends white? and let her be washed, yet she cannot keep her purity, unless
she be strengthened from our Lord. But S. Hierome is so clear, that Luther
says, In Comment. S. Petri. See Cent. 4. c. 10. Col. 1249.
This point which in Christian Doctrine, is to be undoubtedly established, that
in Saints sin abides, was never by Hierome understood.

Calvin also says of S. Austine touching this point, Inst. l. 3. c. 11.. 15.
The very sentance of Augustine, or at least his manner of speaking is not
altogether to be received. Che^nitius of many other fathers writes, Exam.
part. 1.
We sue not process against the Fathers, albeit they commonly take the word
(to justify) for the renewing whereby the works of righteousness are wrought in
us. And, I am not ignorant, that the Fathers do often use the word (justify) in
this signification, namely to make inherently just. The Centuristes reprove
Origin, for that he does Cent. 3. c. 4. Col. 78.
With open mouth declayme of the Justice of Job. They blame Cyprian for saying,
Ib. Col. 82.
He that baptizeth, imparteth the holy Ghost, and inwardly sanctifyeth the
baptized. They affirm of Clemens Alex. that, Cent. 2. c. 4. Col. 58.
In all his writings it appears, he never knew the force of Original Sin,
or the inherent malady thereof. So confessed are the Fathers.

SECT. IV. That Protestant writers do teach the Doctrine of inherent Justice.
LVther, Tom 5 in Gal. 3 fol. 335.
These things fight one against another, a Christian to be just and to be loved
of God, and yet at the same time to be a Sinner: for God cannot deny his own
nature, that is, he cannot but hate sin and sinners, and this he does
necessarily, for otherwise he should be most unjust: how then are these two
contradictories together true: I have sin, and am most worthy of anger and
the hatred of God; and the Father loves me? This absurdity follows, by
affirming a man to be justified, and yet his sins not to be taken away, nor
any virtue infused into his Soul.

SECT. V. Objections from Scripture against inherent Justice, answered.
D. Whitaker Cont. Camp rat 8. fol. 224.
obiecteth that, 2. Cor. 5.21.
Him that knew no sin, for us he made sin, that we might be made the
Justice of God in him: therefore seeing Christ was not truly made sin, but by
imputation, so are we no otherwise made just by him. Answ. Christ is said to be
made sin, not that he was truly a sinner himself, but that he was made an
host, or Sacrifice, for the taking away of sin, for so often the word sin
is taken in the Leuit. 4.21.24. Ezech. 44.29. Ose. 4.8.
Scripture, and so our sins were imputed to him, in that he did voluntarily
undertake to make satisfaction for them: wherefore as Christ not by the means
of another, but in his own person took Romans 8.3.
The similitude of the flesh of sin, and was truly made a Sacrifice for
sin, so we not only by Imputation, but truly and really in our selves, ought
to be the Justice of God. S. Austine explaining these former words, that we
might be made the justice of God, says: De Spir. and lit. c. 18. and ep. 120.
ad Honorat.
Even as when we read Salvation is our Lord, it is not meant that Salvation
whereby our Lord is saved; but whereby they are saved whom he saves: so when it
is sa^d, Gods Justice, that is not to be understood, wherewith God is just, but
that wherewith men are just, whom by his grace he iustifyeth.

Others object, that God, Ephesians 1 6.
has gratifyed us in his beloved Son, that is, only houldeth us acceptable
in him. Answ. That the word (...) does truly signify to make gracious, S.
Chrysostom teaches saying, In Comment. huius loci.
He made us gracious, that is, he not only freed us from Sins, but he also
made us his beloved friends. For if one having a man scabbed corrupted with
plague, disease, old age, poverty and hungar, should presently make him a
beautiful young man, who should excel all in fayrnes, sending out great
splendor from his cheeks, and darkning the brightness of the eyes with
reflections: whom also he should place in the very flower of his age, and
should withal cloth and adorn hi^ (...) purple and all things fine: No
otherwise does Christ make our S^ polished, beautiful, desired, and beloved.

These words also of S. Paul are urged, Philip. 3.9.
And may be found in him not having my Justice, which is of the law, but that
which is of the faith of Christ, which is of Gods Justice in faith: as though
heerby it should appear, that the Apostle would have no Justice of his own,
but only that Justice which is in Christ. Answ. S. Paul calls that a man's
own Justice, which he challenges by the works of the law or nature, without
the Grace of Christ: and that Gods Justice (as S. L. 3. cont. 2. Ep. Pelag. c.
7. De Spir. and lit. c. 9.
Austine expounds this place) not which is in God, or by which God is just,
but that which is in man from God, and by his gift.

CHAP. XXXVI. The true State of the Question, concerning Iustifition by Faith
and Works.
Whether man is truly justified by Faith only, or that Hope, Charity, and good
Works are likewise causes of Iust^fication. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
HAVING proved man's Justification to be made by some virtues infused by God
into the Soul; it remains now to show what Virtues these are whereby man is
Justified: In manifestation whereof the Catholic Church has decreed, that,
Council. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 9.
If any shall affirm, the impious man to be justified by only faith, so as he
understands nothing else to be required, which may cooperate to the obtaining
of the Grace of Justification, and that in no respect it is needful that he be
prepared and disposed with the motion of his will, Anathema. And, Can. 24.
If any shall say that Justice received is not preserved and increased before
God by good works, but that the good works are only fruits and signs of
Justification already obtained, but not the Cause of the increasing thereof,
Anathema.

In the Council of Moguntia it was defyned, that, Conc. Mogunt. Cap 7. See
Conc. Senonens. Decret. 16.
He who after the grace of Just fication received, falls again by sin
receives Justification by the remedies of Penance: which with remission of
sins gives ^lso sanctifi^ation and renouation of the internal man in that
by the merits of Christ's Passion, which now is communicated to him tha^
belieueth with pardon of sins, man also receives the Grace of God and by the
holy Ghost together with Faith, Charity also and Hop^ powered into the heart.
And these gifts of God remaining in him, he is not now only reputed, or named,
but truly is just etc.

Catholics Bellar. de Iustif. l. 1. c. 13. Rhem. Testam. in Iac. 2.
generally teach that Faith, Hope, and Charity are the formal cause of man's
Justification, which is ever further increased by good works, so that not only
faith, but likewise Hope, Charity, and good Works do all of them concur, as
true causes of Justification.

Protestant Untruths.
Luther was not ashamed to say, Ad. c. 15. Joan.
Our Papists have neither taught nor understood any thing of faith. And, In
Colloq. Germon. c. de morte.
Show ye me one place of Instification, of faith, in the Decrees, Decretals,
Clementins, in all the writers of all Sums and Sentences, in all Sermons of
Monks, in Decrees of Councels, in all Postils, in all Hierome and Gregory etc.
But whosoever shall but look into these books by Luther cited, shall easily
find that every one of them will condemn Luther for an impudent Liar.

Melancthon affirms that, In Disp. de poenit. propos. 7.
The Schoolmen have taught foolishly and wickedly, Sins to be forgiven by
Contrition without faith. And that In Confess. August. art. de confess. and in
Apol. art. 11. and art. 15.
Satisfactions formerly were extolled immoderatly, but no mention was made of
faith and the merit of Christ, and the Justice of faith. The same just censure
will all Schoolmen give of Melancthon, which formerly was given of Luther.

Protestant Doctrine.
The English Protestant Church decrees, that, Articles of Relig. art. 11.
Calu. Instit. l. 3. c. 11.. 13. 14. 17. 18 19.
We are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, by faith, and not for our own works or deseruings.
Wherefore that we are justified by faith only, is a most wholesome doctrine, and
very full of comfort. Luther, De Postil. in Domin. post Natal.
Nothing else is required to Iust^fication, but to hear, and believe Jesus
Christ our Savior. And, De libert. Christian. fol. 6.
A Christian needs no works for this that he may be just and saved. Perkins,
Tom. 2. in Gal. c. 4. Col. ^19.
The doctrine which dreameth of Justification by works brings in Idolatry.
And, Tom. 1: c. 51. Col. 103.
It is false and ridiculous, that we are justified by works. Whitaker, Ad rat.
3 Camp. p. 7.
That our doctrine is most true and most holy, Man to be justified only by
faith. So that even Charity by these men is excluded from being any Cause of
our Justification.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
S. Austine condemns certain of the Pseudoapostles, for that they taught
that, De fide and oper. c. 14.
Only faith suffices to gain Salvation, because S. Paul had said, Man is
justified by faith without the works of the law. He also L. de haer c. 54.
reproves Eun^mius, for that he taught that, The committing or continuing of
any sins whatsoever could nothing hurt any man, if he were partaker of that
faith, which was taught by him. That our modern Prot. teach the same, Whitaker
shall testify: De Ecclesia p. 301.
We say that if any man have an act of faith. Sins do not hurt him: this
truly Luther affirms, this we all say. And for this your saying M. Whitaker,
you, and your All are condemned by S. Austine for Heretics.

Protestant Errors.
Faith being undoubtedly the beginning and foundation of man's Justification and
Salvation, and according to Prot. at sometimes the only cause thereon: yet it
is wonderful to see at other times how little esteem they make of it: for thus
writes Calvin, Instit. l. 3. c. 11. 7.
Properly speaking we say, only God to justify, we compare faith as it were to
a vessel etc. Faith although of it self it be of no worth or price, it does
justify us by bringing Christ, even as a pot full of money does enrich a man.
Peter Martyr. ^n loc. Class. 3. c. 4.. 8.
If faith it self be considered, as it is our work, we cannot be justified
therewith, seeing it is a work both lame and imperfect, far worse then the law
requires etc. He compares it, In Romans 11
to a hand infected with lepry, infirm, scabbed. D^naeus, In c. 31. Enchir. S.
Aug. p. 785.
If we consider Faith by it self, and as it is in us, it is imperfect, lame,
polluted, and defiled and mi^gled with infidelity, so that it is not truly
worthy the name of Virtue Pa^aeus, De Iustifi^. l. 4. c. 17.. 12. 9.
It is no absurdity, Faith sometimes to have mingled diffi^ence or increduli^y,
which is Sin, and so by accident faith to be Sin. And, Faith iustifyeth as
the beggar by his scabbed hand receives alms. Perkins, Tom. 2. in Gal. 3.
Col. 1^9.
Salvation does not depend of our Faith. Luther, Tom. 1. in Disp. hab. an.
1520. fol 371. See Schluss. tom. 7 Catal. haeret. p. 182. 193.
Faith unless it be without all even the least works does not justify; yea it
is not faith. Amsdorfiu^, In Colloq. Aldeburg. script. 6. p. 121.
Good works even according to their nature and substance, as they are
commanded by God, are hurtful to salua^ion Luther, Tom. 3. in Ps. 5 fol. 171.
Let this be thy rule, where the Scripture commands a good work to be done,
so understand it, that it forbids thee to do a good work, seeing thou can
not do it. Tom. 2. Wittemb. de Captiu Babyl. fol. 74.
A Christian or baptized person is so rich, that although he would, he cannot
loose his Salvation by any sins how great soever, unless he will not believe.
And this good reason he gives hereof elsewhere, In 2. part. Postil. Germ. fol.
140.
For only Infidelity condemns all men that are condemned: and on the
contrary, Only Faith makes all men blessed. So that a right Lutheran may live
and dye a Traitor, a murderer, Adulterer etc. and yet is sure to be saved.

SECT. II. It is proved by the Sacred Scriptures, that not only Faith, but
likewise Hope, Charity, and other good Works do truly justify, and cause
remission of Sin.
TO examine this so weighty a point by the Scriptures, all such Arguments
taken from Scriptures, as convince Faith to justify, do likewise prove the same
of the rest. Of faith it is said, Heb. 11.6.
Without faith it is impossible to please God: for he that comes to God must
believe that he is, and is a rewarder to them that seek him. Ab. 2.4.
The lust shall live in his faith. Act 13.39.
In him every one that belieueth is justified: and the Romans ^.27.28. Gal.
3.6.14.
like. Now answerably herto it is said of fear. Eccles. 1.27 28.
The Fear of our Lord expels sin; for he that is without fear cannot be
justified. Philip. 2.12.
With fear and trembling work your Salvation. Of Hope, Ps. 36.40.
He will etc. save them, because they have hoped in him. To 8.24.
By hope we are saved Of Charity and good Works, Luc. 7.47.
Many sins are forgiven her, because she has loved much: But to whom less
is forgiven, he loves less. 1. Io. 3.14.
We are translated from death to life, because we love the Brethren. 1. Pet.
4.8. Prou. 10.12.
Charity covers the multitude of Sins. By mercy and truth Iniquity is
redeemed. Tob. 12.9.
Alms purges Sin. Luc. 11.41.
Give alms, and behold all things are clean to you. Mat. 25.34.
Come etc. possess the kingdom etc. for I was an hungry etc. Prou. 16.6.
Dan. 4.24.
Redeem thy sins with alms. 2. Pet. 1.10.
Labor the more, that by good works you may make sure your vocation and
Election. These last words are so clear for us, that In suis Biblijs German.
and in Comment. in 2. Pet. 1. tom. 5. fol. 487.
Luther, Beza, Tremelius, and our English In the kings Bible.
Prot. do quite leave out these words, By good works. So express it is, that
Alms and good Works do cause remission of sins, and justify.

Because these words, Dan. 4.24.
Redeem thy Sins by Alms, do prove that good works do justify and satisfy
for Sin, Gesnerus therefore affirms that Compend. doct. ca. l. loc. 23. p.
495.
This Translation is corrupt. And yet Peter Martyr avouches that the Chaldee,
in which this Epistle was written, has verbatim, Redeem thy sins in
Justice.: and that, the Vulgar reading is taken from the Greek text.

And whereas concerning this last place of Daniel, some Prot. for redeem,
translate, break of; yet by the judgment of In Ps. 84. Englished c. 6. part.
4. p. 517.
Hemingius, the Hebrew word signifies to redeem. S. Hierome here reads
accordingly, and so also does Luth loc. com. class 1. p. 72. Pet. Mar. in his
com. plac. in Eng. part. 3. c. 4. p. 114. Melancth. loc. com. c. de bon. opib.
p. 157. Calu. Inst. c. 5. pa. 181. Bull. Dec. in Engl. p. 584. Aret. loc. com.
p. 321.
Luther, Peter Martyr, Melancthon, Calvin, Bullinger, with sundry other Prot.
and so also are some of our English Of Anno 1566.
Bybles.

This place is so conuincing, that Herbrandus says thereof, I answer, If (...)
the word be urged, it is manifest the sense of those words (of Daniel) to
fight with the scope of the whole Scripture, and with analogy of faith. So that
according to the litterall words, the sense directly makes against
Protestants. In like sort whereas Christ before said, Give Alms, and behold
all things are clean to you, Prot. in answer heerto, do expound the same in a
direct contrary sense. Vallada, Apol. cont. Episcop. Luzonensem c. 22. p. 300.
Christ is far from teaching, that sins are redeemed by Alms, that to the
contrary he derideth and reprehendeth the Pharisees, because they had this
opinion. Peter Martyr, In Romans 11. p. 518.
These words, Give alms etc. may be expounded 3. ways, first, that we decree
that it is an Ironicall speech etc. And the same answer is given by Apol.
Confess August. c. de respons. ad argumenta. Ar^t. in loc. part. 1. fol. 90.
others. But if such Ironicall speeches may be houlden for good, it will be easy
to euade all textes of Scripture though never so plain, for any one Article of
our Christian faith.

Lutherans expound those words, Apol. Confess. August. c. de impletione legis.
Because she loved much, that is, because she truly worshipped me with faith,
and with the exercises and signs of faith, still flying to their signs and
figures, and strangely confounding Faith and Charity, being virtues most
distinct. Because those words of Christ, Luc. 7.47.
Many sins are forgiven her because she loved much, do make for justification
by works; Beza instead of quoniam, because, places nam, for. And this he
says he did, that it might more easily be understood, the cause of remission
of Sin not to be showed in these words. Illyricus upon this place does
follow Beza.

But what more plain then those words and examples produced by S. James, C.
2.21.22.24.25.
Abraham etc. was he not justified by works, offering Isaac his son upon the
Altar. See thou that faith did work with his works, and by the works the
faith was consummate etc? Do you see that by works a man is justified, and not
by faith only? etc. Rachab the harlot was she not justified by works etc? S.
Austine L. 83. quaest. q. 76.
notes, that of purpose S. James took the very same example of Abraham, whom
S. Paul said to be justified by faith, and declares that he was also justified
by works, specifying the good work for which he was justified, to wit, his
obedience, and immolation of his only Son.

Calvin Instit l. 3. c. 17. sect. ^1. Fulk. again. Rhem. Test. fol. 4^9. And
the Marg. notes of the Engl. Bible of 1576. Whitak. cont Dur. l. ^. sect. 13.
and others do answer herto, that here, by faith is understood a barraine and
dead faith: But this is to offer violence to the words and meaning; for the
Apostle having told, that faith without works is idle, alleges in further
proof thereof the example of Abraham justified by works, whose faith did
work with his works, and then concluding immediately thereupon, Do you see that
by works a man is justified and not by faith only: so clearly is it spoken of
such faith, as wrought with works, and whereby Abraham was called the friend of
God, which cannot be a barraine and dead faith.

Perkins Reform. Cath. p. 92.
would euade by affirming, that by the word, justified, is understood only our
Justification before man: but this is as helples as the former, for the Apostle
saying, By works a man is justified, and not by faith only, does here at once
and alyke refer the word Justified, both to works and faith: wherefore if by
faith he meant a true faith, then does that justify before God; and if a
barraine and dead faith without works, then does it not justify so much as
before man. Again, the Example of Abraham who believed, and it was reputed to
him for justice, and who was called the friend of God, conuinceth that this
Justification was before God.

Paraeus his answer is, that S. James De iustif. l. 4. c. 18. p 1157.
adds the Antithesis, or contrary, and not by faith only, by imitation of
hypocrites: But so far was S. James from hypocrisy or dissimulation, that by
those words he spoke as plainly and fully for Justification by works, as any
Roman Catholikce at this day can do.

Lastly this place is so unanswerable, that sundry Prot. rejecting this
Epistle, for Apocryphal, do yield for their reason thereof, that Justification
by works is taught therein. Whereof Luther says, Tom 6. in c. 12. Genesis fol. 282.
James concludes naughtily; It follows not as James doteth, therefore fruits
justify. Let our Adversaries therefore be packing with their James. Melancthon,
Tom 2. de sacris Concionibus fol. 23.
But if they cannot be mitigated by any exposition, as that of James, you see
etc. such simply are not to be received. Beza, In Ep. Iac. 2.14.
This Epistle for that Cause is altogether rejected by some, as though it did
impugn sound doctrine. And the same is taught by other Muscul. in loc. tit. de
instif. p 504. Schlussel. Theol. Call. li. 1. art. 15 fol. 50. Cent. 1. l. 2. c.
4. Col. 54.71.
Prot. So that when the Scriptures are so plain, as that by no Exposition they
can be euaded by Prot. then they must be cast away for Apocryphal.

But the Scriptures are so plain and plentiful in behalf of good works,
that Luther being much urged therewith, has instructed his Scholars to
answer them thus, Tom. 3. in Gal. 3 fol. 345.
Here is Christ, there the Testimonies of Scripture, for the law and works:
But Christ is Lord of the Scripture etc. thou vrgest the Servant, that is, the
Scripture: I leave the servant to thee; I urge the Lord, who is the king of
Scripture. So making Christ and the Scriptures to be contrary one to another:
which is intolerable blasphemy, and an evident sign of a desperate Cause.

But to proceed, if neither Hope, Charity, nor other virtues, but only Faith
does justify, then it necessarily follows, that if true faith were separated
from other virtues, the same would truly justify, whereas it is most certain
that, 1. Io. 3.14.
He that loves not, abides in death. And, If 1. Cor. 13.2.
I should have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not
Charity, I am nothing. Because these words, 1. Cor. 13.2.
If I should have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not
Charity, I am nothing, do prove no faith to be sufficient to Justification
without Charity; Beza here for (...), omnem, translateth, totam: and this he
says, he did, lest this should deceive any man. Besides it would follow, that a
man having true faith were truly just, though he had a full and deliberate
intention to blaspheme, murder etc. which is most absurd.

Now, that a man may have true faith without Charity, besides the next recited
words of S. Paul, is by sundry other texts manifest, as, Yet Io 12.42.43.
of the Princes many believed in him: but for the Pharisees they did not
confess, that they might not be cast out of the Synagogue, for they loved the
glory of men more, then the glory of God. What (54) will it profit etc. if a
man says he has faith, Iac. 2.13.
but has not works? shall faith be able to save him? Tit. 3.8.
They which believe in God, be careful to excel in good works. All these
places speak of true faith, and not only of an imperfect knowledge of Christ,
as some would euade; agreably to which says S. Austine, Tr^ct. 5^. in Joan.
See how the Evangelist notes, and reproves some, which yet he says to have
believed in him; who if they should profit in this entrance of faith, they
would by profiting overcome the love of humane glory. But if this faith could
profit, and by profi^ing overcome the love of humane glory, certainly it wa^ a
true faith. Again says the same S. Austine. Tract. 54 in Joan.
Some hau^ believed being Predestinate to life eternal, but some have not
believed: But of those who have believed, some did so confess, that taking
boughs of Palms they met him coming, reioicing in the same Confession of
praise: But others of the Princes durst not confess, lest they should be cast
out of the Synagogue. Here the same Faith is ascribed to those which professed
Jesus manifestly, and to those who durst not profess him. Now no man will
deny, but that those who did profess him, had true faith in Christ, therefore
also it was true in those that did not confess him: but in the first it worked
with Charity, in the later it was alone without Charity. Lastly, he expressly
teaches that, De Trinit. l. 15. c. 18.
Faith truly may be without Charity, but not to profit.

This truth is further proved by all such Mat 3.12. and 13.48, and 22.10. and
25.2.
places as show, that in the true Church (in which none can be without true
faith) some are good, and some are evil: And yet the bad are not reprehended
for want of faith, but for want of the marriage garment, that is, Charity, and
for want of oil, which signifies works of mercy. And Mat. 7.21.
not every one that says to me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my father, which is in heaven, he shall
enter into the Kingdom of heaven. These men have Faith, otherwise they could
not invoke Lord, Lord; according to that of S. Paul, Romans 10.14.
How then shall they invoke in whom they have not believed, and yet besides
this faith, to enter into Heaven, they must do the will of the Father.

Lastly, Prot. do therefore teach Justification by only faith, because if it
depe^ded conditionally upon works, then no man could be assured of his
Justification, in which assurance or certainty they place their Justification,
and so their said Justification should be impossible. But if faith be
necessarily joined with works, then, in that our Justification depends of
faith, it depends also at least for our knowledge thereof, of good works,
and so thereby none can be assured, that he is justified, directly against
Protestants.

SECT. III. The Fathers expound the Sacred Scriptures in proof of
Justification not only by faith, but likewise by works: Also that true faith
may be without works.
IN cleerest proof here of S. Austine writes thus, De fide and oper. c 14.
Wherefore now let us see that which is to be cast from Religious hearts, lest
by evil security they loose their Salvation, if for the obtaining thereof, they
shall think only faith to suffice, and shall neglect to live well, and by good
works to keep the ways of God. For even in the times of the Apostles,
certain hard sentences of Paul the Apostle not being understood, some thought
that he said this, Let us do evil that good may come, because he had said.
Romans 5.20.
The law entered in, that sin might abound. And where sin abounded, grace
did more abound etc. When then the Apostle says, that he accounts a man to
be justified by faith without works of the law, he does not this, that faith
being obtained and professed, the works of Justice should be contemned, but
that every one may know, that he may be justified by faith, although the works
of the law be not precedent. For they follow him that is justified, do not go
before him that is to be justified etc. Therefore because this opinion was then
begun, the other Apostolical Epistles of Peter, John, James, Jude, do
chiefly direct their intention against it, that they may strongly confirm,
that Faith without works does profit nothing: Even also, as Paul himself has
not defyned any faith whatsoever whereby God is believed, but that wholesome and
plainly Evangelical, whose works proceed of love; Gal. 5.6.
Faith, says he, which works by Charity. Whereupon that faith which seems
to some to suffice to Salvation, he so affirms to profit nothing, that he
says, 1. Cor. 13.1.
If I should have all faith, that I could remove mountains, and have not
Charity, I am nothing. And, De fide and oper. c. 15.
I see not why Christ should say, if thou will have life everlasting, keep the
Commandments, if without observing of them by only faith, a man might be saved.

S. Ambrose demands, L. 10. Ep. 82.
What Salvation can be to us, unless we wash away our sins by fasting, seeing
the Scripture says, Job. 4. and 12.
Fasting, and alms do free from sin. Who then are these new masters, who
exclude the merit of fasting? Origin affirms that, Tract. 32. in Mat.
Those who profess faith in Jesus, but do not prepare themselves with good
works to salvation, are to be compared to the foolish Virgins. Whereof also
says S. Cyrill, Catech. 15.
Do not trust in this, that thou have the lamp only, but keep it burning. Do
not trust in this only, that thou belieuest, but keep faith burning, that thy
light may shine before men by good works etc.

S. Chrysostom demands, Ho. 30. in Joan.
Is it sufficient for life eternal to believe in the Son? And his answer
is, No, For not every one, Mat. 7.
says he, who says to me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven
etc. If thou shall rightly believe in the Father, and the Son, and the holy
Ghost, but shall not rightly live, it does nothing profit thee to Salvation. To
the same effect says Cyrill of Alexandria, L. 10. in Io c. 18.
That faith does not suffice to Salvation, the Disciple of Christ shows,
writing. Iac. 2.19.
Thou belieuest there is one God, the Devils also believe and tremble. If
therefore only faith should be sufficient, the multitude of Devils could not
perish: wherefore the works of Charity must come to faith.

The Fathers did so confessedly teach Justification by works, that Melancthon
says, In Ep. ad Romans p. 391.
Origin, and many others following him, feigned men to be just for their
works. Whitaker charge with Resp. ad Rat. Camp. p 78. Fulk. in Def. of the
Engl. Transl. p. 368.
Error herin not only Cyprian, but almost all the most holy Fathers of that
time. The Centurists say of those ancient times, C^nt. 3. c. 4. Col 79.
It seemeeh, that for the most part this chiefest Article of Justification to
have been obscured, for they attributed to works Justice even before God.
Cent. 3. Col. 265. 266.
Origin made good works the Cause of Justification Luther terms In Gal. c. 4.
Hierome, Ambrose, Austine and others, Iustice-workers of the old Papacy.
Bullinger acknowledges that, Upon the Apoc. Sermon. 87.
The Doctrine of Merits, Satisfaction, and Justification of works, did
incontinently after the Apostles times lay their first foundations. So
confessedly did the ancientest and learned Fathers teach our Catholic
Doctrine of Justification by works.

SECT. IV. That sundry Prot. do teach our Doctrine of Justification by Works,
and not only by Faith.
IT is supposed, that Husse, Wicliffe, and other pretended Prot. before Luthers
time agreed with Catholics heerin, as well for that we do not find that they
were charged, or troubled for any contrary doctrine, but also for that Fox
avouches that, Act. Mon. p. 402.
Our free Justification by faith only was long hid before Luthers time, and
opened by him. And so Melancthon censured Ep. ad Frider. Micon.
Wicliffe, that, He did not at all understand, nor hold the Justice of faith.

M. Napier upon these words of the Apocalypse, Apoc. 20.12.
The dead were judged etc. according to their works, writes thus, In Apoc. c.
20. p. 296. 297.
By works here are we judged and justified, and not by faith only, as also
James 2.24. testifyeth, meaning heerby, that of lively faith and of the good
works that follow thereupon, man is justified, and not of that dead faith,
that is by it self alone without any good works. And then reconcyling the
seeming repugnance between S. Paul and S. James, he affirms that S. Paul
says, We are justified by faith without the works of the law, that is to say,
not without good work, whatsoever etc. although it be without the precyse
works that the law requires etc. Yea shall find both James and Paul agree in
diverse places, that faith without works is a dead faith, and serves nothing
to Justification. Yea he spares not to say, we are justified by faithful
works etc.

Calvin affirms, Iustit. l. 3. c. 17.. 8.
Justification not to stand without works, and that good works are not only
acceptable to God, but also are to have reward. And good works of the
faithful are causes why our Lord does bestow his benefi^s upon them, Finally
that, our Lord does embrace works as the inferior Causes of our Salvation.
Rogers confesses that, Def. of the Art. art. 20 p. 110.
Justification by faith only, is groun^^d upon Gods written word, though not by
our common and vulgar terms to be read therein: which is in plain terms, to
acknowledge, that Justification by faith only, is not to be read in Gods word.

Peter Martyr expounding the foresaid words of Daniel, Redeem thy Sins with
Alms, confesses that, Hom. 21. in Dan.
This seems to be the most plain sense of all; If thou will hear me, thou
shall consider hew thou may purge thy Sins, and may return into favor
with God: this may be done, if thou shall redeem thy sins by Justice, and
Beneficence.

SECT. V. Objections taken from Scripture in proof of Justification by only
Faith, and not by Works, answered.
IT is objected from S. Paul that, Romans 4.2.
If Abraham were justified by works, he has glory, but not with God. And,
Romans 3.28.
We account a man to be justified by faith without the works of the law. Answ.
Luther to make this later place the stronger, adds thus to the text, we
account a man to be justified by only Faith: And in defense heerof he says to
a friend of his, Ep. ad amicum. de voce (sola) quam Romans 3. de suo adiecit. See
tom. 5. Germ. Ien fol 141. and tom. 4. Ger. Wit. fol. 475.
If thy Papist show himself angry and discontented for the word (sola)
forthwith tell him, A Papist, and an Ass are the same thing. Again, I knew
long since, that in this place neither in the Greek nor the Latin text the
word (sola) was read, neither was there any need that the Papists should
admonish me thereof etc. I repent me that I added not (omnes) and (omnibus)
that so it should be without all works of all laws, and so I had spoken well
and roundly. Wherefore this word shall remain in my Testament, although all
Bishops should run m^d together, and should be transformed into Asses, yet
they shall not shave it thence from me. But to omit this cursed adding to the
Scirptures, and Luthers scurrill impudency, the Gentiles did boast of their
Philosophy and moral virtues proceeding of nature: and the Jews did likewise
boast of their law and legal Observations, both which the Apostle confuteth in
that Epistle, and proves that neither of these are of any force to Salvation,
without the Grace of Christ and faith in him; to that end in the later place
expressly naming and excluding the Works of the Law, that is, says John
Husse, In Ep. Iac c 2.
The legal Ceremonies: and in the first, explayning himself, saying there
next before, Romans 4.^.
What did Abraham find our Father according to the flesh? Agreably herto
answers ancient Sedulius, Ad c. 3. ad Romans
Without what works of the law is the Apostle to be thought to affirm man to
be justified by faith? to wit of Circumcision and the Saboth, and other such
like, not without the works of Justice, of which S. James says, Faith without
works is dead. Lastly, this is answered by S. De Gra. and lib. Arb. c. 7.
Austine saying: Men not understanding that which the Apostle says (we count a
man to be justified by faith without the works of the law) did think that be
said, faith would suffice a man though he lived ill, and had no good works.
Which God forbid that the Vessel of Election should think: who in a certain
place after he had said, In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision nor Prepuce,
avails any whit, he straight added, but faith which works by love.

And whereas some oppose S. Paul to S. James, S. Austine thus Catholickly
reconcileth them, L. 83. Quaestionum. q. 76. fin. and l de fide and operibus c.
14 init.
Wherefore the sentences of the 2. Apostles Paul and James, are not contrary in
themselves: when one says, a man is justified by faith without works, and
another says, Faith is void without works: because he, speaks of works
that go before faith, this, of those which follow faith, even as Paul himself
shows in many places. Heerof says D. Whitaker, Resp. ad Camp. rat. 1 p. 12.
See Cent. 5. c. 10. Col. 1133.
Austine reconcileth James to Paul, wherefore, says Austine, the Sentences of
the two Apostles, Paul and James, are not contrary in themselves etc. because
Paul speaks of works which go before faith (unto which never any Catholic
ascribed Justification) and James of those works that follow faith: which is
the same truth that Catholics now teach.

Others object that, Io. 1.11.
As many as received him, he gave them power to be made the Sons of God, to
those that believe in him. And, Io. 3.14.
So must the Son of Man be exalted, that every one which belieueth in him
perish not, but may have life everlasting. Answ. Whereas many causes concur to
the producing of one effect, as our Justification, sometimes the Scriptures
attribute the same effect to one Cause, sometimes to another; yet never so as
excluding the rest. And so, as in these places it refers our Justification
and salvation to Faith; so in other, it refers to Luc. 71 47 1. Io. 3.14. 1.
Pet 4.8.
Charity, Romans 8.24.
Hope, Tit 3.5.
Baptism, and other virtues. And agreably unto this says S. Clement. L. 4.
Strom. post med.
Wherefore when we shall hear, Thy faith has saved thee, we do not understand
him to say absolutely those to be saved, who any ways believe, unless their
deeds shall follow: And so where it is said in S. Mark, Mar. 16.16.
He that belieueth and is baptized, shall be saved, S. Matthew also adds these
words of our Savior, Mat. 28.20.
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, which
contains all good works, and the whole Justice of a Christian man.

Such places also are urged, wherein our Justification is said to be gratis.
Romans 3.24.
Justified gratis by his grace: Romans 11.6.
If by grace, not now of works, otherwise Grace is not Grace. Answ. The word,
Gratis, is either taken, as it is opposed to debt of Justice, and true merit de
condigno, and this hinders not, but that as faith, so likewise good works may
concur gratis to our Justification, as dispositions, and as meritorious de
congruo: or else it is taken as it is opposed to works done without grace, only
by the force of nature; but this excludes not absolutely all merit, but only
our own merit, that is, such as is from our selves, and not from God: so that
Justification gratis, is not all one with Justification by only Faith: neither
does it exclude such works as proceed from Grace, for so it also should
exclude faith, which proceeds from Grace, and which also is a most excellent
work it self. Io. 6.29.
This is the work of God that you believe in him etc. but it only excludes
such works, as are done only by the strength of nature, and such as should
merit our Justification de condigno, Justice, and debt.

Some object those words of our Savior, Luc. 8.50.
Believe only, and she shall be safe. Here some think they have found only
faith to save: But here Christ speaheth not of Justification and remission of
sins, but of the miraculous raising of one from death to life. Now for the
working of miracles faith alone does sometimes suffice, as might be easily
proved from Mat. 7.22.

Now that true faith cannot be without good works, some object that of 1. Tim.
5.^.
S. Paul, But if any man have not care of his own, and especially of his
Domesticalls, he has denied the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. Answ. S.
Chrysostom and others do expound this of those who are said to deny their
faith, because they do not live as their faith teaches them, who, as the same
Apostle says, Tit. 1.16.
Confess they know God, but in deeds deny him. Who are said in this respect of
want of Charity toward their own, to be worse then Infidels, who have a care
of their own; and so deny their faith not in heart or mouth, but in deeds.

Others urge those words of S. John, 1. Io. 2.4.
He that says he knows him and keeps not his Comma^dements is a liar.
Answ. Knowledge here is taken, according to S. Bedes and Oecumenius
Exposition, for the knowledge of love and friendship, in which sense Christ
says to the wicked, Mat. 25.12.
I know you not: wherefore if any man vaunt himself to know God by familiar
and experimental knowledge of his Graces, and yet keeps not his
Commandments, this man is a liar. And therefore such are all modern
heretics, who profess themselves to be in the favor of God, by only faith,
and yet they acknowledge they neither keep, nor possibly can keep his
Commandments. Some object that, 1. Io. 5.^.
Whosoever belieueth that Jesus is Christ, is borne of God, and therefore
doubtless has Charity. Answ. Tract. 20. in Ep. Joan.
S. Austine teaches that this is spoken of faith informed, which works by
Charity.

CHAP. XXXVII. The true State of the Question, concerning merit of Works.
Whether Works proceeding from Faith and Charity, do truly merit increase of
Grace and Glory. SECT. I.
Catholic Doctrine.
HAVING proved that good works do justify, it remains now to show that they
are truly meritorious of Grace and eternal Glory. To which purpose the
Catholic Church decrees that, Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 16.
Seeing Christ Jesus does continually power virtue into those that are
justified, as the head into the members, and the vine into the branches: which
virtue does always precede and accompany, and follow their good works, and
without which they can by no means be grateful to God and meritorious;
nothing more is to be thought to be wanting to the justified, but that by those
works which are done in God, they may be judged to have fully satisfied Gods
law, for the state of this life, and to have truly deserved life eternal to be
gained in its time, if that they shall depart in Grace, etc. neither is that to
be omitted, that although so much be ascribed to good works in the sacred
Scriptures, that to him who shall give to one of his least ones a draught of
could water, Christ promises he shall not want his reward etc. Yet God forbid,
that a Christian should either trust or glory in himself, and not in our Lord;
whose goodness is so great toward all men, as that those things which are his
guiftes, he will have to be their merits. And because all offend in many
things, as every one ought to have before his eyes mercy and goodness, so also
severity and judgment: neither let any man judge himself, although he be
guilty of nothing to himself; because the life of men is not to be examined
and Judged by man's Judgment, but Gods, who will enlighten the hidden things of
darkness, and will manifest the Counsels of the hearts. And then praise shall be
to every one from God, who, as it is written, will give to every one according
to his works. Wherefore, Sess. 6, Can. 32.
If any shall affirm, a just man's good works so to be the guiftes of God,
that they are not also the good merits of him that is justified: or that he
who is justified by good works, which are done by him through the Grace of
God, and the merit of Jesus Christ, whose lively member he is, does not truly
merit increase of Grace, life eternal, and the obtaining of life eternal, if
so he dye in Grace, as also the increase of glory, Anathema.

In the Council of Moguntia it is defined, that, Cap. 8. See Conc. Senon.
Decret. 16.
Those works which the justified do etc. to be truly good and grateful to
God, and worthy the reward of eternal life. And so all Catholics teach, that
works proceeding from Gods Grace, through the merits of Christ, are truly and
properly meritorious of Grace and eternal Glory. Bellar. de Iustif. l. 5 c. 1.
2. etc. Rhem. Test in Romans 2.6.


Points Disputable.
All believing that works proceeding from Grace do truly merit: some Durand.
1. Did. 17. q. 2.
teach, that the reward given to such works is according to the form of
communicatiue Justice. But Caiet. 1. p. q. 21. art. 1.
others more probably teach, that it is according to the form of distributive
Justice.

Some Durand. 2. Did. 28. q. 5. Gabr. 2. Did. 28 q. vnica.
teach that the natural motions of the mind do merit ex congruo, the first
grace. Vega q. 7. de Iustifi^.
Others ascribe this only to the supernatural motions of perfect faith,
Charity etc. Whereby we are sufficienly disposed to grace, considering them,
not as they proceeded from Grace, but from free will. Valent. Tom. 2. Disp. 8.
q. 6. P. 4.. 2.
Others more probably deny merit ex congruo, to all acts disposing to Grace.

Some Caiet. in. 1.2. q. 114. art. 3. Sotus l. 3. de Not. and Great. c. 7.
think, that the good works of the just do merit ex condigno life eternal,
by reason of the work, although there were no pact or promise from God. Scotus
1. Did. 17. q. 2. Vega de Iustificat. q. 5.
Others think that they only so merit by reason of the pact and Gods
acceptance. But S. Tho. 1.2. q. 114. art. 1.3. S. Bonauent. in 2. Did. 27.
others most probably teach, that they are so meritorious by reason of the
pact, and the work also.

Protestants Untruths.
Melancthon In Apol. art. 12.
affirms, that Catholics believe that, by good works done out of the state
of Grace they merit grace by Gods covenant, that, by attrition they merit
grace: that, for the blotting out of sin only detestation of the crime
suffices: That, by Contrition, not by faith in Christ we may obtain remission
of sins etc. Again, In Apol. p. 112.
Our Adversaries are plainly deaf it has been so often said, the law not to
profit without Christ, for whom good works pleased. But they every where
Christ excluded, do teach the works of the law to merit Justification. But
these are all so gross, that I persuade my self instead of further answer,
that no man will believe him.

Accordingly Rogers says, Def. of the Art. art. 11. p. 52.
Sins mortal, not by the merits of Christ only, but many ways besides are
cleansed, think the Paepists, as by the merits of dead Saints, namely of S.
Mary the Virgin. And, Ib. Art. 14. p. 61.
Supererogatory works do merit (say they) remission of sins, and that not
for the doers of them only but for others besides. But the Rhemistes whom he
cyteth for this, have not the word merit, but only satisfy: teaching as all
other Caholickes do, the good works of one, though they cannot merit for
another, yet they may justly satisfy for him.

Protestant Doctrine.
The Doctrine of merit of works is so displeasing to Prot. as that Iustit. l.
3. c. 15.. 2.
Calvin much disliketh the word Merit, or Reward, reproving the ancient Fathers
for using the same: And further saying. Ibid. c. 16.. 2.
We take from men the opinion of meriting. According to M. Perkins, Reform.
Cath. Contro. 5. c. 1.
Man cannot merit a morsel of bread. Scharpius, De Just. C^ntrou. 15. p. 218.
We say, that the works of the faithful in ^he sight of God are no ways
meritorious, neither of congruity, nor condignity.

Protestants agree with Ancient Heretics.
We condemn (says S. De temp. Ser. 191.
Austine) the Error of Iouinian, who said there was no difference of merits in
the world to come. And S. Conc. Telense and Rescriptum Ambrosij and aliorum ad
Siricium. Pap. Ib.
Ambrose with others term it a rude howling etc. to confound all things
promiscuously etc. and to take away the degrees of different merits.

Protestant Errors.
Luther teaches that L. de libert. Christ.
good works do not make a man good, nor evil works evil. And, L. de Captiu.
Babyl. c. de Bap.
Thou see how rich a Christian or baptized man is, that although he would, he
cannot loose his Salvation by any sins how great soever, unless he will not
believe; for no sins can damn, but only Infidelity.

Many Calvin in Epist. duabus ad Polones. Chem. l. de duabus naturis. Melancth.
in loc. cap. de filio. and in l. concor. p. 556. 645. 736.
Prot. teach that Christ is our Mediator according to both natures, divine and
humane. Yea Swinglius teaches that, L. de vera and fall. Relig. c. de Euchar.
Christ is to us a Savior by that part wherein he descended from heaven, not by
that he was borne of the most unspotted Virgin. And further adds Tom. 4. in c
6 Joan. p. 310.
elsewhere, that the flesh of Christ profits nothing, it profits nothing at
all.

Calvin affirms that, Instit. l. 2. c. 17. 6.
to ask whether Christ merited to himself (which the Schoolmen do) is no
less foolish curiosity, then temerarious definition, where they affirm the
same etc. by what merits could man obtain that he should be the Judge of the
world, the head of Angels? And the same is taught by Controu. 2. p. 207. Paraus
de Iustif l 5. c. 3. p. 1227.
Danaeus, and Paraeus.

Tyndall thinks that, In Fox his Act. and Mon. edit. 1610. p. 1138.
For as much as concerns pleasing of God, no work is better then another To
make water, to wash dishes, to be a Schoomaker, or Apostle, is all alike. And
this doctrine Fox himself thinks to be free from heresy. Luther, If I
should see heaven open, and that I could merit it by taking a straw Apud
Scioppium in Ecclesiastico. c. ^7.
from the ground, I would not take up the straw. So poor esteem have Prot. of
all merits of good works.

SECT. II. It is proved by Scriptures that works proceeding from Faith and
Charity, do truly merit increase of Grace and Glory.
TO decyde this by Scripture, such texts prove our Catholic Doctrine as teach
life eternal to be called (...), merces, wages, hyre, or reward. Mat. 5.12.
Rejoice for your reward is very great in heaven. Mat. 20.8.
Call the workmen, and pay them their hyre. That by reward and hyre in these
places is understood life eternal, it is so manifest, that I think none will
deny it: And that this reward is due not only in regard of Gods promise, but
also in regard of the works, these words convince: Call the workmen and pay
them their hyre: Neither can any without great abuse in speech entitle with the
name of wages, hyre or reward, a gift of a King promised upon mere liberality
without all respect of desert and work in the receyuer.

If the reward of heaven be given according to the measure and proportion of
our works and labors, then in the bestowing of that reward, respect is not
had only of the promise and bounty of God, but also of the dignity and desert
of the works. Mat. 16.17. Romans 2 6. Apoc. 22.12.
The Son of Man shall come in the glory of his father with his Angels: and
then will he render to every man according to his works. Luc. 6.38.
With the same measure that you do meat, it shallbe measured to you again. 2.
Cor. 9.6.
He that sows sparingly, sparingly also shall reap, and he that sows in
blessings, of blessings also shall reap. 1 Cor. 3.8.
Every one shall receive his own reward according to his own labor. Luc.
7.47.
Many sins are forgiven her because, she has loved much: but to whomelesse
is forgiven, he loves less. These and sundry other such places convince that
the greatness or smalnes of our reward, is proportionable to the greatness or
smalnes of the dignity and worth of our works: which conuinceth the works to
be meritorious.

Good works are further said to be the cause, why life Eternal is given us.
Mat. 25.34.
Come you blessed of my father, possess you the Kingdom etc. for I was
hungry, and you gave me to eat etc. Because thou have been faithful over a
few things, Mat. 25.23.
I will place thee over many things; enter into the joy of thy Lord. Apoc.
7.14.15. sect. 1. Io 3.22.
These are they which are come out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, therefore they are before
the throne of God etc. 2. Cor. 4.17.
Our tribulation which presently is momentane and light, works above measure
exceedingly an eternal wayght of glory in us.

For the avoiding of this place, Ag. Rhem. Test. 2. Cor. 4.17.
Fulke and other English Translatours of the Bible, do instead of works,
translate, prepares, whereas the Greek Word, (...), signifies works, and
some Of 1576.
English Bybles translate, causes; yea Fulke himself confesses that, In
defense of the Engl. Translation. p. 173.
That translation of preparing, is not so proper.

The reward of good works is said to be given of Justice. 2. Tim. 4.8.
There is laid up for me a Crown of Justice, which our Lord will render to me,
in that day, a just Judge: and not only to me, but to the^ also that love his
coming. 2. These. 1.4.5.6.
Our selves glory in you etc. for your patience and faith in all your
persecutions etc. for an example of the just Judgment of God, that you may be
counted worthy of the Kingdom of God etc. If ye be just with God to repay
tribulation to them that vex you, and to you that are vexed rest with us in
the revelation of our Lord Jesus from heaven with the Angels etc. Heb. 6.10.
God is not unjust to forget our works And hence it is, that our good works
are called Luc 1.6. Apoc. 19.8.
(...), Iustifications.

A promise made upon Condition of some work, the work being performed, is of
Justice to be kept, and the worker truly deserves it: but life Eternal is
promised to good works. Iac. 1.12.
Blessed is the man that suffers tentation for when he has been proved, he
shall receive the Crown of life, which God has promised to them that love
him. 1. Tim 4.8
Piety is profitable to all things, having promise of the life that now is, and
of that to come. Mat 19.29.
Every one that has left house or brethren etc. for my sake, shall receive an
hundred fould, and shall possess life everlasting.

To be worthy, to merit or dese^ue, signify all one thing. Christ says, Lu.
10.7.
The workman is worthy of his hyre. Col. 1.10.
That you may walk worthy of God, in all things pleasing, fructifying in all
good works. 2 Thessalonians. ^.5. See Luc. 20.35. and 21.36.
That you may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God; for the which also you
suffer. Ap 3.4.
They shall walk with me in whytes, because they are worthy. And, Sa^. 3.5
God proved them and found them worthy of him. Now whereas Prot. for Worthy,
translate, Meet, it is so unworthily done, that Fulke himself says, Defense
of the Engl. Transl p. 276.
For my part I wish they had retained the usual signification of that word,
and said, worthy of himself, God being a lust Judge, and not accepter of
persons, does thereupon give to every one according to his merits. Romans 2.11.
Gal. 2.6.
There is no acception of persons with God. 1. Pet. 1.17. Act. 10.35.
If you invoke the Father, him which without the acception of persons,
judges according to every ones work.

But the Scriptures are so unanswerable and conuincing in behalf of good
works, that Luther for want of other answer does fly to his desperate and
damnable refuge, saying, Colloq. Isl^b de Christo. fol. 96. tom. 1. Ger. Wit.
part 2. fol. 190 tom. 5 len. fol 500. in Colloq. de Sanct. fol. 1^5. de
tentationibus fidei, fol. 288. ^om. 6. Ger. Ie^. fol. 86. tom. 7. Ger. Wit.
fol. 483.
Although the Papists dobring a great heap of Scriptures, in which good works
are commanded, yet I nothing care for all the words of Scripture, although more
then those were yet produced. Thou Papist do greatly contemn, and with the
Scripture make thy self courageous; which yet is inferior to Christ, as
Lord. Therefore I am nothing moved therewith. Go too then, rely upon the
servant as much as thou will, but I do rely upon Christ the true master, Lord
and Emperor of Scipture. To him I do assent, and know that he will lie to me
in nothing, nor will lead me into Error. I do rather make choice to honor and
believe him, then that, with all the sayings of Scripture, I will suffer my
self to be removed from my opinion a nails breadth. So conuincing then are
the Scriptures, for the merits of works, as Prot. are enforced to disclayme
from the Scriptures, and to appeal only to Christ himself, as though the
doctrine of Christ and the Scriptures were contrary.

SECT. III. The Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proof of Merit of Works.
S. Ambrose demands, L. 10. Ep. 82.
What salvation can be to us, unless we wash our sins away by Fasting, seeing
the Scripture says, Tob. 4. and 12.
Fasting and alms do free from sin: who are therefore these new Masters, who
exclude the merit of fasting? And upon those words of the Psalmist, Be
mindful of thy word, he further says, Ser. in Ps. 118.
God will be agreed with, that if any following the rewards propounded to
virtues, shall strive well, he may expect suite of reward, yea he may exact it.

Tertullian asks. In Scorpiac. c. 6.
How there are many Mansions with the Father, if it be not for the diversity of
merits? And how shall a 1. Cor. 15.41.
star differ from a star in glory, unless it be for the diversity of beams?

Clemens Alex. writes that, L. 4. Strom.
There are with our Lord many rewards and Mansions by proportion of their
lives. For who, Mat. ^^41.
says he, receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive the
reward of a Prophet. And he that receives a Just man in the name of a just
man, shall receive the reward of a just man; and who shall receive one of these
little Disciples, shall not loose his reward.

Let us return (says S. Austine) De Great. and lib. Arb. c. 6. and ho. 14. ex
50. and in Ps. 83 and in Ps. 100.
to Paul the Apostle, whom we find without any good deserts, yea with many
evil deserts to have obtained the Grace of God, giving good for evil. Let us
see what he says now, his Passion drawing near, writing to Timothy: 2. Tim.
4.^.
For I am even now to be sacrificed, and the time of my resolution is at hand.
I have fought a good fight, I have consummate my Course, I have kept the faith.
These his good merits he now rehearses, that after good merits he may obtain
the Crown, who after evil merits obtained Grace. Finally attend what
follows: Concerning the rest, says he, there is laid up for me a Crown of
Justice, which our Lord will render to me in that day, a just Judge. To whom
would the Just Judge give a Crown, if the merciful Father had not given
Grace? And how had that been a Crown of Justice if grace had not gone before,
which iustifyeth the wicked? How should it have been given as due, if it had
not formerly been given gratis? And again, Tract. ^7. in Joan.
Although one be stronger then another, one wyser then another one more just
then another one more holy then another in my Fathers house there are many
mansions. None of them shall be estranged from that house, where every one is to
receive a Mansion according to his merit. Mat. 20.2.10.
That penny truly is equal to all which the Master of the family commands
to be given to all them who wrought in the vinyard, not in tha^ making
difference who had labored less and who more: by which penny life eternal is
signified, where no man lives longer then another, because in eternity there
is no different measure of living: but many Mansions do signify the diverse
dignities of merits in one life eternal: for one is the glory of the Sun,
another of the Moon, another of the Stars, for star differs from star in
glory, so also is the resurrection of the dead. As stars the Saints obtain in
the kingdom diverse Mansions, diverse excellencies as it were in the heaueus Yea
says he, Ser. 191. de Tem^ore.
We condemn the Error of Iouinian, who says there is no difference of merits
in the world to come. Of this say the Centuristes, ent. 5. c. 4 Col. 518. See
Chemnit. Ex. part p. 4. 110. 142. and Wotton in defense of Perkins. p. 500.
It appears, that Austine was of that opinion, that Virgins dedicated to
holiness, have more merit with God then the faithful that are married: for
because Iouinian thought the contrary, that they had no more merit, this in him
reprehendeth Austine.

S. Gregory in proof of merits argues thus; L. 4. Mor. c. 31.
Because in this life there is difference of works, there shall no doubt in
the other, be difference of honors, that by how much here one excels
another in merit, there one shall exceed another in reward. Whereupon in the
Gospel the Truth says, Io. 14.2.
In the house of my Father there are many Mansions. But in those same Mansions,
there shall be in some respect an agreeing diversity of rewards: because such
force of love does join us in that peace, that what any one receives not in
himself, he rejoices to have received in another.

S. Irenaeus L. 4. c. 28.
produces Solomon saying, Prou. 19.17.
He lends our Lord that has mercy on the poor. For God who needs no man,
takes unto himself our good works to this end, that he may bestow upon us
the retribution of his goods. Even as our Lord said, Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you, for I was
hungry, and ye gave me to eat etc.

Sundry Prot. do reprove S. Austine for our Doctrine of the merits of good
works. Osiander says, Cent 4. ^4. c. 23.
Austine sometime in the Article of Justification seems to attribute over
much to the merits of good works, which are done after a man's Conversion.
Others charge him for teaching that, English Ha^m. of Conf sect. 16 c 25.
We obtain remission of our sins and life, not only for Christ his sake
through faith, but also for the merit of our works. Doctor Humfrey says, In
Jesuit. part. 2 p. 530.
It may not be denied, but that Irenaeus, Clemens, and others whom they ca^^
Apostolical have little Apostolically inserted into their writings the op^nion
of Freewill, and Merit of works Calvin, Instit. l 3. c 15 n 1.
I conf^ss^^nat the writers of the ancient Church have every where used the
n^me of Merit, and I would to God, that by the abuse of this word they bad not
given t^ ^sterity occasion of Error. White gift acknowledges the D^f. p. 472.
Almost all the Bishops and learned writers of the Greek Church, and Latin
also for the most part were spotted with doctrines of Freewill of Merit etc.
And the very same is affi med by Against the Plea of the Innocent. c. 9. p. 120.
D. Couell Wherefore the Fathers are most clear in their Expositions of the
Scriptures for merits of works, and are therefore reproved by Prot. writers.

SECT. IV. That Protestant writers teach our Catholic Doctrine of Merit of
Works.
Protestants See Fulke ^g. Rhem. Test. in 2. Cor. 9. sect. 2. f. 312. In his
Answer to the Marginall notes.
teach that good works shall be rewarded in heaven: And that, Ib. in Heb. 11.
sect. 3. fol. 417. and in. 1. Cor. 9.23. sect. 7 f. ^76. and in Mat. 19. sect.
13 f. 38.
Men may or ought to do good in respect of reward. That, Clapham in his
Sovereign remedy ag. Schism. p. 46 Hook. in Eccl Pol. l 2. s^ct 8 p. 122.
Haffent. loc. Theol l. 3. loc. 10. p. ^^4.
the degrees of glory shall be according to our works.

Friccius teaches that, D^ Eccles. l. 4 c. 18.
Christ does plant in us virtues of new life, and imparting to us Merit and
Justice with most singular fruit, he is said, to live in us, and by this
means the glory of Christ is not obscured, but made clear.

Perkins acknowledges that, In his 4. Treatises. 4. treat. n. 9.
The man justified does deserve and merit at Gods hands the kingdom of heaven
and eternal life in, and by Christ. The Confession of Auspurge speaking of
Fasting, says, Harm. of Confess. p. 495.
These Exercises be good in the godly, and are meritorious works. And the like
is more then insinuated by M Eccl. Pol. l. 5 sect. 72. p. 208.
Hooker. The same Confession also acknowledges good works to be, Harm. of
Conf. p. 273.
a righteousness worthy of reward: and Ib. p. 273.
Spiritual Sacrifices deserving reward. And that, Ib. p. 229.
Repentance deserved that God should alter his purpose touching Niniue. And the
like is taught by other Ib. p. 300. And Spangburg in his Margar. Theol. de
Sacram. p. 48. 50. Hook. Eccl Pol. l. 5. sect. 72.
Prot. amongst whom Melancthon says that, Loc. Com. de bonis operibus.
After we apprehended our Reconciliation by faith, the worthiness of our works
is not (then) to be extenuated, for the Scripture sets honorably forth this
Justice of works. Calvin says, Instit. l. 3. c. 15.. 3.
Our Lord calls the good works which he has bestowed upon us, ours, and
testifyeth that they are not only acceptable to him, but that they shall have
reward. And a little after, Therefore good works do please God, neither are they
unprofitable to the workers, but rather in liew of reward they bring the
greatest benefits of God. So certain it is, even by the Confession of
Protestants, that good works proceeding from Grace, do truly merit Reward.

SECT. V. Objections from Scriptures against Merit of Works, answered.
SOme urge that, Romans 8.18.
The Passions of this time are not condign to the glory to come. Answ. The
Passions of this time considered in their own nature, or only in reguard of
their short continuance, are not worthy of the forsai^ glory, which hinders
not their due worth considered as proceeding from faith and Charity. The
Passion of Christ himself in reguard of that immense glory, which thereby he
purchased to himself, and that unspeakable good which he merited for man, was
but short, and yet he truly merited thereby his own glory, and our redemption.
So likewise the pleasures of this world are but few and of little esteem, in
respect of eternal and most painful damnation. In like sort it is most true
that, Cor. 4.18.
Our tribulation which presently is momentane, and light, works above measure
exceedingly an eternal weight of glory in us.

Others urge those places wherein our Reward is said to be given us of mercy and
not of Justice, Ps. 10^.4.
Who crowns thee in mercy and comm^serations. Mat. 5.7.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Answ. Our reward (as
S. Ep. 105. and l. de correp. et. gra. c. 13. Greg. in Ps. 7. Poenis.
Austine and S. Gregory do expound) is attributed to mercy, not because merit
has not a true reward, but because our merits are given of mercy; for no man
can merit unless he be first justified, which first Iustifica^ion is not merited
by works, but given gratis, and of mercy.

To the same effect are urged these textes, Isa. 55.1.
Come ye and buy without silver, and without all change wine and milk. Dan.
9.18.
Not in our Iustifications do we prostrate prayers before thy face, but in thy
many Commiserations. Answer. Wine and milk (according to S. In Comment.
Hierome) do not signify Eternal glory, but present Grace, which though it be
not obtained without works, yet not for works but gratis. And in sign that
wine and milk do signify Grace, S. Hierome testifyeth, that Christians were
accustomed to give to such as were newly baptized, wine and milk to taste.
Daniel prays not here for eternal glory, but for delivery out of temporal
Captivity, into which the people of God through their sins were cast.

But many urge that, Luc. 17.10.
when you shall have done all things that are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants; we have done that which we ought to do. Answ. According
to S. L. 8. in Lucam.
Ambrose Christ commands heerby, that we acknowledge that which we are of our
selves, to wit, unprofitable servants, unable to fulfill those things which he
commands, whereas by his grace we are made profitable, according to that of
the Apostle, 2. Tim. 2.21.
If any man therefore shall cleanse himself from these, he shall be a vessel
unto honor, sanctified and profitable to our Lord, prepared to every good
work. 2. According to S. Ser. 3. de verb. Dom.
Austine, we may be said to be unprofitable servants, when he have done all
things that are commanded us, because we do nothing but that which we ought,
neither can we exact any reward, had not God of his voluntary and liberal
Covenant agreed with us: for of our own condition we are the basest slaves of
God, bound without expectation of all reward to perform all works himself
pleases. And this our base estate, for the preservation of humility, Christ
here directs us to acknowledge: which nothing hinders, but that, supposing
the bountiful pact and promise of God, we may through his grace truly merit,
and expect reward, himself saying, Mat. 20.13.14. and see ver. 2.
Did thou not covenant with me for a penny? take that is thine, and go. 3. S
In Illud, Elatum est Cor Isaiae.
Chrysostom observes that Christ says not, you are unprofitable servants,
but say, you are etc. willing us after our good deeds to think humbly, lest
they be corrupted with pride; for that those which work evil be only
unprofitable, and that those who work good, profitable, our Savior testifyeth
saying, Mat. 25.20.21.30.
Well fare thee good and faithful servant, because thou have been faithful
over a few things, I will place thee over many things; enter into the joy of
thy Lord. And the unprofitable servant cast ye out into the utter darkness.

Again it is objected that, Romans 6.23.
The stipend of Sin, death: but the grace of God, life everlasting: And, Romans
4.4
To him that works, the reward is not imputed according to grace, but
according to debt. Answ. The Apostle (as S. L. de Gra and lib. Arb. c. 8. 9.
and ep. 105. in Enchyr. c. 107.
) Austine teaches) might truly have said, The wages of Justice, life eternal,
as he said, The wages of Sin, death; but yet he did not, lest any should
think, that as of our selves we have sin, so likewise we have Justice:
wherefore life eternal is called Grace, not because it is not the reward of
merit, but because our merits proceed from grace. In the second place S. Paul
speaks only against such works, as are done without the Grace of God, only
by the Sea Ephesians. 2.8.
natural power of our freewill.

Lastly, it is generally urged, that if any thing be attributed to our merits,
injury is thereby done to Christ's merits, as though they were not sufficient.
Answ. The merits of the just are not to be opposed to the merits of Christ, but
springing from them, whatsoever praise they have, redoundeth to the merits of
Christ. Io. 15.5.
He is the vine, we are the branches. Io. 15.4.
As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, unless it abide in the vine; so
we neither without Christ.

Now as i^ nothing detracteth from the glory of the vine, that the branches are
fruitful, but rather augmenteth the same; so does it neither diminish the
glory of Christ, but rather adds thereunto, if his servants through Faith,
Charity and other virtues, inspired and given by him, do produce such works,
as are truly just and meritorious. Neither are the merits of man requisite for
any insufficiency of the merits of Christ, but rather for proof of their great
virtue and efficacy: for the works of Christ not only merited with God our
eternal Salvation, but also that we might obtain the same through his grace
and merits, by our own merits. To give light to the world by the sun, or to
give heat or cold thereto by fire or water, does nothing derogate from the
power of God, but rather more proves his Omnipotency, whereby he could work
those things, not only himself, but likewise could give to his Creatures, the
power of working.

Laus Deo, and B. Virgini.
Faults escaped in the Print.
In the Text.
Page, Line, Error, Correction. 39. 8. contending contenting 57. 24. was
opinion was of opinion 71. 21. satisfaction sanctification 73. 29. certainty
certainly 86. 6. to so 89. 8. promises premonisheth 96. 27. unavoidable
vnauaylable 97. 12. for or Ibid. 13. Elections Election 115. 2. teaches teach
117. 34. know it, know not the truth, but also the that know it, 130. 10. or of
145. 7. alike Ass-like 244. 12. word world 247. 12. ction perfection 261. 37.
his this 306. 9. intrauit initiauit 354. 29. not we not what we 374. 28. many
may 406. 18. perato, operato, 411. 23. boundant abundant 414. 17. for or 433.
5. alleating alleging 484. 8. another other 488. 26. reply rely 505. 20. do
thou 512. 23. never ever Idid. 26. familiar familiarly 531. 9. reservation
reseration Ibid. 15. whence when 53^. 27. he that that he 170. penult. dele the
582. 25. of you O you 661. 26. but not 689. 12. Patron Patrones 698. 3. facts
fact 719. 31. dole to will 721. 4. Godt, hrough God, through

In the Margent.
Page, Figure, Error, Correction. 8. fig. 9. 81. 18. 13. 11. 52. cap. 52. 38.
40. 2. 32. 40. 56. 218. 288. 57. 32. 82. 8. 2. 64. 28. 573. 533. 71. 40. 3. 13.
76. 6. 324. 243. 83. 7. 235. 335. 90. 3. 106. 166. 98. 30. 16. ib. 103. 12 c.
c. 4. 117. 21. Io 1.27. 1. Io. 2.27. Ibid. 24. 62. 26. 255. 8. 53. 35. 276. 11.
180. 380. 287. 5. in 8.14. in Mat. 8.14. 325. 34. Ep. 5. 1. Ep. 5. 343. 49.
309. 306. 396. 17. 10. 18. 401. 37. 145: 415. 405. 20. 2. 24. 446. 45. 67. 77.
448. 3. Mat. 11. Mat. 3.11. Jbid 5. 1408. 1048. Page 491. 61. 266. 260. 498.
106. 16. 61. 504. 21. etc. etc. p. 211. 515. 19. 6. 60. 587. 68. 18. 12. 588.
5. 597. 579. 590. 4. 3. 33. 595. 14. 442. 422. 689. 3. 82. 62. 690. ^2. ^23.
23.

AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE, Directing where to find the particular Points handled
in this Book, through every Chapter and Section, with reference to the Figures,
where they are to be found.
A.
Absolution. FROM sin, given by Priests, See Penance. Abstinence. FRom
certain meats: See Fastes. Absurdity. OF Prot. Real Presence. chapter 21. sect.
2. Adoration. OF the B. Sacrament. chapter 21. sect. 1. fig. 5. Sect. 5. fig. 30.
and f. ^7. Angels. SEe Intercession and Invocation of Angels and Saints.
Antichrist. PRot. lies to make the Pope Antichrist. Chapter 10. sect. 1. f. 14.
Prot. believe the Pope to be properly Antichrist. ib. f. 17. Antichrist is not
yet come, nor any Pope Antichrist. sect. 2. He is to be one man. ib. f. 5. An
open Adversary to Christian Religion. ib. f. 14. Is to sit in Hierus. ib. f.
20. His Reign short. ib. f. 23 Enoch and Elias are to oppose him. ib. f. 63.
See also for these points the Fathers. sect. 3. and Prot. sect. 4. Object.
answered. sect. 5. Apostles. ERred in their doctrine according to Prot. chapter 2.
sect. 1. f. 29.
B.
Baptism. NEcessary to salvation. chapter 20. sect. 1. f. 1. sect. 2. 3. 4. Prot.
lies concerning Baptism. sect. 1. f. 7. They think it not necessary. ib. f.
23. And are therein condemned with ancient Heretics. ib. f. 31. Their errors
concernig Baptism. ib. f. 40. Object. answered. ib. sect 5.
C.
Chastity. Counseled. cha. 11. sec. 2. f. 1. sec. 3. f. 1. sec. 4. f. 7.
vowed. chapter 12. sec. 2. f. 13. sec. 3. f. 1. by the B V. Mary. ib. sec. 3. f.
13. sect. 4. Object. answered. sec. 5. Christ. THe first man that entered into
Heaven. chapter 14. sec. 2. f. 1. See Limbus Patrum. Church. ROman Church mother of
all Christians. Ep. Ded. to the Prot. Nob. Best Interpreter of Scriptures.
Prep. sec. 10. What is understood here by the Church. ib. sec. 11. Judge of
Controversies. chapter 1. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. untruths concerning
the Church. chapter 1. sec. 1. f. 15. Church cannot err in matters of faith and
manners. chapter 2. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lies in disgrace of Church
and Councels. ib. sec. 1. f. 11. According to Prot. the whole Church may err.
ib. f. 15. And the same was taught by ancient Heretics. ib. f. 22. Objections
against the Churches not erring answered. ib. sec. 5. Commandments. THe 10.
Commandments rejected by some Prot. chapter 5. sec. 1. f. 18. They are possible to
be kept. chapter 32. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lies. ib. sec. 1. f. 11.
They deny them to be possible. ib. f. 13. And therein agree with former
heretics. ib. f. 24. Their Errors. ib. f. 29. Object. answered. sec. 5.
Communion. Under one kind lawful. chapter 22. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
Prot. untruths sect. 1. f. 11. They defend the use in both kinds. sec. 1. f.
13. And are therein condemned in ancient Heretics. ib. f. 16. Their gross
Errors. ib. f. 19. Object. answered, sec. 7. Concupiscence. WIthout consent not
sin. chapter 28. sec 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. teach the contrary. ib. sec. 1.
f. 7. And agree therein with former Heretics. ib. f. 9. Object. answered. sec.
5. Confession. OF sins. See in Penance. Confirmation. A True Sacrament. chapter
19. sec. 1. f. 2. sec. 2. f. 9. sec. 3. f. 7. sec. 4. f. 1. Counsels.
AVthority to determine Controversies. chapter 1. sec. 1. f. 3. sec. 2. f. 31. sec.
4. f. 28. Cannot err. chapter 2. sec. 2. f. 26. sec. 3. f. 7. sec. 4. f. 19.
Counsels Evangelical. Proved. chapter 11. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot.
untruths concerning Counsels. ib. f. 3. They deny all Counsels. ib. f. 10.
For which ancient Heretics were condemned. ib. f. 14. Prot. Errors concerning
Counsels. ib. f. 20. Object. answered. sec. 5. Cross. TO be honored. chapter
17. sec. 3. f. 12. The sign thereof to be made. ib. f. 17. sec. 4. f. 26.
D.
DEcrees. See Counsels.
E.
Errors. SEe in every Chap. sec. 1.. Prot. Errors. Eucharist. SEe Real
Presence. Extreme Unction. A True Sacrament. chapter 19. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4.
F.
Fastes prescribed. ANd abstinence from certain meats proved to be lawful.
chapter 27. sec. 1. f. 1. sec 2. 4. Prot. untruths. ib. sec. 1. f. 11. They
impugn them. ib. f 15. They agree with ancient Heretics. ib. f. 18. Their
Errors. ib. f. 33. Object. answered. sec. 5. Fathers. AVthority to interpret
Scriptures. chapter 1. sec. 1. f. 5. sec. 4. f. 47. Freewill. Proved chapter 31. sec.
1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. untruths. ib. sec. 1. f. 24. Prot. deny it. ib.
f. 26. And agree therein with ancient Heretics. ib. f. 30. Their gross Errors.
ib. f. 36. Objections answered. sec. 5.
H.
Hell. SEe Limbus Patrum. Heresies. SEe sec. 1. of every Chapter. 5. Prot.
agree with ancient Heretics.
I.
Jesus. THis name is to be honored. chapter 17. sec. 4. f. 21. Images of Saints.
MAy be made, and worshipped, proved. chapter 17. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4. Prot. untruths.
sec. 1. f. 9. Prot impugn Images ib. f. 14. For which ancient Heretics were
condemned. ib. f. 18. Prot. Errors in this. ib. f. 24. The Image of God
himself, or the B. Trinity may be made. sec. 2. f. 12. They may be placed in
Churches. ib. f. 21. f. 3. and worshipped. f 30. Object. answered. sec. 5. The
second Commandment not taken away in behalf of Images. sec. 3. f. 6. sec. 5.
f. 33. Indulgenc s. Proved. chapter 26 sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3 4. Prot. untruths.
ib. sec. 1. They impugn Indulge^ces ib. f. 25. And are therein condemned, with
ancient Heretics. ib. f. 28. Object. answered. sec. 5. Interces^ion and
Invocation. OF Angels and Saints proved chapter 16. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lies.
sec. 1. f. 11. They deny this Intercession and Invocation. ib. f. 18. And are
therein condemned with old Heretics. ib. f. 27. Prot. Errors herin. ib. f.
34. The Angels and Saints do know our Prayers. sec. 2. f. 1. sec. 4. Angels
and Saints do pray for us. ib. f. 26. sec. 3. 4. We may pray to them. sec. 2.
ib. f. 45. sec. 3. 4. Object. answered. sec. 5. Judge of Controversies. SEe
Church, and Scriptures. Justice and faith may be lost. Proved. chapter 34. sec. 2.
f. 20. sec. 2. f. 20. sec. 4. f. 5. Justice inherent. Proved. chapter 35. sec. 1.
f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. deny it. ib. sec. 1. 1. 14. And therein agree with
ancient Heretics. ib. f. 17. Their Errors. ib. f. 21. Object. answered. sec.
5. Iust^fication by faith and works. Proved chapter 36. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3.
4. Prot. lies. ib. sec. 1. f. 7. They teach only faith to justify. ib. f. 11.
wherein they agree with condemned Hereti^kes. ib. f. 17. Their Errors. ib. f.
20. Object. answered. sec. 5.
K.
Knowledge. KNowledge of true Religion necessary. Pref. to the Prot. Read. how
to be gained. ib. KNowledge of our Predestination, and salvation not
infallible. chapter 34. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. untruths. ib. sec. 1. f.
9. They teach that every man ought infallibly to believe his own
Predestination and Salvation. ib. f. 11. Prot. Errors. ib. f. 18. Object.
answered. sec. 5.

L.
Limbus Patrum. CHrist descended into Hell. chapter 14. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4. Prot. in
the understanding of this Articles are divided amongst themselves. ib. sec. 1.
f. 11. Their Errors in this ib. 18. Before Christ's descending the souls of
the just were in Limbus. sec. 2. f. 10. Object. answered. sec. 5. Luthers
gross errors. c. 9. sec. 1. f. 30. and sec sec. 1. of every Chapter..
Protestant Errors.

M.
Mass. A True Sacrifice. chapter 23. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 1. 4. Prot. Untruths.
ib. sec. 1. f. 10. They deny all proper external Sacrifice. ib. f. 28. And are
therein condemned with ancient Heretics. ib. f. 31. Object. answered. sec. 5.
Matrimony. A True Sacrament. chapter 19. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4. Method. Observed
throughout this Book. Pref. to the Prot. Reader. Moses. A Priest. cha. 1.
sec. 2. f. 4. sec. 3. f. 1.
N.
Nobility. Wherein it consists. Ep. Dedic. to the Prot. Nob. Nobility by birth
much to be honored. ib. by virtue more. ib. Christian Nobility what, and most
to be esteemed. ib. To degenerate from Nobility dishonorable. ib.
O.
Omnipot^ncy of God Denied by Prot. chapter 21. sec. 1. f. 75. Orders. A True
Sacrament. chapter 19. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4.
P.
Pastors of the Church. ARe to decide controversies. chapter 1. sec. 2. f. 32.
sec. 4. f. 56. According to some Prot. the Church for some ages had no Pastors.
chapter 2. sec. 1. f. 25. Pastors of the Church are to be obeyed. chapter 2. sec. 2. f.
42. Penance a true Sacrament. Proved. chapter 19. sec. 2. fol. 15. chapter 24. sec. 1.
f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Priests power to forgive sins. ib. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2.
f. 1. sec. 3. sec. 4. Confession of sins necessary. ib. sec. 1. f. 4. sec. 2.
f. 14. sec. 3. f. 1. sec. 4. Prot. untruths. ib. sec. 1. f. 18. They reject
this Sacrament, and all necessity of Confession. ib. f. 20. And are therein
condemned with former Heretics. ib. f. 34. Their dangerous Errors. ib. 43.
Penance imposed after Confession. sec. 3. f. 17. Object. answered. sec. 5. S.
Peter's Primacy. Proved. chapter 8. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. give this
Primacy some to Ministers, others to the Laity, others to Temporal Princes,
men or women. ib. f. 10. Denial of S. Peter's Primacy condemned for heresy. ib.
f. 14. Primacy denied to Christ as man by Prot. ib. f. 16. Object. answered.
sec. 5. Pope. POpe cannot err in defyning matters of faith. chapter 2. sec. 2. f.
48. sec. 3. f. 10. Successor to S. Peter in Primacy. chapter 9. sec. 1. f. 1. sec.
2. 3. 4. Prot. untruths against the Pope. sec. 1. f. 16. Some Prot. made a
woman their supreme head. ib. f. 20. Others admit none but Christ. ib. f. 21.
The denial of his Primacy condemned in ancient Heretics. ib. f. 25. Object.
answered. sec. 5. Poverty. Counseled. chapter 11. sec. 2. f. 5. sec. 3. f. 5.
Poverty vowed. chapter 12. sec. 2. f. 10. sec. 3. f. 2. 6. sec. 5. f. 4. Priests.
ARe not to be married. chapter 13. see. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lies for Priests marriage.
ib. sec. 1. f. 1. They allow their Bishops and ministers to marry. ib. f. 11.
For which they are condemned with ancient heretics. ib. f. 13. Prot. Errors
concerning Priests marriage. ib. f. 18. Object. answered. sec. 5. Priests
power to forgive sins. See in Penance. Private spirit. NOt sufficient to
decide Controversies, or to interpret Scriptures. chapter 4. sec. 1. f. 1. 2 3. 4.
5. Challenged by Prot. and ancient Heretics. ib. f. 6. 8. Object. answered.
ib. sec. 6. Punishment, or Satisfaction. Remains, the ^ault being pardoned.
chapter 25. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lies. ib. sec. 1. f. 14. They deny
all necessity of any Satisfaction. ib. f. 20. Object. answered. sec. 5.
Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead. Proved. chapter 15. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4. Prot.
untruths concerning Purgatory. sec. 1. f. 9. Prot. deny Purgatory. ib. f. 11.
And are therein condemned with ancient Heret. ib. f. 14. Prot. Errors concerning
Purg. ib. f. 20. Object. answered. sec. 5.
R.
Real Presence. Proved. chapter 21. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 3. 4. 5. 6. 10. Prot.
untruths. ib. sec 1. f. 21. Their Real Presence what. ib. sec. 1. f. 33. sec.
2. They are condemned with ancient Heret ib. s^c 1 f. 38. And teach gross
Errors. ib sec. 1. f. 68. Object. answered. sec. 7. 8. 9. Reservation of the B.
Sacrament. chapter 21. sec. 1. f. 4. sec. 5. f. 15.
S.
S^c^aments. THey confer Grace. chapter 18. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. 5 Prot.
untruths concerning the Sacraments ib sec. 1. f. 27. They equal them only
with the Sacraments of the old Law. ib. f. 36. They are condemned with ancient
Heretics. ib. f. 39. They dislike the word Sacrament. ib. f. 44. And teach
that the Devil may administer Sacraments. ib. f. 47. That women may ^re^ch.
f. 49. That all Christians are Priests. f. 48. And that Intention is not
necessary in the A^ministration of them. ib. f 50. Object. answered. sec. 6.
Sacraments seven. chapter 19 sec 1. f. 2. sec. 2. 3. 4 5. Prot. untruths
concerning the number of Sacraments ib. sec. 1. f. 33. They allow only ^^o. ib.
f. 58. ^herin they are condemned with ancient Heret. ib f. 55. They hold
gross Errors herin. ib. f. 70. Object. answered. sec. 6. Sacrifice. SEe Mass.
Scriptures. ARe the true word of God, and in all things to be believed. Prop.
sec. 1. f 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Rejected by some Prot. ib and chapter 1. sec. 1. f. 53.
To corrupt or reject Scriptures impious. Pre. sec. 5. Scriptures true sense
necessary to be found Prep. sec. 6. Scriptures how said to be the book of
Heretics. ib. f. 7. They admit several true senses. ib. sec 7. The literal
sense affoardeth the strongest argument. ib. sec. 7 ep. 16. Mystical sense not
so forcible. ib. f. 13. How to discern the literal sense from the figurative.
ib. sec. 8. And how to find out the true sense. ib. Rules observed by Prot for
the fynding out of the true sense, refuted. ib sec. 9. The certain Rule thereof
is the Church. ib. sec. 10. What Catholics here understand by the Church,
ib. sec. 11. Scriptures according to some Prot. sole Judge of Controversies.
chapter 1. sec. 1. f. 24. according to others the Private spirit. ib. f. 30.
Appealing to Scriptures used b^ Prot. condemned by the Fathers in Ancient
Heretics. ib. f. 35. Prot. Errors against the Authority of. (...) Scripture.
ib. f. 53. Scriptures difficult to be understood. chapter 3. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2.
3. 4. 5. According to Prot. most easy. ib. f. 3. Conference of Scripture does
not make it easy. ib. sec. 6. Objections answered. ib. sec. 7. Sundry Bo^kes of
Script. rejected by Prot. chapter ^. sec. 1. f. 18. Sins. Mortal and Venial.
chapter 29. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. According to Prot. all Mortal. ib. sec. 1.
f. 7. wherein they are condemned with Ancient Heretics. ib. f. 12. Their
gross Errors. ib. f. 17. Object answered. sec. 5. God is not the author of
sin. chapter 30. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. 5. Prot. lies. ib. sec. 1. f. 19.
They teach that he is the Author of sin. ib. f. 12. And agree therein with
former Heretics. ib. f. 43. Object. answer. sec. 6.
T.
Toby, Judith etc. ARe Canonical Scriptures. chapter 5. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3.
4. Denied as Apocriphall by Prot. ib. f. 9. Objections answered. sec. 5.
Traditions. Proved. chapter 7. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lies concerning
Traditions. ib. sec. 1. f. 6. Traditions denied by Prot. ib. f. 16. And ancient
Heretics. f. 21. Sundry particular Traditions by Prot. sec. 4. f. 4. Object.
answered. sec. 5. Translations of the Bible. THe vulgar Latin proved to be
best. chapter 6. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. f. 34. Rejected by some Prot. sec. 1. f. 15.
Luthers Translation corrupt. sec. 2. f. 1. And so are all other Prot.
Translations. ib. Object. against the Vulgar Translation answered. sec. 3.
Transubstantiation. CHap. 21. sec. 1. 3.
V.
Vows. Vows of perfection lawful. chapter 12. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot.
Untruths, concerning vows. ib. f. 2. 1. f. 11. vows impugned by Prot. ib. f.
14. For which they are condemned with ancient Heret. ib. 20. Objections
answered. sec. 5.
W.
Works of the just, are not all sins. Proved chapter 33. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2.
3. 4. Prot. teach all works of the just to be sinful. ib. sec. 1. f. 5. Prot.
Errors. ib. f. 9. Object. answered. sec. 1. f. 5. Prot. Object. answered. sec.
5. Works that are good do merit. Proved chapter 37. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4.
Prot. untruths. ib. sec. 1. f. 13. They deny all merit to works. ib. f. 17.
And therein agree with former Heretics. ib. f. 21. Their Errors. sec. 1. f.
32. Object. sec. 5. Works that are good, do justify. SEe Justification.
FINIS.

