THE ENGLISH SCHOOLMASTERS: Teaching all his Scholars, of what age soever,
the most easy, short, and perfect order of distinct Reading, and true Writing
our English-tongue, that has ever yet been known or Published by any. And
further also, teaches a direct Course, how any unskillful person may easily
both understand any hard English words, which they shall in the Scriptures,
Sermons, or elsewhere hear or read: and also be made able to use the same
aptly themselves; and generally, whatsoever is necessary to be known for
English speech: so that he which has this Book only, needs to buy no
other to make him fit, from his Letters unto the Grammar-Schoole, for an
Apprentise, or any other his private use, so far as concerns English. And
therefore is made not only for Children (though the first Book be mere
childish for them) but also for all other, especially that are ignorant in the
Latine-tongue. In the next Page the Schoolmasters hangs forth his Table to
the view of all beholders, setting forth some of the chief commodities of his
Profession. Devised for thy sake that want any part of this skill, by Edward
Coote, Master of the Free-Schoole in Bury St. EDMOND.

Perused and approved by public Authority, and now the Eighteenth time
imprinted, with certain Copies to Write by, at the end of this Book added.

LONDON, Printed for the Company of Stationers. 1630.

The Schoolmasters his Profession.
I Profess to teach thee that art utterly ignorant, to Read perfectly, to
Write truly, and with judgment to understand the reason of our English-tongue
with great expedition, ease and pleasure.

I will teach thee that art imperfect in either of them, to perfect thy skill
in few days with great ease.

I undertake to teach all my Scholars, that shall be trained up for any
Grammar School, that they shall never err in writing the true Orthography of
any word truly pronounced: which, what ease and benefit it will bring unto
Schoolmasters, they best know: and the same profit do I offer to all other,
both Men, and Women; that now for want hereof, are ashamed to write to their
best friends: for which I have heard many Gentlemen offer much.

I assure all Schoolmasters of the English-tongue, that they shall not only
teach their Scholars with great perfection, but also they shall with more ease
and profit, and in shorter time teach a hundred Scholars sooner, than before
they could teach f^rtie.

I hope, by this plain and short kind of teaching, to encourage mady to read,
that never otherwise would have learned. And so more knowledge will he brought
into this Land, and more Books bought than otherwise would have been.

I shall ease the poorer sort, of much charge that they have been at, in
maintaining their child^en long at School, and in buying many Books.

Strangers that now blame our Tongue of difficulty, and uncertainty, shall by
me plainly see and understand those things which they have thought hard.

J do teach thee the first part of Arithmeticke, to know or write any number.

By the practice thereunto adjoined, all learners shall so frame and tu^e their
voices, as that they shall truly and naturally pronounce any kind of style,
either in prose or verse.

By the same practice, Children shall learn in a Catechism the knowledge of
the principles of true Religion, with precepts of virtue, and civil behavior.

J have made a part of a brief Chronology for practice of reading hard Words,
wherein also thou shall be much helped for the understanding of the Bible, and
other Histories: and a Grammar Scholar learn to know when his Authors both
Greek and Latin, lived, and when the principal Histories in them were done.

J have set down a Table, containing and teaching the true writing and
understanding of any hard English word, borrowed from the Greek, Latin, or
French, and how to know the one from the other with the interpretation thereof,
by a plain English word: whereby Children shall be prepared for the
understanding of thousands of Latin words before they enter the Grammar
School, which also will bring much delight and judgment to others. Therefore
if thou understand not any word in this Book, not before expounded, seek
the Table.

Jf I may be generally received, J shall cause one uniform manner of
Teaching: a thing which as it has brought much profit unto the Latin tongue,
so would it do to all other Languages, if the like were practiced.

Finally, J have given thee such Examples for fair Writing, whereby in every
School all bad hands may be abandoned, that of thou should buy the like of
any other (which thou shall seldom find in England,) they alone will cost
thee much more money than. I ask thee for my whole Profession.

If thou desire to be further satisfied, for the performance of these
things; read the Preface, where thou shall also see the reason of some things
in the first Book, which thou might otherwise dislike.

The Preface for directions to the Reader.
OTher men in their writings (gentle Reader) may justly use such style, as may
declare learning or eloquence sit for a Scholar; but I am enforced of
necessity to effect that plain rudeness, which may ^it the capacity of those
persons with whom I have to deal. The learneder sort are able to understand my
purpose and to teach this Treatise without further direction. I am now
therefore to direct my speech to the unskillful, which desire to make use of
it, for their own private benefit; and to such men and women of trade, as
Tailors, Weauers, Shopkeepers, Seamsters, and such other, as have undertaken
the charge of teaching others; give me leave therefore (I beseech thee) to
speak plainly and samiliarly to thee, yea let me entreat thee to give
diligent regard to those things which I shall deliver unto thee; I seek
nothing by thee, but thy own pleasure, ease, and profit, and the good of
theschollers, If peradventure for 2, or 3. days at the first it may seem
somewhat hard or strange unto thee, yet be not discouraged, neither cast it
from thee: for ^f thou take diligent pains in it but 4. days, thou shall
learn many very profitable things that thou never knew; yea thou shall know
more of the English tongue, than any man of thy calling (not being a
Grammatian) in England knows* thou shall teach thy Scholars with better
commendation and profit than any other, not following this order, teaches; and
thou may sit on thy shop board, at thy Loomes, or at thy needle, and never
hinder thy work to hear thy Scholars, after thou have once made this little
book familiar to thee. The practice and order of study, I know is a stranger
unto thee; yet must thou now be sure that thou pass not over any one word,
before thou well understand it. If thou can not find out the meaning, and
true use of any rule or word, and having none present to help thee, make a
markethereat with thy Pen or Pin, until thou meetest with your Minister, or
other learned Scholar, of whom thou may enquire; and do not think it any
discred it to declare thy want, being in a matter pertaining to Grammar, or
other such things as those of thy condition are usually unacquainted with:
rather assure thy self, that all wise men will commend thee that desire
knowledge, which many reject; but they which refuse to be directed, I know are
such as delight in their ^o^tish ignorance, like Scoggius Priest, who because
he had used his old* Annumpsimus for these do^en years, would not forsake it
for the other new Assumpsimus though it were never so good. Two things
generally you must mark for the use of this Book: first, the true
understanding of it, in the ^atter: secondly, the manner of learning it, if
thou be only a Scholar, then the order of teaching it, if thou be also a
Teacher. And for the first, where I profess to teach with far more ease and
pleasure to the learner. And therefore with greater speed than others,
understand the reason. Thou have but two principal things to learn; to spell
truly any word of one syllable, and to divide truly any word of many. For the
first, I have disposed syllables so in the first Book, howsoever at the first
sight they may seem common, as that thou can meet none, but either thou
have it there set down, or at least so many like both for the beginning or
end, as that none can be propounded unto thee, that thou shall not be skillful
in.

And I have so begun with the easiest, proc^eding by degr^es unto harder,
that they first learned, all the other will follow with very little labor.
These syllables known, because all words, be they never so long or hard, be
made of them, thou have nothing to learn, but to divide them; for which I have
laid down so easy and certain Rules (believe me that have tried) as that
thou shall never ^rr^ in any hard word: I doubt not but thine own experience
shall find this true, and so my promise in that point performed to the full.
Marvel not why in this first book I have differed in writing many syllables
from the usual manner; yea, from my self in the rest of the work: as templ
without (e) tun with one (n) and plums, not plummes, etc. My reason is, I have
put there no more letters than are of absolute necessity, when in the rest I
have followed custom: yea, often I write the same word diversely (if it be
used indifferently) the better to acquaint thee with any kind of writing.
Touching the speeches at the end of the 1, 2, 4, 7, and 8, Chapters, regard not
the matter (being vain) but my purpose, which is to bring thee to present use
of reading words of one syllable which thou have learned to spell, and so thou
may have nothing in the second book to learn, but only division of words,
and other hard observations. The titles of the chapters, and notes in the
margent (which I would always have thee diligently read and mark) will make
these things more (...) unto thee.

Also where I undertake to make thee to write the true Orthography of any word
truly pronounced, I must mean it of those words whose writings determined:
for there are many, wherein the best Englishmen in this Land are not agreed as
some write malicious deriuing it from malice, other write malicious, as from
the Latin malitiosus. So some write Germane from the Latin, some German from
the French. Neither do I deal with proper names, strange words of Art in
several Sciences, nor the unknown terms of peculiar Countries (if they
differ from ordinary rules) unless sometimes upon some special occasion. I
know ere this, thou thirstest that art a Teacher, to hear how thou may with
more ease and profit teach a hundred Scholars, than before forty; follow my
advice and I warrant the success. Let every one of thy Scholars (for the
best thou have shall learn, that here which he never knew, neither needs
he any other for English) provide and use this Book, then divide thy Scholars
in 2, 3, or 4. sorts, as thy number is, for more thou need not, although thou
have a hundred Scholars) and place so many of them as are nearest of like
forwardness, in one lesson or form, as in Grammar Schools; and so go
through thy whole number, not making above four companies at the most: so that
thou shall have but four Lectures to hear, though thou have a hundred
Scholars, whereas before thou had forty Lectures though but forty Scholars.
Then when thou would hear any form, call them forth all, be they ten,
twenty, or more together: hear two or three that thou most suspectest to be
most negligent, or of dullest ^onceit, and let all the other attend, or let one
read one line, sentence or part; another the next, and so thorough, so that all
do somewhat, and none know when, or what shall be required of him, encourage
the most diligent and tenderest natures. And thus doubt not but thou shall do
more good unto twenty in one hour* than before unto four in several lessons.
For the apposing each other, as I have directed in the end of the second Book,
emulation and fear of discredit, will make them envy who shall excel. By this
means also every one in a higher form shall be well able to help those
under him, and that without loss of time, seeing thereby he repeateth that
which he lately learned. Now touching the framing and sweet tuning of the
voice, I have given thee this help: I have added for prose all sorts of style,
both dialogue and other; and for verse, Psalms and other verses of all the
several sorts vsual^: which being well taught, will frame thee to the natural
reading of any English. But here I must make earnest request unto all careful
Ministers, that as they tender the good education of the youth in their
Parishes, they would sometimes repair unto the Schools of such Teachers as
are not Gra^marians, to hear their children pronounce, and to help such with
their direction, that desire to use this Book in their Schools: for it is
lamentable to see into what ignorant handling silly little children chance,
which should at the first be most skilfully grounded; which is the only cause
of such woeful ignorance in so many men and women; that cannot write (without
great error) one sentence of true English: therefore let Parents now be wise
unto whom they commit their children.

But to return to my teaching Tradesmen: If thou desire to be informed how
to teach this Treatise, mark diligently the directions given in all places of
the Book; and as thy Scholar is in saying his lesson, mark what words he
misseth, and them note with thy pen or pin, and let him repeat them at the next
Lecture, and so until he be perfect, not regarding those where he is skillful.
And let his fellows also remember them to appose him in them in their
appositions. But me ^hought I heard thee say, that my reasons have persuaded
thee to be willing to ^each this: but thou can not move all their Parents to
be willing to bestow so much money on a Book at the first. Tell them from me,
that they need buy no more, and then they shall save much by the bargain. But
they will reply, that his little young child will have torn it before it be
half learned. Then answer him, that a remedy is provided for them also, which
is this: First, the Printer upon the sight hereof has framed his Horn-booke,
according to the order of this book, ^aking the first part of my second page
the matter thereof, which in my opinion ^^e did with good reason; for a child
may by this Treatise almost learn to spell ^^rfectly in as little time, as
learn well the other Horn book. But this latter ^^ing first learned, being
the ground work of spelling, all the rest of this work will (...) gotten with
small labor. Secondly, I have so disposed the placing of my first ^^oke, that
if the child should tear out every leaf as fast as he learneth it, yet it
^^ll not be greatly hurtful, for every new following Chapter repeateth and
teach^^h again all that went before. I hope if he be a reasonable man, that
this an^^er will suffice. Touching my Chronology and Table, I have before the
en^^ce into them, prefixed the manner how to understand the use of them,
where^^^o I refer thee, having been already ouer-tedious. For the particular
ordi^^^y sounding of the letters, I wholly omit, leaving it to the ordering of
the Tea^^^r, especially it being before sufficiently and learnedly handled by
another. Thus ^^e I so plainly pratled and lisped unto thee, as that I hope
thou understand purpose and single heart for thy good: which if I find
accepted, I may per^^^enture hereafter proceed in my course, for the easy and
speedy attaining the ^^^rned L^nguages: an argument which as it is more
pertinent to my professi^n so might it rather be expected from me than this
poor Pamphlet.

But in the mean time, if in this thou find my words true, accept my good
will, and give glory to GOD.

A. a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. r. s. s. t. v. u. w. x.
y. z. and.

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. V. W. X. Y. Z.

A. a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. s. s. t. v. u. w. x. y.
z. and.

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. V. W. X. Y. Z. Ae.

A. a. b. c. d. e. e. f. g. h. i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. s. s. t. v. u. w. x.
y. Z. z. and.

A. A. B. B. C. C. D. D. E. E. F. G. G. H. J. I. K. L. M. M. N. N. O. P. P. Q.
Q. R. S. T. V. V. W. X. Y. Z. Ae.

ct. ij. fr. fi. si. sh. fl. sl. ff. ss. ss. st. st.

The first Book of the English Schoolmasters.
CHAP. I.
TEaching all Syllables of two Letters, beginning with the easiest, and joining
them together that are of like sound, as you may perceive by placing (c)
betwixt (k) and (s) and coupling them as you see: and then teaching to read
words of two Letters. The titles of the Chapters must not be^ taught the
Schol^^^ but only direct the Teachers.


When your Scholar has perfectly learned his Letters, teach him to know his
vowels: and after two or three days when he is skillful in them, teach him to
call all the other letters consonants, and so proceed with the other words of
Art, as they stand in the Margent; never troubling his memory with a new word,
before he^ be perfect in the old.

a e i o u a e i o u Ab eb ib ob ub Ba be by bo bu Ad ed id od ud Da de di do
du Af of if of uf Fa fe fi fo fu Ag eg ig og ug Ga ge gi go gu Ah eh ** oh **
Ha he hi ho hu Al el il ol ul La le li lo lu Am em im om um Ma me mi mo mu An
en in on un Na ne ni no nu Ap ep ip op up Pa pe pi po pu Ar er ir or ur Ra re
ri to ru At et it ot ut Ta te ti to tu Ak ek ik ok uk Ka ke ki ko ku Ac ec ic
oc uc Ca ce ci co cu C. before a, ^, u, like (k) but before ^, or i, like (s)
if no other letter come between.
As es is os us Sa se si so su Az ez iz oz uz Za ze zi zo zu Dip^^ongs Ai ei *
oi * Ia ie ji io iu Now you may teach your Scholar, that he can spell nothing
without a Vowell. Ay ey * oy * Ya ye ** yo ** Au eu * ou * Va ve vi vo vu Aw ew
* ow * Wa we wi woe ** Ax ex ix ox ux Qua que qui quo **

Teach him that (y) is out for (i) the vowell, and make him* read^ these lines
distinctly.

If you do ill, fie on us all:
Ah, is it so? he is my foe.
Woe be to me, if I do so.
Up, go on: lo I see a py^
So it is, if I do lie,
Woe is me, oh I dye,
Ye see in me, no lie to be
CHAP. II.
Teaches to join the two former sorts of syllables together, I mean (ab and
ba.) and so the rest, with practice of reading the same sorts of words of three
Letters. And here you see, that this and every new Chapter does so repeat all
that went before, that your Scholar can forget nothing.

Ba bab ba bad ba bag ba bar bat bay.

Be bed be beg be bet.

By bid by big by bil by bit.

Here you may teach your Scholar to call these words syllables; and that so
many letters as we spell together, we call a syllable. And you may repeat
the first two letters as often as the capacity of a Child shall require it:
And for the more pleasu^e of the child, I have used such syllables as are used
for English words.

Bo bot bo bon bos bo box boy.

Bu bud but bug bu bull bu but bu^.

Da dad dag da dam daw day.

De den det de dew.

Di did dig dim din dip.

Do dog dol do dop dor dot dow.

Du dug dull du dun.

Fa fall fan far fa fat.

Fe fed fell fe fen few. Fi fill fin fir fit.

Fo fog fop for fo fox. Fu full fur.

Ga gad gag ga gap gay. Ge ges get.

Gi gib gig gil. Go gob god got.

Gu gub gug gul gu gum gun gup got.

Ha had hag hap ha hat haw hay.

He head hell hem hen hew.

Hi hid hill him hi hip his hit.

Ho hog hod ho hom hot hop.

Hu huf hug hul hu hum hue.

La lad lag lap la las law lay.

If your Scholar be ready in the former terms of a vowell, consonant, and a
syllable, you may now teach him what a Dipthong is, especially those in the
former Chapter, ai, ei, ^^, au, eu, ou,

Le led leg le les let.

Li lib lig lim li lip.

Lo lob log lo lol lop los lot low.

Lu lug lu lul.

Ma mad mam man ma map mas mat maw may.

Me meg men mes. Mi mil mis.

Mo mop mos mow. Mu mul mum mur.

Na nag nam nay. Ne nel net ne new.

Ni ni bib nil nip nit. No nod nor not now.

Nu number nun nut.

Pa pan pas pat paw pax pay.

Pe ped peg pen. Pi pid pil pix.

Po pod pot. Pu pull pur pus put.

Ra rag ram ran rap rar raw ray.

Re red row. Ri rib rig rim rip.

To rob rod ros rot. Ru rub ruf rug run.

Ta tap tar tax. Te teg tell ten tow.

Ti tib til tin tip tit. To tog tom top tos tow toy.

Tu tub tug tun tut.

*In these kind of words of one syllable, we use only (c) before (a, o, u)
and (k) before (e, and i) and not otherwise, except in fained words, as Cis for
cisse^y: Kate for Katherine; as in some proper names, as Cis the father of Soul.

But we use (s) before any vowels: therefore have I placed them as you see.

Ca call came can cap cat.

Ke ket key. Ki kid kis kit.

Co cob cod cog co com cow coy.

Cu cud cuf cul cu cup cur cut.

Sa sad sag sam sa saw, se sell set.

Si sip sir sit, so sob some sop sot sow.

Su sum, su sup.

Ia iar iag iaw. Ie iet iow. Iu iud.

Ye yel yes yet.

Va vau vat. Ve ver.

Wa wag wan was wat way.

We wed well wet.

Wi will win. Woe wol wot.

Qua quaf quat. Qui quil quib quit.

*This speech is made only of the words taught before, where you are not to
regard the sense being frivolous but only to teach distinct reading. And this
observe in the rest, making your scholar to read them perfectly, but not the
titles of Chapters, nor the Notes in the Margent,

* Boy go thy way up to the top of the hill, and get me home the bay Nag fill
him well and see he be fat, and I will rid me of him: for he will be but dull,
as his dam; if a man bid well for him, I will tell him of it; if not, I do but
rob him: and so God will vex me, and may let me go to hell, if I get but a
Iaw-bone of him ill.

Here examine your scholar what Consonants will follow b, and Let him answer
(l) or (r) and so practice him in all the rest. For the more perfect he is in
them, the more ease and be^^fit you shall find, when you come to the rules of
Division in the second Book. I cal^ (h) a Consonant here, and elsewhere for
examples sake, which properly is (...), to avoid multitude of Rules.

CHAH. III.
SEtting down only all those Syllables that are of three letters beginning
with two Consonants.

Bla ble bli blo blu.

Bra bre bri bro bru.

Cha che chi cho chu.

Cla cle cli clo clu.

Cra cre cri cro cru.

Dra dre dri dro dru.

Dwa dwe dwi dw^ **.

Fla fle fli flo flu.

Fra fre fri fro fru.

Gla gle gli glo glu.

Gna gne g^i gno gnu.

Gra gre gri gro gru.

Kna kne kni kno knu.

Pla ple pli plo plu.

Pra pre pri pro pru.

Sca sce sci sco scu.

Ska ske ski sko sku.

Sha she shi sho shu.

Sla sle sli slo slu.

Sma sme smi smo smu.

Sna sne sni sno snu.

Spa spe spi spo spu.

Sta ste sti sto stu.

Swa swe swi swo **.

Squa sque squi squo squu.

Tha the thy tho thu.

Tra tree tri tro true.

Two twe twi two **.

Wha when whi who whu.

Wra wre wri wro wru.

CHAP. IIII.
Here are adjoined the Syllables of the former Chapter, with the second sort
of those in the first Chapter, beginning with (ab.) And then teach to read
words made of those Syllables.

Bla blab. Ble bled bles blew. Bli blis. Blo blot. Blu blur.

Although I have so disposed these words, as that the latter Chapters are a
repetition of the former, yet would I have ^chollers in ^uery form, say over
in part some of that they have learned, and appose one another, as I have
taught in the first Chapter of the second Book.

Bra brag bran bra bras brot bray.

Bre bred bret brew. Bri brim. Bro brow.

Cha champ chap chas chat. Che chew.

Chi chi^ chip. Cho chod chop. Chu chub.

Cra crab crag cram. Cre crew.

Cri crib. Cro crop cross crow. Cru crum.

Dra drab draf drag dram draw dry.

Dre dreg dri drip. Dro drum drop dru.

Dwe dwell.

Fla flag flap flat flaw flax. Fle fle^.

Fli flit. Flo flot flow flox. Flu flux.

Fra fray. Fre fret fri frig. Fro frog fr^^ frow.

Gla glad glass. Gle glue. Gli glid.

Glo glos glow. Glu glum glut.

Gna gnat gnaw.

Gra graf gras gray. Gri grig grip. Gr^ gr^^.

Kna knap know. Kni knit.

Kno knor know. Knu knub k^^^^.

Pla plat play. Plo plod plot plow. Plu plum.

Pray prat pray. Pre pres. Pri prig.

I have placed (c, and k) as in the second Chapter, although you shall find
(k) written before (a) and (u) as in skarlet, skul, yet do the most exact
Writers say scarlet, scul: but Calendar.

Sca scab scan scar.

Ske skeg scep skew ski skill skin skip.

Sco scof scot scul scum.

Sha shed shad shall, shed shel show.

Sla slab slay sle slew.

Sli slid slip slit slo slop slow, slu slut.

Sme smell smi smit, smo smot, smu smut.

Sna snag snah snat, sni snip, sno snow, snu snut.

Spa span spar, spe sped spel spew.

Spi spil spin spit, spo spot, spu spur.

Sta stat stag star stay, stem.

Sti stif still stir, sto stod stow, stu stub stuf stur.

Swa swad swag swan swap sway, swe swel.

Swi swig swil swim.

Tha than that thaw, the them then they.

Thy thin this, tho thou, thu thus.

Tra trap tray. Tree trey. Tri trim trip.

Tro trop trow troy. True trub trus.

Twy twig,

Wha what. When when whey. Whi whip. Who whole whom.

Wra wrap. Wre wren. Wri wrig wril. Wro wrote.

Squa squab squad squat, squi squib.

I met a man by the way this day, who when he saw me, hit me a blow that it did
swell, for that I did not stir my cap when I met him. But I fled from him, and
ran my way, then did he fret and out-ran me, and drew out his staff^ that had a
kno^ on the end, and hit me a clap on the scull, and a cross^ blow on the leg,
so that I did skip at it: yet was I glad to know and to see as in ^ gla^^e my
bad spot: and I will pray him that if he shall see me so gross, and so far
out of the way, that he will wh^p me well, ^o that I may know what I am to do.

CHAP. V.
Sets down all Syllables of four Letters beginning with three Consonants.
Secondly, joyneth them like the former Chapter, with like practice of reading.
Lastly, it teaches syllables made of Dipthongs.

Appose your Scholar in these, as I willed you in the third Chapter for the
same purpose: the first of these is ever (s, or th)

Scra scre scri scro scru.

Skra skre skri skro skru.

Scla scle scli sclo sclu.

Skla skle skli sklo sklu.

Shla shle shli shlo shlu.

Shra shre shri shro shru.

stra stre stri stro stru.

spla sple splt splo splu.

spra spre spri spro spru.

thra three thri through thru.

thwa thwe thwi thwo.

Scra scrap scrat skre skru scre scrub.

Shra shrap* shre shred shrew, shri shrig shril, shru shrub shrng.

Stra strag strau stray, stre stres, stri strop strut,

Spla splay, spli split.

Spra sprat, spre spread, spri sprig.

Thra thral. Through throt. Thru thrum.

Make your scholar know perfectly these Dipthongs: and use him to spell the
two last by their sound, and not call them double ee, or double oo.

Ai ail ^ail quail stai staid brai brain twain, wai way.

Bra brau braul scaul lau laud.

Toi toil boi voil spoil. Ioi ioin coin hoi hois.

Ou our your out stout fou foul soul cloud hou house.

Fee feed bleed she sheep fee feel heel queen.

Bo boo book look hook hood stood good fool hool stool.

CHAP. VI.
TEaching all Syllables of three Letters, that can end any word with two
consonants.

The former Chapters do fully teach to begin any word: these are for endings
which we call terminations; therefore here I am enforced to use syllables
that are not words.

Abl ebl obl ubl.

Abs ebs ibs obs ubs.

Ach each ich och uch.

Acl / Akl ecl / ekl icl / ikl ocl / okl ucl / ukl

Adg edg idg odg udg.

Ads eds ids ods uds.

Alf elf ilf olf ulf.

Ald eld ild old uld.

Alk elk ilk olk ulk.

Alm elm ilm olm ulm.

Alu elu ilu olu ulu.

Alp elp ilp olp ulp.

Als else ils ols uls.

Alt elt ilt olt ult.

Amb emb imb omb umb.

Amp emp imp omp ump.

Ams ems ims oms ums.

And end ind and und.

Ang eng ing ong ung.

Ank enk ink onk unk.

Ans ens ins ons uns.

Ant ent int ont unt.

Apl epl ipl opl upl.

Aps eps ips ops ups.

Apt ept ipt opt upt.

Arb erb irb orb urb. force with 1c.


Ard erd ird ord urd.

Arf erf irf orf urf.

Arg erg irg org urg.

Ark erk irk ork urk.

Arm erm irm orm urm.

Arn ern irn orn urn.

Arp erp irp orp urp.

Ars ers irs ors urs.

Art ert irt ort urt.

Ash esh ish osh ush.

Ask esk isk osk usk.

Asl esl isl osl usl.

Asp esp isp osp usp.

Ast est is it ost ust.

Aith eith ith oath uth.

Atl etl itl otl utl.

Ats ets its ots uts.

CHAP. VII.
ADioyneth the syllables of the former Chapter with the first of the first
Chapter, and others that begin syllables with such practice of reading as
before.

Babab babl. Gagad gadl wrab wrabl scrabl.

Pe ped pedl. By bib bibl nibl dri dribl scri scribl.

Co cob cobl bobl go gob gobl hob hobl.

Hu hub hubl stu stub stubl.

Cra crab cras, dra drab dras, stab stabs.

We web webs. Ri rib ribs.

Lo lob lobs, so sob sobs. Tu tubs stubs.

You may sometime spell this way, if the word will be more easy, which is
especially when the word end^th in (ch, gh or sh) for then they cannot well be
divided.
Ri ich rich whi which. Mu uch much su such.

La lad lads, shad shads, squads. Be bed beds peds.

Li lid lids. Go god gods rods.

Ba ba^ batl snact. Mu mufl shufl rufl.

Ha haf haft craft. De def cleft.

Gi gif gift lift rift si sift clift.

Lo lof loft soft. Hu huf huft tuft.

La lau laugh. Hi high nigh, plo plou plough, through through.

Da dag dagl gag pagl wagl dragl stragl.

Gi gigl higl wri wrig wrigl.

Go gog gogl* stru strug strugl.

Ba bal bald sca scau scaul scauld. He hell held geld.

Gi gil gild mil mild pild child wi wild.

Bo bou bold gould hold would should. Cu culd.

Ca call calf half ralf.

Pe pel pelf self shelf twel twelf. Gu gul gulf.

Ba bal balk chalk walk stalk.

Mi mil milk silk. Yo yol yolk. Hu hul hulk.

Ba bal balm ealm palm. He hell helm. Fill film. Hol holm.

Fa fall fallen. Sto stol stolen, swo swollen.

Sca scal scalp. He hell help. When whelp. Gu gul gulp.

Fa fall falls. Pu pull pulls.

Fa fall falt. Sha shall. Be bell belt felt melt smelt.

Gi gil gilt hilt tilt wilt spilt.

* La lam lamb. Kem kemb. Com comb. Dum dumb thumb. After (u) we use to give
little or no sound to (b.)


Came camp damp lamp cramp stamp. Shri shrim shrimp.

Po pom pomp. Du dum dump. Iu ium tump cump stump.

Da dam dams hams. Ste stem stems. Plu plum plums.

Da dau daua daunc faunc iaunc launc chaunc.

Fe fen fenc penc henc. Qui quiuc st^c. O^ oun ounc.

Ba ban band hand land sand wand. Ben bend lend spend send.

Fi fin find blind wind. Bon bond. Ho houn hound round.

Ha han hang. Si sin sing thing string.

Yo you young strong wrong. Du dun dung.

Ba ban bank rank blank flank frank shank.

Li lin link brink pink drink shrink. Mon monk.

Pa pan pant plant gra grant haunt.

Be ben bent lent meant rent went shent spent.

Di din dint mint flint mint splint.

Fo fon font wont. Hu hunt lunt blunt.

Da dap dapl grapl gripl. Ni nip nipl.

Co cou coupl.

Ca cap caps raps traps chaps. Hip hips lips quips.

So sop sops tops chops drops strops.

Ca cap capt grapt lapt chapt shrapt. Ke key kept.

Di dip dipped ripped tipped slipped skipt tript stripped.

Do dop dopt sopt copt cropped. Su sup supt.

He her herb. Cu cur curb.

Ca car card guard lard quard ward yard.

Be ber berd. Gi gir gird. Lo lord word. Cu cur curd.

Ca car carf dwarf scarf wharf. Tu tur turf.

Ba bar barg larg charg. Ve ver verg.

Di dir dirg. Go gor gorg. Su sur surg spurg.

Ba bar bark dark hark mark park clark spark.

Woe worcester work. Lu lur lurk.

Ba bar barm farm harm warm charm swarm

Te ter term. Fi fir firm. Woe worcester worm storm.

Ba bar barn warn yarn. Fer fern quern stern.

Bo bor born corn torn. Bu bur burn turn spurn.

Ca car carp harp warp sharp.

Ver verse. Woe wors. Cu cur curs purs.

Ca cart dart heart part quart wart smart swart.

Di dir dirt. For fort sort short. Hu hur hurt.

Da dash da * ash lash ra rash gua guash, The reason of this difference I
showed before.


Fre fresh. Fi ish fish.

Gu ush gush push rush tush blush brush crush.

Ca cas cask mask task. Des desk. Hu hus husk musk.

Fri fris fris^ wrist. Mu mus must rust.

Ga gas gasp hasp rasp wasp. Ri risp wisp crisp.

Cas cast fast have last taste vast wast chaste.

Be bes best, ie jest nest rest west yest chest wrest.

Fi fis fist list wist. Co cos cest host lost most post.

Du dus dust lust must rust.

Ra rat ratl pratl. Ke ket ketl. Ti titl spitl. Ru rut rutl.

Ba ath bath say says has lath ath says wrath.

Wi ith with since. Do oath moth mouth south flouth.

Thru thrust. Thra three thresh. Through throng.

Thwa thwai thwait thwaits.

Tell me now in truth: How rich art thou?
What have thou that is thine own?
A cloth for my table, a horse in my stable,
Both bridle and saddle, and a child in the cradle
(But no bag of gold, house or freehold.
My Coin is but small, find it who shall:
For, I know this my self, it is all but pelf):
Both cow and calf: you know not yet half.
She does yield me milk, her skin, soft as silk.
I got, without help, a cat and a whelp;
A cap and a belt, with a hog that was gelt;
With a pot of good drink, full to the brink.
And I had a Lark, and a Fawn from the Park,
Thus much in haste, may serve for a taste.
And so I must end, no vain word to spend.
CHAP. VIII.
TEaching words ending first in three, then in four Consonants, containing the
hardest s^llables of all sorts, with practice of reading ^he same.

Cat ca caught naught taught.

Ey eight. Hei height weight. Si sight bright.

Bou bought ought fought wrought sought.

Ru rug rugl rugls.

Bell belch welsh. Fi fill filch milch pilch.

Am amb amble bramble. Scra scramble. Ni nimbl wimbl.

Fu fum fumble mumble stumble. Ni nim nymph.

Am amp ampl sampl crampl. Tem templ. Pim pimpl.

Pu pum pump pumpl. Pomp pomps. Pumps.

Ba For (a) here many put an.
bla^ch branch panch. Ben bench wench wri wrinch.

Ca can candl handl. Spren sprendle.

Ma man mantl. Spra spran sprantl. Grun gruntl.

Ten tenth. Ni nin ninth. De dep dept.

Ca came camp campt stamped. Tem tempt. Stum stump.

Ki kind kindl spindl. Bu bun bundl.

An We may put (c) before (k) not pronounced.
ankl. Wri wrinkl sprinkl. Un uncle.

Man mangl tangl strangl wrangle. Min mingl singl.

Ga gar garb garbl marbl warbl. Cu curb curbl.

Ci cir circ circl.

Far fard fardl. Gir girdl. Hu hur hurdl.

Gar gargl. Hu pur purp purpl. Ki kir kirt kirtl mirtl.

Tur turt. Woe worcester world. Cu cur curld.

Ca cast castl. Wra wrast. Thy thist thistl. Just iustl.

Da dash dashed lasht swasht. Pu push pusht rusht.

As ask asked. Cla clas clasp clapped.

Ca catch watch scratch. It itch witch.

Words ending in four conso^ants, most of them being the plural number.
Len length strength. Eygh weight weights Hand handl handls. Spin spindls
hardls girdls. Turtls. Worlds.
As I went through the Castle-yard, I did chance to stumble in a queach of
brambles, so as I did scratch my heels and feet. and my gay girdle of gold and
purple. Then I sought how I might wrestle out, but I dashed my hands into a
bundle of thistles; till at length, by the strength of mine arms and legs. I
wrought my self out, but did catch a cough, and caught a wrench in mine ankle,
and a scratch on my mouth: but now I am taught, whilst I am in this world, how
to wrangle with such as are too strong* and full of might for me.

The end of the first Book.
The second Book of the English Schoolmasters. Wherein are taught plain and
easy Rules how to divide truly and certainly any long and hard word of many
Syllables, with Rules for the true writing of any word.
CHAP. I.
In this Chapter are set down the words of Art used in this Treatise, with
other necessary rules and observations, especially for words of one Syllable,
both for true writing and reading.

I divide your syllables for you, until you have rules of division, and then I
leave you to your rule.

Master. Do you think your self so suf-fi ci-ent-ly in-struc-ted to spell
and read distinctly any word of one syl la-ble, that now we may proceed to
trach Rules for the true and eas^^ diui-si-on of any word of ma-ny syl-la-bles?


Scholar, Sir: I do not well understand what you meant by a sylla-ble? Look
not for any exact definitions, but for such descriptions is are fit for
children. I make (h) a letter for plainnes; which exactly is none, but a no^e
of b^ea^hing.



Mast. A syl-la-ble is a perfect sound made of so many letters as we spell
together: as, in di-ui-si-on, you see are four syl-la-bles.


Schol. Now ma^ny let-ters may be in a syl-la-ble?


Ma. A-ny num-ber v^-der ni^^; as, I do say that welsh knight, broug^t*
strength.


Schol. What let-ters make a syl-la-ble a-lone?


Ma. Any of the vowels; a, e, i, o, u, as a-ny e-uill, I-doll, o uer-tur-neth,
v-ni ty.


Schol. But Sir, I sometime find two vowels to-ge-ther in one syl^able, what
shall I do with them.


Ma. You must then call them a Dipthong.
Dipthong, which is nothing else but a sound made of two vowels.


Schol. Will any two vowels make a Dipthong?


*Teach, that any two vowels that will make a perfect sound, is called a
Dipthong.

Ma. No, no^e that are fully soun-ded, but these: oi, ei, oi, au, eu, ou, oo,
ee; as in say, either, coin, taught, eu eu-nuch, For when one is little
sounded, I call them improper Dipthongs Ae, Oe, in Latin words, make a
Dipthong.
ought, good, feed. Which when you find, you must join toge-ther, ex cept in
some proper names, as in Beer-she ba, Natha-ni-el, so in see*eth, agree-ing,
and such words, where a syllable begins with (e or i) is added to a per-fect
word ending in (e) as see, a-gree, de-gree. But aa, oo, and such like, make no
dipthongs, and therefore may not be joined.


Schol. Yet do I find ia, ie, io, iu, va, ve, vi, vo, joined toge there, as in
James, Jesus, join, Judas, va-lew, ve-ri-ly, visir, vow: I pray you, are they
then no dipthongs.


Mast. No, for i and v. ioy-ned with a vo-well in the begin-ning of a
syl-la-ble, are tur-ned from vo-wels in-to conso-nants, as A*hi-iah.


Schol. What mean you by a Consonant? Consonant.



Mast. I mean all the other let-ters ex-cept the vo-wels, which can spell
nothing without one of the vo-wels: as take (e) out of strength, and strngth
will spell nothing.


Schol. Why Sir, (y) did even now spell a word, yet is there in it none of the
five vowels.


Ma. Indeed (y) is often used for (i) when it is a vo-well; but when they be
Con-so-nants, they differ: for (y) is also a Con-so-nant, when it is joined in
the beginning of a syl-lable with a vo-wel, as in yes, you: so iet dif-fe-reth
from yet and such like.


Schol. I pray you show me the reason why in (like) which was the last word you
used, and in many other before, you put Not sounded.
in the end, which is not sounded.


Ma. This letter Not sounded.
in the end of a word not sounded, has two principal uses. The first and
chiefest is to draw the sylla-ble long: as he is made, mad.

A Mill dam. A ^^rewd dame.

My man has cut my horse mane.

A great gap. gape wide.

Spare this Spar. Be ware of war.

* Feed until thou have well fed.

*In this sound when (e) is long, it is commonly doubled and made a Dipthong.

Make your Scholars very perfect in these: and then you may try them in other
like.

You feel not my pain. The waspe is fell.

He hid the Ox hide.

At is a mile to the mill.

A little pin. My flesh does pine.

A branch of fir: good for the fire.

A dor fitteth on the door.

Tos the ball. Tose the wool.

You have a dot on the nose, and you dote.

Rud is not rude.

A tun of wine, the tune of a song:


Schol. What is the second use?


Mast. It changes the sound of some letters: but this use, with the further
de-cla-ra-ti-on of this let-ter, because it is har-der than you will at the
first ea-si-ly conceive, I will refer you unto another place.


Schol. Are no o-ther let-ters not all, or but lit-tle pro-nounced.


M. Yes, ve-ry ma-ny: as (a) is not pro-noun-ced in earth, goat; nor (e) in
George; nor (i) in brief; nor (o) in Letters not pronounced.
people: neither is (u) pro-noun-ced in guide. All which words of all sorts I
will set down af-ter-ward; when I have gi-uen you more ne-ces-sa-ry rules in
these three first Chapters, and you bet-ter a-ble to use them.


CHAP. II.
By this Chapter, you shall easily and plainly know how many syllables are in
every word.

Mast. IF you di-li-gent-ly ob-serue these things, you cannot err in any word
of any one syllable: therefore I will pro-ceed in the di-ui-si-on of
syl-la-bles; which if you care-fully mark, you shall ne-uer fail in di-ui-ding
the longest or hardest word that ever you shall read.


Schol. That will as-su-red-ly bring me great pro-fit and plea-sure: for when I
meet with a long hard word, I stick so fast in the mite, that I can nei-ther
go forward nor backward. And I ne-uer yet heard that any such rules has been
e-uer yet taught by a-ny. I pray you there-fo^^ tell me what is the first
general rule, or the chiefest ground in this work.


Ma. Briefly it is this: Mark how ma-ny vo-wels you have in a word, as in
streng^h, ti-ed, e-spi ed, sub-mis-si-on, sa-lu-ta-ti on, re-ge-ne-ra-ti on,
ex-tra-or-di-na-ri-ly; in which se-uen words, you have as ma-ny syl-la-bles as
vowels: and above se-uen syl-la-bles, I remember no word.


Mast. But I fi^d the con-tra ry even in this rule: for in the words you, have
brief: are ^no vo-wels th^n syl-la-bles.


Ma. It is well observed, therefore you must know that you can hard-ly find a
ge-ne-rall rule without some ex-cep-tious.


Schol. How ma-ny ex cep-ti-ous has it?


Mast. Three. The first is, when there is (e) in the end of a word, or a-ny
o-ther vo-well not at all, or but lit-tle pronoun-ced; as in chief, have,
twice: wherein we sound not (i) in chief, nor the last (e) in any of them.


Schol. What is the se-cond ex-cep-ti-on?


Ma. The second is, if there be a Dip-thong, as in may* your, then have you two
vowels in one syl-la-ble?


Schol. Are there not three vowels in your?


Ma. No: for, I told you before, that (y) before a vowell in the same syllable,
is a consonant.


Schol. What is the third ex-cep-ti-on?


Mast. Words ending in (es) have a-boue one vo-well; as James, pre-serues,
al-waies, names, hides, bones. But of these more shall be said hereafter.


Schol. Shall I never else find two vowels in one syllable?


Ma. Yes; after (q) always is (u) with another vowel, as in quasse, queen,
quick. and sometime after (g) as in Gualter, language; otherwise never, unless
we say, that in words ending in (uen) as Hea-uen, e-uen, are in on^ syllable,
because we commonly prenounce them.


CHAP. IX.
This Chapter teaches plain rules, how to divide truly the longest and
hardest English word that you shall find.

Schol. I Have al ready with ease and cer-tain-ly, learned to know how ma-ny
syl-la-bles are in a-ny word, so soon as I see it: yet know I not how to
divide them truly.


Mast. Mark then these rules fol-low-ing, and you shall For the la^ to syllable
must no^ begin with a vowel, except the former end in a vowell.
Doubleconsonants.
never fail. The first is is, if you ^aue two vowels come toge-ther, both
fully pro-noun-ced, and no Dip-thong, you must put the for-mer of them in the
for-mer s^l-la-ble, and the latter of them to the syl-la ble following, as in
tri-al mu-tu-al, say-ing, try ump^, E phra-im. Likewise when the same
con-so-nant is dou-bled, they must be di-ui-ded in like manner, as ab bot, ac
cord, ad-der, let-ter, dif-fer, com-mon, ne ces si^tie, etc. The plural number
I will now leave dividing those syllables which I have taught by rule, the
better to bring Scholars to present practice.
except when they are need-les-ly dou-bled in words of the plu-rall number, as
in plumme^, whipps, hills, cragges, for plums, hills, whips crags.


Schol. What mean you by the plural number?


Mast. When na-^ing a thing, we speak of mo than one, as one whip, we call
the sin-gu-lar num-ber, because it speaks but of one; and whips we call the
plural number, because it speaks of mo than one. One Consonant.



Schol. But what shall I do, when I find but one con-sonant be-twixt two
vo-wels.


Mast. Because the former syllable cannot end with a Consonant, except the
syllable following begin with a consonant.
You must put the consonant unto the vo-well follow-ing him, as in o-ver,
enough, v-sed, be-cause, re-port, de-li uer, re-ioy*ced, di li-gent,
re-ge-ne-ra-ti-on, except in some compound word.


Schol. What kind of words be they?


Mast. When two several words which we call simple words are joined together,
as in saue-gard, two syllables, not sa-ue-gard, three syllables, We call that
simple, that is not compounded.
because it is made or compounded of two several words, save and guard; so
where-of, there-in, here-out, vn-e-ven, lame nesse, wisely. Where you must
note, that if the last part be an addition only, and signify nothing, The
syllable will keep the same letters, as when he was simple.
as (nes) in lame-nes, we call that a deriuatiue word, and not a word
compounded. Also (x) is put to the vowell before him, as in ox en, ex-er-cise,
ex-or-eists, the reason is, because Therefore (x) is called a double consonant.
Two consonants.
has the sound of two con-sonants, (cands) and (cs) cannot begin a syllable.


Schol. What i^ there come two diverse con-so-nants betwixt two vowels.


Mast. Then if they be such as may, they must be joined: for those that begin a
word, must begin a syllable in any part of the word.


Schol. How then shall I know which are Consonants may begin a word, and
therefore must be joined?


Mast. If you turn back to the third Chapter of the first book, they are set
down together: but because I would have you very perfect in these letters, I
will give you of every one an example; as bless, crew, child, clap, cre^p,
draw, dwell, fl^m, fret, glass, great, grace, know, play, praise, scab, shall,
skip, flow, smart, snuf, spend, squib, stand, sway, that, trap, twain, when,
wrought.


Schol. I pray you now give examples, how these must be joined in words of
mosyllables.


Ma. Mark then diligently there: restore, not thus, restore, because (st) may
begin a syllable: it must not thus, rest-ore, because a Consonant (if there be
any) must begin the syllable; so in re*fraine, ex-e crable, and such like: but
in god-ly, sell dome, trum-pet, lod god, mor-ning, etc. the middle Consonants
must be divided, because none of these (dl, ld, mp, dg, rn) can begin a word,
therefore can they not begin a syllable. Again, you may not spell thus:
lodg-ed, because (g) may begin a word.


Schol. Is then the same reason to be observed, if there Three, or more
Consonants,
come three or more Consonants together in the midst of a word?


Ma. Yea, altogether: For as many Consonants as can, must be joined, and the
rest divided.


Schol. How many Consonants may come in the beginning of a word?


Ma. Three and no more: therefore, if in the midst there come four, or mo,
they must be divided, although four may end a syllable, as in words.


Schol. How shall I be sure, which three may be joined?


Ma. They are all set down in the beginning of the fifth Chapter of the first
book. But for more plainness sake, I will give every one of them an example,
whereof we have an ordinary English word, as scraps, skrew, shrink, stroke,
spilt, spring, thrall, twhi^e.


Schol. Give an example for dividing of these words, wherein many consonants
come together.


Mast. One or two may serve, if you remember what has been taught. As for this
word con-straine, you may not say co-nstraine, nor cons-traine, const-raine,
nor constr-aine, but con-straine, because (ns) cannot begin a syllable (str)
can, therefore it must begin it; so im-ploy, King-dome, destruction,
ac-know-ledge, trans-gresse, etc. And this rule must you carefully
still-practice, that you may readily give the reason in all such words, why
every consonant must go to this syllable rather than to that. But still look,
as before, that so^le compound words must be marked, as mis-take, dis-like,
transpose, without, through-our, etc. Which if they had been simple words, we
must have spelled them thus, mi-stake, dislike, tran-spose, as ye have
learned, because in composition every word must have his own letters, not
mingled with other.


Schol. But Sir, some men spell deriuatiue words thus: speak eth, strength
en-ing otherwise than you have taught.


Mast. I know it well: yet because if such words should be so spelled, we must
for them frame new rules, (which were to bring a needless oppression on
childrens memories:) and that the former rules can bring no inconvenience, in
any word, therefore follow them without fear or doubt. And thus may you, by
this that you have learned, spel truly certainly, and with judgment, any
English word, that can be laid before you.


Schol.


Mast. here being orderly taught, as is prescribed, never by (the blessing of
God) doubt of a comfortless success: therefore I wish that no man with a
preindicate opinion, do reject them, before he has made good trial upon some
ordinary wits: but would have all such as teach to read, that they would make
their Scholars as perfect in the rules of these three Chapters as may be,
being of the chiefest necessity and use: the other that follow, because some of
them be more hard, containing only difference of sounds of our English letters
and other observations for true writing, if your child be very young or dull,
trouble him with understanding no more of them than he is fit to contain and
use: yet let him learn to read them all: for it were granted, that he could
understand none of them, no, nor some of the former; yet while he reads them,
he learneth as much, and goes on as fact, as by reading any other matter. For
I demand what he understands, when he reads a Chapter in the Bible? Yet will
no man deny him profit by reading. And this has made me longer by the one
half for plainness sake, than otherwise I might, knowing that in practicing
to read, he loses not his labor.


Although these three Chapters be of greatest use for Readers, yet let your
Scholar diligently read the rest. For although he do not understand some of
the rules following at the first reading, yet he may at the second.

CHAP. IIII.
This Chapter lays forth a more full declaration of certain rules mentioned
before, as of (e) in the end of a word of those letters which are not
pronounced, Of (e) in the end of a word.
and for writing any words of the plural number.

Schol. I Remember you told me, the (e) in the end of a word is not pronounced;
beside that, it draws the syllable long, it also changes the sound of
Letters: I pray which are they?


Ma. It changes the sound of these letters u, c, g. when any of these vowels
go before, as au, eu, iu, ou, ac, ic, oc, uc, ag, ug, so iu ag, ig, as in *
hau, have, leu, leave* lou* love, so cave, save, Here u, with e, has the sound
of a consona^t. And (ee) as (se) and when short words and in (c) we use to add
(k)
salve, hiue, thrive: so (a) without (c) is sounded like (k) but ace with (e)
like ase, as in accord: but place, race; so lic, lice, truc, truce: also ag,
age, as stag, stage, so cag cage; so ^^g, huge, deluge, so hang, strange,
string, fringe, so larg, large, in most of which (e) does also draw the
syllable long, a^ you saw in ag, age, hug, huge. Where you must mark, that the
sound which (g) has in age, and huge, being long, in short syllables is made
by putting d, before g, as in badg, trudg. So it is also when e, i, or o, come
before g, as leg, ledge, rig, ridge, log, lodge; which vowels before g, are
never long except in leig, sieg, which is the putting in i.


Schol. But Sir, you have used (e) in the end of many words not sounded, when
neither it changes, sound, nor makes the syllable long: why is that?


Ma. We see it indeed often, but rather of custom, (as they say) for
Especially after, and is as in esp^e, argue.
beauty than of necessity, as after (i) but not after (y) as in bie, by; and
after two consonants, or a consonant doubled, as in article, angle, bar,
chafe, son, whereas the learned languages neither double the consonant, nor
use such (e) as the Latins say, mel, as, ros, we mell, as, rosse, And sometime
we use not (e) when the word is long, as after (ll) as in all, fall, shall,
yea, we use (as) longer without (e) than ass; with it. Yet sometime we use (e)
after two consonants, to draw the syllable long for difference sake,
principally if the end of them be (l) as in cradle, ladle; least they should be
pronounced Whereas some would make such words as able, two syllables, and that
e in the end, makes bl, to be as it were a syllable, I can see no reason for it.
short, like saddl, ladl; which some men would distinguish by doubling (dd) as
saddle. But it is both usual and needless to write bibbl, and chilld; to make
them differ from bible, and child. And some pronounce these words, blind, find,
behind, short: other blind, find, behind, with (e) long. Which (e) if we
should write after some words, it would utterly overthrow the natural sound,
as if we should write hang with (e) thus hang, we must pronounce it like
strange, and hence arises the difference of the last syllable in hanger, and
stranger. So words sounding, as long, song; and ending in ing, as reading,
writing, if they should have (e) would sounded like fringe, hinge; as swing him
in a rope, swinge him with a rod, which must not be written with (dg) frindg,
as some think, as the former examples show, and these words, fringed, hingell,
where (d) is never written.


Schol. If this be custom without reason, what certainty shall I hold?


Ma. Although it were good and easy both for our own Country learners, and
for strangers, that certain rules were known and practiced, (which thing
might easily be done) yet because it lies not in us to reform, I wish you
rather to observe the best, and follow that which we have, than to labor for
innovation, which we cannot effect. And let this admonition serve for all
customs in the rest.


Schol. I remember you promised me to set down those A letter not pronounced.
words which have other letters besides (c) either not at all, or but little
pronounced.


Mast. I will either set you them down, or else give you rules to know them.
Mark them therefore as they follow: The joining of these kind of vowels may be
called improper dipthongs, because one of them ^^ little heard.
is not pronounced, when (ea or oa) come together, as in earth, wealth,
beauty, abroad, toat, boat. Where (a) does draw the syllable long, like (e) in
the end, as appears by these words, Beast, best, bread, bed, goad, god,
coast, cost; as if you wrote bread, good, etc. And hereupon this word year,
year, year, is diversely written: yet we say, be-atitude, create, cre-a-tor.
etc. but creature; and in foreign proper names, we commonly pronounce both,
as in Ichoshable-ath, Gile-ad* Teco-a, Bo-az.

(e) Not pronounced in George, truth. (e)


(i) In shield, field, priest, chief, brief, shrieue, grieve, siege, (i)
Master, their, view, mischief, fierce, friese, atchieue, marueil, relief,
grief, biere, adieu, interfier, kirchiefe, lieutenant, fruit suit, bruise,
bruit.

(o) In people, flood, blood, yeoman, ieopardy. (o)


(u) In guest, guife, buy, guide, prologue, build, tongue, guile, (u)
guilty, conduit, league, dialogue, plague, epilogue, sinagogue.

(b) In lamb, comb, thumb, debt, doubt, bdelium. (b)


(c) In back, pack, deck, pecke, lick, stick, rock, (c)
knock, hucke, luck. And all alike: for we use no short words ending in (e)
without (k) so in these that end in ackle, eckle, ickle, ockle, uckle.


Schol. Why may we not say that (k) is not pronounced in these as well as (c)?


Mast. It differs not much which: for although that (k) does end our English
words when they be long: as in bake, cake, seek, speak, like, look, duke:
yet these that we make short, the Latins make the same sound in (c) as lac,
nec, dic, sic, hoc, duc, when we say, lack, neck, dick, sick, hock, duck.

(g) In sign, resign, ensign, phlegm, reign, sovereign, Gascoigne. (g)


(h) In Christ, mirth, Ghost, John, whole, scholar, eunuch, chronicle,
authority, anchor, choler, crystal, Rhene, rhenish, (h)
rhetoric, abominable, melancholy. So in foreign proper names, as Thomas,
Achaia, Cheaanath, Zacharias, Zichri, Chios, Aristarchus. So those that end in
arch, as Monarch: but in the beginning seldom, as Archangell; therefore
commonly writ Arkangell.

(gh) Coming together except in Ghost, are of most men but little sounded, as
might, fight, pronounced as mite, fite; (gh)
but in the end of a word some Countries sound them fully, others not at all:
as some say, plough, slough, bough: other, plou, slou, bou, Thereupon some
write borough, some borrow; but the truest is both to write and pronounce them.

(n) In solemn, hymn. (n)


(p) In Psalm, receipt, account. (p)


(s) In Isle. (s)


(t) Is always written, but little sounded before (ch) when (t)
the syllable is short, not having another consonant next, before, as in catch,
stretch, ditch, botch, smatch, except in rich, which, much; in which, custom
has prevailed against rule: But if the syllable be long, or has another
consonant with (ch) then (t) is not written, as in attach, reproach, couch,
b^lch, bench, etc.

Here again observe, that custom has prevailed against reason, else why
should (a) be written in boar, boat, rather than in door, dote, or (i) in
fruit, rather than brute? But to know when to write them, and when not, you
shall find all that may breed doubt, set down in the table at the end of the
book, where you may ask council, as your doubts shall arise, and not for
those sorts only, but for any other hard or doubtful word not mentioned
before in this book.


In such rules of writing, you must not only understand the first original
word but all deriuations rising from them. Note that ^ long sounde^, as in Se
not as Sea, is always written wi^h ea. Words of the plural number

Schol. You told me, you would observe something more in words ending in es; I
pray you what is it?


Mast. Well remembered it is this: words ending in (es) are most of the plural
number, and are made of the singular by adding (s) for where it is not needful
to use (e) in the end of the singular number, it shall not be needful to use
es in the plural, as in jewels, ingines: except the singular end in a vowel,
or in (w) put for (^) as in flies pies, toes, crows. Therefore shall you find
hands, things, words, more usual in the exactest writers, than hands,
things, words, with (e) although both ways be common: and this makes the
difference betwixt mils and miles, tuns and tunes, curs and cures: and not by
writing them being short, with the consonant doubled, as milles, tons,
curres, which is needless though usual, unless it be sometime for difference
of words, as to make Sons differ from the sound of the latin word sons.


Schol. Are there then never more syllables in the plural number, than in the
singular.


Mast. Yes sometime, as when the singular number ends in ce, ch, gd, dg, s,
or sh, As in graces, places, churches, cages, hedges, noses, fishes. And this
makes the difference betwixt gags for the mouth, and gages for a Uessell. Note
also, that if the singular number end in (f) it is turned in the plural into
(u) as wife, knife, calfe, whose plurals are wives, knives, calves.


Schol. Do all words of the plural number end in es?


Ma. No, for we may say lice, mice, men, b^^thren, oxen, teeth, feet, kine: and
many other. And sometime the singular and plural are both one; as one sheep,
ten sheep, one mile, twenty mile, or miles.


CHAP. V.
This Chapter teaches all observations that are necessary for the perfecting
of a Scholar.

What is the first thing next to be learned?

You shall f^nde some word witten with (e) and (o) single, when they should be
written with the dipthongs, ee, (e and o)
oo, as he, be, me, she, do, mother, for he, be, me, do, etc. but Which
Gra^marians call the second person ph.
thee when we speak unto one, and the otherwise, and so must their
pronunciation differ, as I will tell thee the matter. Secondly, that ph, is as
much as (f) and is used only in words borrowed from the Greek tongue, as in
Physic, Prophet, Philip, Phenice: for the rest look the Table.

Thirdly some letters beside those before mentioned, have not always one and
the same soound: as th is commonly sounded: as in these words, thank, thief,
third, throt, (th) Like (^) the Greek* (th) which only Scholars understand.
thump: except in these words following, that, fatham, the, them, then, there,
their, these, brothel, furthest, thine, this, thither, worthy, thou, through,
thus: and in words of more than one syllable, ending in there, thed, theth,
thest, thing; as father, breathed, breathest, bathest, seething.

Also (g) when (e) or (i) follow, brings great hardness to (gi, and ge)
our learners and strangers, being diversely sounded: (ge) most often sounds
as (ie) as in * agent, gorget, gentle, gentile, The first sort are sounded like
the latin (g) the other like Greek (v)
except in these words, together, get, bragger, target, burgen, guess, gled,
gow, gnawes, viniger, anger, finger, hanger, hunger, eag^r, sugar. And (g) as
(ij) as in grant, ginger, clergy, imagine, etc. except in begin, biggin, giddy,
gift, gig, giglet, gild, gilty, gimlet, ginni-hen, gird, girdle, girl, girth,
gittron, give, gives, Gibbon: and deriuatiues ending in ger, gec, geth, ge^^,
ging; which follow the sound of the words whereof they be made, as in hanger,
hanged, hangs, hang^st, hanging. Some men think that these words might be
thus differently written: a childs gig, a Scottish jig, the gill of a fish,
and a jill of wine. But our English tongue will hardly bear (ij) in one
syllable: Therefore to be sure when to write (g) and when (i) know that the
sound (gi) is always written with (g) and write (ie) always with (i) saving in
those words that you shall find written with (g) in the Table. But our English
proper names are written as it pleases the Painter, or as men have received
them by tradition; otherwise, why should Iermine be written otherwise than the
first syllable in Germane; or less, rather than Guess? and this I take to be
the reason, why Gifford is diversely pronounced and made two different names,
which is most like to be at the first but one; yea, I have known two natural
Brethren, both learned to write their own names differently.

Moreover (ti) before (on) is pronounced as (fi) as in redemption: except s or
x go before i, as question, adustion, mixtion; and commonly before other
vowels, as in patience, Egyptian; except when a syllable beginning with a
vowell, is added to a perfect word ending in (ti) as if (ing) be added to
pity, or est to lofty, it is pitying, loftiest.

But the hardest thing in our English tongue, for true writing, is to discern
when to write (ce or se, ci or si) or both Ce, se, ^^, s^*
as science: therefore many words that are merely English, are almost left
indifferent: as some write fausset some fauset, other faucet: so pincers, or
pinsers: bullace, or bullasse, so ^e bulleis: so Si^^ers, or cisers, but
exactly it is scissers. But because the most are written with ^, as seat,
serve, side, sick, etc. therefore you may write (s) before (e and i) except
with those words that are written with (c) in the Table, or any other made of
them by That is, by adding something to the beginning or end.
deriuation or composition; as if you know how to write Cite, you must so write
incite, citation, incitation, and so in other. Note, that ance, ence, ince,
once, ounce, ancy, ency, are usually written with (c) so it is after (a) in the
end, as temperance, prudence, excellence, grace, etc. except in case, base,
chase, or when (s) is sounded like (z) *as amase: words beginning with trans,
be always written (s) Often like (z) as brazier.
with (s) and circum, with (c) as transfer, circumstance. For other
exceptions, see the Table.

But to know when to write ci, si, ti, xi, before (on) mark that ci, and xi,
are seldom, as suspicion, complexion, si more Ci, si, ^i, xi.
often, as in those that end in casion, cession, cision, cursion, fession,
susion, gression, hension, lusion, misaion, passion, pression, pulsion, tision,
session, swasion, version, vision, as redemption, etc. but for particulars if
you doubt, view the Table.

Schol. What else is there to be observed?


Diverse writing of the same sound.

Ma. That diverse other words of the same pronunciation, by changing their
signification, change also their writing, as the reign of a Prince, the reine
of a bridle, and the rain falls.

Two men came to me. Their minds are there.

Wait on me, and sell it by weight.

Nay, not so, the horse does neigh.

The Sun shines, my Son cries.

Stand still here, that you may hear.

A true Prophet, brings much profit.

I heard that which was hard. (o) Before (m) or (n)


This Mill-wright cannot write.

Some men have a great sum of money.


Sometime we pronounce (o) before (m) or (n) as (u) ^^ in come, number,
custom, The proper name is wrieten, Some or Soame.
some, son, etc.

The same writing of a diverse sound.

Sometimes the same writing is diversely sounded, as (s) sounded like (z) as we
use this use. And when that (i) does so come betwixt two vowels, as that it may
be taken for a dipthong or consonant, as Iehoi-dah, or Ieho-jadah.

Sometime we shall have a word diversely written in y^ same sense, as (w) is
written for (u) as in brown, broune; but especially in the end of a word. Yet
do now, how, differ in sound from know, blow. And therefore I see no reason why
now and how, might not be written as thou and you, thus; nou, hou, that so to
make a difference between these words, to bow a bow, or sow for the sow, we
might write to bou a bou, to sou for the sou, and so out and ought, and such
like.

The same writing in a diverse sense.

Sometime we use the same writing and sound in words, differing in
signification, as the Which some write heart.
heart of the Heart pants.

As foul can fly over a foul way.

Thou art skillful in the Art of Grammar.

The right ear: Ear thy Land for an ear of corn.

My brother May, may live till May.

Sometimes a word is diversely written and sounded in Diverse sound and writing
in the same sense*
the same sense, as many beginning with (in) intent inform, or entenc,
inform, so bottell, bottle; yerke, or ierke, jaile, or Jail. To words ending
in (i) as money, journey, tansie. or money, journey, tansey. So words ending in
(or) (or)
short may ^e indifferently written with (or) and (our) as honor, favor, or
honor, favor, except for, nor, dor, abhor.

Further you must mark, that words of more than one syllable, ending in this
sound (u) are written with (ous) as glorious, (like que) Write sound that end
in (cus in Latin, as publicus* with (k) public; and those that end in (quus)
as obliquus, with (que) oblique, but traffic, because it is French.
frivolous. But words of one syllable, thus, us, trusse.

But to know when a word ends in (like) as public, when in (que) as oblique,
being both of one sound, is hard, without the Latin tongue, from whence most
of them be borrowed. The best help is deriuation; for we write pubike,
because we say publication: for (c) and (k) here be both ^ne, so (Rhetoric,
because we say Rhetorician.

The last thing I would have you to mark; touching this ^art of true writing,
is to know when to write (y) for (i) the ^owell, wherein almost so many men, so
many minds; some ^ill have it before certain letters, other when it comes ^^
a dipthong, but more reason they have which write it (y)
when another (i) follows, as in say-ing, or in the end of a word found
sharp, as in deny. But I think naturally and truly it ought not to be
written, but in words borrowed of the Greek, as hypocrite, mirth, mystical,
all which words you shall find in the Table, where you shall find no other
written with (y) for difference sake, although other-where I have written (y)
for (i) without regard, following the usual custom.

Schol. But Sir, I read a little before Psalm, and you did not teach me that
Ps. might begin a word.


Ma. Well remembered: such diligent marking what you read, will soon make you a
scholar: The answer is this, that word is borrowed from the Grecians, and they
join consonants that our English tongue does not, M^^son, Ptol^meus, Rhodus,
ctenes, signifying the four fore-teeth, pnuma a spirit or breath, ^nieus,
bastard saffron. But these are very rare; so we have many terminations in
proper names: and latin words that are not usual in English, as fons, ar^ns,
falx, arx; in proper names, alz, anz, ai^, etc. Thus alb, is of the latins? we
use also in Latin Stlata, not used in English: we use also contract words in
English, as hanged for hanged.


Sch. Have I now no more to observe for distinct reading?


Ma. That which the Grammarians call accent, which is, ^ccent usually omitted
in our English Prints.
the lifting up of the voice in one syllable higher than in another, which
sometime differs in a word written with the same letters, as an incense to
incense; where (in) in the former word, as cense in the latter is lifted up
more.

You must observe also, those which we do call points or stays in writing, as
this mark, like to a small half Moon, notes a small stay; two pricks thus:
makes a longer stay, and one prick thus. is put for a full stay as if we had
ended. When a question is asked, we mark it thus?

*The points are thus called, a Comma,: a Colon,. a Period,? an Interrogation.

When some words may be left out, and yet the sentence perfect, it is noted
thus () a Parenthesis. as teach me (I pray you) to read. But for the true
framing of your voice in all these, you must crave help of your Master.

You must also know the short kind of writing Called breuiations,
used in some words: as a strike over any vowell for m, or n, as man for man,
co^ for con, ye for the, ye for that, you for you, with for with etc. for and so
forth. In written hand there is many other, and so a word ending in a vowell,
does lose it sometime when the next word begins with a vowell, Called
Apostrophe's.
as the intent for the intent, which exactly should be written thus, * the intent.

Capital letters.
Lastly, you must write the first letter of every proper name, and of the first
word of every sentence and verse, with those that we call Great and Capital
letters, as Robert, Anne, England, Cambridge: As also when we put a letter for
a number, as V. for five, X. for ten, L. for fifty, C. for a hundred, D for
five hundred, M. for a thousand. Lastly, when we put a letter for a word, as L.
for Lord, LL. for Lords. B. for Bishop, BB. for Bishops.


Schol. Now I am sure that I shall never miss in spelling, or reading, nor (as
I think) in writing.


Mast. I know not what can easily deceive you in writing, Corrupt pronunciation
and writing.
unless it be by imitating the barbarous speech of your Country people,
whereof I will give you a taste, thereby to give you an occasion to take heed,
not of these only, but of any like. Some people speak thus: The mell stands
on the hell, for the mill stands on the hill: so knet for knit, bredg for
bridge, know for gnaw, knat for gnat, belk for belch, yerb for herb, griffe for
graffe, yelk for yolk, ^eam for realm, afeard for afraid, dirt for dirt, gurt
for girth, stomp for stamp, ship for sheep, hafe for half, sample for
example, parfit for perfect, dauter for daughter, certain for certain, cercher
for cerchiefe, leash for lease, hur for her, sur and suster, for sir and
sister, to spat for to spit, etc.

So do they commonly put (f) for (u) as feale for veale.

We use to put (n) to the words (a my or thy when the next word begins with
a vowell to avoid a gaping sound.

And a nox, a nasse, my naunt, thy nunckle, for an ox, ass, mine aunt, thine
uncle, etc.

Take heed also you put not (e) for (i) in the end of a word as unity for
unity, nor (id) for (ed) as vnitid for united, which is Scottish: And some
ignorantly write a cup a Wine. for a cup of wine* and other like absurdities.


Schol. How shall I avoid these dangers.


Mast. By diligent marking how you read them written.


Schol. May I then never use my proper Country terms in writing.


Mast. Yes, if they be peculiar terms and not corrupting of words, as the
Northren man writing to his private Neighbor may say, My Lathe stands near
the kirk garth, for My barn stands near the Churchyard. But if he should
write publicly, it is fittest to use the most known words.


Schol. What can now hinder me, why I should not readily and distinctly read
any English?


Ma. Nothing at all, (if you be thoroughly perfect in this that I have taught
you) unless it be want of more practice, which (although this you have
learned, will so sufficiently teach you, that you cannot fail in any word,
though you have never any other teacher, yet for your more cheerful
proceeding, I would wish you if (you can conveniently) not to forsake your
Master, until you have gone through these exercises following, of which I have
made choice of all sorts, both of prose and verse that you may not be wanting
in any thing.


Schol. Sir, I will follow your advice, thanks you for your pains, and crave
the Lord his blessing. And now will I appose some of my fellows, to see how
we can remember some of these things taught.


CHAP. VIII.
Here is set down an order how the Teacher shall direct his Scholars to
appose one another.

When your Scholars first learn this Chapter, let one read the questions,
and another the answer. When your Scholars appose one the other, let the
answerer answer without book.

John. Who will adventure his credit with me in apposing for the victory?


Robert. I will never refuse you nor any in our form, in any thing we have
learned, begin what you will.


John. How spell you lo?


Robert. l, o?


John. Spell of?


Robert. o, f.


John. Spell from?


Robert. f, r, o, m.


John. How write you people?


Robert. I cannot write.


John. I mean not so, but when I say write. I mean^ spell; for in my meaning
they are both one.


Robert. Then I answer you, p, e, o, p* l, e.


John. What use has (o) for you give it no sound?


Robert. True: yet we must write it, because it is one of the words we learned,
wherein (o) is not pronounced.


John. Are there any more of them?


Robert. Yea many: I will repeat them if you will.


John. No, that would be ouer-long. But tell me, why pronounce you not (e) in
the end of people?


Robert. It is not pronounced in the end, if there be another vowell in that
syllable.


John. To what end then serves it?


Robert. We have learned two principal uses: one is, it draws the syllable
long, as h, a, t, spelleth hat, but h, a, t, e is hate.


John. How spell you Jesus?


Robert. I, e, s, u, s.


John. How know you that this is not written with g, e?


Rob. Because it is not in the Table at the end of my book: for all that be
written with g, e, be there, and our Master taught us that all other of that
sound must be written with I, e.


John. How write you Circle?


Robert. S, i, r, c, l, e.


John Nay, now you miss: for if you look but in the Table, you shall find, it
Circle* Therefore now you must appose me.


Robert. I confess mine error, therefore I will try if I can requite it What
spelleth b, r, a, n, c, h.


John. Branch.


Robert. Nay but you should put in (u.)


John. That skilleth not, for both ways are usual.


Robert. How spell you Might?


John. M, i, g, h, t.


Robert. Why put you in (gh) for m, i, t, e, spelleth mite?


John. True, but with (gh) is the truer writing, and it should have a little
sound.


Robert. If your syllable begin with (b) what consonants may follow?


John. Duly (l) or (r.)


Robert. Where learn you that?


John. In the third Chapter of the first Book.


Robert. And which will follow (g?)


John. l, n, or r.


Robert. How prove you it?


John. Because g, l, a, spells gla, g, n, a, gna, and g, t, a, spells gra.


Robert. When three consonants begin a syllable, how shall I know which they be?


John. We have them before twice set down; besides, put a vowell unto them,
and see whether they then will spell any thing, as str, put a, and it spelleth
stra; but btra, will spell nothing: they cannot begin a syllable?


Robert. Does not str, spell stra?


Make your Scholar read over this Dialogue so often until he can do it a^
readily and pronounce it as naturally as if he spoke without book.

John. It spelleth nothing without a vowell.


Robert. How many syllables are in this word rewarded?


John. Three.


Robert. How prove you that?


John. Because it has three vowels, without any of the three exceptions?


Robert. How divide you them?


John. Re-war-ded.


Robert. Why put you w to a?


John. Because it is one consonant between two vowels.


Robert. And why divide you r, and d?


John. Because they cannot begin a syllable.


Robert. What is the best way to spell a long word, as this admonition?


John. I must mark how many syllables it has, which I find to be five, then
take the first a, d, ad, then take the next, m, o, mo, then put them together,
admo; so spell and put to the third, admoni, and so until you come to the end.


Robert. What if a man should did you write this word?


John. I must follow the same order, first write down ad, then write unto it
mo,admo, then join unto that ni,admoni, so the rest admoniti, admonition.


Robert. What is the best way to make us perfect inspelling hard syllabies.


John. My Master does sometime practice us in harsh counterfeit syllables
through all the five vowels, as in thraugh, threugh, thriugh, through, thruugh.
Wrasht, wresht, wrisht, wrosht, wrusht. Yarmble, yermble, yirmble, yormble,
yurmble. Weight, weight, etc. vaigh, veigh, etc. janch, jench, jinch, ionch,
iunch.


Rob. What if you cannot tell what vowell to spell your syllable with, how will
you do to find it? as if you should write from, and know not whether you
shall write it with a or o.


John. I would try with all the vowels thus, fram, frem, frim, from: now I have
it.


Rob. But Good man Tailor our Clarke, when I went to School with him, taught
me to sound these vowels otherwise than (me thinks) you do.


John. How was that?


Let the unskillful Teachers take great heed of this fault, and let some good
Scholars hear their children pronounce these syllables.

Rob. I remember he taught me these syllables thus: for bad, bed, bid, bod,
bud, I learned to say* bad, bid, bide, bod, bude, sounding a bed to lie upon,
as to bid or command, and bid, as bide long, as in abide: bud of a tree as bude
long like rude: for these three vowels e, i, u, are very corruptly and
ignorantly taught by many unskillful Teachers, which is the cause of so great
ignorance in true writing in these that want the Latin tongue.


John. You say true, for so did my Dame teach m^ to pronounce, for sa, se, si,
so, su, to sa, see, si, so, so, as if she had sent me to see her sow, when as
(e) should be sounded like the (sea) and (su) as to (sue) one at the Law.


Robert. But let me return to appose you: how were we taught to find out the
natural sound of consonants.


John. By the sp^ch of a stutterer or stammerer, as to observe how he labors
to For letters were first devised according to sound.
sound the first syllable of a word: as if the stammerer would pronounce Lord,
before he can bring it forth, he expresses the sound of (l) which is the
first Letter, and so of all the other consonants?


Robert. How many ways may you express this sound si?


John. Only three: si, ci, and sci, or xi, which is (csi.)


Robert. Now have you erred as well as I; for (ti) before a vowell does
commonly sound (si) and now I will give you over for this time: but I will
challenge you again to morrow, both in some few questions, in some part of
that which we have learned, and also after every lesson: and as you are
insaying, I will mark where you miss, and therein will I deal with you.


John. Do your worst, I will provide likewise for you, and never give you over,
until I have gotten the victory, for I take not so much pleasure in any thing
else all day.


Robert. I am of your mind: for I have heard our Master say, that this apposing
does very much sharpen our wi^s, help our memory, and many other commodities.
But now let us look unto our Catechism, for our Master will examine us next
in that.


John Nay by your leave, we shall first read over again all that we have
learned, with the Preface, Titles of the Chapters, and Notes in the Margents of
our Books, which we omitted before, because they were too hard: for we shall
go no further before we be perfect in this.


The end of the second Book.
short Catechism.
What Religion do you profess?

Christian Religion.

What is Christian Religion?

It is the true Profession, believing, and following of Ac^s 12, 16
those things which are commanded and taught us by God in the holy Scriptures.
Romans 10, 9, 10. Acts. 4, 12


What call you the holy Scriptures?

The word of God, contained in the Books of the Old and New Testamen^. 2, Tim.
3, 16 17


Does this Scripture or word of God contain in it all points of D^u. 4, 35,
and 6, 4
true religion, and euerything necessary for the Salvation of a Christian?

Yea.

Tell me then from this Scripture how many Gods there be?

One. Ephesians. 4, 6 1, Tim 1, 17 John 4, 24 1, John 5, 7 Math 3, 16, 19 Math. 28,
19 1, John 5, 7 Psalm. 1^, 1, 7, and 29, 3, 4, 5. Romans 1, 29, and 10, 18


What is God?

An everlasting Spirit, Immortal, Invisible, most strong, and only wise.

How many persons are there?

Three.

Which be they?

The Father, the Son, and the Holy G^ost.

How is God known?

By his Works, Word, and Spirit.

Who created the World?

Heb. 11, 3 Genesis 1, 1 Genesis 1, 27* ^, Cor. 8, 6. Ephesians. 4, 24. Gen, 1, 27 Romans
11, 36
God.

Whereof did he create it?

Of nothing, and that by his word.

Who made you?

God the Father.

How did he create you?

In Holiness and Righteousness.

Why were you th^^ created?

To glorify God.

Are you able to do this of your self?

No.

Why so? Romans 3, 10, 11 12.


Because I am a sinner. Rom 3, 23. 1, John ^, 8, 10


How come you to be a sinner. seeing you were so perfectly created?

By the fall of Adam? Romans 5. 12. ^8 29.


What was his sin?

Disobedience against God in eating of the forbidden fruit.

How comes it to pass that you are become a sinner in Adam? Genesis 3, 6


Because he was the Father of all Mankind. Romans 5, 1^.


How do you prove that you are a sinner?

By the Testimony of mine own Conscience, and by the Law of God. Romans 2, 15,
and 3, 2^*


What is the Law of God?

A perfect rule of righteousness, commanding good, and forbidding Gal. 3. 19.
Psalm. 19, 7.
evil: the sum whereof is contained in the Commandetmens.

How many be there?

Ten. Exodus 34, 28


Rehearse them?

1 Then God spoke all these words and said: I am the Lord thy God, which has
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, Exodus 20, ^.
out of the house of bondage: Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

2 Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, nor in the Earth beneath, nor in the water under
the Earth; thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them; for I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the
Children, unto the third and fourth generation, of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands to them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

3 Thou shall not take the Name of the LORD thy GOD in vain; for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.

4 Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day; six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God; In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy Son, and
thy Daughter, thy Man-seruant, and thy Maid servant, thy Cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy Gates: for in six days the Lord made Heaven and
Earth, the Sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; Wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

5 Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6 Thou shall do no Murder.

7 Thou shall not commit Adultery.

8 Thou shall not Steal.

9 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10 Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house: thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his Servant, nor his Maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Are these words. I am the Lord thy God, etc. a Commandment, or Preface?

A Preface to the whole Law.

How be the Commandments divided?

Into two Tables or Parts. Leuit. 19, 29 Exodus ^1, 18 and 34, 16


How many be there of the first Table?

Four.

How many of the second?

Six.

What do the Commandments of the first Table teach you?

My duty toward God. Math. 22, 27


What do the Commandments of the second Table teach you?

My duty toward my neighbor. Math. 22, 29


Are you to use the Commandments as Prayers?

No, because they be no Petitions, but Commandments.

Are you able to keep them, without breaking any one of them in thought, word,
or deed.

No*

Why?

Because I am ready and disposed by nature to offend both God and my Neighbor.
Ephesians. 2, 3 Romans 3, 10.


To what end then serves the Law?

To show us our misery, and to lead us to Christ, and to be Romans 3, 10, Gal.
3. 34. Prou. 2, 18. Psalm. 119. 105, Romans 6, 23
a rule ever after for the well ordering of our lives.

What is the punishmant for the breach of the Law?

Eternal destruction both of body and Soul.

Js there no way to escape it and be saved?

Yes. Acts, 4, 1^


How?

By Jesus Christ.

Who is this Christ?

The Son of God, perfect God and perfect Man. Math, 3, 1^ Romans 9, 5, Esaias 9,
6. Heb. 1, 6.


Could there no other mean^ or person be found in Heaven or Earth to save you,
but the Son of God must do it?

No verily.

Must he needs be God and Man?

Yes.

Why?

First, because he must dye for us; and God cannot dye; Heb. 9, 2^
therefore he must be Man.

Secondly, he must overcome Death, which being only Heb. 2, 14. 1, Pet. 1, 9,
and 2, 22
Man. he could not: therefore he must be also God.

did he save us?

As he was Man perfectly righteous, he performed the perfect Heb. 4, 15. 1,
Pet. 1, 24. and 4, 1*
obedience of the Law, and satisfied the justice of God, for me. And as he was
God, he overcame death, and raised 1, Pet, 3, 18. Mat. 25, 46, and 7, 23.
up his body the third day.

Are all men partakers of this benefit of Redemption purchased ^y Christ?
Revel. 22, 1, 5. John 3. 16. Gal. 3, 26. Heb. 10, 22 Romans 4, 20, 2, ^ John, 1,
12. Acts. 4, 12, 2, These. 3, 2. Phil. 2, 29. Math 16 ^ ^ Romans 1^, ^^


No: there are a number that shall have their part in Hell with the Devil and
his Angels.

Who are they that shall have their part in the death of Christ?

Only such as truly believe.

What is Faith?

Faith is a full assurance of my salvation in Jesus Christ alone.

Has every man this faith in himself?

No^ for it is the gift of God, and not of nature.

How is faith gotten?

By the outward hearing of the Word of God Preached, and the inward working of
the Spirit.

How is it strongthened and increased in you?

By the same preaching of the Word, and the use of the Sacraments and Prayer.

How shall any man know whether he have this true and saving faith, or no?

By the fruits and marks thereof. 1, Cor. 1, 22 Acts 2, 41 2, Cor. 4, 13 Ioh.
1, 31, and 6, 17,


What be the fruits of faith?

A hatred of all sin, a continual care to please God in the duties commanded,
and unfeigned love to Gods word, and to his people.

Rehearse the sum of your faith?

I believe in God, the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven 1, Pet. 2, 2 Acts. 2,
37 Heb. 11, 7 Psalm. 119, 123 ^, John 3, 14
and earth, and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived
by the Holy Ghost, borne of the virgin Mary* suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead and buried; he descended into Hell, the third day he rose
again from the dead; he ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of
God the Father Almighty, from thence shall he come to judge the quick and the
dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of
Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. Amen.

How many parts be there of this Creed?

Two.

Which be they?

The first is of God: the second is of the Church.

us now come to the means of strengthening of faith, as of the Sacraments and
Prayer: and first, what is a Saorament?

A Sacrament is a Seal and a pledge of those benefits of my Salvation which I
receive by Christ. Romans 4, 11.


How many Sacraments be there in the Church of God?

Two.

Which be they?

Baptism and the Supper of the Lord? Math. 28, 19 and 26, 16


Who ordained them*?

The Lord Jesus.

To what end? 1. Cor. 11, 23


To strengthen our Faith, and to further our Repentance? Math. 26, 26 ^, Cor.
11, 23


How many things are to be considered in a Sacrament?

Two.

What be they?

The sign, and the thing signified. Genesis 17, 11 Romans 4, 11 Acts, 8. 26


In Baptism, which is the sign signified?

Water.

What is the thing signified?

The washing away of my sins by the blood of Christ. John 3, 5


How is your faith strengthenea by Baptism?

By Baptism I am received into the family and Congregation Mark. 16, 16
of the Lord and am thereby fully assured, that both my sins Acts, 2, 23
are forgiven me, and the punishment due to the same.

What do you profess in Baptism?

To dye unto sin, and to live unto Righteousness. Romans 6, 3


In the Supper of the Lord, which be the signs that may be seen?

Bread and Wine.

What do they signify?

The body and blood of Christ?

How is your faith strengthened by the Supper of the Lord? Mat. 2^, 26, 27 1,
Cor. 11, 23. 24, 25.


By the Supper of the Lord my Faith is strengthened, that as I receive the
Bread and Wine into my body to become mine, so does my Soul receive withal
Jesus Christ, with all the benefits of his death, to be wholly mine.

Is the Bread and Wine turned into the natural Body and Blood of Christ,
flesh, blood, and bone.

No; the Bread and Wine of their own nature are not Genesis 17, 10, 11 Exodus 12,
11
changed, but in use they differ from other common Bread and Wine, because they
be approved of the Lord, to be signs of the Body and blood of Christ.

Why then does Christ say; This is my Body?

It is a figurative speech used in the Scripture; as Circumcision is called the
Covenant: the Lamb is called the Passover: and yet is not the Covenant, nor
the Passover, but a sign of it.

How do you eat Christ's Body, and drink his Blood.

Spiritually, and by Faith. John 6, 63.


Are all persons without exception, to be admitted to the Supper of the Lord?

No.

Who are to be not admitted?

Children, Fools, Madmen. Ignorant persons, known Heretics, 1, Cor. 11, 18
Tit. 3, 10.
open and notorious sinners not repenting.

What must he do that will come worthily to the Supper of the Lord?

He must prove and examine himself. 1, Cor. 11, 28, 29.


Wherein must he examine himself?

First, what knowledge he has in the principles of Religion, and specially in
the matter of the Sacrament.

Secondly whether he has true faith in Jesus Christ, or no.

Thirdly, whether he be penitent and sorry for his sins past. Math, 1, 23,
Romans 12, 18. Heb. 12. 14.
purposing to leave them, and to live godly, endeavoring himself to be in
brotherly love and charity with all men.

Then it seenieth there be some, who albeit they come, yet they lose the
benefit of this Communion in themselves.

Yea.

Who be they?

Such as come not in Faith, and are not grieved for their 1. Cor. 11, 30 ^,
Cor. 11, 30.
sins past, as Hypoc^ites, evil men, Church-Papists, private enemies to Gods
word; and so many of the godly as come not sufficiently prepared, procure a
punishment.

What is the other help^ you have to increase Faith?

Prayer.

What is Prayer?

Prayer is a spiritual action of Faith, wherein we require of Rom ^, 2^. James
16. 1, John 5, 14,
God in the name of Christ, all things necessary to his glory, and our comfort.

To whom must you pray?

To God only.

In whose name? Psalm. 50, 14, 15


In the name of Christ. John 16, 2, 3


Then you may not pray to Saints or Angels, or to God in the name of Saint or
Angel?

No.

Why?

Because there is neither Commandment, promise, nor example in the Scripture
for it.

How must you pray?

As Christ has taught me, saying?

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name: Thy Kingdom come: The
will be done in earth, as it is in Math, 6, 9
Heaven: Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us n^^ into temptation. But
deliner us from evil; for ^hine is the Kingdom, the power and the glory, for
ever. Amen.

How many Petitions be there in this Prayer.

Six; Three concerning the glory of God, and three our own necessities.

What are these words; Our Father which art in Heaven?

A Preface or Introduction to Prayer.

What are these words: For thine is the Kingdom, the power and the glory, for
ever?

The Conclusion of the Prayer. Psalm. 116, 12, 13 Ephesians 5, 10 Deu, 8, 3, 6 and ^


What do you owe to God for all his benefits?

Thanksgiving.

Is it enough that you thank him with your lips alone?

No: But I must be obedient to his laws and Commandments: which grace the
Lord grant me. Amen.

Sundry necessary observations of a Christian.

1 THat we keep a narrow watch over our hearts, words 1, Pot. 1, 15.
and deed continually.

2 That with all care the time be redeemed, which has Ephesians. 5, 16 Col^^ 4,
7, and 2, 2
been idly, carelessly and unprofitably spent.

3 That once in the day at the least, private Prayer and meditation be used.
Luk 14* 15 1^. Deu^. 4, 9 and 6, 7.


4 That care be had to do and receive good in company.

5 That our family be with diligence and regard instructed, Genesis 18, 19 Pro.
31. 27, 28. Colos 3. 1. Heb* 13, 16. Gal. 6, 10. Colos. 3, 5. Ephesians. 5. 3. 4.
Math. 10, 24 Dan, 9, 34. etc 20,
watched over and governed.

6 That no more time or care be bestowed in matters of the world then must
needs.

7 That we stir up our selves to liberality to Gods Saints.

8 That we give not the least bridle to wandering Lusts and affections.

9 That we prepare our selves to bear the Cross, by what means i^ shall
please God to exercise us. Lamen^ 1. 1


10 That w^^ bestow some time, not only in mourning for our own sin, but
also for the sins of the time and age wherein we live.

11 That we look daily for the coming of our Lord Jesus 1, Cor, 1, 7 Tit, 2,
2, 16
Christ, for our deliverance out of this life.

12 That we use (as we shall have opportunity) at least as we shall have
necessity, to acquaint our selves with some godly and faithful person, with
whom we may confer of our Christian estate, and open our doubts to the
quickening up of Iam. 5, 13
Gods graces in us.

13 That we observe the Departure of men out of this life; R^cles 7, 4 Phil. 1,
23. Revel. 22, 24
their mortality, and vanity, and alteration of things below, the more to
contemn the world, and to continue our longing after the life to come. And
that we meditate and muse often of our own death, and going out of this life,
how we must lie in the Grave, and all our glory put off, which will seru^ to
beat down the pride of life that is in us.

14 That we read somewhat daily in the holy Scriptures, D^^. 11. 19, 20 Joshua
1, 8, Psalm, 1, 2 Dan. 9, 2 Neh. 9, 38 2, Chro. 34, 31 1, Pet. 1, 14
for the further increase of our knowledge.

15 That we enter into Covenant with the Lord, to strive against all sin, and
especially against the special sins and corruptions of our hearts and lives,
wherein we have most dishonored the Lord, and have raised up most guiltiness
to our own Conscience, and that we carefully see our Covenant be kept and
continued.

16 That we mark how sin dies and is weakened in us; and that we turn not
to our old sins again, but wisely avoid 2, Pet, 2, 20, 21 22.
all occasions to sin.

17 That we fall not from our first love, but continue still Math, 18, 8 ^*
Thef 5, 22 Revel. 2, 4. Iam. 1, 19. Iam. 1. 22 Romans 2, 13, Eccles, 4, 17.
our affections to the liking of Gods Word, and all the holy exercises of
Religion, diligently hearing it, and faithfully practicing of the same in our
lives and conuersations: that we prepare our selves before we come, and
meditate and confer of that we hear, either by our selves or with others;
and so mark our daily profit in Religion.

18 That we be often occupied in meditating on Gods benefits Ephesians. 5, 20.
Psalm. 116. 12, 17, and 118, 15. Phil. 1, 13. 2, Tim. 4, 7, 8.
and works, and sound forth his praises for the same.

19 That we exercise our Faith by taking comfort, and delight in the great
benefit of our redemption by Christ, and the fruition of Gods presence, in his
glorious blessed Kingdom.

20 Lastly, that we make not these holy practices of repentance, common in
time, nor use them for course.

A Prayer framed according to this Catechism.
ALmighty God and most merciful Father in Jesus Christ, as thou have plainly
set before us our cursed state, in the clear glass of thy heavenly Word; so
we beseech thee open our eyes to see it, and pierce our hearts to feel it, by
the inward working of thy holy spirit, For we (Lord) are most vain and vile
creatures, justly tainted with the rebellion of our first parents, conceived in
sin, bondslaues of Satan, necessarily, and yet willingly, serving diverse
lusts, and committing innumerable sins against thy Majesty, whereby we deserve
most justly to endure all miseries in this life, and to be tormented in Hell
for ever. But blessed be thy Name (O Lord our God) who when there was no power
in us, no not so much as any desire or endeavor to get out of this woeful
estate, have made us see and feel in what case we were, and provide a most
sovereign remedy for us, even thy dear and only begotten Son, whom thou have
freely offered to us, not only kindling in us a desire to enjoy him, but
enabling us by a true and lively faith to lay hold upon him, and to be
partakers of all his benefits, to the salvation of our souls. And now, Lord,
that it has pleased thee by faith to join us to thy Son Jesus Christ, and
by thy Spirit to make us members of his body, we humbly pray thee by the same
spirit, to renew us daily according to thine own Image, work in our hearts a
daily increase of true faith and repentance, and in our lives a holy and
comfortable change. O God, enable us in all good measure, to walk worthy of
all thy mercies, and to serve thee, who have created and chosen us, and thy
Son, who has redeemed us from death, and made us heirs of glory; and thy
blessed Spirit, who does continually sanctify and keep us, with faith, fear,
and zeal, in true holiness and righteousness, all the days of our life.
Finally, seeing of thine infinite goodness and mercy thou have appointed
diverse excellent and holy means, for the daily increase of thy graces in us,
and for the confirming and quickening of us in Christian conversation, we
humbly beseech thee to grant all those good means unto us, and to continue
them among us, giving us grace to use them purely, constant^y, and zealously,
to the glory of thy Name, and profit of our brethren, and salvation of our
souls, through Jesus Christ; to whom with thee, O Father, and the Holy Ghost,
be given all honor and glory for ever. Amen.

A thanksgiving before meat.
O My heavenly Father, I thank thee through Jesus Christ, for making these
Creatures to serve me, and for giving me leave to feed on them, now I humbly
pray thee to give me grace moderately and soberly to use them, that my bodily
health may be still continued to thy glory, the good of others and mine own
comfort in Jesus Christ. Amen.

A thanksgiving after meat.
O Lord, feeling my body to be refreshed with meat and drink, and my mind
also fitter to do those things that thou requirest of me: let it now be my
meat to do thy will, and those works which belong to my duty, with all
cheerfulness and good conscience, that for these, and all other thy mercies,
my thankfulness in heart, word and deed, may be acceptable in thy sight, to
the end of my life, through Jesus Christ* to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost,
be all honor, glory, and thanksgiving, now and ever. Amen.

A Prayer for the morning.
O Lord our heavenly Father, we thy poor and wretched creatures, give thee
most humble and hearty thanks for our quiet and safe sleep, and for raising us
up from the same. We beseech thee for Christ's sake to prosper us this day in
our labor and travel, that it may be to the discharge of our duty in our
vocations: principally to thy glory; next, to the profit of the Church and
Commonweal; and last of all, to the benefit and content of our Masters.
Grant, dear Father, that we may cheerfully and conscionably do our business
and labors, not as men pleasers, but as serving thee our God, knowing thee to
be the chief Master of us, and that thou see and beholdest us with thy
fatherly eyes, who have promised reward to them that faithfully and truly walk
in their vocation; and threatened everlasting death and damnation to them that
deceitfully and wickedly do their workers and labors* we beseech thee, O
heavenly Father, to give us the strength of thy Spirit, that godly and gladly
we may overcome our labors, and that the tediousness of this irksome labor
which thou for our sins have powered upon all mankind, may seem to us
delectable and sweet. Fulfill now, O Lord, these our requests, for thy Son
our Saviors sake; in whose Name we pray as he himself has taught us, Our
Father, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening.
MOst merciful God and tender Father, which besides thine inestimable mercies
declared and given unto us in the making of the world for our sakes, in the
redeeming of us by the death of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, in the calling of
us to the knowledge of thy blessed Word, in keeping of us hitherto in thy holy
Church, and in thy most gracious governing of us, and in all things hitherto,
for our singular wealth and commodity, have also most fatherly cared for us,
kept us this day from all dangers both of soul and body, giving us health,
food, apparel, and other things necessary for the comfort and succor of this
poor and miserable life, which many other do want: for these, and all other
thy good gifts and gracious benefits, which thou of thine own goodness only,
and fatherly providence, have hitherto powered upon, and do presently power
upon us and many other, we most humbly thank thee, and praise thy holy Name:
beseeching thee, that as all things are now hidden, by means of the darkness
which thou have sent over the Earth, so thou would vouchsafe to hide and
bury all our sins* which this day, or at any time heretofore we have committed
against thy holy Commandment: and as now we purpose to lay our bodies to rest,
so grant the guard of thy good Angels to keep the same this night and for
evermore: and whenever our last sleep of death shall come, grant that it may
be in thee, good Father, so that our bodies may rest both temporally and
eternally, to thy glory, and our joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

The 119. Psalm.
BLessed are those that are undefiled in their way: and walk in the Law of the
Lord.








The second Part.








Proverbs, Chap. 4.






















































The first Psalm.
THe man is blessed that has not bent
to wicked read is ear:
Nor led his life as sinners do,
nor sat in scorners chair:

does set his whole delight:
And in the law does exercise
himself both day and night.

fast by the water side,
Which brings forth most pleasant fruit
In her due time and tide.

but flourish still and stand:
Even so all things shall prosper well,
which this man takes in hand.

they shall be noting so:
But as the dust that from the earth
the wind drives to and fro.

in Judgment stand upright:
Nor yet the sinners with the just,
shall come in place or sight.
For why? the way of godly men,
unto the Lord is known:
And eke the way of wicked men,
shall quite be overthrown.
The fourth Psalm.
O God that art my righteoulsnesse,
Lord hear me when I call:
Thou have set me at liberty,
when I was bound and thrall.

and grant me my request;
For unto thee incessantly
to cry I will not rest,

my glory thus despise?
Why wander ye in vanity,
and follow after lies?

the Lord will take and choose:
And when to him I make my plaint,
he does me not refuse.

examine well your heart
And in your Chamber quietly,
see you your selves convert.

of righteousness, I say,
And look that in the living Lord
you put your trust always.

and riches do embrace:
But Lord grant us thy countenance,
thy favor and thy grace:

more joyful and more glad.
Then they that of their corn and wine,
full great increase have have had.

taking my rest and sleep:
For thou only wilt me, O Lord,
alone in safety keep.
the 50 Psalm.
THe mighty God,
the eternal has thus spoke,
And all the world
He will call and provoke:
Even from the East,
and so forth to the West:

which place likes him best.
God will appear
in beauty most excellent:

before that long time be spent.
Devouring fire
shall go before his face:
A great tempest
shall round about him trace.

the earth and heavens bright,
To judge his folk
with equity and right.

and now my Saints assemble,
My pact they keep,
their gifts do not dissemble

declare his righteousness,
For God is Judge
of all things, more and less.

for I will now reveal,
List Israel,
I will thee naught conceal:
Thy God, thy God
am I, and will not blame thee,

all manner offerings to me.
I have no need
to take of thee at all
Goats of thy fold,
or Calfe out of thy stall:

are mine within the woods,
On thousand hills
Cattle are mine own goods.

all birds that are on mountains,
All beasts are mine,
which haunt the fields and fountains.
The 51. Psalm. The first part.
O Lord consider my distress,
and now with speed some pity take,
My finnes deface, my faults redress,
good Lord, for thy great mercies sake:

from this unjust and sinful act,
And purify yet once again,
my heinous crime and bloody fact.

me to acknowledge mine excess:
My sins alas do still remain
before my face without release.

and done this evil in thy sight,
And if I were therefore condemned,
yet were thy judgments just and right.

that first I was coneiued in finne,
Yea of my mother so borne was,
and yet vile wretch remain therein.

the inward truth of a pure heart:
Therefore thy wisdom from above,
thou have reueald me to convert.

I shall be clearer then the glass:
And if thou wash away my spot,
the snow in whiteness I shall pass.

that inwardly I may find grace,
and that my strength may now amend,
which thou have swag'd for my trespass.

for I have felt enough thy hand,
And purge my sins I thee desire,
which do in number pass the sand.

and frame it to thy holy will,
Thy constant Spirit in me let rest,
which may these raging enemies kill.
The 67 Psalm.
Have mercy on us Lord,
and grant to us thy grace,
To show to us do thou accord,
the brightness of thy face:

the way to godly wealth,
And all the Nations on a row,
may see thy saving health.

give praise unto thy Name,
O let the people all abroad,
extol and laud the same,

let all rejoice with mirth:
For thou with truth and right do guide
the Nations of the earth.

give praise unto thy name*
O let the people all abroad,
extol and laud the same.

great store of fruit shall fall,
And then our God, the God of peace,
shall bless us eke withal.

and then both far and near,
The folk throughout the world always,
of him shall stand in fear.
The 104. Psalm.
MY soul, praise the Lord,
speak good of his Name:
O Lord, our great God,
how do thou appear,
So passing in glory,
that great is thy fame?
Honor and Majesty
in thee shine most clear.

thou have the beclad,
Whereby all the Earth
thy greatness may see.
The heavens in such sort
thou also have spread,
That it to a curtain
compared may be.

in clouds full sure:
Which as his chariots
are made him to bear:
And there with much swiftness
his course does endure;
Upon the wings riding
of wind in the air.

as Heralds to go:
And lightning to serve,
we see also pressed:
His will to accomplish,
they run to and fro,
To save or consume things,
as likes him best.

so firmly and fast,
That it once to move
none shall have such power.

for it made thou have:
Which by his own nature
the Hills would devour.

the waters do fly:
And so give due place,
thy Word to obey:
At thy voice of thunder
so fearful they be,
That in their great raging
they haste soon away,

they then up ascend,
If thou do but speak,
thy word they fulfill:
So likewise the valleys
full quickly descend,
Where thou them appointest,
remain they do still.
Their bounds thou have set,
how far they shall run,
So as in their rage,
not pass that they can:
For God has appointed
they shall not return,
The earth to destroy more,
which was made for man.
The 112. Psalm.
THe man is blessed that God does fear,
And eke his Law does love indeed,

And bless such as from him proceed.

His righteousness endure shall still.

In trouble joy, in darkness light,

And mercy always in his sight:

He does by justice things expend.

For in remembrance still is he.

Who in the Lord sure hope does see.

For he shall see his foes down cast.

His righteousness shall still remain:

Although the wicked do disd^ine,

And so consume his state to see.
The 113. Psalm.
YE children which do serve the Lord,
Praise ye his name with one accord,


Till it return where it begun,
is to be praised with great fame.

As for his glory we may count,
Above the Heavens high to be.

Whose dwellings in the heavens are,
Of such great power and force is he.

Things to behold both here below,
and also in the heavens above:

And eke the poor which help none saw,
His only mercy did him move:

With Princes of great dignity,
That rule his people with great fame.

And eke with joy her fruit to rear,
Therefore praise ye his holy name.
The 120 Psalm
IN trouble and in thrall,
Unto the Lord I call,
and he does me comfort.

From lying lips always,
and tongues of false report.

Get'st thou thus for to sting,
Thou false and flatering liar?

No less then Arrows keen,
Of hot consuming fire.

Within these tents so black,
Which Kedars are by name:
By whom the flock Elect,
And all of Jsaacs sect,
are put to open shame.

I came a peace to make,
And set a quiet life:

Causeless I was controlled,
by them that would have strife.
The 126. Psalm.
When that the Lord,
again his Sion had forth brought,
From bondage great,
and also servitude extreme:
This work was such
as did surmount man's heart and thought:
So that we were
much like to them that use to dream:
Our mouths were
with laughter filled then,
And eke our tongues
did show us joyful men.

were forced then to confess,
How that the Lord,
for them also great things had done.

and therefore can confess no less.
Wherefore to joy
we have good cause as we begun.

thou can our bondage end,
As to Deserts
the flowing Rivers send.

that they which sow in tears indeed,
A time will come,
when they shall reap in mirth and joy:

in bearing of their precious seed:
For that their foes
full oftentimes did them anoy.
But their return,
with joy they shall sure see,
Their sheaues home bring,
and not impaired be.
The 148. Psalm.
Give laud unto the Lord,
From heaven that is so high,
Praise him in deed and word,
Above the starry Sky.

His Angels all,
Armies royal,
Praise him with glee.

Which are both clear and bright,
The same of you be done,
Ye glittering Stars of night.

Yea heavens fair,
And clouds of the air,
His laud express

All formed as we see:
At his voice did appear
All things in their degree:

To them he made
A Law and trade,
For aye to last.
The Schoolmaster to his Scholar.
MY child and Scholar take good heed,
unto the words that here are set:
And see you do accordingly,
or else be sure thou shall be beat.
First I command thee God to serve,
then to thy parents duty yield:
Unto all men be courteous,
and mannerly in town or field.
Your clothes vnbuttoned do not use,
let not your hose vngartered be,
Have Handkercheife in readiness,
wash hands and face, or see not me.
Lose not your Books, ink-horne, or pen,
nor girdle, garter, hat or band;
Let shoes be tied, pin shirt-band close,
keep well your points at any hand.
If broken hos'd and shooed you go,
or slouenly in your array,
Without a girdle, or untrust,
then you and I must have a fray.
If that you cry, or talk aloud,
or books do rend, or strike with knife;
Or laugh, or play unlawfully,
then you and I must be at strife.
If that you curse, mis-call, or swear,
if that you pick, filch, steal, or lie,
If you forget a Scholars part,
then must you sure your points untie.
If to the School you do not go,
when time does call you to the same,
Or if you loyter in the streets,
when we do meet, then look for blame.
Wherefore (my child) behave thy self
so decently at all assaies,
That thou may purchase parents love,
and eke obtain thy masters praise.
The first part of Arithmeticke, called Numeration.
ALL numbers are made by the diverse placing of these nine figures, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and this circle (0) called a Cipher. Now look how many of these
stand together, in so many several places they must needs stand. But mark
that thou call that which is next the right hand, the first place; and so go
(as it were) backward, calling the next unto him toward the left hand, the
second place; the next, the third place, and so forth, as far as thou will.
Secondly the further any figure stands from the first place, the greater he
is: every following place being greater by ten times, than that next before;
as (5) in the first place is but five, but ^n the second place ten times five,
that is five times ten, which is fifty: in the third place, five hundred; in
the fourth place, five thousand; and in the fifth place, fifty thousand; and so
thou may proceed. As for example: the number thus placed, 1630 being this
present year from the birth of Christ, is one thousand six hundred and
thirty. And this number, 5551. being this present year from the Creation,
(though otherwise commonly taken) is five thousand, five hundred fifty one. But
my Book growing greater than I purposed: pardon me (I pray thee) though I
break off this matter sooner than (peradventure thou may think) I promised.

Directions for the ignorant.
FOr thy better understanding this brief Cronologie following, I thought good
to aduertis^ thee thus much. Thou must first be perfect in the numbers above,
so far as concerns the fourth place. Then mark how I have divided the
years of the world in the 5 parts called five periods, which I, for plainness
sake, stick not to call Chapters, therefore I begin my account five times; best
answering (as I think) thy demands, when such a one lived, or such a thing
done; for thou commonly mouest thy question one of these five ways; either how
long was it after the Creation? or how long after the Flood? how long after the
departure out of Egypt, and the Law given? how long before Christ? or how long
after Christ? as thou think it nearest one of these times. If then thou
find the name thou seek, and the year set by it, look upward from
thence to the beginning of that Chapter, and thou shall see how long that thing
thou seek, was from the time mentioned in the title of that Chapter. Further
I have set it down (as thou see) in a diverse letter, according to the
diversity of the matter. If then thou seek for any thing proper to the
Bible, or Ecclesiastical Story, seek in the Roman and Italica letter, which
thou use to call the Latin Letter; and pass over those in the English
letter, for they concern not thy purpose. Again, if thou be a Grammar
Scholar, or other, that would find something only concerning any profane
Author, seek only in the English letter, passing over the other. And because
I desire breuity, I have omitted the Kings of Israel, Egypt Assyria, etc. and
the Prophets which wrote not, whose times thou may easily find by
conference with the Judges, and Kings of Judah. And note, that (y) alone
standing by any number signifies (year.) Finally, my first purpose in making
it, was for thy sake that learnest reading. Therefore read them ^o often,
until thou can run them over as fast as any other English.

CHAP. 1. After the Creation. God having made the World* and created Adam, and
Heuah; their posterity was borne in these years after, as follows.
Year 130 Sheth. Year 253 Kenosh. Year 325 Kenan. Year 395 Mahalaliel.
Year 560 Iared. Year 622 Enoch. Year 687 Methusalah. Year 874 Lamech. Year
1056 Noah. Year 1556 Iaphet. Year 1558 Shem. Year 1656 The Universal Flood,
after which follows the generation of Shem.
CHAP. 2. After the Flood.
Year. 2 Arphaxad. Year 37 Shelah. Year 67 Eber. Year 101 Peleg. Year 101
Tower of Babel built. Year 131 Reu. Year 163 Serug. Year 192 Nahor. Year
222 Terah. Year 292 Haran. Year 252 Abraham. Year 436 Ismael. Year 452
Sodom destroyed. Year 452 Isaac. Year 512 Jacob. Year 587 Reuben. Year 588
Simeon. Year 589 Leui. Year 599 Judah. Year 600 Dan. Year 601 Naphtali.
Year 601 Asher. Year 602 Issacher. Year 602 Gad. Year 602 Zebulon. Year
604 Joseph. Year 619 Benjamin.
These twelve were the sons of Jacob, called the twelve Patriarchs of whom
came these 12. Tribes of Israel. Minerua. Year 629 Phares. Year 642 Hezron.
Year 643 Jacob went into Egypt, where they were 215 years. Hercules Lyb.
Aram. Premethens. Atlas. Aminadab. Year 778 Aaron. Year 783 Moses. Job.
Naasson. Salmon Year 858 Moses delivered the children of Israel out of Egypt,
then was the Law given.
CHAP. After the Law given.
Phaeton burnt. Year. 40 Joshua brought the people out of the wilderness into
the land of Canaan, and reigned 18. years. Year. 41 Iubiles began. Year. 58
Othoniel judged Israel 40 years, whereof Cushan the Aramite oppressed them 8.
years. Rhadamanthus. Year. 80 Boaz of Rahab. Year. 98 Ehud and Shamgar
judged 80 years; whereof Eglon the Moabite oppressed 18 years. Troas ruled in
Dardania, and called it Troy.
Pegasus. Orpheus. Year. 178 Debora and Barak judged 40 years: whereof Iabin
and Sisera oppressed 20 years. Year. 198 Obed borne of Ruth. Year. 218
Gideon judged 40 years, whereof the Midianites oppressed 7 years. Theseus.
Year. 258 Abimelech 3 y. Year. 261 Tholay 23. y. Year. 284 Iair judged 22.
y. whereof the Ammonites and the Philistims oppressed 12. y. Amazons Battle
against Thebes. Year. 305 Iesse father of David by Obed. Year. 311 Ibzan
judged 7. y. Year. 318 Elon 10. y. Troy destroyed. Year. 329 Abdon the
Pirathonite 8. y. Year. 336 Samson 20. y.
In the time of these 6 Judges, the Philistims oppressed. Year. 356 Ely the
Priest 40. y. Year. 397 Samuel and Saul 40. y. Year. 332 Brutus came into
England, if the Story be true. Year. 437 David reigned 40. y. Nathan, Asaph
Heman, and Ieduthun Prophets. Year. 477 Solomon reigned 40. y. and 481, in his
fourth year, built the Temple before the birth of Christ, about 916. y.
CHAP. 4. Before Christ.
Year. 936 Temple built. Year. 900 Hesiod. Year. 899 Rehoboam ra^gned ou^r
Judah 17. y. Year. 882 Abijam 3. y. Year. 878 Asa 41. y. Year. 838
Iehoshaphat 25. y. Year. 813 Iehoram 8. y. Year. 805 Ahaziah 1. y. Year. 804
Athalia 6. y. Year. 798 Ioash 40 y. Year. 758 Amaziah 29. y. Jonah
prophesies. Year. 743 Rome built by Romulus upon four hills, which are
Palatinus, Capitolinus, Exquilinus, Auentinus, and after enlarged by Se^uius
Tullns, within the walls, with other three hills, Coelius, Uiminalis and
Quirinalis. Year. 729 Kingdom of Judah void 12. y. Year. 725 Sardanapalus.
Year. 718 Azariah 25. y. Kingdom of Israel void 22. y.
Year. 700 Numa Pompilius the second Roman King. Year. 685 Lycurgns the
Lacedemonian. Joel, Hosea, Amos, and Isaiah prophesied.
Tullas Hostilius the third Roman King. Year. 677 Ioatham over Judah 15.
Micaiah also prophesied. Year. 662 Ahaz 15. y. Year. 646 Ezekiah 29. y. 628
Salmanasar carried the ten Tribes of Israel captive to Babel, from whence they
never returned. And here the race of the Kings of Israel ceased.
Merodachbaladan began to bring the Empire from Asher to Babel. Year. 628
Simonides. Aristoxenus. Ancus Martus, the fourth Roman King. Archilocus,
Zalencus, Homer, Phalaris. Year. 617 Manasseth 55. y. Jeremy prophesies.
Year. 610 Sappho: Milo: Stesscorus: Epimenides. Year. 564 Nebuchadnezzar.
Year. 562 Amon 2. y. Year. 560 Josiah 21. y. Zephaniah and Habbakkuk
prophecy.
Year. 526 Iehoiakim 11. y. Year. 526 Captivity, wherein Nebuchadnezzer
carried captives, Daniel, and many other into Babylon, began the 3. year of
Iehoiakim. Jeremiah continues his Prophecy in Judah. Daniel prophesies in
Babel.
Year. 618 Zedekiah 11. y. Ezekiel prophesies.
Year. 507 Jerusalem destroyed, and leremiah, with the remnant of Judah
carried into Egypt, where Jeremiah prophesies. Ezekiel continues his
prophecy in Babel.
Year. 501 Consuls, 2 yearly began in Rome. Year. 495 Horatius Coc^es.
Year. 494 Salathiel. Year. 493 Dictators in Rome. Year. 487 Tribunes of the
people began in Rome. Year. 468 Zorobabel. Year. 466 Pythagoras Pyndar^s,
Democritas, Cresus, Heraclitus, Es^pe, Salon, Thales, 7. Wisemen, Pisistratus.
Year. 456 Darius and Cyrus his Son wan Babylon from Balthazar: began the
Empire of the Persians, and gave leave for the Jews to return and build the
Temple.
Year. 454 Temple began to be built. The History of Ezra. Artashashte, called
of profane Writers, Cambyses, reigned with Cyrus his Father. The History of
Ester. Ahashuerosh called Darius.
Year. 440 Hystaspis divorced Vasti, married Ester, hanged Haman, and advanced
Mordecai. Year. 431 Tribuni Mil^tum. Year. 425 Darius of Persia called also
Artaxshast, and of profane Writers, Darius Longimanus, reigned 36 years.
Haggai prophesies. Zachariah* prophesies.
Year. 423 Malachy the last Prophet. Year. 425 Nehemiah his Story, who
builded the walls of Jerusalem. Year. 397 Battle Peloponestack, ^ot 27 years
till the Lacedemanians overcame Atbens. Year. 386 Rome taken by Gallus a
Britain. Year. 386 Themistocles, Aristides Aeschilus, Sophocles, Pericles,
Emp^docles, Hiypocrates, Parmenides, Artstarchua, Eurypides, Herodotus,
Aristobulus, Socrates, Alcihiades, Diogenes, Plato, Xanephon, Agestlaus. Year.
363 Philip of Macedonia conquered all Gracia, after the Thebanes and su^dued
the Lacedaemonians. Year. 351 Marcus Cortius, Manlius Torquates. Year. 350
Aristoteles, Demostenes Epicurus, Epaminandas, Theophrastus, Menander,
Zenderates. Year. 344 War with the Samnites at Rome continued 49 years.
Year. 332 Alexander the Great, conquered Persia, he entreated the Jews
honorably, and reigned 12. years.

Now was the Empire of the Grecians great, which after the death of Alexander,
was divided unto four Captains where of Syria and Egypt continued until the
Empire of the Romans, and always vexed the Jews.

Now begineth the Story of the Maccabes. Year. 301 Two Decij in Rome. Year.
300 Zeno author of the Stoiks, Aratus, Demetrius, Phalerius. Year. 228
Prolomie Philadelphus caused 70 Interpreters to tra^sl^te the Law into Greek.
Year. 283 Hetruria ye^lded to Rome wholly. Year. 272 Regulus, Polibius,
Cleanthes. Year. 267 War of Carthage and Rome, two and twenty years. Year.
241 Battle African with Numidia. Year. 237 Jesus Sirach. Year. 236 Neuius
Pla^tus. Year. 224 Antiochus Magnus. Year. 219 Second Battle of Carthage,
because that Hannibal had receuered Spain from Rome. Year. 131 The third
Battle of Carthage, which was in three years utterly cestroyed by Scipio
Junior. Year. 129 Pharisees, Saduces, and Esses began their Sects. Year. 89
Civil War in Rome 8. years between Marins and Sylla, because Sylla being
younger, was chosen Captain into Asia to the Battle Mi^hridaticke. Year. 87
Tigranes King of Armenie. Year. 65 Cato Vticensis, Salustius. Year. 57 Cicero
Consul. Year. 52 Britain entered upon by Julius Caesar. Year. 47 Julius Caesar
reigned Emperor five years. Year. 45 Virgil, Horace, Liuy, Ovid, Cornelius
Nepos. Year. 42 Octauius Augustus Emperor 56 years. Year. 34 Herod the
Great, made King of Iewry: after whose death his four sons were confirmed in
his Kingdom, and called Tetrarchs. See Luke 3. 1. Temple again sumtuously
builded by Herod. Christ borne in the 42 year of Augustus from which begins
our usual account.
CHAP. 5. After the death of Christ.
Year. 16 Tiberius, Emperor after the birth of Christ 16. years. Year. 33
Christ crucified. Year. 33 Stephen stoned. Year. 34 Paul converted. Year. 42
Herod Agrippa, President in Jury: he beheaded James. Year. 42 Matthew wrote his
Gospel. Year. 44 James beheaded. Year. 44 Mark preached in Egypt. Year. 46
Luke wrote. Year. 50 Epistle to the Galatians. written from Antioch. Year. 53
Epistle to the Thessalonians, from Athens. Year. 54 Philip martyred. Year. 55
1 Epistle to the Corinthians from Ephesus. Year. 55 1 To Timothy from Troas
Year. 55 To Titus from Troas. Year. 55 To Corinth from Philippi Year. 55
Peter's first Epistle. Year. 56 Peter's second Epistle. Year. 59 To the Rom
from Corinth Year. 57 Claudius Nero persecutor, Year. 59 Epistles to the
Philippians Ephesians, Colossians, Philemon from Rome. Year. 61 Acts by Luke
(now as is thought*) Year. 63 James thrown down from a Pinnacle. Year. 69
Epistle to Timothy. Year. 69 Paul martyred at Rome. Year. 73 Jerusalem
destroyed by Vespasian and Titus. Year. 76 Ignatius Bishop of Antioch Year.
83 Domitian Emperor. Year. 85 Nicholaitan Heretic. Year. 90 Cornelius
Tacitus, Sueton, Aulus Gellius, Plutar^h, Quintilian, I^^enal, Appian,
Appuleius. 93 John banished to Pathmos, where (as is thought) he wrote his
Gospel, and the Revelation. Year. 97 John returned from Pathmos to Ephesus.
Year. 100 John dyed. Year. 114 Pliny writes for the Christians. Year. 133
Galen. Year. 170 Justinius dyed a Martyr. Year. 180 Irenaeus of Lions. Year.
187 England received the Gospel. Year. 202 Clemens Alexandrinus. Year. 210
Tertullian. Year. 216 Origin. Year. 249 Cyprian. Year. 289 Constantine
reigned in England. Year. 307 Eusebius. Year. 333 Athanasius. Year. 347
Hillarie. Year. 347 Gregory Nazianzene. Year. 371 Ambrose B. of Millaine.
Year. 375 Hieronymus. Year. 409 Chrysostom. Year. 409 Augustine. Year. 414
Theodoret. Year. 500 Goths conquered Italy; then increased Barbarism and
Papistry.
Directions for the unskillful.
IF thou have not been acquainted with such a Table as this following, and
desire to make use of it, thou must get the Alphabet, viz. the order of the
Letters as they stand, without book perfectly, to know where every letter
stands, as (b) near the beginning, (m) about the midst, and (v) toward the
end. Therefore if the word thou would find, begin with (a) look in the
beginning of the Table; if with (t) look toward the end. Again, if the word
begin with (ba) look in the beginning of the letter (b) but if with (bu) see
toward the end of that letter: and if thou obseruest the same for the third and
fourth letters, thou shall find thy word presently. Secondly, thou must know
the cause of the difference of the letters, all written with the Roman, as in
(abba) are words taken from the Latin, or other learned Languages. Those with
the Jtalike letter, as (abandon) are French words made English: those with the
English letter are merely English, or from some other vulgar Tongue. The word
joining unto it, is ever in English, and is the interpreter of it in a more
familier English word. But those that have no word expounding them, are set
down to let thee see their true writing where I thought thou might otherwise
err. And know further, that all words that have in them (y) or (ph) together,
or begin with (chr) where (h) is never pronounced, or. end in (isme) are all
Greek words, as Hypocrite, philosophy, Christ, Baptism. But where I say they
are Greek I mean with some difference of termination, for they were brought
from Greece to us through Rome, where they were newly stamped and when they came
to us, we coined the^ after our fashion, as Christ is in Latin Christus, in
Greek Christos: so Baptism is in Latin Baptismus, in Greek Baptismos. The
like must be observed for the Latin words: as those that we have ending in
(ion) the Latin has in (io) creation, remission, in Latin is, creatio,
remissio. But touching the French, we have some of them with difference, and
some without, and thus thou shall discern them: those with difference are
marked with this star (*) as (accomplish) in French is (accomplir) and
therefore you shall find it by this mark (*): the other have none. Sometime I
refer thee from one word to another, as thus; at this word brigantine see
bark, then those two be of one signification: and so shall thou also learn
variety of words. When a word has two significations, if one be well known, I
omit that, as to bark as a dog, is well known: but a bark, that is, a little
Ship, is not so familiar; therefore I put down that. If I should put down all
deriuations, it would be ouer-long; therefore I hope, the diligent Scholar
will learn by practice soon from the primative or original: I have therefore
set down some few of the hardest, yet some rules for them thou shall find in
the end. There are many more From Latin and French, but being well known, I
omit them.

Abandon cast away. abba father. abbess, abbatesse mistres of a Nunnery.
abbreuiate short. abridge see abbreuiate. abut lie unto. abecedary the order
of the letters, or he that uses them. abet to maintain. abominable. abhor.
abject base. abjure renounce. abolish make void. abricot * k. fruit. aboard.
abrogate see abolish. absolve finish. absolute perfect. absolution
forgiveness. abstinence refraining. abstract see ab^eniate. absurd ^oo^ish.
acce^t tune. accept take liking. access free coming to. accessory partaker.
accident befall. accomodate fit to. accomplish * finish. account * to r^ckon.
accord * agreement. accurate cunning. accrue * grow. acertaine * make sure.
atchieue see accomplish. acorne. active nimble. actual in act. acute witty.
addict given to. adieu farewell. address prepare to direct. adjacent lying to.
adiourne. adjure make to swear. administer govern or serve. admire marvel
at. admiral chief by Sea. admission receiving. adopt take for his child.
adore worship. adorn beautify. adverse contrary. advertise give knowledge.
adulation flattery. adulterate counterfeit. advocate attorney. aduouson
patronage. adustion burning. affable ready and courteous in speech. affect
earnestly desire. affinity kin by marriage. affirmative auouching. affiance
trust. affianced betroathed. agent doer. agrauate make grievous. agility
nimblenesse. agony g^ heavy passion. alacrity cheerfulness. alarm a sound to
the battle. alien a stranger. alienation estranging. alight. allege * bring
proof. alliance kindred or league. allusion pointing to. allude to point to.
aliment nourishment. alms. almighty. alphabet g. order of letters. altercation
debate. alle^gory g* similitude. allegiance obedience. altitude height.
allegation alleging. ambassador messenger. ambiguous doubtful. ambition
desire of honor. ambushment privy train. amorous full of love. amplify
enlarge. anatomy g. cutting by. anathema g. accursed. andyron. anguish grief.
anchor. animate encourage. annual yearly. animaduersion noting. atichrist
against Christ. antidate fore-date. anticipation preventing. angle corner.
antickly disguised. annihilate make void. ancestour. annullity, see annihilate.
aphorism general rule. apostate a backslider. apostacy falling away. amen so
be it. apostle g. see ambassador. apology g. defense. apocalypse g.
revelation. alpha g. the first Greek letter. apothecarie.* apocrypha g. not of
authority. apparent in sight. appeach accuse. appeal to seek to a higher
Judge. appertain to belong. appertinent apurttenance
belonging. appetite desire to eat. application applying to. appose ask
question. apposition apposing. approbation allowance. approve allow. approach*
come nigh. appropriate make his own. apt fit. arbiter arbitrator
vmpire. arbitrament judgment. arch g. chiefs. arch-angell g. chief Angel.
archbishop chief bishop. architect chief builder. argent silver. argue to
reason. arithmaticke g Art of numbering. arc ship. armorie house of armor.
arraigne. arrive* come to Land. arrearages* debt unpaid. artificer
handy-crafts-man. artificial work-man-like. articulate ioynted. ascend go up.
assertaine* assure. assent agreement. ascent a going up. ascribe give to. askew
as^ide. aspect looking upon. aspire climb up. asperate rough. aspiration
breathing. assay prove. assail* set upon. assault* see assail. assentation
flattery. assertion affirming. assiduity continuance. asseueration earnest
affirming. assign appoint. assignation appointment. assizes. assistance help.
associate company. astrictiue astringent
binding. astronomy g. astrology.
knowledge of the Stars. atheist g. without God. atheism the opinion of the
atheist. attatch seize upon. attaint convict of crime. attainder a conviction.
attempt* set upon. attentive heedy. attribute give to. auarise c^ueteousnesse.
audacious bold. audience hearing. auditor hearer, or officer of accounts.
audible eas^e to be heard. auerre* avouch. augment to increase. avouch affirm
with earnestness. authentical g. of authority, autumn the harvest. axiom
certain principle. Balance a pair of skales. bailiffe. bankerupt bankerout.
banquet. baptist a baptizer. baptism. barbarion a rude person. barbarism
barbarousnesse. barque* small ship. barretter a contentions person. barrester
allowed to give counsel. barter* to bargain. battery beating. baulme.
beatitude blessedness. beguile. beneficial profitable. benevolence good will.
benign favorable. benignity bounty. bereft deprived. besiege. biere to carry
a dead corpse. bishop ouerseer. blanke* to make white. blaspheme g. speak ill
of God. blood. bear. beast. boat. bough. bought. bonnet cap. braclet. bracer.
briefs. brigandine coat of defenc^. brigantine see bark. brandish* to shake a
sword. broad. breath. brothell keeper of a house of bawdery. bruise. bruit.
buggery conjunction with one of another kind. burgess a head man of a town.
build. Callidity craftiness. capacity conceit, or receipt. cancel to undo.
canon g. law. canonize make a Saint. capital deadly or great. capable
containing. capitulate. captious catching. captive prisoner. captiuate make
subject. carbuncle k. disease, or stone. carnality fleshlinesse. casualty
chance. castigation chastisement. cathedral gr Church, chief. in the
Diocese. catholic universal. cauldron. caution warning. celebrate make
famous. celestial heau^nly. catalogue g. bed-roule. celerity swiftness.
censor corrector. censure correction. centurion captain. cease. cement center
midst. ceremony. certain. certify. ceruse white lead. cesterne. character
the fashion of a letter. chaunt * sing. champion wide field. chambering
lightness. charter a grant performing. chamberlain. chariot. chancery.
chiualry knighthood. chief. cherubin order of Angels. chirograph g. hard
writing. christ g. anointed. surgeon g. choler g. a humor causing. anger.
chronicler g. chronographer g.
history writer chronology g. story of times. church faithful people.
crystal g. k. glass. cider drink made of apples. cinnamon. circle. circuit.
citren. city. citizen. circumcise to cut the privy skin. circumference round
rircuit. circumspect heedy. circumlocution circumserence* of speech. circumuent
prevent. ciuet. civil. clamorous ready to speak ill. clemency gentleness.
client he that is defended. cockatrice k. beast. collect gather. colleague
companion. collation recital. coadiutor helper. cogitation thought. collusion
deceit. column one side of a page divided. comedy g. stage play. commencement
a beginning. comet g. a blazing star. comentary exp^s^tion. commodious
profitable. commotion rebellion. communicate make partaker. communion fellow
worship. compact joined together. compendious short. competitor he that
stands with me for an office. compile gather and make. complexion. accomplices
colleagues. compose make. composition agreement. comprehend contain. comprise
see comprehend. concoct to digest meat. concord agree, concordance agreement.
competent convenient. compromit to make agree. concauity hollownesse.
compulsion force. conceal. conception conceiving in the womb. concupiscence
desire. concur agree together. condescend agree unto. condign worthy.
conduct guiding. confession compounding. confederate see compact. confer
talk together. conference communication. confidence trust. confirm establish.
confiscate forseitur^ of goods. conflict battle. confound overthrew. congeale
harden. congestion a heaping up. congregate gather together congruity see
concord, conjunction joining together. conjecture guess. consent agreement.
concent harmony. consequence following. consecrate to make holy. consequent
following. conserve keep. consist stand. consolation comfort. consistory a
place of civil judgment. consort, see consent. conspire agree together for
ill. construe expound. consult take council. contagious that corrupts.
contemplation meditation. continent modest abstaining. contract make short.
contradiction gaine-saying. contribute bestow. contrite sorrowful. contrition
sorrow. convert turn. convict proved guilty. convent bring before. converse
company with. convocation calling together. convulsion. copartner fellow.
copious plentiful. corpse dead body. corporal bodily. corrosiue fretting.
corespondent answerable. corrigible easily corrected. corroborate strengthen.
covert hidden place. costiue bound in the body. cosmography gr. description of
the world. counterpose make level. countermand command contrary. compuction
pricking. coffin basket, or corpes-chest. creed the beli^fe. credence belief.
credulous easily to beleeu^. criminous faulty. crucify fasten to a cross.
crocadile k. beast. culpable blameworthy. cubite a foot and a half. cupboord.
cusorily running fast over. cymball an ^nstrument. clyster, or glister.
cypress. Deacon gr. prouider for the poor. debility weakness. deaf that
cannot hear. damage * loss. decent comely. decline fall away. decision
cutting away. decorum comeliness. decypher d^scribe. dedicating a deuoting.
deduct take out. defect want. deflowre to dishonest. defraud deceive. deformed
ill shapen. define show what it is. degenerate be unlike. his ancestor^. dehort
move from. deity Godhead. deifie make like God. delectation delight. delicate
dainty. delude deceive. deluge great flood. delusion mockery. demonstrate show
plainly: denison freeman. denounce declare sentence. against. depend hang upon.
deportation carrying away. depose put from. deprive, see depose. depute
appoint. deride mock. derive fetch from. deriuation taken from another.
derogate, see detract. describe set forth. descend go^ down. desert
wilderness. desist leave off. detest hate greatly. detect bewray. detract take
from. detriment loss. detrude thrust from. deuote given unto. dexterity
aptn^sse. diabolical deuilish. diadem crown. diet manner of food. dialogue
g. conference. defame. dificult hard. diocese g. jurisdiction. diocesan that
has jurisdiction. digest bring in order: see concoct. dignity worthiness.
digress turn from. dilate enlarge. direct guide. diminution lessening.
disburse * lay out money. descend, see descend. disciple scholar. discipline
instruction. dissent disagree. discern see. disclose discovery. discord
disagreement. discuss, see dilate. disioyne vnieyne. disfranchise take away
freedom. dismiss let pass. disloyal disobedient. disparagement inequality
of birth. dispense set free. disperse spread abroad. dispeople to unpeople a
place. descent from our ancestors. dissimilitude unlikeness. dissolve unloose.
dissolute careless. dissonant disagreeing* distinguish put difference. dice.
disable, make unable. disability, unableness. disanull, make void. disputable
questionable, or doubtful. define. discomfite put to flight. discomfiture a
putting to flight. discipher lay open. digestion bringing into order.
digression going from the matter. difficulty hardness. diffamation a
slandering. dimension measuring. direction ordering. dissimulation dissembling.
d^scourse. dismember part one piece from another. disposition natural
inclination or setting in ord^r. dissipation scattering. dissolution breaking.
distillation distilling, or dropping down. distinct differing. distinction
making a difference. divulgate make common. dispoyle take away by violence.
display spread abroad. distracted troubled in mind. distribution division.
disturb disquiet. dissuade see dehort. ditty the matter of a song. divert
turn from. divine heavenly. divinity heavenly doctrine. diuturnity daylinesse.
doctrine learning. dolor grief. dolorous grievous. docility eastnesse to be
taught. dolphin k. of fish. domestical at home. dominion domination
rule. Eclipse g. failing. Ecclesiastical belonging to the Church. edict
commandment. edifice building. education bringing up. edition putting forth.
effect a thing done. effectual forcible. effeminate womanish. efficacy force.
effusion pouring forth. egresse forth-going. enhance make greater. election
choice. elect chosen. elegance fine speech. elephant k. of beast. emerods k. of
disease. eleuate lift up. emblem gr. picture. emmot, or pismire. empire
government. encroch. enarration declaration. encounter set against. enduce
moon. enimity enmity
hatred between. enchant* bewitch. enfranchise make free. inflame burn
engrate press upon. ensign flag of War. enormious out of square. enterre
lay in the earth. enterlace put between. enuiron compass about. epha k. of
measure epitaph the writing of a book. epitomie gr. the brief of a book.
epitomize gr. to make an epitomie. epistle gr. a letter sent. episcopal
bish^p-like. epicure given to pleasure. epilogue conclusion. equinoctial when
the days and nights are equal. erect set up. eronious full of error. escheat
forfeit. essence substance. estimate esteem. eternal everlasting. evangelist
bringer of good tidings euict overcome. eunuch g. gelded or great Officer.
euocation calling forth. exasperate whet on. exact perfect, or require with
extremity. exaggerate heap upon. exaltation advancing. except. excursion
running out. exceed. excel. exchequer office of receipts. exclaim cry out.
execrable cursed. execute perform. excrement dung. exempt free. exemplify
enlarge. exhibit put up. exile banish. exorcist g. coniurer. expedient fit.
expel put out. expend consider. expedition haste. expect look for. expire
end. explicate declare. exploit enterprise. expulsion driving out. exquisite
perfect. extend spread forth. extenuate lessen. extol advance. extort wring
out. extract drawn out. exptemporal extemporary
sudden. Fabulous fained. fact deed. faction division. factious that makes
division. facility easiness. falco^er. fallacy deceit. fantasy. fatal by
destiny. festival feast day. festiuity mirth. female feminine
the she. fertile fruitful. fervent hot. fever ague. figurative by signs.
finally lastly. firmament sky. flagon great wine-pot. flexible easily bent.
phlegm one of the humors. flux disease of scowring. fornication uncleanness
between single persons. fortification strengthening. fountain head Spring.
fortitude valiantness. fragments relics. fragility brittlenesse. fragrant
sweet smelling. fraternity brotherhood. fraudulent deceitful. frequent often.
frivolous vain. frontlet k. head attire. fructify make fruitful. frustrate
make voys. frugall thrifty. fugitive runnagate. function calling. funeral
burial. furbusher, dresser. furious raging. future time to come. Garboile
hurly burly. garner, corn-chamber. gemme precious stone. gentilitie generositie
gentile. gentile a heathen. generation offspring. gender. genealogy g.
generation. genitor father. gester. gyues fetters. ginger. gourd k. plant.
gorget. gorgeons. gospel, glad tidings. geometry g. art of measuring.
gradation by steps. graduate that has taken degr^. gratify to pleasure.
gratis freely. guardaine keeper. gulf deep poole. Hability or ability
ableness. habitable able to be dwelt in. habit apparel. harmony g. music.
haleluiah praise the Lord. heralds Kings messengers. hauty lofty. hebrew from
Hebers stock. heathen, see gentile. helmet headpiece. harbenger, sent before
to prepare. heretic heretical
that hold heresy. homage, worship. hosanna save I pray thee. horror,
fearful sorrowful. hostage pledge. host army. hostility hatred. hymn g.
song. humane gentle. humidity moisture. hypocrite g. hysope. Idiot g.
unlearned. Idolatry g. false worthly. jealous. Jesus Savior. ignominy
reproach. illegitimate unlawfully borne. illusion mockery. imbecility
weakness. imbarke. immediate ^ext in. imitation following. immoderate without
measure. immortal everlasting. impeach accuse. immunity freedom. impediment
let. imperial belonging to the Crown. imperfection imperfectness. impenitent
unrepentant. impiety ungodliness. impose lay upon. impression printing.
impudent shameless. impugn disprove. impute reason. impunity without
punishment. impropriation making proper. immanity beastly cruelty. importune to
be earnest with. imperious desiring to rule. incessantly earnestly. inquisition
searching. incense k. offering. to incense to stir up. incident happening.
inchant * bewitch. inclination moving. incline lean unto. incumber trouble.
incommodious hurtful. incompatible insufferable. incongruity without
agreement. incontinent presently, or unchaste. incur run into. indemnity
without loss. indignity unworthiness. indination hatred. induce move.
induction bringing in. indurate harden. infamous ill reported. infection
corrupting. infer bring in. infernal belonging to hell. infirmity weakness.
inflammation inflaming. infinite without number. influence a flowing in. inform
give notice. ingraue car^e. ingredience entrance. inhabit dwell in. inhibite
forbid. inh^bition forbidding. iniunction committing. injurious wrongful or
hurtful innouate make new. innovation making new. inordinate out of order.
inquisition searching. insinuate creep in. inspire breathe into. insolent
proud. instigation provoking. institute appoint. intercept prevent.
intercession going between, or making entreaty. interchange, exchange.
intercourse mutual. access. interest loan. interline. intermeddle deal
with. intermingle mingle with. intermission foreslowing. interpreter expounder.
interrogation a question asking. interrupt break off. intricate inwrapped.
introduction entrance. intrude to thrust in violently. invincible not to be
won. irruption breaking in. irreuocable not to be recalled. irreprehensible
without reproof Israelite of Israel. judicial belonging to judgment. Iubile
year of joy. Iuror sworn man. juice. justify, approve. Lapidary skillful in
stones. largess or largis liberality. lascivious wanton. laud praise. laurel
Baytree. laxatiue loose. legacy gift by will, or embassage. legion host.
Legate Embassage. legerdemaine. light-handed. leprosy k. of disease. libertine
loose in religion. lethargy g. k. drowste disease. licentious taking liberty.
Lieutenant. limitation appointment. literature learning. lingell Shoomakers
thread. linguist skillful in tongues. litigious quarrellous. lore law. lotary *
casting his lots. loyal obedient. lunaticke wanting of wits. Magician using
witchcryafts. magistrate governor. magnanimity valiantness. magnificence
sumptuousness. malady disease. malicious. male-contented disconteniod. malign
hate. manicles, fetters. manger. maranatha accursed. manumisse set free. march
go in array. mart fair. martial warlike. marchesse borders. margent edge of
a book. marrow. martyr witness. matron ancient woman. matrice womb. mature
ripe. mechanical g. handy-craft. mediocrity measure. medicine. mercement.
Mediator Advocate. Mercer. mercy. meditate muse. menstruous defiled. melancholy
gr. humor of solitariness. melodious g. sweet sounding. meritorious that
deserves. method gr. order. metaphor g. similitude. ministration ministering.
militant warring. minority under age. monastery college of Monks. miraculous
marvelous. mirour * a looking glass. mitigate assuage. mixtion mingling.
mixture idem. mobility moving. modest sober. moderate temperate. modern of
our time. moity half. moment weight, or sudden. momentany sudden. monarch gr.
one ruling all. moote argue. monument antiquity. morality civil behavior.
mortal that ends. mortuary due for the dead. motive cause moving. mortify
kill. mountain great hill. munition defense. mutable changeable. mustaches
upper lip hair. malmesey. Muses goddesses of Learning. mutation change. myrrh
k. of sweet gum. mystical that has mystery in it. mystery hidden se^ret.
Native horn. narration. declaration. niece. necessity. navigations sailing.
nephew. nerve sinew. negligence. neuter of neither side* Nicholaitan gr. an
Heretic. from Nich^las. necromancy g. black Art. nonage vnderage. nonsuit not
following. nouice. notify give knowledge. numeration numbering. nutriment
nourishment. Obeisance obedience. oblation offering. oblique crooked. obliuious
forgetful. obstinate froward. obscure dark. obstruction stopping. obtuse
dull. occidentall belonging. to the West. odious hateful. odor smell.
odoriferous sweet smelling. officious dutiful. oliuet p^ace of Olives.
omnipotent almighty. operation working. opportunity fitness. oppose set
against. opprobrious reproachful. ordure dung. original beginning. oracle a
speech from God. ordination ordaining. orphane without parents. orthography g.
true writing. ostentation boasting. overplus more then needs. pacify quiet.
pamphlet a small Treatise. pantofle slipper. paradise g. place of pleasure.
paraphrase g. exposition. paramour an amorous lover. parable simlitude.
parcel. parget. partial. partition division. passion suffering. passover one
of the Jews. feasts. patheticall gr. vehement. Patriarch g* chief Father.
patrimony fathers gift. patronage defense. patronize defend. pauilon * Tent.
paucity fewness. pauement. peccaui I have offended. peculiar proper. pensive
sorrowful. Pentecost g. Whitsontide. perceive. perigrination iourneying in a
strange land. peremptory resolute. perfect. period, g. end. perilous *
dangerous. permit suffer. permutable changeable. perpetuity a continuance.
perplexity trouble, grief. persecute persist persevere
continue. perspicuous evident. participate partake. pervert overthrow. perruke
hair said forth. perverse froward. pettegree a stock. petition prayer.
fantasy imagination. phesant. Pharisee one of that sect. phisiognomie
knowledge by the visage. Physic. phrase g. form of speech. frenzy gr.
madness. philosophy g. study of wisdom. pigeon. pirate sea-rober. piety
godliness. pillage spoil in warr^. pilot * a master guider of a Ship.
plaintiff the complainant. plannet g. wandering star. plausible pleasing.
plenitude fullness. plume feather. plurality m^ then one. polici^. doitrell
ornament for a horse breast. poet gr. a verse-maker. poetresse a woman Poet.
polish deck. pollute defile. pomegranat k. of fruit. ponderous weighty.
populous full of people. postscript written after. protract defer. populary
pleasing the people. preamble fore-speech. precept. predecessor. predestinate
appoint before. precious. precinct compass. predominant ruling. preface, see
preamble. prejudice hurt. preiudicate forestalled. praemunire forfeiture of
goods. preparatiue preparation. preposterous disordered. prerogative
privilege. presbytery g. eldership. prescript decree. prescription limitation.
pressed ready. primitive first. priority. pristine old. probation allowance.
prodigious monstrous. proceed. profound deep. profane ungodly. prognosticate
foretell. progeny offspring. prohibit forbid. prologue, see preface. prolixe
tedious. prompt ready. promulgation, see publication propitiatory* sacrifice to
pacify. propose propound. propriety property. prorogue put off. prostitute set
upon for uncleanness. prophecy foretell or expound. prophet g. he that
prophesies. prospect a sight far off. prowess valiantness. prose that
writing which is not verse. proselyte gr. stranger converted. prostrate fall
down. protect defend. provocation provoking. provident foreseeing. prudence
Wisdom. psalm a heavenly song. psalmograph psalmist
writer of Psalms. psalter book of Psalms. publish set abroad. public open.
publican tole-gatherer. publication publishing. purgatory place of purging.
Pursuit * following. puissance * powerful. putrify corrupt. Quadrangle
foure-cornered. quadrant four square. queach thick heap^. quentessence chief
virtue. quotidian daily. Repacity rapine
violent catching. ratify establish. real. receipt. receipt. recognisance
acknowledge. recoile * go back. reconcile bring into favor. recreate
refresh. redeem buy again. redemption buying again. refection refreshing.
reflection casting back. refer put over. refuge succor. regenerate borne
again. regiment government. register calender. reject cast away. reioynder.
reiterate repeat. relate report. relation reporting. relapse backe-sliding.
relaxation refreshing. relinquish forsake. remit forgive. remiss loose.
remorse prick of conscience. renouate renew. renounce * forsake. repast food.
repel put back. repeal call back. repose put trust in. repress put down.
repulse putting back. repugnancy contrariety. repugnant contrary. repute
account. resign give over. restoration restoring. resume take again. revoke
call back. rhetoric art of elequence. rhetorcian g. skillful in the
rhetoric. rheum gr. rogue. ruinous ready to fall. rudiment first
instruction. rupture breach. rusticall clownish. Sabbath rest. sacrilege
Church-robbing. sacrament holy sign or oath, sacrifice. Saducee k. sectary.
safe conduit safe keeping. saint holy one. sanctification holiness. salubrity
wholsomnesse. sanctity sanctimony
holiness. sanctuary holy place. sandals g. slippers. sapience wisdom.
satiety fullness. satyr nipping verse. saturity fullness. savage wild. sauce.
scalpe pate. scarifie lance a sore. scepter sign of rule. schism breach.
schismaticke that moves a schism. scripture writing. scruple doubt.
scrupulous full of doubts. scourge. scurrility saucy scoffing. seclude shut
out. sectary, see schismaticke. secondary the second. seduce deceive. sodulity
diligence. signiory Lordship. seminary a nourcery. senator Alderman. sensible
easily felt. sense. sensual brutish. sepulcre grave. sequel following.
sequester put to an indifferent man. service. sergea^t. servitude bondage.
seru^le slavish. severity sharpness. sex kind^. significant plainly
signifying. simplicity plainness. sinister unhappy. situation placing.
slaughter. slice. sluice. soar mount high. sociable fellowlike. solace comfort.
solution unloosing. society fellowship. solicit mou^. summary brief.
sophister cauiller. sorcery. sovereign chief. spacious large. specify
signify. special spicery. spleen g. milt. spongeous like a sponge. spruce.
squinancy k. disease. station standing. stability surenesse. stillatory a
distilling place. stipendary that serves for wages. studious diligent. style
manner of speeth. submisse lowly. suborne procure false witness. subscribe
write under. substract subtract
take from. substitute deputy. subtle crafty. subversion overthrowing. succeed
follow. suggest prompt. sulphur brimstone. summarily briefl^. superficies
upper side. superfluous needelesse. superscription writing above. supplant
overthrow. support bear up. supposition supposing. suppress. superior
higher. supremacy thiefdome. surcharge over charge. surmount exceed.
sur^ingle. suspense. surplus, see overplus. survive * ouerliue. synagogue place
of assembly. sycophant tole-bearer. synod a general assembly. Tabernacle a
tent, temerarious rash. temerity rashness. temperature temperatenesse.
temperate keep a mean. temperance sabriety. temple a Church. tempestuous
boisterous. temporize to serve the time. temporary for a time. terrestrial
earthly. tenuity smalnesse. tetrarch g. governor of a fourth part. tenure
hold. termination ending. thwite shave, timorous fearful. tertian every other
day. testification witnessing. theology g. divinity. thyme k herb. tractable
easy to handle. tractate a treatise. tragedy a solemn play. tradition
delivering from one to another. trafique bargaining. transfigure change.
transitory soon pass away. tranquillity quietness. transfer convey over.
tranforme transfigure. transgress break. translate turn. transsport carry
over. transpose change. triangle three-cornered. tribunal judgment seat.
tripartite three-fould. triuiall common. trybe company. trompe deceive. triumph
great joy. triumphant reioyeing for the conquest. tribute. truce peace.
turbulent. timpany k. dropste vacant void. valor courage. vanquish overcome.
vapor moisture. vendible saleable. venerable worshipful. versifie make
verses. venereall fleshly. vesture vestment
garment. vice. vicious. view. vincible. victorious that has gotten many
victories. vineyard orchyard of grapes. vigilant watchful. visitation going to
see. vision sight. ulcer bile union, unity. unite join. universal general.
urine stale. insatiable that has not enough. vocation. calling. volubility
swiftness. voluptuous given to pleasure vrbanity courteste. vsurp take
unlawful authority vtility profit. vulger common. Wager. wages. weight.
wrought.


FINIS.
To the Reader.
I Purposed (gentle Reader) somewhat here to have spoken, touching the true
forming and signification of deriuatiues and compounds, as those that begin
with dis, circum, trans, in, etc. and end in ly, tie, on, ons, able, ible, etc.
but special occasion has for the present altered my purpose. Also I crave
pardon for many faults escaped, especially in the Table, many words being
misplaced; and the character mistaken. But I hope the learned will with favor
see my purpose; and the unskillful reap the fruit until opportunity may serve
to reform it.

If, notwithstanding any former reasons, thou doubtest that thy little child
may have spoiled his book before it be learned; thou may fitly divide it at
the end of the second book, or thou may reserve fair the written copies
until he can read.

If thou think me, either for hardness of rule, or length of matter, unfit
for children; plentiful experience in very young ones (believe him that has
tried) does daily confute thee. Therefore to dislike, before thou have either
tried or diligently read, were either to be rash or unkind.

Fair well.
A a a b c ^ d d e e f ff g h h i k l ll.

m n o oo p ^ pp q r s s s st s t tt v u w x y z z ^ qu

A B C D E F G H I K L M N

O P Q R S T V W X Y Z ^

In the name of the father and of the son and of the holy ghost amen. /

My soul cleaves to the dust: O quicken thou me according to thie word /

I have acknowleged my ways and thou heardest me. O teach me thie statuits

Make me to understand the way of thie commandments and so shall I talk of
yi wondrous works

My soul melts away for very heauynes, comfort thou me according unto thy
word

Take from me the way of lying and (...) thou me to make much of thy law /

I have chosen the way of faith and thy judgments have I laid before me /

I have sticked unto thy testimonies, O lord confound me not.

I will (...) the way of thy commandments when thou have set my heart at
liberty. /

FINIS.
LONDON: ^rinted for the Company of Stationers. 1630.


