DISCOURSES upon Seneca the Tragedian. By Sir William Cornwalleys, Knight.

Imprinted at London for Edmund Mattes, at the hand and plough in Fleetstreet.
1601.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR John Popham Knight, Lord chief Justice of
England, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
HOnorable Sir, since I can truly, let me confidently affirm, this boldness
proceeds only from the sight of your virtues; I honor you, and reverence the
executions of your place; I behold not your fortune, but your self: and since
it is so, be content to accept these and me, both which offer themselves to
you, not for any thing they can, but willingly would do you service.

From the honourer of your virtues, W. Cornwalleys.

A Table of the Heads.
a. shows the first side of the leaf: b. shows the other side.

Oedipus. Act. 3. Creon Oedipus insanus. A. 1. a. 1. Odia qui nimium timet,
Regnare nescit; Regna custodit metus. Agamemnon. chorus. 1. A. 5. b. 2. O
Regnorum magnis* fallax fortuna bonis, in praecipiti dubioque nimis excelsa
locas. Hercules fure^s. Act. 2. Sc. 1. Megera. B. 2. a. 3. Prosperum, ac foelix
scelus virtus vocatur; sontibus pare^t boni. Troas. Act. 2. Sc. 2. B. 7. a. 4.
Noscere hoc primum decet:
Quid facere victor debeat, victus pati.
Violenta nemo Imperia continuit diu:
Moderata durant.
Hercules furens. Actus. 2. Sc. 3. Megera. C. 6. a. 5. Non est ad astra mollis
e terris via. Hippoliti. Act. 3. chorus. D. 8. a. 6. Res humanas ordine null^
Fortuna regit, spargitque manu
Munera caeca, peiora fouens.
Troas. Act. 1. Sc. 1. Hecuba. E. 5. a. 7. Quicunque regno fidit, and magna
potens
Dominatur aula, nec leaves metuit Deos,
Animumque rebus credulum laetis dedit,
Me videat, and te Troia, non vnquam tulit
Documenta sors maiora, quam fragili loco Starent superbi.
Octauia. Act. 2. Sc. 2. Nero. Sen. F. 8. a. 8. Inertis est nescire quid liceat
sibi. Troas. Act. 3. Ulysses. G. 6. a. 9. Magis haec timet, quam moeret,
ingenio est opus:
Alios parents alloqui luctu decet.
Thebais. Act. 4. Iocasta. H. 1. a. 10. Gladius and spes and metus,
Sors caeca versat: praemium incertum petit
Certum scelus.
Troas. Act. 4. chorus. H. 3. b. 11. Far quam sortem patiuntur omnes, nemo
recusat.
Faults escaped in the transscript of the copy.
B. Leaf 2. b. 3. this, read there. B. leaf 8. b. 1. mule, read mute. C.
leaf 2. a. 19. direction, read deiection. C. leaf 5. a. 22. angry, read
anger. C. leaf 7. b. 9. prove, read promise. C. leaf 8. b. 11. wine, read
vine. D. leaf 2. b. 21. and 22. his abstinence, read her abstinence. D. leaf
3. a. 2. he, read she. E. leaf 2. a. 7. superfluously, read superficially.
E. leaf 3. b. 8. name, read rome. E. leaf 8. a. 9. Pilate, read Pilote. F.
leaf 2. a. 21. his, read this. F. leaf 5. b. 11. affection, read infection.
G. leaf 5. b. 10. and commings in: read, to our commings in.
DISCOURSES Upon Seneca the Tragedian.
-- Odia qui nimium timet,
Regnare nescit: Regna custodit metus.

THough common Experience does manifest, and natural reason justify, that
States in an equality of degree, vpheld by persons knowing no preeminence,
cannot stand, nor promise continuance: yet cannot the aspiring constitution of
man, with patience behold higher erected fortunes, how justly soever obtained:
so if he cannot reach them with equality, he will with envy, whose effects
would be dangerous, did not fear bridle them. Then must Sovereignty nourish
fear in subjection; for out of subjects fear grows Princes safety.

But how this awe is to be obtained, restes the Art; for fear has two
additions, that make it good or bad; from some fear comes hatred, from such
fear ruin: from fear love; from this preservation, sovereignty; with this
is Government, with the other Tyranny. The power of a Prince breeds fear;
his actions hatred or love: from his actions then must he draw his
flourishing, which illustrates the nobleness of the mind; for the commands
over fortune, whose power stretches no further, then to lay open virtue; mean
states being therefore miserable, because wanting stuff to show their
workmanship; for liberality consisting only in meditation, is invisible:
Temperance with poverty has not much to do, and so of the rest.

-- Odia qui nimium timet,
Regnare nescit. --
There is no affection so unnatural to Princes, as fear; the limits of their
proceedings, must be bounded by other respects: For rightly has this Author
determined; Who fears hatred too much, knows not how to reign. It is
impossible for one person to harbor Majesty and fear; for they are opposite,
differing as much, as to command and obey. Fear begettes obedience, Majesty
does what he does uncompelled: for compulsion and inforcement killes
authority: but that he is unrestrained by fear, gives him not a lawless
liberty; though he wants inforcement, he does not persuasion; which in all
noble natures, preuailes more then compulsion: he is not urged by fear, but
in fears stead has justice, has the sight of his own place, has the
knowledge, that upon his shoulders rests the whole body of the foundation;
which respects curb Princes, vnrestrayned by fear. More particularly to the
Tragedians meaning, -- Odia qui nimium timet; It belongs to a Prince to shun
the deserving hate; not to fear hatred: fear, as it is said, belongs not to
them; and if in them, bastardizeth their natures, and corrupts them. The unjust
partiality of some natures, abused by self love, will hate the execution of
justice, and not understanding the intent of laws, think injuriously of their
executors. This must not be regarded by Princes, nor stop their well intended
courses. The satisfaction of his conscience is Metridate expelling the poison
of ill tongues, and himself finding he has performed his office with
judgment, shall be strong enough to resist vulgar thoughts, which live in
opinion. The hate of these is feeble, and howsoever common it is to the worst
meanings, to give them handsome colors, yet cannot these present their griefs
to judicial men, so shadowed, as not to be discerned faulty: so cannot the
way of truth beget hate, able to do harm; malice and spleen from some
particular it may, but they are too weak ever to do hurt. But were there
peril in the performance of the true office of a Prince, yet must it not
dissuade him; for shuns he the execution of his duty for fear of hate, he
explaneth his regalitie to be an office undertaken, to please himself, not to
profit his country, then which mind* there is not any more monsterous and
detestable. The judgment of al causes, the deciding all controversies, the
ce^sure of all me^, the sentence determining all actions, are his, and in these
performances restes the very soul of the state, and the life of a states
flourishing, in which shall fear of hate make him swerve, he ruinates and
depopulates his kingdom: for this pusillanimity will bring confusion, when the
virtuous and vicious, well deseruers, and ill, the accuser and the accused,
shall go indifferently reckoned of.

-- Regna custodit metus. -- It is the destinated affection to servile natures,
fear: and it is well, for they are not so straightly bound to be good, as are
higher fortunes. Two are the bands, whereby the divine wisdom preserves the
world: Love of virtue, and fear of punishment: and thus are some (I am afraid
most) kept from the extremity of ill; Therefore in the preservation of
Kingdoms, fear has, and ought to have a great hand. It is not the often
using tortures, and executions, that purchases this; though offenders
suffering, and according to the fact rigorous execution, is wholesome to the
body of a state: and that I verily believe, the hanging of one man, to work
better effects amongst men, then twenty made into mummie; yet that fear
amongst Subjects, that preserves the kingdom, has his original, not from
this, but from the princes life: for those states only are enriched with the
blessedness of virtue, and tranquillity, where the Prince uses his authority
to chastise offenses, not to authorize his own offenses; for though he has
the odds of being above the law, yet if he give his Subjects evil example,
they will follow him; albeit he seek to quench the fire of their viciousness,
with never so much of their blood. It was a common trick among the heathen
Princes, to fetch their petygree from the Gods; I do not think their fortunes
had so besotted the^, as to think so themselves, but only nourisht the opinion
to draw the more awe and obedience from their Subjects. They should have
imitated the divine powers in the purity of their lives, and so have been
nearer the gods, and more feared of men: for nothing produces true fear from
Subjects to their Prince, but the worthiness of his own person. His power,
his splendour, his fortune, his gards, and other circumstances, (without virtue)
do rather stir up disdain against him and his fortune, then awful regard:
the use of all these things will be converted into detestable names; his power,
tyranny, his splendour, prodigality, his fortune cursed, his guard termed the
instruments of oppression, his other signols of authority, the deckings of a
corrupt mind: under which name, when the people shall behold them, they bring
his authority to contempt; and being once brought to that declyning, they
never leave roulling, until they come to the bottom of unhappiness. Regna
custodit metus. -- But that fear must come from the virtue of the Prince, not
from his power, or else it holds not: for without virtue, it has no virtue.

Upon these verses.
O Regnorum magnis, fallax fortuna bonis, in praecipiti dubioque nimis excelsa
locas. WHo beholds or undertakes a Dyademe, merely respecting the magnificence
of the place, chooses so indiscreetly, as leaving the contentment of the mind,
for colors to paint the body. All the States, and Estates of the world, being
founded and originally descended from man, must necessarily accompany his
transitorinesse, the which though we know, and see daily chances of
mutabilitie acted before us, yet when any thing is embraced by us, rather for
our own use, then the right use; neither can reason, experience, nor the every
days happening of such things, persuade us to part with it as we ought. Thus of
that highest degree amongst men, were it managed by a hand justly administering
to all, and as he is a head, so content to take the least pleasure, and yet to
take care for all, neither would they complain of fortune, nor hold this great
good deceivable. It is the erroneous opinion of the world, that deceiues the
world: it is not pleasure to do what we list, but never to stray from what we
should; for I think all good tastes will judge it more sweet, to do well, the^
to be able to do ill without co^trolment. This done, principality excels
all states in happiness; for it resembles the divine state, whose communicating
power of doing good to all, is numbered amongst his blessed perfectio^s: this is
in the office of a Prince, which makes it without exception the most excellent
estate amongst men, nor is it subject to fortune; for nothing can perish, that
has truth and justice for the foundation.

Dubioque nimis excelsalocas. That it is situated by, and subject to the most
headlong downe-fal, me thinks tells them the nature of their place, which is
advice, keeping them from danger: it is meet they should stand thus ticklely,
for the mind of man is not to be trusted with a life of that power and
preeminence, separated from care and doubt: for were he, his once falling
would make him fall once more. Doubt belongs to Princes, but not by the name of
doubt, but providence; this iogs him, if vain pleasures lul him in sensuality;
this whispers in his ears, Beware, and sharpeneth his sight to look into the
courses of his own life, and to amend his errors; this gardeth him from outward
and inward invasions: both which strengthening and quickening his understanding,
to penetrate into the most secret drifts of his adversaries, to conclude this
providence or doubt, is the mother of counsel, industry, and doing well* --
Dubioque nimis. But too much doubt argues too much guiltines, which this too
much suspision confesses: vice vnco^mitted may make us believe she is
pleasant, but once tasted, so powerful a virtue is justice, as, though she
does not publicly chastise offenses, yet never does she omit, inwardly to
prove they are offenders, and after proof not to punish: so much of Justice
has every particular body in it self: who therefore will not doubt too much,
must not do ill too much; for they are inseparable.

Upon this verse.
Miserrimum est timere, cum speres nihil. IT is an observation worthy of
regard, to contemplate how the body of man is equally poysed with affections;
he has hope and fear, love and hate, and so the rest, every contrary has his
contrary, but in such an equallitie, as he goes right up in these
extremities; and the mind does well amongst these, as the bodies constitution
consisting of dissenting elements, so long has health, as these parts of his
are without an extraordinary preeminence: but when any affection in the mind,
or any humor in the body, vsurps an ouer-swaying authority, the body
languisheth, and the mind thinks it self miserable; for ^iserrimu^ est timere:
cu^ speres nihil.

Miserrimum est timere* -- I have often spoken of this fear, and yet
necessarily must here speak of it again. There is no affection, that
afflicts the mind upon the first apprehension, but fear. Yet so strangely
powerful are all affections, as they make the possessed body delight in his
torment, and prosecute those infected thoughts, though with the loss of his
whole contentment and quiet; yet is it most miserable to fear: for that is
miserablest, that is most remote from contentment. Infinite are the occasions
of vexation that encounter us without seeking them, but fear adds both the
number and force of griefs, and believes the^ both more and more terrible then
they are: therefore did the Tragedian end with miserrimum est timere, he should
end with truth; for I hold fear the most afflicting punishment, that
accompanied the fall of man. -- Cum speres nihil. --

Whether it be, that this life, being but a counterfeit of life, displeases
the soul, (to mitigate which anguish, she administreth hope to her self for
a cordial,) or whether the possession of things comes short of the intended
satisfaction; certain it is, that the most pleasing and most conversant
thoughts of the best contented minds, are descended from hope, which hope
doubtless is the unspotted issue of the soul, being little a kin to the
body, though behoofefull to the body; for the acts of the body are more
gross and beauy, which every man may easily discern, if he observes his
intendme^ts, before execution. For whiles only in the brain they carry a much
more delightful representation, then after, when they come under the censure
of the eye, our life is nothing but a life of hope, which, if we cannot have
with a possibility* we will without; for we cannot live without it, what
shift soever we make. The most plenteous possessed creature of contentment that
ever was, annexeth hope to his ample fruition, and is content with that he
has, because he has hope. It never leaves us, no, not when we lie a dying:
men vnassisted by Christianity, at this time, even by nature are taught, to
hope of another life, from which, neither ignorance nor impiousnes can drive
them: but when they cannot build hope upon their own deserts and knowledges,
they will ground it upon mercy and hope, and so die embracing it, and never
leave hoping, till they have left breathing.

Miserimum est timere, cum speres nihil. It is most miserable to fear when we
cannot hope, it is, for fear vnballansed by hope, is desperation, then which
both by divine and humane understandings, there cannot be a greater curse: into
such extremities run the affections of man, when not curbed by reason, or
counterpoysed by a contrary affection: for the body and mind agree in
receiving safety from a mediocritie, which is easily discerned, since no part
of man holds out in extremes, but thereby is driven into the greatest
dangers, being violently carried into diseases and death.

Upon these verses.
-- Prosperum, ac foelix scelus virtus vocatur; sontibus pare^t boni. HOw much
outward prosperity preuailes over judgment, how willingly we suffer the
glitering of fortune to dazell our understandings, how we coozen our selves of
the discerning truth, with looking upon every thing through the false glasses
of wealth or want, by him that is yet sober, and not drunk with these partial
affections, cannot choose but move him to much commiseration, and to pity, and
shun the society of the world. Taking the last of things, and being led by
events, we know nothing originally, nor do we in our lives any thing, but
lift up them, already up; and throw lower the already overthrown. How often
have I heard the weakest bent bows of reason, shoot at the highest actions?
No, this is nothing so common, as the vulgar censure upon the matters of most
importance, in which they will as boldly undertake to commend and disprayse,
as if they had been conversant in the seriousest counsels: but thus goes their
attributing praise or disprayse; he has praise that winnes; who loses,
loses not only his designs, but withal loses the opinion of having either
wisdom or virtue. To who^ should I lay this fault, but to our own follies,
who lay the chief estimation, not upon virtue, but fortune, and perhaps, our
folly is permitted by the divine hand, to abate the pride of higher persons,
that cannot with all their greatness, defend themselves from the blows of
ignorance and indiscretion. So are the sins both of high and low punished;
the low, inamored of wealth, are deprived of wisdom; the high, subject to
these vniudiciall censures, have their high attempts soyled and made
contemptible, with being pulled through these common gutters of mire and
pollution.

-- Prosperum, ac foelix scelus,
virtus vocatur. --
Prosperous and happy wickedness is called virtue: wickedness can neither be
prosperous nor happy. Prosperity is a word destinated to the world, and by that
word we understand wealth, honor, estimation and such; but all these being
but the adherents of a transitory life, and that life depending upon another
of much more excellency: who obtaines this prosperity with wickedness, loses
that; who loses the best for the worst, prospers not; who prospers not, is
not in prosperity: neither can I call it prosperity, to be accounted so by
the world; and in the mean time to have that most unquiet companion, an
exclaiming conscience, which as certainly follows dishonest attempts
obtained, as desire prouokes before obteining: between which two, the
insatiable mind is perpetually tormented.

-- Foelix scelus. The contrariety of these two words, illustrates how much our
servile natures are content to debase themselves, to lose truth, the highest
part of reason, I, sense the lowest part of man, happy wickedness, an epithet
due, not to the best of our actions, yet are we content to bestow it on the
worst of our actions of wickedness. Can any thing subject to the frailetie of
time be happy? no, not possible: happiness is not of this world: we may be in
the way of happiness, when by a good life we are in the way to heaven, but
cannot here be happy; for nothing that is transitory is happy, happiness
being due to express only the joys of eternity; for no pleasures can reach
happiness, that stoop so low as time. Then can it not be due to wickedness,
whose groueling earthly mind never looks so high, but sticks fast in the
imagination of the vile pleasures of the world, and has his best contentments
of no more continuance, then the senses pleasure, which taste and swallow, in an
instant.

Virtus vocatur. -- It seems virtue once had the Empire of the world, for
antiquity shows many coins of her stamp, and even this age so fears her
power, as every one will wear her livery, though few do her service. The
worst, though they love vice, yet adorn their ill with the counterfeit color
of virtue: so strong is she yet, and so feeble is vice: seemings are now
sought, beings thought superfluous; the labor of most men now adays is not to
obtain trueths, but opinions warrant: so are most of the actions of these last
ages; but painted with cou^terfeit colors, which last no longer then
themselves live, so long perhaps fear or flattery makes them hold; but they
taken away by time, they are either devoured by oblivion, or discovered to be
without al worth, or truth. Yet can I not but commend their policies, that
entitle virtue to their particular actions; for nothing else goes with so
general an applause: fayles he here, he shall be supplied by them, that no
other respect has laid hold of; wants he that? he has yet pity, well
wishers, and good opinion: so has it been already observed by the world,
since no great action has passed without the name of suppressing Tyranny;
chastising the irreligious, or the common good. This is policy; but that I
speak of now, baseness: so miserable are the minds as well as fortunes of the
vulgar, that no action of greatness passes without commendation: does he mean
to catch the people in his cappe, and makes courtesy entrap their simple
understandings, they auow him to be humility it self. Does pride and a
selfe-opinion make him look big? he carries himself like a Prince, to
whose place it belongs not to lose of his height, by declining to
familiarity: does he spend? he reckons not his own estate, so he may supply
the wants of others: does he save? it is nobly done, not to undo his
posterity: Loves he wars? magnanimity and fortitude shines in him; is it
peace? no commonwealths men are so worthy as the preseruers of peace: In a
word, does he what he will, he does virtuously; let him get prosperity, and
get it how he can, he shall not want virtue, for -- prosperu^ ac foelix scelus
Virtus vocatur. --

-- Sontibus parent boni. There is not a greater plague to be inflicted upon
mortality, then this; for the subjects of wicked governors cannot prosper:
inferiors participate with the natures of their betters, as birds with the
weather, they move as they move: Imitation being the destiny of those, that
are not by the Destinies allowed their own choice; who subscribes not to their
licentiousness, with putting on the fashion of their life, perishes by the
hand of tyranny; who does, by the hand of the divine Justice: So is there no
safety under such Magistrates, since refusing or obeying, ruins one of the
two best parts of man. The good obey the ill; it is worth the observation, how
the eternal wisdom applies and suffers: ill is here made the touchstone of
good, and good obeyes ill, to try goodness constancy: could the ill soften
or give the least alteration to the good, it were not good, nor were good then
worthy of the preeminence. Thus does he make goodness combat with his
contrary, which contention ends with the excellency of his justice and
wisdom; his wisdom, in descrying by this means hypocrisy; his justice,
that at the end of these wars, both parties are made ready for his sentence,
when no excuse or color can mitigate or darken his reward to the victor, and
punishment to the vanquished. In the time of life, against this oppression
there is hardly any counsel to be given, since if he comes to authority by
succession or just election, it is not lawful to practice against him; but if
otherwise, it is otherwise: and a life is well sold, that loses it in
conspiring their overthrow: but atteyning it by any of the two other means,
howsoever it prove* he must be suffered: for so God has appointed of the
Anointed; and perhaps he uses them, for a scourge to the wicked, which happens
often, and then it is meet: ^or it seems his pleasure is, that -- sontibus
parent boni.

Upon these Verses.
-- Noscere hoc primum decet:
Quid facere Victor debeat, victus pati.
Violenta ^emo Imperia continuit diu,
Moderata durant. --
Unto every life, unto every fortune, a peculiar fashion belongs, which
whether it comes from the all one working of fortune with all, and so the
continuance and generality has made it customs, or whether the alteration
brings with it an alteration of behavior, carrying in it self the aspect
fitting it self; certain it is, the world has been long governed with
certain set forms, which have gone from the father to the son; as the
vanquished to lose their minds with their fortunes, the Victors to proclaim,
Quodcunque libuit, facere victor licet.

But how does wisdoms moderation repine at this downe-hill headlong course? to
what end exclaimes she? Has nature given man reason, time experience, since
he entertaines the changes of the world, so ignorantly, as if they were
strangers to him? he falls not too low, nor mounts not too dangerously hie,
whose reason and experience married together, has between the^ brought forth
their destinated issue, Moderation. This is the stay of the reeling steps of
humanity; this the vanquisher of fortune, and the true counselor in the
managing all estates. -- Noscere hoc primum decet.

If manual trades ask time and experience, to be expert in their faculties,
needs must those minds that profess the serving of their countries with their
minds, have a time of prenticehood and learning: for the minds executions are
more difficult and of more importance: if a trade-mans work pleases not the
chapman, happily it may be mended, or at the worst, there is but so much lost:
the effects of the mind can hardly be recalled, and if miscarried, dangerous.
Every man by the state he is born in, may guess in what manner he is to do his
Country service: so ought he to prepare himself, especially those nobly
descended, which as they have a greater portion of their Country then ordinary
men, so are they bound extraordinarily to care for her preservation; they are
chief Actors upon this stage, whose action if it does not fit their part,
whose part if forgotten or not learned, the whole matter is disgraced, and
themselves more taxed then a Messenger or a mule, upon whom the eyes of men
have set no note. It is then the office of a true discerner into things, not to
undertake any place or office, in the managing which, he is yet ignorant, but
to prepare himself for that is likely to follow; for the first lesson of
wisdom is,

-- Noscere hoc primum decet,
Quid facere victor debeat, victus pati.
In general, mercy belongs to the Conqueror; for if the fault be but
slight, the conquered has punishment enough, to hold his life, of any lord but
God: besides, his own destiny is unknown, which may come to the same point
and then his clemency may procure him clemency: more it often happens,
commiseration of the estate of enemies has converted them, and made them
perfect friends: here then to be rigorous, were his own loss; for there is no
possession comparable to that of friends. But particularly, the cause of
quarrel, the nature of the people, their force, their distance must produce
the Victors use of his Conquest. If they take up arms being Subjects, and now
become rebels, example must teach them to know their errors; if a neighbor or
confederate, that has committed treacherous actions, or proceeded contrary to
the law of nations; rigor again. If naturally the people be contentious, it
is necessary to suppress their natures, with cutting off their strength; if
their forces be apt to entice them to arms, to abate their force, the cause
of their inticement; if far off, and yet meet to be held in subjection, to
remove the naturals likely to practice, and to plant Governors of the Victors
appointment, and to mingle the blood of the Conquerours with the conquered. In
this first, the punishment must not exceed the offense, for then it is
cruelty: for the other, they must be accomplished without much blood, for the
shedding of blood without a very just cause, is inhumane. To threaten people
must be carefully shunned, for he that gives his enemy desperation, gives
him a weapon more dangerous then valor. From both rigor and mercy, proceed
great benefits to a State, but they must be used according to a Princes own
state; for if he be yet to conquer them, his estimation of clemency
softeneth their spirits, and is the only means to make them cowards: if
already in subjection, their opinion of their Princes rigor keeps them in
awe.

But Justice must reconcile this question, of which, is most necessary; for by
his warrant, to save or kill is lawful.

-- Victus pati. Adversity has no more to do but this, a short lesson though
hard, hard through the custom of sympathizing with our fortunes, a misfortune
far more lamentable then the first; for bewayling them, draws the mind to
an extreme baseness, to an extreme folly: for if our harms be not past
recovery, yet was there never any helped by this direction, many have been
despised by this; for from others there is no assistance drawn, except in the
way of charity, which every worthy nature abhors; but from the strength of
our own either inward or outward graces: the outward is already lost, the
inward lost, if we bewail the outward loss, which in the Victor stirs up
either contempt or pity, the best of which in a noble mind is more abhorred,
then the worst part of fortune. In the vanquished, debarred from all assistance
of outward things, is there an opportunity to show their own worth, more then
in any other time; for he is then separated from those things, that are wont to
make disfigured monsters to look handsomely: though there be a trial in the
moderation of high fortunes, yet is it a thing much more easy, it comes not
so near the quick: for he that endures famishing without alteration, has a
greater part of virtue, then he that comes from a feast without a surfeit,
patience being a more substantial part of Virtue, then temperance: this is
left him, which should procure both patience and comfort, the exercise of the
mind being to be preferred much above the ease of the body. This meditation,
with a mind iudicially determining what ought to be done, not what is most
ordinarily done, cannot choose but learn him in calamity, to wear that part
with as much ease as he did the other: the strength of the mind is able to do
more then this, whose power, whose worth, whose abilities, we are ignorant and
so destitute of, with following the beaten way of the idle vulgar.

Violenta nemo Imperia continuit diu,
Moderata durant. --
No extreme continues; an ordinance of natures, to suppress conspiracies, for
might the force of violence continue, her fair work would soon be
confounded: she has given limits to all things, and to all things courses
fitting their natures, which gone beyond, and able to run on, would beget a
new Chaos, turning all things from their own natures; there would be nothing,
for co^bating against one another, and setting their forces one against
another; the Victor would convert all things to his own nature, and that would
destroy nature, whose glory is the multiplicitie of her instruments, and the
working the^ with one another. Much more dangerous is it in men, whose reason
is able to resist violence, and more strongly, whose reason teaches them to
abhor violence. The state of a Prince is vpheld by his subjects opinion, his
Majesty begets reverence, so long as his power fitteth it self to justice;
his Royalty maintained, so long as they find his wisdom and virtue gouerns
him, and he them in peace: nothing assisteth another, that is not again by
that assisted. The violence amongst men is tyranny, an humor begotten
between self-love and ignorance; it resembles self-love, in prizing his
own safety above the lives or loves of his subjects; like ignorance, in
fetching the means of his safety from false grounds, an humor of all humors
the most unsafe and most displeasing: for he is not safe, when he is safe, his
mind thinks then of danger and treason, and for the bodies safety without
the minds, it little helps, for the mind gives quiet to the body, not the
body to the mind; most displeasing it is, for it displeases the whole world,
and with the world himself, for he raises no contentment out of his course,
and that displeases, that goes without contentment.

No State of this nature continues: if the Turkish Government be enforced
against this Axiom, it may be answered, It is a tyranny, that goes masked
under religion: for were it so naked, as the people might behold they suffer by
the bloody hand of cruelty, without the allowance of God, and that his actions
were altogether unlawful, soon would that State be brought within the
compass of this Axiom, No violence continues.

-- Moderata durant. The whole world is vpheld by moderation, from the highest
to the lowest, especially man is beholding to her; for without her help, of
all other, he is the most detestable creature: without moderation, affection
conquers reason; without moderation, the wit of man will serve a wrong master;
without moderation, the body will rebel against the soul; without moderation,
the soul yields to the body; in a word vnmoderated, both soul and body
perishes. This is she, that makes the distinction betwixt virtue and vice;
this is she, that makes courage valor, that without moderation would be
angry, and then fury; this is she, that separateth justice, and cruelty;
providence, from fear; power, from tyranny; majesty, from pride: this is she
that keeps tempera^ce from staruing her self, thrift from covetousness,
humility from baseness; this is she that tempereth, and keeps in frame the
whole frame of the world, without who^ violence and extremes her contraries,
would overthrow and ruin all. Thus much owe we to moderation, to whom after
our service to God, if we would sacrifice a serious meditation to her
excellency, our actions would thrive the better: for no man is wise, nor
virtuous, nor any thing worth, without moderation; thus age has preeminence
over youth: for their affections by time grown weak, and by time their
experience being grown strong, they have a more ample portion of moderation
the^ youth, whose affections strong, and experience weak, moderation is
resisted, and so folly gouernes him.

Non est ad astra mollis e terris via. SO subject is the constitution of man to
follow the perverse counsel of his body, as the object of his soul: virtue is
called hard, the bodies corrupt satisfaction, pleasure; weighed down with the
grosnes of which, his ascension to the stars, to worthiness, to heaven, is
difficulty: so over balanced are the excellent designs of the soul, with the
body and his affections; but accounting of this difficulty, as it rightly
ought, and as we are content in other things, which have esteem for their
rareness, scarsity, and hard obtaining, and more for this, the^ for themselves
bearing price, it should not make the Port of virtue vnfreqented, it should not
wither our endeavors, but rather hearten our soyles and make us shoot up, with
the meditation of this incomparable blessing, and be spurs to hasten us on
to this excellent cariere. Virtue is she that makes us apt for this ^light,
vice is the burden of impediment; virtue is, and is the way to heaven; vice,
the earth and a heaviness, sinking and still falling downward: from virtue we
receive two wings to mount with, pleasures, resistance; virtue applied from
vice, two clogges, sloth, and appetite; here rests the happiness and unhappiness
of man, here rests the difficulty of our exaltation, for non est ad astra
mollis e terris via.

This body of virtue, which is the harvest of a well-ended life, is no
otherwise obtained, but by obeying the souls counsel, whose divine essence
beholds no other thing with contentment, but virtue: for never was there
soul so corrupted by communicating with the body, as not to offer men good
instructions, the fault has been in the bodies disobedience: for otherwise
virtue would be as fast fixed to man, as life. The strength of the best and
largest understanding, is too weak and too short to incompasse the full and
exact lineaments of virtue: we know her, rather by her contrary, then by her
self: we never saw the picture of fortitude to the life; we never saw
temperance well placed, but cowardice and excess have made imagination guess
at virtue, with thinking her altogether unlike vice. Well may I then not doubt
of pardon, if I miss in the desciphering this sanctified piece, who am a man,
and young; by both states full enough of errors and misprision, especially, the
last, the strength of whose affections, if they carry him violently out of ye
way, is by custom made venial. The^ am I not compelled to work above my
strength, who already have confessed my weakness: my poverty can not tell you
of acts, but of thoughts; these papers are no cronicles that prove certainety,
but like Kalenders that go by guess: I have thought of virtue, and this verse
has revived that meditation, of which in general I will say something. This
only substantial piece of all things possible to be comprehended and possessed
by man, was once goodness, when goodness was unlabored excellency; but when the
heavenly fire infused, was quenched by earthly concupiscence, it became then
laborious and painful; with the change of our state the ancre-hold of man was
translated out of goodness into virtue, a word expressing a possibility rather
the^ a possession of grace. Virtue is not the^ like the fortune of elder
brothers, whose patrimony falls to the^ by succession without further care,
but like younger brothers states, ye must fetch their aduancements out of their
own industries: to go just with the bodies pleasure, to observe his
satisfaction above any thing, is not the way; this is every day to fall: but he
that aspireth to this flight to the stars, must make his body humbly desire
his soul to purify and make apt his gross enclosure of earth. No^ est ad
astra mollis e terris via. In times past, when the goodness of virtue was not
fully discovered, but their electio^s drew their force rather from a galla^t
industrious inclination, then from gratefulnes of honoring ye worlds Creator,
or ye hope of eternity; yet eue^ then they magnified nor deified none, but me^
famous for atchiueme^ts, or profitable inventions. Thus came the multiplicitie
of the heathen gods, most of whom were so excellent, either in chivalry, or in
managing the state of peace, as drove their country men between the effects
of admiration, and gratefulness to proclaim them gods. Thus Jupiter, who
doubtless was an excellent soldier; thus Bacchus, for finding out the use of
the wine; whose means though we have spotted with many imputations, no doubt
they were extraordinary men of quality, whom the people of those times made
gods, though the Poets of after ages made one a lecher, the other a drunkard:
but that was not their fault, but a fault of the idleness of poetical fancies.
From these may be seen, that moral virtues are not to be obtained, without the
employment of the mind and body, laysinesse the younger brother of idleness,
is one of the burdens of impediment, the soul is of too fine and quick a
metal, to love doing nothing; she must have employment, otherwise she will
grow dull and heavy, and like prisoners that are debarred exercise, fat and
vnweildsome: in many things does the soul follow the bodies inclination, even
as the eye sees by the assistance of a spectacle, whose glass, if false, the
eye cannot see truly; if thick, my stily: the body by cherishing grows not
able, but like a pampered horse, short winded, pursie, and unserviceable, whose
organes by this means grow unapt to perform their functions, and the soul
deprived of showing her dexterity, like a house uninhabited, grows desolate
and ruinous.

Contrarily, the soul cherished and observed, recompenseth her obseruer, with
a more large increase, then harvest does the husbandman.

So for the first journey to virtue, there cannot be a truer way appointed,
then the subiecting the body, and giving the souls motions liberty: for the
soul by cherishing flourishes; the body cherished, decays.

Now of the wings enabling our flight, the first is pleasures resistance, not
the true pleasure, but a wrong conceived: for the hope of the true, is the life
of all good actions, and all men live by the meditation of the obtaining this
sum of happiness.

But we miscall and mistake virtue, reading whose front, and conceiving there
is nothing in her, but a stearne deprivation of liberty, so leave her.

But how does our imagination err, since virtue undertakes to lead men
into the mansion of a never dying pleasure?

And the main difference of virtue and vice, that makes the one worthy of
embracement, the other of refusal, is virtues continuance in pleasure; vices
sudden conversion into dolor and calamity.

I cannot deny, but the false solicitours for vice our senses, bring a kind
of pleasure with their satisfaction; but so short it is, as every man knows
^ow subject to end this surfeiting pleasure with griefs and vexations. It is
the permanencie of pleasure then, that makes it worthy, which though it
comes unto us not by any immediate means, we must not therefore refuse, for
so comes all things to man, which is the cause that the life of man must be
laborious and painful: for so are all things, that must use second and third
means, for obtaining the first and chief. We reckon of Physicions, because
the end of them is health: of Lawyers, for they say they produce quiet: of
Soldiers, for they purchase peace. Let us think thus of virtue, and we shall
be virtuous; temperance first aspect is not to be valued, nor his abstinence;
but that the end of his abstinence gives pleasure a longer continuance then
appetites satisfaction: to this end fortitude embraces peril and pains,
that he may receive a contentment, more full and continual then a dastardly
idleness: this is the reason of virtues prohibition, because she would give
us pleasure and happiness more lasting and solid: who then will not restrain
the humorous wishes of vice, since by that means he shall obtain virtue, and
with her eternal contentment.

But yet has man gotten but one wing, with which though he can flicker, and
hoppe, yet can he not fly: for himself, he has enough to serve his turn,
but he is borne to society, and to help others: to perform which, his other
wing is appointed, virtues application; this is the wing of splendour, the other
is profitable, so are the designs for a man's self; but this leans to the
good of others, and is therefore commendable.

Who applies himself to his country, with a mind applying all things to
virtue, he is so worthy, as nothing originally of the world more worthy:
First, he beholds the state of the distressed, he redeemeth that, for
commiserations sake: Next, he vieweth the lives of his Countrymen, whose
swaruing crookedness he amendeth, both by counsel and example: Lastly, he
beholds foreign States, with the eye of prevention, that no invasions,
incrochings, or conspiracies, disturb the safety of his Commonwealth. I call
this last, because I will under these three heads, mention what I think, not
doubting of many more respects that belong to this life, nor enforcing any man
to believe, that these three comprehend the sum of their duties; but thus
shall my slight touch of these pass his journey.

To commiserate the distressed I estate of others, needs no great persuasion,
for all good natures bring it with them from their cradles; but I know not
how, great fortunes, and high estates, so alter the dispositions of men, as it
deserves a remembrance; for nothing is more common, then the prosperous to
despise the distressed. This commiseration has two means of performing his
function, to help the oppressed by violence of men; and the oppressed by the
malignitie of fortune: the former is justice, the last charity. In this first
ought there to be a freedom given to Suitours, to enter both into your gates
and presence; me thinks there cannot be a more unjust course, then to
profess justice, and to deny suitours their presence. How can he know the
griefs of men without hearing their complaints? Who deserves his place,
unless ready to hear the distresseds petitions? But these do evil. Who will
do well, let him give ready audience, and as ready dispatch, without any other
reward, then the remembrance of his good deed; with this he must be careful
of his servants, lest his authority and their covetousness despoile not the
poor, and make them buy justice at a dear rate.

For Charity, it befitteth well the life of abundance to have recourse
hither, but how to dispose gifts, that they may rightly deserve the name of
Charity, is the difficulty. It is no charity to give so violently as may
waste the maine of an estate; but what may be spared, by cutting off
superfluous delicates and outward pomp, to convert this to the poor
distressed outcasts of fortune, is true charity. I like not of feasting those
that are able to feast me again, nor to keep a table for all comers: it is
better to give one his dinner that knows not elsewhere to have it, then twenty
able to answer feast with feast. I have often inueighed against our English
second courses, which kill many with surfeits, whiles as many starve at their
gates with famine: I cannot think of an Honourabler estate, then to have much,
and yet to live temperately, depriving themselves of excess to supply the
wants of others, which course whosoever shall entertain, shall increase his
virtue, keep his body from diseases, and his fortune from envy.

To make his country men worthy of enjoying their country, and meet to
preserve it, there are two means, rewards and punishment. I spoke lately of
charity, which is to give them altogether in want; I speak now of
liberality, which is to give to them rich in virtues, but poor in wealth: but
to give gifts as we use nowadaies in hope of a greater, belongs neither to
liberality nor charity.

Me thinks it becomes Magistrates to have an eye as well to those of deserts
and to cherish them, as to be inquisitiue about offenders and their
punishment. It is not thus, and that it is not, I think has been the greatest
cause of the decay of virtue: for by this neglect, virtue has lost one of her
means of persuasion, and many worthy spirits have run out their lives
unprofitably.

I possess as little of virtue, as the most beggarly in that commodity; yet
did I never see any limme of her body, but I was enamoured of it. How much it
would raise the spirits of worthy fellows, and lift up declyning virtue, to
have great men lend them good looks, and withal to displace Buffoones,
flatterers, and unprofitable pleasures of great charge, and to convert that to
their use, the proof will be better believed then I; yet in my opinion, this
man should be as profitable to his country, as the most vigilant, turning his
eyes to some other care.

For punishment, the physic of a State, it ought with as much regard to be
looked into, as this former, they are indeed to go arm in arm: of this part
of justice since the direct mean is hardly to be obtained, I hold him the
best Statesman, that leans rather to severity, then to much lenity; for
example, the use of justice does nothing so much harm with some strict
executions, as with letting offenders escape without punishment: law is the
Lodestone, whereby justice saileth, and must be kept in a venerable account: if
the crimes procuring them be but light, and not likely to impair the Common
wealth much, it is better not to see them, then seeing them, to let them
escape: for there is not a more dangerous and disgraceful thing to a Common
wealth, then to make laws, and then suffer them to lie unprofitable without
execution. For foreign estates, their force, the natures of the manages of
those forces, gives the eye of prevention the surest judgment; if their
forces be of too great strength, and to their strength added a wise governor,
there is most danger: if these meet not, no great peril when they do: the
breeding the same jealousy in other bordering Countries that your self
conceiues, is a means likely to make your strength able to encounter him, but
before this time it had been meet to have foreseen this danger, there being
no surer means to prevent foreign invasions, then to keep any one from being
too powerful; which is easily done, by succouring the weaker parts, but these
are secrets of which my writing is mere presumption: for I hardly ever carry
any of my thoughts so high as this meditation, more low flies my conceit, and
to the form of my life more profitably, in which it may be, my sight can carry
level as far as need requires; but in these things I am altogether purblind.

Non est ad astra mollis e terris via. It is not by the way of a downbed, soft
clothing, and delicacie; much more on the right hand lies the way to heaven:
which though those tender trauaillers, that shape their course through
se^sualitie, call hard, is not therefore to be shunned: for the obtaining set
apart, which we allow painful in the attaining, the sleightest mystery, it
is not hard, but easy and pleasant, joined with such a contentment and
satisfaction, as is past the power of any pens expressing, for it can be
known neither by words nor any resemblance, but only it self is able to
express it self.

Upon these verses.
Res humanas ordine nullo
Fortuna regit, spargitque manu
Munera caeca, peiora fouens.
THe giddy lightness, the unresolved motions, the unsteady frail buildings of
humane actions: so fly, so stagger, so erect, as no marvel, if the work
which always resembles the crafts man's skill, be full of uncertainties and
wauerings: for how can weakness manage matters of strength? or why should
strength be blamed, if he produces not wisdom, since nature, to prevent
monsters, has appointed every thing, to beget things of his own likeness? I
can not call the actions of men monsters, though monstrous: for they resemble
their mothers, which is this body, it being a fit resemblance me thinks, since
all thoughts are bred between the agitatio^ of the soul and body, to call
bodies females, the soul the male, how so ever the Grammarians have agreed
upon haec anima, since he is full of a more true and Masculine force then the
body.

Res humanas. -- Though we consist of a soul as well as body, though his part
be so great in us, as by it only we move, live, and understand, though he be
full of divinity, and laden with the riches of the place from whence he came;
yet so much does the issue of these two resemble the body, as all our actions
are called humane; a word expressing frailty and death. That they are thus
called, and called so by their own deserts, proceeds not from necesitie, nor
can I say in all through the malice of choice, but through the want of examining
and weighing our intendements, the lightest of which are of so much weight, if
they were duly reckoned of, the grauest, and lightest, so near of our
kindred, and all so ready to lay open themselves, if questioned with by a
considerate judgment; as letting them pass thus carelessely, shows us to be
both unnatural and unwise: for might the soul be made acquainted with their
sending forth, she would give them so fair and lasting a constitution, as they
should be no longer called humane, but divine actions.

-- Ordine nullo
Fortuna regit. --
That our actions are called, and rightly called humane, here is the reason;
fortune gouernes them: which word, though the fancy of Poets has given a body
to, and made her blind, and a goddess, yet is she neither a goddess, nor a
separated essence: for there are millions of fortunes, yea as many as there are
men, every man his own fortune; but the word expresses chance, and by chance
we are governed, for so must they needs be that allow not their designs
premeditatio^ without order: it is a shift to set up fortune, and the
imputation of fortunes preposterous and disorderly working, it is our own
fault; since nothing comes from us marshalled with judgment, but as our
senses catch up every object destinated to their functions, without all choice
or regard: so suffer we our selves to ingrosse the commandments of lust and
appetite, to embrace every thing that they see, and to devour poison, so it
promises but sweetness.

I can not say we go without meanings, but without the true meaning I may:
for superfluously taking the survey of things, not penetrating the depth, we
never taste of any thing but the scumme and top of things. Hence come the
exclamations of the world, the shipwrackes of all estates, and to comprehend in
a word that might fill pages, all that we call calamity, and think worthy of
the bewayling.

-- Spargitque manu
Munera caeca. --
How my Tragedian means here, I know not; but how I understand him, is thus
equivocal: he may call these gifts blind, by the means of the obtaining,
which is by adventure or may mean them blind, in respect of their impotent
insufficiencies; for so examined straightly, must I confess these jewels of
the world to be, since they bring but themselves, not their use, in which
consists the true spirit of the worthiness of things. Alas poor man, how art
thou deceived, that sendes thy mind to attend these things, that ought to be
the attendants of thy mind? for what is thy use of these things, without a
mind? and that thou have not, for already it is converted into this dross;
the sickness of which surfeit, is the shipwreck of the mind, upon these
rocks of earth, they dissoluing the substantial body of humanity, into
licentiousness, the pride raised from the opinion of wealth, prodigalities,
looseness, covetousness, extortion. It is meet here also to tell those weak
estimations, that glory in those blind gifts that childishly they account of
feathers and wind, and suffer themselves to be transported out of the Bay of
judgment, into the uncertain sea of opinion, by their blind and doting
election.

-- Peiora fouens. It is no marvel, since every thing hasteneth to the
connection of his own kind, and thus earth to earthly minds; but that spirits
of a more true stamp, envy and mislike, that the world is engrossed by these,
both, I mislike and lament: for not out of a mind that contemnes because he
cannot obtain, but even so near truth as to speak what I think, I hold
humane prosperity, the coin current with our mortal states, no nearer
goodness, or happiness, then liuelesse things, whose motions belong to our
pleasure; or otherwise so near a kin, as a Stage to the Commedians, which
though it gives them a fair and fit name, making them apt for the eyes of men,
yet is no way guilty of their good or evil action.

All things hold esteem for their use, and this persuasion defends the
thirsters after excesses: but if my use be sufficiently supplied, by a far
less number of ceremonies, then serves the nice and curious, me thinks my
state is the better: for I mislike nothing so much in ships and women, as
their many tacklings: to have use of so many things, brings them to have need
of many things. Then doubtless their states are the miserablest, and those
most happy, that are not impatient, with the service of a less number of their
implements.

Then are not the wicked and worser sort cherished, but punished, in their
abundaunce, since like the throats of drunkards, the more is powered in, the
more they thirst.

There be many vices that we bring with us into the world, and questionless
we had enough to do, to maintain wars with them, procured we no more: but
as many more are sprung up, out of this root of abundance; for from thence
springs the particular malice of men, contentions, slanders, unlawful
wishes; after those put in practice, in a word, abusing themselves both in the
obtaining and having: so can I think it nothing but a means of temptation to
our best part, and to the body a procurer of envy and danger.

Res humanas ordine nullo
Fortuna reget, spargitque manu
Munera caeca, peiora fouens.
That this confusion is incident to our lives, is our own fault, since the
disorder of a State belongs to none, but to the governors of a State; so
this to man who is Vicegerent of the earth, the remedy may be imagined, but (I
doubt) not accomplished: the disease by continuance being past the power of
curing, the best physic is contempt, taken by a mind content upon contempts
purge, to rectify the weak stomach with the sucking in a love of a more
noble nature, whose counsel will expel confusion, and take away the strength
of this just inuectiue, or rather true pattern of our unhappy condition.

Quicunque regno fidit, and magna potens
Dominatur aula, nec leaves metuit Deos,
Animumque rebus credulum laetis dedit,
Me videat, and te Troia, non vnquam tulit
Documenta fors maiora, quam fragili loco
Starent superbi: --
Whatsoever hold the world takes of the glittering barks of men; what honor
soever the base inferiors cast upon greatness, with what pace soever he
treads, or with what pomp soever he goes, yet is he mortal, subject to
time, subject to desire, subject to errors, subject to all the incidents,
incident to his subject; and no more does death or destiny, or any of those
period-makers, spare him, then the most abject creature in his dominion: but
rather more conversant are dangers with them, then any: for greatness is
subject to envy, and envy often the author of destruction.

Are kingdoms then such holds, as their possession shall make us proclayme
wars against God and man? or is power so confidently to be trusted, as
leaning upon that pillar, the wars of the world cannot stir us? Who
believes so, let him behold Troy, let him behold Priam, let him behold Hector,
Cities too weak to resist ruin; Principality, not able to shun the
miserable part of calamity; Valor made the footestoole of the Conqueror.
Which examples if either by age thought weak, or by passing through the hands
of a Poet, a fiction: let it serve to stir up our memories, which can produce
examples of these kinds more fresh, and to our knowledge more sure.

All the things of this world, being but the servants of the body, and the
body of the soul, how base are they, that fly their own authority, and
become servants to their servants servant? and how foolish are they that
will make these things destinated to this life, longer-liued then man's life, to
account the needful helps of a mortal body, immortal? yet does the erroneous
choice of the world set up these things above all respects; prefer degrees of
the world, above the preferment of their soul, setting up power against
truth; greatness of fortune, above the purity of a good conscience; wealth
against honesty; gilded honor, above real; the applause of men, before the
allowance of virtue; the body, above the soul; villainy, above goodness;
confusion, above tranquillity.

Quicunque regno fidit and magna potens
Dominatur aula. --
Whose thoughts soever shoots so low, as to trust to any state of the world,
whose ignoble mind does so degenerate, as to fetch the price of his
estimation, from Heraldrie, or the reverence of baseness, can neither find
safety in his estate, truth in his subjects, nor quiet in his mind: how can
he, safety, since he fetches his contentment from the subjection of
inferiors? and they finding they are used but for the foyles of his
magnificence, soon will they spurn at such authority: for peace and the
combination of societies, has his original from no other ground, but the hope
of a mutual supplying each others defects: how can he, truth in his servants,
since himself is the example of the contrary? and no rigor can forbid those
mean states the following the courses of their Governor; admonition and
punishment never prevailing over example. Lastly, the quiet of the mind is not
within the compass of the bodies authority, and he that knows nor trusts
to any thing, but the servants of the body, how can he procure the quiet of
the mind? nothing can do this but virtue, who sends the sweet vapors of
quiet to the mind, and gives it peace and rest; as the stomach does to the
head, to procure sleep the restorer of the body: from nothing else is it to
be had; for it is a forced contentment to the mind, that is procured from the
fullness of the bodies possession, not nourishing, but dangerous; even as the
rest of the body obtained by taking Oppium -- and magna potens dominatur aula.
--

The possessions of a private fortune, be they never so great, and never so
ill used by the possessour, is but a particular harm; the possession of
authority in the court of Princes, swarueth it never so little from the true
bounds, indangereth the whole state: it little skilleth, whether a common
sayler be endued with any thing, but strength; but if the Master or Pilate be
not expert in his science, rocks and tempests threaten continually their
destruction; who is exalted to this state, by any other but his own deserts,
Phaeton-like, makes his ambition purchase his own downfall, and the fiering
of the world. Were there in this life no more to be done, but the resisting
the allurementes that the world casts upon the height of his fortune,
doubtless he had much to do; his judgment, his modesty, his virtue, should
be all employed; but with this particular care, the general care comes
accompanied, so is he doubly set a work, and more then doubly besieged by
false and deceivable inticements. Under these two heads marches the glory and
danger of the favorites of Princes, his fortune not to corrupt himself,
himself not to corrupt the state: and first, to the first, there is nothing
that is fed with it own humor, but increases and grows mighty, and at
last dangerous; thus things combustible, heaped upon fire, make it grow furious
and devouring; thus waters assembled together beyond the bounds appointed by
nature, conspire to overrun the earth. The eyes of the people continually
observe upon whom the Prince looks favorably: upon whom he, they, like eyes
unable to behold the Sun, yet loving light, bend themselves to behold the
Suns reflection; meets this with an ambitious humor, it swells him, and
at last bursts him: but meeting with a discreet modesty, he knows from
whence it comes, and returns it thither again. The love of the people
deserved, and in their hearts rather the^ caps showing it, is a happy thing:
but when he thus favored, cannot show himself any cause of their love, but
his showing them greatness, it is dangerous. Princes hate competitors, and
popularitie in subjects seems to bandy with the Prince in power, of which if
Princes be suspicious, and carefully remove the cause of their suspicion, they
are not to be blamed: for as Caesar said of the putting away his wife, he did
it, because he would not have Caesar's wife so much as suspected; well may they
divorce from them such servants, for the suspicion is more dangerous. The
upright Statesman, observing how subject the people are, to take ouer-kindly,
upon the actions performed for their good, by great men; truly loving his
Country, and respecting his own health, to all these performances, he should
entitle his Prince, and by all means draw the people to acknowledge, from him
only comes all their good and preservation: thus shall the love between the
Prince and the people grow firm, from which issues the flourishing of a
State; of which he has not only part, but withal receives the
commendations due to a special limme of so fair a body.

No less must these beware of letting their preferments outrun their deserts;
Princes will grow weary of giving, to them that are still begging, and
whatsoever their bounties be, yet I think as Physicians of blood-letting,
which they say takes with that, that is superfluous, some of the vital parts;
so with their gifts, goes some of their love, and the more that is taken, the
more of their love is abated: with this, degrees of honor must be moderated;
whatsoever you may have, must not be reckoned, but what is fit: if sprung
from a progeny lately base and obscure, high humors must by all means be
shunned, howsoever borne; the safe rising, is leasurely and by degrees, so as a
high fortune may not seem strange, and be wondered at by the world.

When you make any suits, to consider, whether it may not be offensive to
many, for in such suits there is great loss and danger; a moderation in pomp,
courtesy, rather for courtesies sake them your own, and still ending all
actions with your face turned to your Prince, doing good to the common wealth,
but desiring reputation from nobody but your Sovereign: howsoever common men
that know nothing before effected, are governed by the event of things, yet
must a judicial Statesman not build his counsels upon these conditions: that
dangerous resolutions prospered once, do not serve the second time; from
probability must he produce his advice, and sitting upon his foundation,
howsoever it falls our, he is free of a deserved imputation: for man cannot
divine what end follows beginning, the nearest is a likelihood, which may
fail without his fault; for to propound, not to conclude, is the destiny of
man. To beware of counselling any thing tending to innovation, if the profit
ouer-valueth not the danger, the thoughts of the vulgar, that goes no further
commonly then what they feel and see, the narrownes of whose discourse, brings
them not acquainted with any thing that they are not daily conversant with,
utterly mislike changes of importance, they that do not, it makes them delight
in them too much, and so is altogether unsafe to most of their dispositions.

Nor in the particular customs of men of these places, does it become gravity
to love change, especially the fashions of other countries are most dangerous,
by which some will conjecture either gain, or lightness, or to those
forreiners an extraordinary affection.

All affection must be abandoned, not looking upon any thing with so true a
desire of well wishing, as upon our country and Prince.

Thus shortly in general, of particulars to mention all, would be too tedious;
to mention some without the whole, would be the pourtraiture of a dismembered
and torn body; and to speak truly, to mention all, is impossible: for
occasion begets them of infinite forms, which when they happen, are to be
considerately carried, without all affection, and with all our judgments.

-- Nec leaves metuit Deus. How lightly are the imaginations of man drawn to
betray his Master? more lightly, then feathers and dust fly by the wind: they
fly and change their place, when the air grows rough and tempestuous.

But caulmes as well as tempests, carry men up and down in uncertainties.

Caulmes, resembling prosperity, puff him up with pride, and make him think
better of his own state, then of all others; loosing all respect of God and
man.

The more tempestuous estate of adversity, begettes despair, so do our
frail thoughts fit every state with corrupt imaginations: from no fortune
is the tranquillity of the mind produced; the mind manageth, obeys not the
states of the world: wherefore that common opinion that accompanies fond
desires of determining, if the imagined good were obtained, we should be happy
and at peace, is so far from truth, as with nothing so much satisfaction, we
behold things in our power, as they far off, which we cannot reach with
our hand, but thought.

Religion, the lymiter of man's progressions, the anchour-hold of our souls,
and preservation of our bodies, by the immeasureable fawnings of fortune, is
often to embrace her gifts let go, but how foolish is this choice, since
without Religion, even those esteemed gifts are not to be inioyed? for wrongs
and oppression would soon confound meum and tuum: For no Laws of man, not
esteemed depending upon the Law of GOD, can be kept unviolable: it is not
true that the rays of this light are only reflected upon our souls: no sure,
God made both body and soul, and has a care of both: for such are all the
commandments given to man, as the best Politician for the upholding
Commonwealths, can not imagine rules more profitable and safe. There is no
fortune that can stand without religion, and without a veneration and fear of
the divine powers; the societies of men will perish, yea, even every man: for
were his thoughts able to fly no further then this life, the stop would
confound his understanding, which now though but in hope, yet that hope brought
to an assured confidence, is the best contentment: for what mortal thoughts
may equal the thoughts of Eternity?

Animumque rebus credulum laetis dedit,
Me videat, and te Troia. --
What persuasion can convert infectious minds possessed of things apt to feed
the affection? Nothing can withstand their obstinacies; for the corrupt humor
reigns, and reason is despised: the neglect of who^, and the belief of the
other is credulity, a light trust, unacquainted with judgment. Thus the trust
given to the world and fortune, whose transitorines, though all the counselors
and rulers of our mortal understandings testify, and explain, yet can we
find contentment and pleasure in their possession, though Divinity says,
both we and they are but dust, it helps not; Philosophy shows his
original and downfall so certainly, as if never none had died, we could not
hope to live ever, yet prevails it not: though History presents the ruin of
Empires, Cities, and men of the highest erected States have died, and some of
them most miserably, it auayles not: Lastly, though our own experience sees
death and destruction ruinating all things, and al men, yet will we not believe
but there is pleasure and contentment in the gifts of fortune, credulously
giving credit to the base persuasion of our affections.

Animumque rebus credulum laetis dedit. Mirth, pleasure and joy, differ much in
nature; from ye credulity ye these things are precious and of worth, mirth may
be fetched, from their use pleasure; so may mirth and pleasure serve honest
masters, for they are ruled by their governors; but joy will not be abused,
nor ever attend any thing not truly and indeed precious: then can not the
lightness of these beget joy, who, as one says, is a grave thing, but mirth
and pleasure they may: but they are pricelesse things, accompanied with as much
mutabilitie and transitorinesse as their procurer.

Me videat, and te Troia. -- Behold two mothers, rich in these possessions, in
the small space of ten years made the most miserable: behold Hecuba, a
princess, in her youth made happy, with having magnificence and principality,
accompanied with her youth: in her age possessed of mortal immortality, of
all the graces that reign in man, in a small space, in less then a moment
respecting Eternity, thrown from this esteemed height, and made neither
princess nor mother; thus Troy, the famousest city of the world most
abounding, defaced and ruinated and left desolate of all but blood and ashes:
this the ungoverned flattery of greatness procured: here is powers common
generation, begetting sensualities and unbridled appetite, from whose
transitorinesse and cause of disolution, be it a fiction, yet may we gather
here.

-- Non vnquam tulit
Documenta fors maiora, quam fragili loco
Starent superbi. --
Since the mutabilitie of the world is such, and that ye world could not be a
world, nor stand, were she not supplied by the transitorinesse of things,
resolving one thing into another: how can our opinions be so forcible, as to
hold any of this rank dear or precious? nay, how so monstrous, as to
persuade us to pride; a vice full of the most dangerous effects? for to
greatness it procures hatred; to mean estates derision; to none safety: a
lazy affection, that takes no pleasure, but within doors: a pricelesse
affection, for it is current with none but our selves: an effeminate affection,
for it is still looking in the glass of self-love: in a word; an affection,
making us unsociable, and our conuersations loathsome.

Standing in this uncertain state, who would not govern and prepare himself
fit for another? This cannot pride; for his loftei behavior and stiff
rebellious thoughts cannot nimbly shift the fall of fortune: it is therefore a
vice of all others to be shunned. For besides it is a sin, and so contrary to
goodness; and being contrary, must needs be offensive, in this world it is
also dangerous, seldom going without punishment and destruction.

Inertis est nescire quid liceat sibi. NO knowledge is unfruitful, so
liberally has nature dealt with all things: but ye life of man being appointed
but a short course, and the course of a general knowledge being too long, the
knowledges most pertinent to himself, are to be chosen, which hardly shall he
end before his course be ended: so much is there to be read in himself, and
about himself. Far otherwise has it happened with some minds, who thirsty
enough of knowledge, have fixed their indirected steps upon arts
unprofitable, considering the shortness of our lives, whose swiftness gives us
warning to entertain the most profitable and soonest digested knowledges, both
which are things belonging to life: otherwise we may fall into their errors,
that die good Astronomers, and evil men. Three are the knowledges destinated
to our use; the knowledge of our selves, the knowledge of our fortune, the
knowledge of our country, when by the smart of experience, for by counsel or
good inclination few atteine to it, neither is it so much worth, for that of
counsel has too light an impression, good inclinations naturally are given
none, but to such as are of a dull heavy disposition: but when experience has
made us feel, how subject our courses are to errors, the best means is
impartially to make our heads take account of our days progressions: this
every day, so shall not the number of our vices confound our memories, and make
the account difficult, nor shall this age make them strong and hard to
vanquish, the beginning of things being within the compass of curing, their
continuance incurable. At no time is this Audit to be better cast up, then
when the days circuit is finished: for in the suns presence, the conscience
deals not so forcibly with our offenses, but night works upon guiltines,
and in darkness the terror of an evil life is best seen; then also is the
pleasure of the sin commonly most remote, a time yielding the right
opportunity for amendment; for in the absence of the pleasure, and presence
of the smart incident to that pleasure, is the true time of conversion.

In this search and examination of our selves, we must beware of mistaking
things: a thing carefully to be regarded, since loving our selves, and rich in
the commodities of names, we seek not to shelter cruelty in justice,
covetousness in thrift, cowardice in providence: this flattery of our selves is
like the medicynes of wandering Emperickes, which cure not, but respit pain,
which time expired, the pain and danger is doubled, neither must we let the
success blindfold us; it is an ignorant account that is taken at the end
ofthings: with the beginnings let them begin, that are so valiant as to defye
fortune, for meaning well, the event can not be evil: he that arms his
intent with virtue, is invincible: the travels guided by any other star, how
succesful soever for a time, yet end miserably. Having found our defects, the
gallantest course is resistance; the safest, shunning, but because we are not
privy to all the occurrents of the world, we must fetch this safety from
resistance, and yet when we can, to shun causes of provocation.

In the search of our selves, when we have found some, we must not leave, for
we have many: nor when we have found many: look no further; for years and
the change of fortune, bring with them new dangers, which is daily seen: many
lice^tious youths, ending with ambitious ages; many humble poor men having
proved tyrannical and proud in riches.

The last of our inward inquisition, is, after the true sight of our selves, to
propound no course beyond the power of our managing: if nature has laid
greater strength upon my arms, then head, I will confess it, and frame my
self to be profitable that way: if in my head, that way; if I can not spinne,
I will reele and bunch hemp: thus is the fault, if there be a fault, natures
and not mine, if ambition caryeth me beyond the compass of understanding.

For our states, if there were no body wiser then I, the Law of a
Commonwealth that bound every man to follow the fortune of his father, should
be well thought of, so should the Commonwealth know to whom to trust, and her
constitution be more settled, then the giving every man his choice, by which
riches make some lazy; poverty some industrious; wealth gives estimation;
estimation is sought to for their Counsel, and their wisdoms lie only in
their Inuentoryes. All this time virtue is not thought of, nor their aduices
are of moment: for they are drowned in parsimony.

I like well of thrift, and that we should know the secrets of our fortune,
how much we are able to spend, and how we ought to spend, in which I
allow not the living at the uttermost: it is a dangerous custom, that because
a Gentleman or Noble, and of this living, we must go brave and entertain
all, and save nothing. I do hate being at the appointment of others,
especially to be bound to follow evil counsel: there is liberality and
charity to perform, which every man is bound to, and to perform which, other
superfluous costs must be omitted: it is better to keep poverty from
staruing, the^ to feast knaves: which if it be misliked for the virtue, shall
fit some for the thrift: forty shillings goes further amongst the poor, then
doubled spent in feasting the rich.

More of this I will not treat of, but only to restrain our minds from
looking licorishly upon any other estate, then that our Ancestors lived in: for
besides that the shortness of our life gives us not leisure, having business
of more importance to dispatch first, it being better to be an honest man
then a great man, it is too dearly bought: for as fast as they pursue
promotion, danger, envy, and death pursue them, and not one amongst numbers
but is overtaken.

I do not so often pray for rain and fair weather, as I do that my country
men should deserve it: for we are fallen into the jaws of the Proverb, Better
fed, then taught: an error that will fall foul upon the higher degrees: for
speaking generally of the multitude; they are a people tractable, and ready
enough to be better then they are, if taught, which they can not receive by
their education, because their poverty empoyl^s the^ about other business:
they that may, should give the^ the short and sure precepts of good example,
and so the ones education shall show it self answerable to his birth, the other
be recompensed for their obedience, by being instructed in the rules of life.

Many times I have thought of these degrees of state; of them we call noble and
ignoble: and though my opinion iumpe with the allowance of degrees and titles,
yet am I sorry that the rewards of the promoted should be an inheritance, and
the deserts separated: but in such a state is this earth, that the favor of
time and continuance is abused, and the smiles of fortune nourishes the worst
counsel.

The knowledge of our Country, a book worthy to be read with attention,
consists in these diversities; her Commodities, her Situation, her people:
though I doubt not but nature provided every Country of sufficient provision
for her own burden, yet has the delicacie of man striuen with nature, that
he might want: so are our minds like empty caskes; as they full of wind, so
we full of windy wishes: and all like women with child, like nothing, but what
is hard to come by. Of the commodities, the best is bullion and munition, the
worst clothes and victual: so may I say for our kingdom, the worst
commodities that enter it being the food of wantonness, not of necessity,
and clothes: the other borrowed superfluity, we have little need of, our own
country yielding attire both cool and warm: for these, we part with
merchandise of no less importance, and some of more; but this is now to be
talked of only: for time has made it unalterable, only the excess is to be
prevented, and those things able to be dangerous, carefully to be preserved,
lest we make our Country so unhappy, as to bear children that will ruin
her. The Situation known, recompenseth the knowledge, with being able to
provide against all inconveniences: as to fit our diets to the Climate, our
forces to the strength, our spendings and commings in: Thus shortly and
generally for the particularitie, it must come from the nominating the place.
The knowledge of the peoples natures, is of much importance, both in the using
them upon occasion, and applying laws to them: both which cannot be rightly
executed, without first their natures be known and measured. Thus important is
the knowledge of our selves, and those things belonging to our selves, which
who neglects, deserves the Tragedians title, being a creature altogether
unprofitable and unworthy.

Magis haec timet, quam moeret, ingenio est opus:
Alios parents alloqui luctu decet.
So are we governed by our affections, as our intents speak in face: so
ungoverned are our affections, as what they would shun, they run into; they see
but themselves, and beholding nor knowing nothing else, do like themselves,
easily discovering what they wish most secret. It is the discourse of the mind
only, that is able to see and shun danger at once, the others see it not
with discretion, but fear, whose nature wishes a dispatch without regard,
whether it be with a cut throat or safety; fears furthest with being but to
be out of his pain. Since these affections are so fixed to men, as there is
no man without them; since the suppressing of them is so rare, as hardly it
belongs to any man, there is no action almost, that can escape a wise
observation; for he is led to them, by them that seek most to keep them in
covert: like unto the care that other creatures have of their young ones, which
care carries their pursuer to their nest or cave. For be it an attempt,
wherein the attempter believes great matters of profit will follow; hope
outrunnes it self, ouerweigheth him, and being unaccustomed to carry so high
sails, shows he has determined some strange things: thus fear, thus love,
thus hatred, thus all make the faces of men, in spite of their hearts, go to
confession.

Magis haec timet, quam moeret. -- There is no humane action, that is delivered
to the world, without many circumstances: there is no circumstance, but is a
step, mounting the understanding to the truth. Wherefore, the true
Inquisitour ought not to think any thing impertinent, that is any way
pertinent: for how he spoke, how he looked, how he companied, and even lighter
then these may carry a reach, able to weigh these things into the most secret
part of the secret: for these are threeds, leading into the labyrynth, which
who omitteth, and catches at the body of an action, without joining and laying
together the other circumstances, shall as often miss as hit, and oftener err,
then come to his wished purpose.

Ingenio est opus. There needs no more affection, then will give us taste of
our purposes; affections use, is like the use of a wherstone for a knife, only
to give it an edge, and then lay it by, for use it continually or often times, it
makes the metal thin and weak; and thus affection does to men: what can we
do, whereof done, we are not ashamed? except managed by wisdom, even from
the most triuiall to the most serious perfourmances. Ingenio est opus. Which
excellent guide of our actions, who desires to obtain, must not suffer the
allurements of his affections to lay hold on him, for then they shall
accompany this unhappy weak woman:

Magis haec timet, quam moeret. -- Affectionate passion is both deformed and
unsafe.

Alios parents alloqui luctu decet. No where has affection that power, nor
any where do they display themselves so openly, as the affection of parents to
their children; they were begotten by affection, and by affection they are
maintained: for let them be how they will, though deformed both in mind and
body, yet will they find a loveliness in their out-blemishes, and tolerate
their inward; which if nature has not appointed to keep the increase of the
world from miscarrying, certainly it is a fault: for sincere truth allows
nothing that cannot produce the graces of the mind for evidence. It becomes
parents mourning, to speak in no other fashion: it becomes parents that will
be parents and wise, not to mourn at all; for there is no more allowed to
parents or children, in the exact rules of wisdom, then there is to causes
farther off but speaking of the exact commandments of wisdom, causes stand
all in a distance, there is none nearer or more remote: so should every one,
that will do well, lament his neighbors child as much as his own; but
neither should we for theirs nor ours: for that is a weakness, and the
defective part of our natures, we must seek to recover the^, which we say are
in calamity: but the pity of tears is too waterish to do good; bewailing
being an unnecessary slothful affection.

-- Gladius and spes and metus,
Sors caeca versat: praemium incertum petit
Certum scelus. --
HOw can it otherwise be, when reason yeeldes the prioritie to strength, an
unreasonable and blind judge, but that chance should have a hand in the event?
and where chance has any thing to do, who sees not, that the uncertainty of
the conclusion must needs beget hope and fear? for such thoughts always
follow attempts, where the judgments of men are barred of a certain censure.

War is the remedy for a State surfetted with peace, it is a medicine for
Commonwealths sick of too much ease and tranquillity, but that it carries a
reforming nature, and is a part of justice; yet is it better known then used,
better to keep in awe then to punish; for it can hardly be taken up or
pacified, since it begets in Generals the two dangerous humors of revenge and
ambition; in the limbs obeying this head, dissolutenes and riot: between
which, and the heat of contention, the innocent perish as well as the guilty,
and in stead of reforming nations, they depopulate the^; yet these
inconveniences make me not wholly deny wars profitable: for they were most
profitable, if the distressed had but the opinion, that the recourse to wars
would avail them: for without this, licentiousness and tyranny would devour
all, and without this, desperation would seize upon all in calamity: for
despair possesses none that can have recourse to any remedy, but only those
that are without all refuge. But wars best use, is the same that Nurses make
of Robin Goodfellow, to terrify, and the example much more safe and wholesome
that is taken from the sight of our neighbors, then from our own experience.

-- Praemium incertum petit
Certum scelus. --
Did not this take away admiration with being ordinary, it were a wonder, an
uncertain gain purchased with a certain evil: there is nothing shows me
the vitiousnesse of man, so plainly as this, undertaking courses so
desperately and vainly, as if his intent were nothing else, but to increase his
sins. I see offenders daily, and they see the shame and bitterness of
punishment, yet can not this persuade them; so that I cannot say, looking into
their intentions, without all respect but of their gain and loss, that ever I
saw any, whose profit could recompense their loss.

Omitting petty matters, in that execrable wickedness of conspiring against
Princes, I wonder not that such intendements find Heads; for the profit of the
gain may corrupt men: but how the other limbs are drawn in, I marvel, for
they adventure as much as the principal, and let his design come to pass,
are uncertain of their reward, yea, of their life: for such benefits that are
not easily to be recompensed, are as dangerous as injuries. It is a wonder
then, and either these men flatter themselves with vain hopes, strengthening
which with their will, they resist the more reasonable discourse, or else heat
with the allurement of some affection, run into them without al examination;
both of which are so dangerous, as the day of undertaking such attempts, they
may, without being deceived in their computation, reckon the day of their
ruin: for it is hard to judge of which side he is in most danger, but of one
undoubtedly he shall perish.

In this and in all other the gain is uncertain, the evil certain, which
(me thinks) should alone persuade us, and make all wickedness despised: were
the condition, For the loss of the one, here is the other, we were nearer
temptation: but the eternal goodness has removed it further off, I doubt not,
to no other end, but to withdraw all occasions meet to nourish the corrupt
humors of our natures, by which if we will not yet take warning, but hunt out
vice hidden from us, we are unworthy of pity, yea, of the common pity, that
follows the already overthrown.

Far, quam sortem patiuntur omnes, nemo recusat. -- We have nothing formed
in the true moulde, we carry sometimes actions bearing a handsome gloss, but
they are no nearer truth, then a picture the life: what we should fetch from
the understanding the mutabilitie of things, we draw from the marrow-fretting
sore of envy; so what might be a virtue by the suffering, is a vice: for not
suffering for the true cause, and the strength enduring adversity, is not
patience, since patience is founded in the true discourse of the mind, this
fetched from the sight of others miseries. Every particular body feels his
own affliction: the affliction of others is no medicine curing his; yet from
the adverse fortune of others can we draw comfort: what helps it us to be
richly endowed with reason, since we use nothing but fancy? for this is
fancy, and this is so in most things, being carried up and down with her
lightness, without all rest and permanencie.

Far, quam sortem patiuntur omnes, nemo recusat. -- What all suffers, no
body refuses to suffer: no more should we what we allow; there is this only
good to be had in adversity; the observation how it befell: if by our own
negligence, it begettes experience; if past our knowledge, so much resistance
as leads to patience, is allowed; but repining and sorrow, unprofitable
vexations, rather stirring the divine powers to a more sharp punishment, then
mitigating the calamity. There is nothing in this world erected so high as
man; so nothing more subject to fall: there is nothing so ill as man; therefore
more due to him, then to any: nothing so sensible; therefore nothing more apt
to feel affliction: and as for Chance and Fortune, they are words founded upon
two reasons, sometimes in excuse, when we lay our deserved afflictions upon
fortune: sometimes when the divine executions are above man's, which though we
call chance, yet doubtless is founded upon grounds of more excellent reason,
then we can apprehend: so is chance the issue of folly or ignorance.

FINIS.

