MNEMOSYNVM OR MEMORIAL TO THE AFFLICTED Catholics in Irelande.

COMPREHENDED IN 2. boockes. in the one there is a consolation for the
sorrowful, in the other ae resolution for the doubtful. composed by JOHN
COPINGER priest, bacheler of divinity, with an epistle of S. Cyprian written
unto the Thibaritans, faythfullie translated by the said author.

Printed by Arnald du Brel^ of Tholosa, 1606.

ERRATA.
FOR. READ. PAGE funne sun 18 does, do 20 iues jews 21 intends intend 29
has have 32 takes take 32 pearels pearls 32 eyes eyes 33 optained obtained 34
mad made 35 contraire contrary 35 dolofull doleful 36 ecceleipse eclypse 36
mad made 39 ich itche 40 vr or 40 coufound confound 40 peruerth peruerte 40
there their 41 b^ by 43 te the 44 vocs vvoes 44 filde feilde 45 much much 46
works wrought 46 suffer suffered 47 tribulation tribulations 48 neales
nails 48 nealed nailed. 48 saiih says 48 gotton gotten 68 Ivvel ievvel 69
stoot stout 69 be he 77 forcc force 79 reuatis renatis 156 paltem partem 156
sacerdoti sacerdotem 242

FIN.
TO THE VIRTUOUS, and religious priests, as also the godly constant, and
Catholic laity of Ireland I. C. wishes the grace of perseverance in Chriest
his catho: church.
I Being (loving brethren and cuntrime^) to perform a certain pilgrimage, did
hear there was a persecution intended in our cuntrie against our catholic
religion, as also a proclamation published against the priests and professors
thereof. I thought good to aefer my purposed tourney to those holy relikes, and
to recollecte my self insome place, that I may asvvell declare my duty to the
catholic church, in these her troubles and persecutions, as also signify unto
you my unfeigned affection, and christian charity in these your adversities.
and seeing it is a divine precept to love our negboures, and being affirmative,
it binds us to put it in execution in their destresses and in time of
necessity. I thought good to comfort you in your sorrovves, and to counsel
you in your doubts which be works of mercy, and also to bevvayle your
miseries so the apostle did, 2. Cor. 11.
when he said quis infirmatur and ego non infirmor who is sick or indisposed,
and I feel it not? So also did Job when he said flebam super eum qui
afflictus erat and compatiebatur anima mea pauperi the: Job 30.
affliction of my negbour did cause me to weep, and his poouertie moved me to
compassion. I send therefore unto you this Mnemosynum or memorial asvvell for
your consolation in your troubles, as also for your resolution in your doubts,
I made it first in Latin and thought only to dedicat it unto the priests and
religious of our nation, but being ready to go to the press, I was
persuaded by certain grave religious persons to translate it unto English,
being a language more vulgar and common unto you, hoping it may work some
good effect in such as could not understand it in the latin. and although my
only purpose is to spare no pains where I may do the greatest good and dum
tempus habemus bonum operari to bestovv the residue of my frail life, and
uncertain days where J may do god and his church the best service, yet I
found great difficulty to have it printed in English for too causes, the one,
was, what I had to disraise my charges; I should bestovv it in the printing
being a language altogether unknown unto the printer, and therefore more
charges and longer time should be required, the other that I should be wray my
own insufficiency therein, which unto me is not so natural asvvell for my
birth, as for my bringing up, but I hope a fault in the language is not an
offense before god, which respects more the inward intention of my heart,
then the outvvard characters by which J declare the same. J desire you let not
the impropriet^e of the English thereof, nor the faults, that did escape the
printer which was altogether ignorant of the same, give occasion of loath
so^nesse of the matter, which I hu^blie crave at your hands to receive with
that devotion and intrals of charity, by v^hich I offer it: and for my labor
and charges bestovved therein, I beseech you as many as shall peruse it, to say
one Aue Maria, that you and I may die in the arcke with Noe, that we may be
saved in the mountain with Lot, that we may live and continue in the
catholic church and persevere in go^s favor until the last moment of our
lives, which I beseech svveet Jesus to grant unto you and me Amen; so fare well

from the port of S. Marie the last of April 1606. Your humble servant JOHN
COP.

AFFLICTIONS, AND troubles, are nothing else: then messengers: or purseua^ts,
to call, and summon us to god when we forsake him.
CAP. I.
IN all common miseries, and general afflictions (loving bretheren^ and
cuntrymen) we are bound by the law of god, and nature to bevvayle our
sins, for which, we suffer those miseries to amend, and reform our lives,
and to return, and convert our selves unto god, whose haroldes, and
messengers troubles, 2. Para. 1.20
and calamities be.

So the good King Iosaphat, being oppressed with sundry troubles, and
adversities did return unto god (saying) in our miseries, and calamites, this
is the only remedy we have: that we should lift up our eyes unto thee (o
god).

In the commune afflictions of the people of Israel, Joel. 2
the priests were commanded to prostrate them selves, inter vestibulum, and
altar: betwixt the entry of the temple, and the altar: at the feet of god,
and to cry out: lord save, and spare thy people, give not, thy inheritance,
unto the cruel nations, to be of them trodden under foot, and despised.

The people also were commanded in fasting, mourning, lamenting, and prayeng,
to rende there hearts, Number. 16.20. Exo. 31.
and not there garments. Thus Moses, and Aaron appeased gods wrath against
that people: so did David in the mortality of his people, fly unto god, with
contrition for his sins, 2. ^ Rege 24. 2. and vlt. Iona. 3 5
and purpose of ame^dement: and the plague did cease: the Ninevites did the
like: so did Ezechias being sentensed to die, Isa 3^.
turned his face against the wall and wept: his sentence was recalled: Isa.
35.
and Ezechias was repriued: by giving him 15. years to reform his life. Amb
sup. Hom. i^ E^ang.
vvher upon S. Ambrose says. si noueris mutare delicta tua Deus nouerit mutare
sententiam suam: if thou Know to change thy wicked life: god will also
change and alter his sentence past against thee. Let us follovv the prophet
saying derelinquat impius viam suam and vir iniquus cogitationes suas, Isa 55.
etc. Isa. 55. let the wicked forsake his vvayes, and the ungodly his wicked
thoughts, and let him turn unto god because, he is more inclined to pardon
us, according to his mercy: the^to punish according to his justice. In all
these general, and doleful calamities, of our poor cuntrie: so great as
never any nation, was subject unto: through war, famine, plague, out of
which none of that poor nation, escaped without his portion, wherein
millio^s did perish, and such as are living, or did escape the svvorde: or the
miserable death of their neighbors, are oppressed: or rather overwhelmed:
with such miseries: and such displeasant accide^tes: as it were better for
them to end there miseries by death, then to live in continual torments.

I will take no knowledge, or notice of such as are the procurers of your
troubles. I would where the fault is committed, it had rather been reformed
by the^ then reproved by any other.

But surely the cause of such miseries, and afflictions, ought rather to be
ascribed unto our own grievous offenses, which deserved greater plagues, and
punishments: (if possiblye greater could be inflicted), then unto any other;
for the authors are but god almighties instruments: to beat us with his
vvhipp either for the manifold sins, that we have committed: that by the
same we may amend our lives: and be reduced unto the filiale subjection, of
our eternal father: or else: for the trial of our patience and curbinge us,
from fallinge into greater inconvenience like as the cunninge physician: to
prevent sickness to come, lets the patie^t blood in the spring time, taking
from him, superfluity of blood, which would engender diseases in the summer,
not that the patient is sick, but least he should be sick.

If our miseries be the debt, that are due, unto the manifold trespasses, that
we have perpetrated: or the pain that should follovv the outrageous sins,
that we have committed, we ought to bear them patiently, to embrase them
willingly, and to suffer the^ quietly. lib. i^dith. c. ^.


It is written in the book of Judith, that the captain of the children of
Amon, called Achior, speaking unto Holophernes of the Jews, is said to have
spoken after this sort: their god hates iniquity, and wickedness, and so
our god hates in us catholics vngolidnesse: more then in Jews, pagans and
heretics. and therefore no marueyle: being rebellious children unto god: we
should be punished like rebels and traiturs. it is not expedient. if we
offend god (as we have done) that we should hope for a reward, when we
have deserved pain. If Achior the pagan spoke these words, of the Jews*
much more, a christian ought to speak them of christians. if these afflictions
be sent unto us, for our trial, and exercise of virtue, we ought not to
grudge at them: but rather to entertain them most gladly: and to say with the
prophet proba me Deus: and scito cor meum: Psalm. 136^
and cognosce semitas meas: and vide si via iniquitatis in me est, and deduc me
in via eterna psalm. 136. prove me o god: search my heart: and discern my
steps: and see by the straihgt way whether I walk in the way of iniquite:
and lead me by the way of everlasting life.

Whereas now our troubles rather increase, then decrease, by the last
proclamation, which was published in all places of Irelande: the last
October. I can give you no other remedy: or comfort, then, Ce^. 12. H^
per patientiam currere ad propositum nobis certamen, aspicientes auctorem
fidei consummatorem Iesum: ^ebr. 14.
qui propofito sibi gaudio, confusione contempta crucem subijt, eum recogitate,
qui talem sustinuit aduersus semetlpsum contradictionem: to run, and go
forvvard unto the battle prepared for us, and with patience abide the brunt
thereof. let us says the apostle behold the author of our faith, whose
only joy, was to bear, and entertain his cross, and not respecting the
confusion, unto which he was brought, never left of until he said consummatum
est, it is acomplished. remember (says he) that did suffer such reproaches at
the hands of sinners.

Unto you he drancke the bitter cup of his passion, which Chriest vvoulde have
to pass unto his church: and the members thereof.

For Christ being in the garden of Gethsemani, in the dark alone, flat upon
his face, svveating and praieng, and having apprehended, the sore agony of his
bitter, and paynfull passion to come, did not desire of his father eternal,
that the elect of his church should be cherised, with possessions, or vvorldly
pampered: but of that cup he would give them a draught to drink.

This holy cup of Chriest: is no other thing, but temptation, hunger, cold,
thirst, persecutions, exile, poverty, and martyrdom of which things god
gives to drinck, and to taste, to such, as he has chosen, to serve him, and
has predestined, to be saved.

A stomach that is full of bad and corrupt humors: and a body, that
languisheth through disseases, must take a sour purgation: vvherby, the one
should be cleansed of the humors: and the other healed of the sickness.
Shall not a miserable soul, infected, with the poison of sin, and corrupted
with sundry vices, take this wholesome potion, and purgatio^ of Chriest his
cup? vvherby, it should be cleansed, of the disease: and lighted of the heavy
burden, of malignant humors. Shall not a putrified wound, be healed, by a
hot iro^? shall not we therefore, that are catholics, and christians only
in name, but contrary unto Christ in our vvourkes: and persecutors of Christ,
and his church: in our purposes so inco^sta^t, so malicious in our vvilles, so
hypocritical: only bearing a shevve of fained holiness before man, but before
god, who is the searcher of our hearts, are found stubble, and dry sprigges
fit for hell fire, shall not we (I say,) be purified by the fire of
tribulation? and be chastised by the rodd of affliction? to the end, we might
be made perfect members, of Chriest his church: tried and well trained
soldiers in the ca^pe of Jesus.

But I fear very much, that the grieuouse, and lamentable complaint of
Ezechiel, is meant of us by fill hominis, T^^e e. 29
etc. I have put the house of Israel (says he) into a for nace of the
captivity of Babylon hoping, that being with in the fire of tribulation, she
would resolve to pure gold, and fine silver: but she is converted into
leather, lead, brass, and Iron.

This is the meaning of the holy ghoast in this text, that man is converted
into lead, who being put into the furnace of tribulation, cannot only not be
amended, but from one day to another grovve worse, and worse: that man
becomes iron, to whom god having sent some punishment, to advertise him, in
place to be amended, he cease not to repine at it. He is turned into leather,
who out vvardly seems to be of holy life, and when any tribulation
happens, he is found an hypocrite, and that man is resolved into brass, who
in his disposition, is intractable, in his condition inflexible, in his life
careless, and in his conscience negligent: so as I fear much that there are
far greater number of such as by tribulatio^s, are converted into iron,
leather, brass: and lead, the^ of them which become gold or silver. god
deliver you in all your troubles from the like transmutation, and give you the
grace to make better profit of your tribulations.

Assuring our selves that they be the only vvayes unto the King dome of heaven,
For by them the blessed saints did enter into glory: and having passed over
the tempestuous waves of this miserable world, now they cry out and say
transiuimus per ignem, and aequam: vsal 65.
and eauxisti nos in refrigetium: we passed through fire and water: and at
length thou have brought us unto our expected end and desired rest.

Unto these Chriest did drink his cup: which is the sign of those that
shall be saved. he said unto the sons of zebedei: potestis b^bere calicem?
M^^. 3.^^.
etc. can ye drin^e of the cup, of which I must drink? 3. Math. 20. of this
cup David sard: calicem salutaris accipiam Ps. 115. I will. Ps. 115.
accept and receue at the hands of my savior the hoalsom cup of affliction:
and then will I call upon his name.

For we cannor escape hell, butt at the cost of great travail. The svvoard of
saint Peter: the cross of saint Andrew: the knief of saint Bartholome:
the gratyron of saint Laurence: and the sheares of saint Steven: the svvoard
of grief of the blessed virgin: the general calamities of all the sanctes:
what other things are they, but certain badges they have received of
Chriest: and certame gulpes they have svvallo wed of this cup: and certain
lances vvher with they were let blood. least the superfluity thereof in the
heat of the funne should corrupt the soul.

So many degrees, we shall receive in heaven, of glory: as we have dru^cke of
the cup of Chriest in this life. Psalm. 92.
the prophet says secundum multitudinem dolorum meorum: in cord meo
consolationes tuae laetificauerunt animam meam: according to the measure, and
quantity of the sorrows, and afflictions of our pensive contrite heart, in
this world: our soul shall be comforted, and made joyful in the celestial
paradise. and therefore we ought to pray unto god, euerieday, with tears,
that, if we cannot drink all his eupe, at the least: that he would suffer
us to taste thereof. the cupp of Chriest: although it be bitter in drinckinge:
after the drinckinge thereof, it does great profitt. I would say the troubles
which we suffer, to be good, they give not so much pain, vvhenvve endure
them: as they after wards, give pleasure, having passed them, let David
fancy the cold water of Bethelem, let the glutton in helcry out unto Abraham
for the least drope of any licour, or any moisture, let the couetuous gape
after riches or the drounckard thirst aftervvine: but for the consolation and
salvation of a chriestan: there is nothing so necessary for him then that he
should drink of this cup.

There is another cup, which is called the cup of the wrath of god: vvherof,
to speak the intrales: does open, the members does quacke, the heart does
fail, the fleash does tremble: the guilty conscience does torment, the eyes
does weep, and our imagination does vex us with the apprehension thereof.
with this cupe god does threaten us. This is that, which the prophet speaks
of: I^. ^^.
vae tibi Hierusalim quia bibisti calicem irae Dei vsque ad faeces, vvo be unto
thee Hierusalim, be cause thoue have sucked, the cup of our lords wrath even
vvto the dregs, he drincketh, the cup of wrath, that falls from the state
of grace, vvherin hestood. whereof it follovveth, that the soul is much more
dead, without grace: then a body without a soul. of this cup the unfortunate
Synagoge did make her self druncke: and the druncknesse of this, was the
cause, that Isracl was banished: from Judea: and translated unto Babylon: and
also that of gods inheritance: and his vineyarde those Iues we are deprived:
which was given unto the gentiles: and this was the cause, that the
catholic religion: and gods tabernacle, was taxen from many christian
countries: and did pass over unto the east, and vveast indies. and now such
as wear good christians in time past, are become infidels and subject unto
Turckes, pagans, mahometistes, and heretics: and in steed of the catholic
religion they do embrace the rites of paganism Mahometisme, Iudaysme: and
Caluinisme. and truly, it is gods just punishment: saying, they did not obey
the true pastore, that they should be confounded by false prophets: and for
that they have forsaken the catholic religion of Chriest they should be
peruersly mislead and intoxicated with many false religions. Math 24.5. Ioh.
5.43. 1. Timoth. 4.3. 2. Tim. 31.2. (...). 5.
this was prophesied of this people in the scripture. thiese be they that did
drink the grounds and dregs thereof, until nothing was left: thiese
wear they that made a shipvvreacke of there faith by forsakinge there ancient
religion, by denieinge all the articles of christianity: thiese be they, of
whom the prophet complayneth excusserunt iugum Domini, Hier. 8.2.
and diripuerunt vincula eius, they have cast of the yocke of our lord, they
have brocken his gives and fetters: thiese be they of whom the foresaid
prophet speacketh derelaquerunt me fontem aequae viuae, etc. they have forsaken
me being the fontaine of life, and have made unto them silues cisternes that
cannot contain any water, thiese be they, that have droun^e^ the cup of
everlasting vvoo, by whose miserable forsa^inge of the catholic faith, by
whose manifest contempt and despisinge of all sacrifices, sacraments, rites,
and religious ceremonies, thovvsandes have been miserably perverted, and
millions left in endless vvoe.

I hope this is not the cup that you drink of, but the cup of the passion of
Chriest, not the cup of the Synagoge, but the cup that our savior in the
garden did drinck of, by which he would have his church to be cherished. of
the one whosoever drincketh he does swallow hell, of theother heaven. the one
has a svveet taste indrinckinge but aftervvades, a terrible smarte, the other
sour in drinckinge, but after wards, gives health, unto him, that
drincketh thereof. nulla remedia tam faciunt dolorem quam ea quae sunt
salutaria: Cice. ad quint. frat.
there is no remedy so hoalsom as such that causes the greatest smarte.

This cup of tribulation, was so bitter, as none could drinck the same, until
Chriest, did beginn it unto us, in the apprehension of his passion, and in the
anguishe of his extreme pain.

None could drink the waters of mara until Moses did cast his rod, into it,
Exodus 15. nu^e. 33.
and being bitter before, was after wards made svveet and pleasant. the
cross of Chriest, and all other tribulations, wear infamous, and
dissonerable unto those, that bear and suffered them. but now by the death of
Chriest, the cross is renowned in the world, and tribulario^s, suffered for
his sake, are more svveet, then the honey co^be. and this blessed cross being
cast into the waters of afflictions, Io. 4.
sons aquae salientis in vtiam aeternam a fontaine of water runninge unto life
everlasting, springs out of them.

Thiese be the afflictions, that christians ought alvvayse, to desire of god,
thiese be the tribulatious, that virtuous people ought to embrace, as sent from
god, and thiese by the fatherly corrections, by which we ought to return
unto god if we have forsaken him.

The godly people that went before did assure us, and we by daily crosses
of the good and the prosperity of the ungodly ought to believe the same, that
there is no greater temptation, then not to be tempted, no greater trouble then
not to be troubled, no greatet chastisment, then not to be chastised, nor no
greater whip, then not to be scurged of god. let us therefore follow the
counsel of the apostle exhibeamus nos metipsos in multa patientia, 2. Cor. 6.
in tribulationibus, etc. Let us (says he) as the servants of god behave our
selves in much patience, abide much troubles, suffer tribulatious, distresses,
pains, anguishes, perplexities, labors and pain, let us says he yield our
selves unto the austere works of penance, of long vvatchinge, much fasting
and all other religious exercises. Let us shevve our selves in chastity and
unfeigned charity, mortified, but alvvaise living chastisinge of our selves,
but not dead thereby, because this is the time, 1. T^. 1.4.
that judgment, should begin at the house of god-as sancte Peter says. and as
the prophet speaks cum accepero tempus, etc. When I shall have leisure I
will examine, Ps. 74. Job. 9.
and judge thy righteousness of which time Job says. Verebar omnia opera mea,
etc. I did fear all my works, kuovvinge that god spateth not to punish a
sinner-against whom the sin is committed. do not therefore fear them, that
kills the body. but fear him rather, that can cast both soul, and body
unto the pit of hell. our savior says. Math. 10.
all that confesses me, before man. him will I confess before my father,
which is in heaven. Math. 5
tradent enim vos in tribulationem, etc. they vvil says he, procure your
trouble. augment your torment: math. 25.
cause you to bessaine. many false prophets shall rise and shall seduce many.
iniquity. shall abou^de. charity shall wax cold. who soever shall continue,
unto the end shall be saved. for this end we strive. even unto death against
all the princes of darcknes: and against all those that intends to debare and
hinder us thereof.

And because that god is the end of our peregrination: the center of our
mouinge, the consolation of our troubled minds: the Knowledge of our
understanding, the object of our love, the desire of our hearts: the
quietness. and rest of our languished spirit: the felicity thatvvee long
for, and the joy thatvvee hope for: who will not suffer us, to take rest or
conforte in any earthly thing but in him self, let us therefore follow him.
even as the iuie takes no rest, upon the earth, until, it gets some tree;
or wall, by which it may be lifted up: so our poor foul takes no rest in
any earthly thing: either gold: or silver until it co^ unto god. and find
him. and therefore saint Augustine had reason to say Domine fecistime propter te
and cor meum non quiescit quousque venerit ad te: thoue haste made me o lord
for thy self, and my soul, shall never be at rest, until it shall com and
arrive with thy self, in the place of your felicity. lib, 4. conf.
with reason the said authoure says* non est quies vbi illam quaeritis.
quaerite quod quaeritis, sed non est vbi quaeritis, quaritis beatam vitam in
regione mortis? non inuenietis quomodo vitam inuenietis vbi viuere poena est?
there is no rest where you seek it: you may search it but you shall not
find it, do you ask a happy liefe in the region of death? but you shall not
find it. how can thoue find lief, vvheare there is nothing but death? why
should we expect any joy or felicity in the kingdom of pain, and miseries?
if Chriest according to his divinity, being the maker, and creator of
thevvorlde, had no place of rest therein: when he says the foxes has there
hoales: the birds also there neastes: but the son of man has not a place to
put in his head. the birds, that be incages though they be made of gold and
precious pearels, takes no rest therein. Moses took no pleasure in Pharaos
court, Joseph not with standing all the riches of aegipt took no rest being
in prison and we that are in the prison of this miserable carkase though it
be loade^, and furnished with never so much riches or wealth can have no rest
nor joy therein. in the way there is no rest but in the end. unto, which, the
way leads, is rest. in the center of our mouinge is rest. and not in the
motion it self. it is a certain infaillible principle among philosophers that
nothing has rest, until it comes unto his end. as the rivers, has no rest,
until they com unto the sea: neither the stone un till it comes unto the
ce^tre: neither the fire, until it comes unto his own sphere, much les the
soul of man until it comes unto god, which cannot be found upon the earth,
which cannot be seen with corporal eyes, ney there optained, or gotten by
earthly, and corruptible desires. the truth vvherof is verified, unto us, by
sa^ct Augustine saying: lib. 10. conf.
existi anima mea ad contemplanda ea quae sunt, per quinque sensus: dic mihi
aliquid de deo meo, nunquid inuenisti illum; etc? O my soul, have you sent
forth your corporal five senses, to be hold the earth? I pray tell me some
thing, of my god: have you found him, upon the earth? dic mihi vbi pascat?
vbi cubet in meridie? ne vagari incipiam quaerens eum: the spouse demands in
the canticles: where does he lodge, least I should go astray, seekinge him in
the world: vvher we may not find him, much les enjoy him: the soul
ansvvered and said I sought him upon the, earth and, I could not find him. I
sought for him of all other things. and they told me that what I sought was
not in them, and that they could yield unto me no rest: if I sought the same in
them. and they them selves wear ordained, and mad, to com unto him, in whom
I should have rest. therefore dear brethren, and contrimen do not expect peace
nor quietness in a world of discord: and troubles: do not loocke for
tranquillity in boistrous seas: full of dangerous waves and contineuall
fearful tempests: do not hope to live for ever in a body so corruptible as
this, which is composed of corruptible, and contraire qualities, which of
force must be dissolved: do not gape for felicity in a lief so short: so
uncertain: so mutable so deceitful: so miserable: and so subject to dolofull
lottes, and doubfull ends. where we can have no rest: vvher every thing by
the essential and natural principles of which it is framed, and compacted, is
subject to strange alterrations, and mutationes: vvher every one that hunteth
after the lamentable pleasures thereof, are sure to suffer eccleipse every
moment, where we feel so many displeasant accidents and dissastruous
euentes, as there are instances in our being. therefore let us say with the
prophet satiabor quando apparuerit gloria Ps. 16.
tua I shall never be satisfied, until I behold and see thy glory in thy
own kingdom, where you give it abundantly, not in this vvreatched world:
vvher every thing yeldeth but loath somnesse. here we must lament, and
weep: that we may rejoice there. here we must be sadd that there we may
be glad. Ps. 125
qui hic semina^t in lachrimis ibi in exultatione metent: whosoever sows
here in tears shall reap there with joy.

THE YROVBLES, by which god visited the just, are exercises of there patience:
occasions of there merits, augmentations of gods grace, and means to increase
and express his glory in the^.
CHAP. II.
IF god be more pleased, and glorified, for the afflictions, that we do endure
and for the trauailles that we suffer, then for the delighres vvherin we
vvallovve: and for the prosperity that we do enjoy? we ought rather to
ask of god patience, to bear, the one: then long lief, and quiet rest to
possess the other. for as the prophet says adiutor est in tribulationibus
quae inuenerunt nos nimis the more we be oppressed with tribulations, Ps. 45.
the more he has an eye toward us, and so he said in the 87. 87.
Psalm. de quacunque tribulatione clamauerunt ad me exaudiam eos, etc. in what
soever tribulation they shall be, I will here them. by wealth, and
prosperity, we forget god: being affrighted: with fear, being troubled
with grief, we turn, and fly unto him: and are mad more perfect and do
recover more strength against our enymies cum infirmor, tunc fortior sum: the
apostle said, that when he was sick, then was he most strong: because the
sickmandoth neither svvel by pride, nor concupiscence does vex him: or avarice
does ich, or inuie does inflame. or ire does alter: ur glutony does, coufound:
or flouth fullness does make negligent, or ambition does peruerth. and for that
cause the holy prophet says tribulationem and dolorem invent: Ps. 114.
and nomen Domini inuocaut being compassed with tribulation, and affliction,
I fled unto god for succoure this is a special means, by which god calls us
unto him self, that being scourged in the world, we should forsake it and so
turn: unto god imple facies eorum ignominia and quaerent te Domine: Ps.
bring the^ unto cofusio^, and they will acknovvledge thy name.
Nabugchodonosor being transformed unto a beast: Damel. 4.
Luc. 15.
did perceive his offense and confessed god. the prodigal child never
returned home until by force of adversity he was compelled. in angustia
requisierunt te Domine in tker anguishes they seek thee. Isa. 26.
there is a remedy for every disease: a cure for every soar, a salve for every
sickness. so afflictions be the only medicionable dingges: and medicines that
do heal, and cure the diease of sin, and as the sickness is great: so the
cure and physic must be accordingly: so our troubles and miseries to have a
proportion unto our wickedness, which we have committed: must be no les then
our offenses vvhervvith they should be cured. the physicio^ also ought to be
expert, and cunning which is god against whom the iniquity is committed. as
saint Augustine says: intelligat homo medicum esse deum: Aug. su per Ps. 21.
and tribulationes esse medicamentum ad salutem: non paenam ad damnationem: sub
medicamento positus vreris, secaris, clamas, non audit medicus ad voluntatem:
sed audit ad sanitatem: let man know says he, that god is a physicion, and
that tribulations are receiptes for our salvation, and nor punisheme^t for
our damnation: and being under cure, the wound being cut, the ulcer being
burnt: god hears not at your leisure, until the putrified soar be healed:
which cannott be don be prosperity, and therefore adversity is very expedient
as the said authoure said: Aug. in quada^ ho.
nullus seruus Christi sine tribulatione est: si putas te non habere
persecutiones: non dum caepisti esse chrsstianus: there is no servant of Chriest
without tribulation: if thoue do not purpose with thy self to suffer
persecutions thoue art not a christian. do not fear to be afflicted. but to be
disinherited. unto which agrees saint Gregory: aurem cordis tribulatio
aperit: quam saepe prosperitas huius mundi claudit. Greg. in hoau sup. Euang.
si iniquus quisque in hac vita permittitur prosperarinocesse est, vt electus
Dei debeat, sub flagelle fraeni retineri: we be said he insensible unto gods
inspirations, through prosperity. and by adversity we hear what he will
have us to do. if this be te only place, vvheare the wicked have there solace:
it must be the only place where the good: and godly must be subject to voes
and miseries, by which he may be keipt and restrained from the iniquity of
sin, as by the bridle of correction.

Abraham said unto the rich vvorldly glutton thoue art now tormented with
pain, thoue have received thy pay in the world and haste reposed thy
felicity in the pleasares thereof, and said Lazarus to be in rest, because he
lived in miseries, when he was in this tra^sitorie life, which saint
Bernard considers sainge:

Sumus in hoc mundo quasi in campo certaminis, etc. D. Ber.
we are says he in this world, as in the filde, where the battle is given,
and who soever abides no hardness, plagues, and tribulations, he must
depart hince inglorious.

Neither let this dismaye you, D. Greg. in quadam ho
that god in this world thus chastises the good. when he knovveth, what is
best for them which S. Gregory notes sainge cum recognosco Job in
sterquilinio: Ioa^nem esurieniem in eremo: Petrum extensum in patibulo: Iacobum
decollatum ab Herodis gladio: cogito qualiter Deus cruciabit, quos reprobat,
qui ita dure affligit quos amat: when I behold says he Job upon the dungbil
replenished with the deformity of boches, John hungry in the desarte, peter
having his head down ward upon the cross, James beheaded by the svvoard
of Herod: Ido meditate with my self: how will he tormente the reprobate,
saying he does so seuerlie punish them: whom he loves.

Thiese godly people wear not somoch glorified, by the miracles that they
vvoarketh: as by the tribulations, that they suffer. even as stares, which in
the day time cannot be seen, in the night they shine, so treue virtue which
in prosperity cannot be discerned, does show it self in adversity.

David (as cassiodorus says) in his greatest tribulations. did compose the
sweetest psalms. Psalm. 89.
wherefore he said laetati sumus pro diebus quibus nos humiliasti: annis quibus
vidimus mala: blessed be the days in which thoue have visited us with thy
corrections. the blessed saints did desire of god this visitation, S. Aug.
saint Augustine did earnistlie desire of god not to be forgotten herin
sainge: hic ure, hic, seca, vt in aeternum parcas. burn and cut me a sundre,
here that thoue may spare me for ever. unto thief blessed saints nothing
is more svveet then the tribulation of this life, because in fuffringe them
patiently they imitate Chriest his patience, and remember Chriest his passion.
the church sings: o svveet neales, with which our savior was nealed,
by reason of the sweetness of his blessed passion, why should not our
tears being shed for him, D. Bern.
besvvet unto us. S. Bernard saiih delitiae angelorum sunt lachrimae vestrae:
the ioys and delights of the angels are our vvepinge. and in his boock of the
contempt of the world, he said felices lachrimae quas benignae manus
conditoris abstergunt. and beatioculi, qui in talibus liquefieri potius
elegerint quam eleuari in superbiam: quam omne sublime videre: quam auaritiae,
and petulantiae famulari: blessed be the tears, which the bountiful, and
mild hands of our savior cleansed, and wiped away: and blessed be the
eyes, that are rather dissolved unto mourninge, and vveepinge: then proudly
lifted upon high: or abused in the vvourkes of ungodliness.

Blessed were the tears of the prophet when he said: lachrimis meis stratum
meum rigabo Ps. 6. Ps. 6.
I did vvash my bed with tears, and blessed be the tears of mary Magdalin by
which she vvashed Lucy.
her soul from the filth of sin. and blessed be the tears, of the saints,
which Christ cleanses and vvipeth a way. Apoc. 7.21


If thet be a vvoe pronunced against laughinge: vvoe be unto you (says
Chriest), Luc. ^.
that laugheth: for you shall bevvayle and weep. so says Solomon risus
dolor miscetur: Par. Sal. 14
and extremae gaudii luctus occupat. hinc iterum dixit risum reputani errorem:
and gaudeo, dixi, quid frustra deciperis. Eccl. 2.
Laughinge (said he) shall be mingled with grief: Prouer. 10.14.
and much gladness in this world, is subject to much affliction. and
therefore he says I have esteemed laughinge to be mere folly. I said unto all
pastimes, and play why are you deceived. and so he says, Eccl. 7.
cor sapientum vbi tristitia est: cor stultorum vbi laetitia: the heart of the
wise is posessed with sadness: but the heart of the fool is become vvanton
and dissolute for joy and mirth.

Why should not we deplore our sins, and with vvepinge eyes wash them a
way: and blott them out of gods memory, that our names may be recorded in
the boocke of lief. why should not we lament in thiese miserable days,
that our tabernacle be taken from us the children of Israel did more lamente,
that, they had not the use of there religion, at Hierusalim, out of which,
they wear banished: then for there captivity in Aegipt, by which they have
been deprived of there liberty, and made slaves unto there enemies. they never
ceased to cry super flumina Babylonis fleuimus dum recordaremur tui syon: Ps.
136.
by the riuerside of Babylon we do weep and lamente, when we remember thee
O Syon. sainge quomodo cantabimus canticum Domini in terra aliena: how can
we singe the song of our lord, in astrange land. the like David has don
sainge: Psalm. 41.
fuerunt mihi lachrimae panes die ac nocte dum dicitur mihi quotidie vbi est
Deus tuus: I could not eat my bread without tears, when it was said unto
me, where is thy god. the blessed Marie Magdalin did weep at our saviors
sepulcher, Mar. 16. 2. Reg. 22.
because she could not find him, the children of Israel did more lamente, that
the philistines, had taken from them the arcke of our lord, then for the
victory, that they had lost, or for the ovverthrovve they sustained, the
three kings of the east wear much grieved, when they lost the stare, that
should lead them unto Chriest. when the blessed virgin lost our savior,
she could never be at rest, until she found him, Psalm. 41.
the prophet cried out and said sitiuit anima mea ad deum fontem viuum, quando
veniam and apparebo ante faciem Dei mei. my soul thirsted after my god which
is the liuelye fontaine of the water of lief. and in another place he said:
Ps. 41
quemadmodum desiderat ceruus ad fontes aquarum, etc. even as the stagge
desires the springes of water even so my soul longs after thee o god.
what lamentatio^ the prophet Hieremie made. Hier. c. 5.
Recordare, Domine, quid acciderit nobis, etc. remember o lord what happned
unto us: behold our inheritance did pass over unto strangers I mean our
religion shall be taken from us, and shall be given unto the gentiles, and our
selves shall be deprived thereof. what a lamantable case it should be, if god
would suffer you to be given, and delivered unto the licentious gospel of
Calvin: to be blinded with heresy, to be confounded with false prophets, to
be cast out of the arcke of Chriest his church, to be pufte up with every
blaste of erronuous doctrine and fantastical opinious, to be cut of, and
dismembered out of the catholic church, which you have obeyed from the
beginning, until these miserable days, and to be deprived of the merittes,
of Chrieste his passion, of which none is partaker, butt, such, as do hold
them selves within his church, and to be separated from god, from Chriest, and
from all his sanctes: of all miseries is the chiefest. and for that cause the
said holy prophet says pone me Domine iuxta te, Hier.
and cuiusuis manus pugnet contra me, join me o lord with thy self and I
care not if all the streinght of man be against me, this is the only thing,
that David sought of god so earnistlie saying: Ps. 26.
vnam petii ae Domino. hanc requiram, vt inhabitem in domo Domini omnibus
diebus vitae meae: one thing I sought of god, and the same all the days of me
life I will ask of him, that I may dvvell in the house of our lord all the
days of my life, and so he said vias tuas Domine demonstra mihi, Ps.
etc. Shevve unto me (o lord) thy vvays and teach me thy steps.

This is that which Chriest says in the gospel, that one thing was
necessary.

Such as be Zealous of gods honor, and have any care of there own salvation,
should sooner suffer all afflictions, then to make a shipvvreacke of there
religion, to suffer them selves, to be separated from cuntry, from wife, and
children, from all the world: rather then to be separated from the catholic
church, though it be subject, to the ragefull tempest of the devil against
which the wicked being his instumentes, have combined together, whose
puissance and formidable attempts we cannot eschevve; and therefore whosoever
continues within yt, must live in continual warfare, and be subject to many
afflictions and tribulations, this is the court of Jesus where the courtiers
must expect, no greater favor or privilege of him, then all manner of
afflictions, and troubles, adversities and persecution: Actoeum 5
for this cause ibant apostoli gaudentes a conspectu concilii quoniam digni
habiti sunt pro nomine Jesus co^tumeliam pati the apostles went more contented
for there persecution, the^ king Solomon to be invested and crowned king of
Judah: and when the apostle says ego Paulus vinctus in Domino: holds him
self more happy to be fettered in chains for the love of god, then if he had
been raised to the greatest principality of the earth.

For as in the palace of princes, who is most favored of the king, is best
esteemed of the people: so in the house of god, his preferment is greatest,
whom Chriest does most chastise, and ought to be put in the rank of the
chiefest friends of god, who suffered Tobias to be blinded, Daniel to be
ymprisoned, Susanna to suffer sentence, not for there harm, but to express the
love he bare them, this being one propriety in gods affection, to chastise
those, that he loves, and leave others to there destruction. the perplexities
that we suffer, for gods cause, though we feel them. yet god does bear
them: and gives us grace, and streingth to endure them, if we suffer the^ for
our own offenses, or rather for the trial of our patience. they ought
rather to be called aduertismentes, then punishments, saying they are
corrections, to amend us, and not stumblinge blocks to make us stumble, nor
heavy burdens, whose weight may make us fall, butt they be furnaces
necessary, to refine our faith, and instruments vvorkinge to our perfection.

This is the cause, that godly people, are subject, to manifold afflictions.
when it is said multae tribulationes iustoru. Ps.
many tribulations are incident unto the just.

David said omnes fluctus tuos induxisti super met all the traueiles and
dangers (oh lord) which thoue were wont equalie, Ps. 87.
to distribuite, unto others, thoue have now reduced and returned oppon me
only. Job having lost his goods, and his children, said hoc sit mihi
consolati^, Job. ^.
vt affligens me dolor non parcas: greater consolation god could not send me,
then chastisinge my offenses, to spare no sorts of sorrovves upon me. ad Gal.
6.
mihi absit gloriari nisi in cruce Domini nostri Jesus Christi: I ask no glory
says saint Paul then to endure troubles, as by that means to communicate
with the glory of Chriest: holdinge it no other glory of this world, then
to be in continual traueles, in continual affliction, in continual
adversities, all thiese says he: 2. ad Tmi 2.
sustineo propter. electos. I suffer for the elects sake to give the^ example
of patience in troubles, by the exercise vvherof men become humble, and being
often tried they are the better justified as the metal that through many
fires, rises more to his fynenesse and perfection.

Believe me and assure your selves, that if in patience you receive all your
perplexities, you shall receive your reward with others who me god made
happy by troubles, by which there patience was tried, there virtue increased,
and there favor with god augmented: whose examples wear motives unto others
to reform there lives, Ps. 76.
to be sorry for there offenses past: and cogitare dies antiquos and annos
aeternos in in mente habere, and to bethincke with them selves there sinful
days past in which they have deserved the eternal and everlasting
punishments that are due unto such grievous sins: if by temporal
adversities, and aduertisme^tes they would not be reformed and reclaymed, and
being once moved with the consideration of the horrible sins, that we have
so boldly committed against god, and his laws, as Ezech. Isa. 28.
was when he says recogitabo omnes annos in amaritudine vitae meae. when I
call to mind how I have misspent my days in folly, my life must be bitte^
and yrcksom unto me, we shall find our pains fare inferioure to our wicked
merits, and our offenses rather touched, with a mild justice, then strayned
by any due conection.

S. Peter, after commitinge that dolfull offense, against Chriest: did think,
all the punishments, that could be inflicted, too little, for him, and his eyes
were never free from tears, the blessed Marie Magdalin, esteemed 30. years
pennanee in the wilderness very little in comparison of her offenses: having
altogether banished from her self, all vvordlye delights, that was the cause
of her fall. David being strocken with this consideration said: Ecco in
flagellis paratus sum and dolor meus in conspectu meo semper: Psalm. 37.
behold I am reddye for the whip, and I hope I shall not want in this world
occasions to procure my grief, and to increase my pain, the blessed apostle S.
Paul being reconciled unto god thought all the troubles, that he sustained:
very light, in respect of the sins that he has committed. in nothing did
he glory somuche as in troubles, miseries, afflictions tribulations and
bearinge Chriest his cross, by which (said he) the world was crucified unto
him, ad Gal. 6.
and he unto the world, of whom the prophet speaks: Ps. 38.
hic est ille vir cuius nomen Domini spes eius and non respexit ad vanitates
and insanias falsas, etc. this is he whose hope is only fixed in god, and is
not carried away with the vain fantasies and deceitful alurementes of this
world: whose only love is in the observation of gods laws: and whose
heart is only occupied therein, and is not blinded with couetuousnes nor
ytched with ambition which may say with the prophet quid mihi est in coel^
and a te quid volut super terram? Ps. 38
Deus cordis mei and pars mea Deus in eternum what shall I do in heaven
without thee, much les have I to do with the earth. the god that lodges
within my breast shall be my portion for ever. from whose love says he neither
persecution, Romans 8.
nor tribulation, affliction, hunger svvord, death, principality, angel, man
devil or world, shall be able to alienat or estrange my heart, for whose
sake he said mortificamur tota Die, etc. Ps. 43
we be alvvayse mortified and as it wear like sheep appointed for the
flaughter. this is he, which fought not like a couard for Chriest his faith,
and was crowned honorably, by the just judge for whose honor, he fought.
this crown every one of us do see^e, and daily pray for: but we cannot get
the same butt by a most serious combat against fleashe, and blood, and against
malignant spirits, and there forces.

This blessed crown cannott be gotten, butt by those means, by which Chriest
did set down in his gospel sainge potestis hibere calice^, Math. 20.
can you drink of his cupe?. can you imitate his blessed passion, can you
walk in the streicte, and hard way? can you bear his cross, can you deny
your self? for as Chrysostom. says res pretiosa, non nisi, pretioso pretio
comparatur: none can reign with Chriest unless he imitat his passion. for a
precious ievvel cannott be bought but with a precious price therefore as the
blessed S. 1. Cor. 1^.
Paul says vigilate: state in fide, viriliteragite, vvatch your own
salvation, hold fast your faith, he have your selves like stout cha^pions of
Chriest, let all things be don according to charity. remember the firm
purpose of christians, and behold the image of Chriest crucified.

THE JUST ARE Not forsaken of god although, they seem unto the wicked, to be
most forlorn: and that in there greatest afflictions, they receive of god the
greatest consolation.
CHAP. III.
IT seems unto Theodorus Beza, that Chriest vtteringe thief words: Deus
meus, Deus meus vt quid dereliquisti me. my god my god why have thoue forsaken
me? was in desperation and out of all hope of consolation. it seems also
strange unto the Iues and gentiles, that Chriest being god, should be subject,
unto the cruel, fierce, and unmerciful hands of sinners. but it ought not to
be strange, that he, that came to pay the debt of sin, yea the sins of all
the world, should be punished as an universal sinner, forsaken of god if it
could be possible, and of all the whole world and therefore the apost. 2.
Co^^n. 5.
says qui non nouerat peccatum pro nobis peccatum fecit, etc. Which did not
know sin is become a sinner that is to say sustaineth the pain, that
follows sin: and for all this represe^tinge not only the person of a
sinner: by which he was worthy to be forsaken, but also the person of the
just, which never wants his comfort in his greatest tribulations: Lue 22.
did behold presently the Angel Gabriel comfortinge him. god would never
suffer us to fight with our enymies, without sufficient forces and fightinge
beholds us, and in the skirmishe healpeth us.

Chriest was present with Sanct Anthony in the vvildernisse, D. Ath. in visa
D. An
fightinge with the devil, although he did not appear visiblie, until the
devil was vanquished and S. Anth. conqueroure. which when he asked of
Chriest, vvheare he was all this while. ansvveared that he was present
expectinge his endeavor, and healpinge him in the combat.

If god be present every vvheare, by his essence, presence. and power (as he
is in deed) according to all the diuins, and according unto Mercurius
Tresmegistus, who says that god, (...) Tres^^^
is figura sphaerica cuius centrum est vbique circumferentia vero nusqua^: god
is a globe, whose center is in all places, whose circumference is no vvheare:
and as the prophet says si ascendere in c^^lum tu illic es, si defcendero in
infernum, ades: Ps. ^^.
if I ascend unto heaven there you are: if I descend unto hell: thou art
present.

If god be in all places and in the entitie and being of every thing, Actorum
capite 17.
that he creates. as the apostle says. in ipso viuimus mouemur and sumus: in
him we live, move and have our being, where fore should not he be with
these that crave and implore his assistance, as him self auoutched by the
prophet, and we ought to believe him clamauit ad me and ego exaudia^ cum ipss
sum in tribulatione, Psalm. 90.
etc. he has cried for my help: and I will hear him, in tribulation I
will be with him: I will deliver and glorify him. Act. 6.
sanct Steaue^ did see him standinge at the right hand of the highest. he met
S. Peter goinge to Rome to be martyred and said thief words vado Romam
iterum crucifigi. Ab^ias in vita Sanct peter.
I go to Rome to be crucified the second time because, that S. Peter was
goinge thither to be crucified. as S. Ambrose says in martyrio Christus
occiditur and in it is, amb. in 4. ^. 2 ad Cor.
qui pro fide patiu^tur aut morte^, aut vincula, aut verbera Christi passiones
su^t, etc. Chriest is slain in his martyrs, and who so ever suffer death,
fetters, stripes, chriest suffers with the^, that his life may be manifested
in there death: wherefore S. Paul desirous of martyrdom says viuo ego ia^
non ego viuit in me Christus: though I live, ad G^. 2.
yet it is chriest by whom I am quickened, that lives in me, which gives
fortitude, and strength unto all martyts, whose sufferinge does shevve the
interance of the life to come, which Chriest promises unto them that do
suffer tribulations for his sake.

These afflictions of the just, by which there patience, is exercised, and there
grace increased, are great motives to harden and confirm the wicked in there
ungodliness. for being delivered unto there hands, they think that god does
altogether forsake them, and that he loves them whom god makes his vvhippe,
to scourge and punish the godly. and therefore the Turckes do brag, and
boast, that they be the choysen people of god: for that be does use there help
to punish the sins of christians, the heretics are hardened and confirmed
in there heresies, by reason of so many victories gotten, by them against
catholics, whose manifold trespasses, and horrible offenses have given
power, and force unto the adversaries, against them, which are suffered by
god, to reform the wicked, and abominable lives of catholics, whose
miseries, and calamities: as they ought to be a vvarninge to amend the vices,
and discomposed behavior of the one: so they ought not to be occasions of the
ruin and obduration of the other.

assuringe your selves if there remains no sin amongst you to be punished:
or negligence to be chastised, or any fault to be corrected, yet your faith
must be tried, by your patience: your religion made perfect by your
persecution: and god glorified, by your tribulation multae tribulationes
iustorum the just must be subject to troubles and therefore let none think,
that your religion is bad, because it is persecuted, or you, that are the
professors thereof, to be forsaken of god, because he suffers you, to bethus
persecuted, the wife of Job did more trouble her husband the^ all his
adversities. by sayeinge ad huc permanes in innocentia: Job. 2.
benedic deo and morere. your innocence gives you nothing else but death,
praisinge god does purchase nothing else for you but tribulation: so Tobias for
seruinge of god devoutly, and for his tribulatio^s by which, he was tried,
Tob. c. 3.
was reviled by his wife and frie^des, who thought him to be most cursed,
and unhappy as if god had no care over such, as be in tribulatio^s: but the
prophet says. Psalm. 33.
oculi Domini super iustos and aures eius in preces eoru god behouldeth the
just and hears there complaint. the apostle declares the same also: Cor. c. 4.
in omnibus tribulatione^ patimur, sed non angustiamur, a poriamur, sed non
dustruimur persecutionem patimur sed non relinquimur: deii cimur: sed non
perimus: In all t^inges we suffer tribulations, but we are not perplexed, we
are as it were brought unto confusion, but we be not destroyed: we suffer
persecution: but we be not forsaken: we be in the brincke of all troubles:
but we perish not. because Chriest for whom you suffer, gives you
sufficient force to bear the burden of his cross. Phil. ^.
qui vobis dederat non solum credere in eum: sed etiam pro illo pati: which
gave you the grace: not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him.

THE SERVANTE Of Chriest ought not to expect any true friendship of this
world which is the enemy of his master.
CHAP. IV.
AS. Chriest, and this world are contrary one to another: so are also there
servants, and followers: there works, and desires, and being contrary one
to another, they can never possess one kingdom: muchlesse reign together in
one place. 2. Cor. 6.
For what communicatio^ can be betwixt good and evil: virtue, and vice:
light and darcknesse: heaven and hell: god and the devil.

For no sooner Chriest, came unto this unthankful world, to redeem it, from
the slavery of sin: from the captivity of the devil, then he was reviled,
persecuted, and banished of the same.

He was sold in Joseph, he was ssayne in the lamb, he was crucified in man,
Ge^e. 37. Ap^. 12. Math. 20,
he was fossaken of the proud Jews, that could not abide to see him, in a
poor distressed state; he was hotly pursued of cruel Herod, that stood in
competencie with him for the kingdom of Jury: which was Chriest his right
inheritance being rightly descended, from the tribe of Judah, and from the
root of Iesse, of which, through the blessed virgin he took his humanity,
of Judas he was sold, of his apostles he was forsaken, and denied, let us not
therefore marveile if you being the scruantes of Chriest the world should
hate, and detest you for his sake, which was ever contrary unto him. It is
not convenient that we should join league or friendshipvvith his prosessed
enemy, whose deceit is known, and whose treachery is detected.

Let us not forsake Chriest, though we see him poor, humble, persecuted of
many and forsaken of all.

If Chriest came into this world to edify the people, to instruct them by
his holy examples, and to teach them what they ought to do, we ought to
receive his instructions. if poverty had not been good, if the contempt of
vvordlie honor had been bad, he would not have given us examples, to embrace
the one, nor counsel to despise the other.

So as in his life we see him poor, bare, naked, and oppressed with all
afflictions and troubles, whose examples ought to move us. We see that his
gospel is full of admonitions, and exhortations to forsake, and deny our
selves, to mortify all our passions, and not to conform our selves unto this
world.

If David to procure all his subjects to do penance, 2. Reg. 75.
that by that means gods wrath should be appeased, and the people pardoned,
did ascend unto mount olives, bare footed, and bare headed to the intent, the
people being moved with that example, should follow him, and so they did.
if Alexander the great in thevvarres of Persia (as Quintus Curtius declares)
his army being much troubled by the abundance of snow, that fell at that
instant, went him self a foot, and so his army by his example went after,
much more ought we to follow the example of Chriest, and to follow his
steps, though we see him poor in this world and persecuted of the same.

The prince Abimelech did cut a branche from a tree, Iudi. 9.
and did carry the same upon his own shoulders, and commanded his soldiers
to do the like, and to follow him: so Chriest, the prince that we ought to
follow did bear his cross before us to the end that not only we should
bear, but also follow it, least we should incur the vvoe that is
pronounced against such that bear thecrosse and follovv not the same vae semel
and vae iterum portantibus crucem Domini, D. Be^
and non sequentibus eam. Si via crucis (as Sanct Basil says) in caelum
patriam tuam te ducit, cur ab ea fugis if the cross be your ready way to
bring you unto heaven: why should you fly from it? and as Isaias says via
tuta, Is. 26.30. Psalm. 118.5. proue^.
via regia, via certa, vt stulti non errent per eam. it is the ready way, it
is a safe way, and it is the kings high way, that fools cannot go astraye
therein. this is the way that Chriest willed us to follow him. he vve^t be
fore us bearinge his cross unto mount Caluarie, where we behold him
crucified, pitifully vvhipped, stripped of his garments, and leaft naked, to
increase his pain and to augment his shame, and confusion, vvheare we see
him crowned with thorns, and nailed unto a cross of infamy, and
malediction, unto which they wear subject in those days that dyed after
that manner: where (I say) we see him deprived of all comfort and
consolation: being a spectacle of shame and reproach unto the whole world.

Thus to follow him I must confess is hard to be done to fleashe and
blood: because we must first learn to deny our selves, forsake the old
man I mean our old humors of concupiscense, mortify our selves, and our
unreasonable passions: cast of our proper vvilles, and so take up his cross,
and to bear patiently all the adversities of this world: and to suffer
gently without grudge all the despleasant accidents of this life.

If This be the way of a Christian why should he gape after vain honors of
this world and follow the lamentable pleasures of this miserable life.

If the captain Vrias would take no rest at his own house 2. Reg. 11.
for that the Arcke of our lord was abroad, under a pauilion. what rest can
the servants of Chriest take, when they behold him nailed unto a cross. Quam
de form est says Saint Bernard spinoso capiti habere delicatum membrum. D.
Bre^a.
what a deformed thing is it, that a head full of thorns, should have a
delicate member.

If the head be troubled, the rest of the members cannot be at rest, but are
partakers of his pain, and subject to his grie^f. If Chriest lived in
continual poverty, in continual exile, in continual conrempte of vvorldlye
honors, how can we hunt after promotions: gape for titles of honors, and
seek riches. That therefore the members should agree with the head, that the
part with the total, that the servant be conformable unto his lord, that the
christian should embrace the example of Chriest, that the sheep should
acknovvledge the shepherd, that the priest should offer him self unto him to
whom all sacrifices are offered. that the soldiour should follow the
captain, that our body should perform the will of the spirit and that the
spirit should accomplish the will of god, we must conform our selves unto
his gospel and direct our lives and actions according to his blessed
counsels, which are nothing else, then to bear his cross, to suffer
quietly, and willingly persecutions: to abide all torments, rather then to
violate any of his commandments: to live in coutinuall martyrdom for the
felicity of the kingdom of heaven is given to the poor in spirit and unto
such that suffer for justice and for the testimony of a good conscience for
according to the apostle omnes qui voluntpie viuere in Christo Jesus patiantur
persecutiones: all that intend to live godly in Chriest Jesus, must suffer
pesecutions. for the world is not only contrary and opposite to
evangelical, and christian virtues but also to moral and civil honesty.
because it favors but dissemblers and vicious persons. there was a law
among the Athenia^s, that any, that had done well for the common wealth, and
lived vprightlie in his actions, should be banished. Aristides being a man as
well of great deserts: Plutar. in vi^a Arist.
as of a just and moral behavior was punished according to this law: and
being demanded of a blunt commoner, which did subscribe unto his
banishmente, what was the cause, that he did pass his suffrage and verdite
against so good a man: ansvvred that his justice was ungrateful unto the
common wealth and offensive also unto him.

So unto men of wicked dispositions, the good be yrcksome, and men of good
life be nothing acceptable. Psalm. 36.
considerat peccator iustum, and quaerit mortificare eum: the finner does
confider the just, and indeuoreth to ouertherovv him. If the world cannot
abide men of moral virtues. no marvel, if it cannot digest men of
supernatural graces, and blesfings which must bear many assaults,
contradictions, and temptations therein. For the scripture says fili accedens
ad Eccles. 2.
seruitutem Dei, etc. son if thou meanest to serve god, prepare and arm thy
self against temptations and troubles. the angel Raphael said unto Tobias:
Tob. 2.
because thou have been acceptable before god thou must needs be tried, by
temptations. God suffered this temptation to leave example with the posterity
of patience. Job. 2.
Job in his troubles said god does try me like gold. God also did try
Abraham touching the oblation of his son. Gene. 22.
Judith says unto the children of Israel in the troubles of Holofernes,
Iud^th. 18
you ought to remember that god did try our fore fathers, whether they loved
him sincerely, or no if these temptations had not bin, (...). 1.
Sanct sames vvoulde not affirm them to be the cause of our greatest joy. for
blessed (says he) that suffers them. for when he shall be proved by the^ he
shall receive a crown of life which god promised unto all those that love
him, 2. Cor. 11
Sanct Paul says in nothing will I glory but in my infirmities and
troubles: unto which Sanct Frances says, he was married.

For by the marriage, that is contracted bevvixt Chriest and us: we ought to
assure our selves that we be married unto the afflictions of this world. for
in all matrimony the persons contracted by reason of the indissoluble knot,
vvherin they be conjoined and united are equally partakers of one another
asvvell prosperirie, as also adversity.

And saying that the church of which you be members, Ephesians 5.
was vvedded unto Christ, upon the altar of the cross (as the apostle says)
this is a great sacrament: I say in Chriest and his church, also in Saint
John, Appo. 20.21.
come with me says the angel, and I will shevve unto you the wife of the
lamb and he shevved unto me the holy city of Jerusalem, etc. and
consequently every member of the church is married unto Chriest as the spouse
says in the canticles dilectus mous mihi and ego illi, etc. Can. 2.
my best beloved shall be with me, and Ivvith him, which is to be understood of
every faithful soul, and as the apostle says.

I have married you unto one man, 2. Cor. 11.10.
to the end you should yield your selves a chaste virgin unto Chriest.

And saying by this marriage, we are made partakers of all the merits, and
treasures of Chriest his passion, why should not we be also made partakers
of his griefs, troubles, and persecutions: and seeing our spouse by Isaias is
called vir dolorum saying non est dolor sicut dolor meus: Is. 53.
the man of afflictions, there is no grief so great as mine, for he was over
vvhelmed with all kind of sorrovves, and tribulatio^s. he did supporte all
our troubles, did suffer all our miseries, and to make satisfaction for our
offenses, to appease the wrath of the eternal father against vvho^ the sin
was committed and the injury offered, did pay the debt of sin, and did
bear upon his own shoulders the heavy burden of the punishments that we
have deserved which have grieuouslie offended, and committed the same.

Let every one of us bear his portion of these miseries, let every one
carry his own burden, and even as they be allotted unto us: so sufficient
grace, and strength is assigned unto us, to sustain them.

Let us follow the spouse in the canticles that said ascendam in altum and
apprehendam fructu^ eius, Ca^^. 7.
I will clime unto the tree and take hold of the fruict thereof: that is ^o say
the fruict of the noble cross, which is nothing else the^ to entertain
willingly all the sharp skirmishes of tentations, to bear adversities
gently, to punish our rebellious flesh: and disordered desires, to embrace
most heartily all the austere works and travails of penance, to bridle all
the incounters, and vehement motions proceedinge from concupiscense against
reason, and our superior powers: and paruulos nostros ad petram allidere:
Psalm. 1^6.
and to dash, and bruise our little vvhelps against the rock, I mean our
vilde and sinister tentations, and the dangerous suggestions thereof, before
they be engendered by our vvilles, and hatched by our consent, to stop our
malignant, and venomous humors, to suppress our sensual inclinations, and
appetites, to Keep under the old man: to put on the new: to chase Ismael out
of the house, that Isaac may possess the inheritance of his father, to
crucify our luxurious carcass, to mortify our members: and senses vvithall
the vices and concupiscense of the same: to the end that our spirit may enjoy
the patrimony for which we are created, and redeemed, this is the virtue of
christian nobility, this is the continual exercise of a christian life,
through this exercise the apostle says mortificamur tota die propter cum qui
dilexit nos: we are mortifieng of our selves for his sake that loved us: ^ Cor
9
this is the cause that he chastised his body: Casti go corpus meu^ and in
seruitutem spiri tus redigo carnem meam: I chastise my body, and under the
obedience of the spirit, I reduce my fleash, and because in this mortification
we are either negligent, or cold, others perhaps usurp our charge unto them
selves correctinge our slacknesse, and chastisinge our negligence and nolentes
cingi and being un vvillinge to be girded, that is to say to suffer for
Chriest or abide any affliction, others now go about to reform us, and
ducere nos quo noluerimus and to lead us where we would not, Joan. 21.
Math. 20.
and being idle in the market place, without any work, or occupation, do
now violently compel us to travail, and labor more earnestly in Chriest
his vineyard, and we being faint hearted, to encourage our selves, and being
ensnared and intrapped in the briers and brambles of the vain desires of this
miserable life, do constrain us to forsake them, and being in the jaws of
the devil, to deliver us and our soul being full of the rust of sin, to
cleanse, and purify it by the fire of tribulation.

A CHRISTIAN MVST resolve vvithim self to fight valiantly against the enemies
of Chriest.
CHAP. V.
IT is the part of a valiant captain to encourage his soldiers to the
skirmish, and contemning all dangers to propose unto them selves the reward
of their labor taken in hand, and the crown of the victory expected, as
also on the other side to set before there eyes the base condition of slavery
and bondage, in which they should have been if they were overcome, neither
only the christians among the gen^iles, but also Judas Macabens in the
battle against Nicanor, both to encourage and embolden the vveake and faint
hearted, as also to confirm, the strongest, declared unto theirs, against
whom they fought, for what cause, and to what end. Told them also that the
victory stood not in the multitude of soldiers, nor in the furious assault
against whom me they were to skirmish: but in gods mighty power, and that
they should not forget the manifold dangers, out of which their ancestors
were delivered, Man c 2
and the vvonderfull victories they had obtained, so that in that battle the
Jews did overcome, and their enymies wear ouerth rovvne having lost 35.
thousand soldiers. even so Chriest having triumphed over the power of
darcknes, and over him, that had the empire of death, having sent his apostles
as poor lambs against tygres, lions, and dragons against the force of hell
and tyranny of man, did encourage them saying: Joan i^
non turbetur cor vestrum: be not faint hearted: for when sudden fear, or
apprehension, either of the danger at hand, or of the evil to come attacheth
us, then our senses by the extremity and vehemence thereof are dismayed, our
soul is vexed, and our heart tre^bleth for fear, and therefore our savior,
bids us to put greatest vvatch, in the place of greatest danger: and did
strengthen us by his exhortations, and admonitions, that when the danger
should come we might be found valiant soldiers, that we should not be like
the fish called Polypus, unto which ^^e Aegiptians did resemble such, as when
they be in any great danger, or affrighted with fear, are soon over thrown
and removed altog^ther from their purpose: Aeliau. de Na hist li. 1. p. im.
lib. 9. c. 29.
for when that fish is in any danger, it does not fly or provide for safe^ie,
but comes unto the next bank and being perplexed is taken by the fisher. in
these dangers of persecutions let not any fear, or labor of your travails,
or love of the world separate your hearts from Chriest: but in all your
dangers and troubles say with the prophet: Psalm. 72.
bonum est mihi adhaerere Deo and ponere in eo spem meam: it is good for me to
cleave unto god, and to put my heart and affection in him, that we may be able
to say with Saint Augustine: amor mous: D^agu.
pondus meum. illuc feror quocumque feror: that god being my love: and my
desire I may alvvaies dravve after him despisinge any other thing what
soever. Then we sha^ be able to sayvvith the said prophet: Psalm. 26.
si consistunt aduersum me castra non timebit cor meum. Si exurgat aduersum me
praelium in hoc ego sperabo: if all my adversaries were in the field against
me: my heart shall not be desmayed, if all the world would wage war
against me therein I will hope to overcome.

If we Keep not this lance of god in our hearts by which we may be helped
and defended against the invasions of malignant spirits, against the dangerous
suggestions of the old serpent: we shall be compelled to say. Psalm. 72.
dereliquit me virtus mea, and lumen oculorum meorum no^ est mecu^: my forces
do fail me, and I have not the use of my sight: and also to say defecit caro
mea and cor meum I have no strength nor courage.

It is the part of a constant man in any great danger, or fierce shirmishe
against his corporal enymies: not to be broken or out of heart when there is no
remedy, to escape but by fighting, much more a spiritual soldier of Chriest
ought not to retire when he is challenged to the co^bate, for the trial of
his faith. then optimum est gratia stabilire cor: Heb. 13
it is the best remedy we have to furnish our soul with the grace and love
of god. Heb. 13.
For faith without this grace and charity of god avails nothing to
vvithstand the eynmies thereof.

We ought most earnestly with all humble and fervent prayers to desire of
god that, which he promised to give by Ezechiel: Eze. 36.
dabo vobis inquit cor nounm and spiritum nouum ponam in medio vestri, etc. I
will says he, give unto you a nevve heart, and a nevve spirit I will put
among you, that you may walk in my precepts, and Keep, and observe my
ordinances.

In any great danger god never fails to give nevve increase of grace which
serves not unless it be put in execution, when the re is occasion to use the
same.

In vain is any force, or power (as Arist. says) unless it be reduced unto
his operation, the talent of our lord is idle, when it is not increased by
daily profit, the fortitude of a valiant mind serves to no purpose, which
in dangers shows not his virtue, all motions are frivolous unless they come
unto their end, the way is miserable that leads not unto our cuntrie which
is heaven; in vain we run if we comprehend not Chriest, and of all men
we be most miserable, if we seek for our labors the reward of this
world. of which Chriest did deprive his dearest friends.

The only rest, and felicity we should crave of god in this short life, is
to prepare our hearts for god, to direct our works, and wills unto him,
and to dispose, and frame our selves to accomplish his blessed will, and obey
his commandment, as David has done inclinaut cor meum ad faciendas
iustificationes tuas in aeternum. Ps.
O lord I bind my self for ever to follow, and observe thy commandementes,
Psalm. 26.
to which purpose he says vnam petij a Domint, hanc requiram, vt inhahitem in
domo Domini omnibus diebus vitae meae. one thing I sought of god, and that I
will earnestly crave at his hands, that I may remain in the house of my
god all the days of my life which is nothing else then to dvvell in his
church, to abide in the arcke with Noe, out of which there is no salvation,
this is that arcke, that although all the outrageous tempests of persecution,
be raised against it, is not drowned: and although all the power of
antichriest be gathered to overthrow it, remains steadfast, and invincible:
and although all the heretics which are the pirates of the sea, wherein the
same saileth, be co^bined together against it, continues steadfast, and
ympregnable.

Blessed are your troubles if you abide in the arcke, blessed is your faith,
when by the trial of persecution now intended, you be found constant therein,
blessed is your religion being in your afflictions duly observed, and in your
dangers perfectlye purified, and blessed be your adversities, that bring
patience, for tribulation without exercise of that virtue meriteth nothing:
when Chriest says in your patience and not in your tribulations you shall
possess your souls and enjoy the crown of your salvation. and S. Luc 21.
Cyprian says paena non facit martyre^ sed causa: torment makes not the
martyr, but the cause for which he suffers: and saying the cause of your
troubles, is your old ancient faith; for which as S. Gregory says luctame^
co^tra malignos spirit sumeredebetis you ought to striueand struggle against
vvicred spirits, you have rather cause of comfort, the^ of sorrovv; quia merces
vestra as our savior says copio sa est in caelis be cause your reward is
great in heaven.

By this faith Chriest is espoused, Osee. 2.
and affianced in marriage (as) Osee the prophet says despo^sabo te mihi in
fide, and iustitia. I will betroth you unto me in faith and in stice. For by
faith god deals with our soul, as a king that is to be married by his
ambassadors, unto a Queen that is absente, unto which he sends his picture,
that beholdinge and saying his proportion, and resemblance she may love him,
and so accept of the marriage, and come unto him: this is the same that the
apostle says: 1. Cor. 13.
videmus nunc per speculum in aenigmate tunc autem facie ad faciem: we behold
him now as it were in a glass or in obscurity, but the^ in his own
kingdom, we shall contemplate him face to face.

By faith we walk unto him, this is the faith of which the apostle
speaks, ad Heb. 12
by which (says he) the saints ovvercame kingdoms, they obtained there
desired purpose, they have stopped lions mouths, they have extinguished the
fury of the raginge fire, they were hardy, and strong in the battle, they
have ouerth rovvne the forces of the gentiles, some were quartered, some were
cast into prison, some we re vvhipped, and brought to co^fu sio^, some were
stoned to death, so me were sovve^ in skins of beasts, and so cast to be
devoured of other beasts, some others did fly unto the mountains, where
they ended there lives in holes, incaues of the earth in most pitiful manner,
in nakedness and vvearines these by the testimony of their faith were tried
and by their trial were found co^sta^te, and by their co^sta^cie leaft behind
the^ blessed examples for us to follow; such as were good among the I
sraelits did labor in nothing so much as in keepinge their faith unto god
unspotted, and their religio^vndefiled: this is the chiefest point in their
last testament to co^mitvnto their children: this when Iosue was ready to
die he did send for the tribes of Israel reckoning unto them so many
privileges and graces they had received of god and did commend unto them
specially the observation of his commandments, Iosue 24.
and a great zeal to hold fast their laws. the like did old Mathathias
father of the Macabees in the hour of his death, left no other testament with
his children, Maca. lib. 1. c. 1.
then this hoalsome counsel with these memorabe words: children hold fast
your laws and give your lives for the testament of your fathers remember the
works, and exploites of your au^cetours which they have achieved and you
shall obtain immortal glory.

S. All, ^i.
Paul says that he was not only ready, to suffer and bear all torments at
Jerusalem, but also to die for the name of Chriest: with whose love, and
contemplation he was so much ravished, that he says so often cupio dissolui,
and esse cum Christo: Gal. 2
I desire to be dissolved, and enlarged from the prison of this corporal
lu^pe, and to enjoy Chriest. for when he lived he said, gaudeo in passionibus
pro vobis, and adimpleo ea que desunt passionum Christi, 1. Cols.
in carne mea pro^ corpore eius quod est ecclesia: I rejoice in sufferinge for
you, and do accomplih what wants of Chriest his passions in my flesh, for
his body, which is his church: not that there was any thing of Chriest his
passion or the merits thereof left unfinished (for he has sufficiently
satisfied the eternal father de rigore iustitiae, as the divines do say in
the rigor of justice for our offenses) but the afflictions, and torments that
the saints do suffer for the church; should be added, and joined unto Chriest
his sufferance, and passion to increase, and augment the treasures of the
church, for the alaye^g and assvvaginge the dread full pains, due unto our
sins out of which treasures and riches so many indulgences are granted by
the chief pastor thereof for this purpose: unto which agrees the gloss of S.
Ambrose upon that place. suppleo reliquias pressu rarum Christian carne mea
pro corpore eius quodest ecclesia. I do make up the relickes and fragme^ts that
lacked of the passion and torments of Chriest in my own flesh, which is
his church. the consideration vvherof moved. S. Basil before the judge of the
Emperor threatninge and co^mandinge him under pain of death, ^ Basil.
to forsake his old religion, and to conform him self unto the iniunction of
the Emperor, to say: I would I had a better gift to be represented unto
him, that would deliver me out of this corrupt carcass, out of this chaos of
confusion, out of the valley of tears, and out of the shadovv of death then
this poor life of mine which god did le^d unto me to serve him: and now
this is the time that I ought to offer it in a lively sacrisiee for his
honor that gave it and for his church.

S. Paul also writing unto the Romans obsecro vos says he vt exhibeatis
corpora vestra, Romans 12.
hostia^ sancta^ Deo placente^, rationabile obsequium vestru^ nolite co^formare
huie seculo: I desire you most earnestly, that you offer up your bodies a live
lie and holy host in a most serviceable and plia^t manner vntogod which must
be grateful and acceptable unto him: and do not co^for me your selves unto
this world.

The reason why we should so do, he gives unto the Corinth: saying Christus
pro omnibus mortuus est, 2 ad Corin. c. 5.
vt and qui viuunt non sibi viuant sedei qui pro ipsis mortuus est, and
resurrexit: Chriest was dead for all, to the end, that such asdo live, should
not live unto them selves, but they should live, and die for his sake, which
was dead and did rise for them.

Most noble christians descendinge from the loins of Abraham, from the
family, and race of Jacob, from the stock of less, from the victorious and
triumphant lion of Judah, like noble lion behave your selves in this combat of
your faith, in which if you shrink and shevve your selves base and couardlie
soldiers (which god for bid) it is not the temporal servitude of 7, or 100,
years or, that of men, which though they be never so cruel have some
commiseration, or some kind of humanity toward one another, but it is the
perpetual, and most miserable slavery and captivity of devils, which has no
pity, or compassion of man, that you do hazard and purchase unto your selves,
neither is it an Earthlye kingdom, or temporal inheritance you loose thereby,
but the everlasting glory of paradise, the society of the blessed saints
the consolation of Chriest and the vision of the blessed trinity vvherin
consists all our felicity, remember what overthrow your faith has given
unto all the forces of Satan, and what glorious victories it has gotten
against all the world. as S. John says haec est victoria, 1. Io. 5
quae vicit mundum: fides vestra, by your faith the victory is gotten against
the world.

Be not carried away with the false resemblance of the unconstant promotions
of this world, cast of all the vain hope of the dangerous honors of mortal
men: accipite as the apostle says armaturam Dei, ad Ephesians. 6.
vt positis resistere in Die malo. putt on the complete harness of god, that
you may resist in the evil day.

Imitate the lion, who beholdinge the hunters coming very strong against
him, and being not able to shun them, respects not their strength, nor
their weapons, least he should be terrified thereby, beholds only the earth
and strikes him self with his tail: even so in all our difficulties we
ought to behold our frailty, and proper miseries, and the shortness of our
temporal life, so uncertain, so oppressed with sundry calamities vvherin
the banished and forlorn children of Eua do lie hovvlinge, and groueling,
which are deformed with so many spots, and blemishes of disloyalty, and
dissobedience against god, troubledvvith so many passions, distracted with so
many cares, confounded with so many errors, overwhelmed with so many
temptations, altered with so many humors, infected with so many diseases,
ex posed unto all dangers of eternal vvoe, if our soul be corrupted by sin,
and not replenished, or beautified by the grace of god, or not mortified, by
the rod of discipline, or not hated of such as before did love it, for as
Chriest says: Luc. 14, Io. ^2.
qui odit animam suam in hoc mundo, in vitam aeternam custodit came, etc.

who hates his life in this world shall preserve it unto life everlasting.

According to S. Aug. D. Aug. tract. 51. in Ia.
si male amaueris tunc odisti, si been oderis tunc amasti, foelices qui oderunt
custodiendo ne perdant amando: if thou love it ill: then thou hate it: if
thou hate it well, then thou have loved it, and blessed are they that hate
it, by keepinge it least they loose it, by louinge it. certainly he that
hates it is he that ouercometh the fearful pangs of the second death. It is
said: Apoc. 2
qui vicerit non ladetur a morte secunda. who soever overcomes shall receive
no harm of the second death, and shall also receive the invisible and hidden
ma^na and saying our own forces are so sle^der and our adversaries so
innumerable and so strong as we are not able to overcome them, but by
supernatural healpes and graces, that our hearts may be inflamed with his
love and in kindled with blessed desires, Psalm. 38.
that we may say with the prophet concaluit cor meum intra me my heart did
wax vvarme in my body and with. S. Aug. scribe domine vulneratua in cord
meo vt ibi legam dolorem and amorem and cuncta aduersa propter te sustineam li
benter. O lord write thyvvoundes in my heart that therein I may behold what
love you do bear unto me and troubles you suffered for me, and will embrace
all adversities willingly for thy sake. and so I will never fear in domino
speraui nontimeboquid faciet mihi homo what man can do against me. Psalm. 55.


TO BEGINN WELL, and not continue therein avails nothing to our justification.
CHAP. VI.
GOD promised unto us, a reward for our labor, a pay for our work and a
crown for the victory, which neither he will bestow more we shall
receive, until our valor be known, and the battle ended, which begins
against us, when we have the use of reason, vvhe we begin to manage and
dispose our actions according or contrary to reason, and continues unto the
last moment of our life.

Our savior tells us qui perseuerauerit vsque in finem hic saluus erit.
Matthew. 24.
who so ever shall persist unto the end shall be saved if we be faithful in
our promise made unto god, and patient in our labors sustained for him, he
also will be fayethfull and vndoubt full in accomplishinge that he promised:
liberal and bountiful in revvardinge what we have deserved.

This is it which he said speakinge with his disciples you are those that do
abide with me in my troubles and temptations, Luc. 2^.
and therefore I have determined to give unto you a kingdom: he said fellows
and partakers of his travails and therefore of his joy in his kingdom.

To begine to be gods servant proceeds of the grace of god but to continue
therein unto the end of our lives a special grace and blessing of god with many
infused and supernatural virtues are required, and chiefly a constant heart
that no perturbation be able to make it recoile from his duty in such manner
as by no temptation itvvaxch faint, or by importunity of travel he forbeareth
to do good.

Of this virtue S. Anthony and S. Hylarie wear great and holy examples who
suffered great tentations in the desarte and yet did not forbear to do god
great service.

Lucius Seneca does attribute so much to the excellency of a man hearty and
valiant that he makes it harder to vanquish a mind environed with the virtue
of constancy: then to take a city well fensed and guarded.

S. In Epta.
Hierom says per bonam and malam famam a dextris and a sinistris miles Christi
graditur, etc. no other thing is the passage of this life, then a public way
on whose rigt hand marched the valiant and hardy man, on the left part the
couarde and faint hearted, and betvveen them both goes the strong ad
resolute. and according to S. (...). 8. mur^
Gregory fortitudo iustorum est carnem vnicere, proprijs voluntatibus
contraire, delectationem vitae presentis extinguere: huius mundi aspera pro
aeternis praemijs amare prosperitatis blandimenta contemnere, aduersitatis
metum in cord superare: the fortitude of the just is nothing else then to
master the fleashe, to resist the appetits of our proper vvil, to extinguish
and despise the delights of this life, to affecte things of hard enterprise
for the kingdom of god, not to be carried away, with the vain alurementes
of vvorldly wealth, and not to es chevv such as be both painful and perilous.
Orig. sup. lib. numeru^ hom. 5.
and as Origines says sicut continens vita, labor, perseuerantia, and agonum
certamina faciunt vnum qu^mque virum virtutis appellari: sic e contrario; vita
remissa, negligens, and ignaua facit virum ignauum iudicari: even as a man of a
continent life, toylsom labor, and of perseverance in a dangerous doubtful
battle deserves to be reputed a virtuous man: so on the contrary side a man
careless, negligent, and sluggish, is holden for a couarde. this is the virtue
without which no heroical designementes can be performed and without
which we ought not to be holden for christians: for the character by which
we be called by that name, avails us nothing, unless we persist still and
persevere with Chriest. Judas reapes no profit for being one of our saviors
apostles because he did not continue unto the end: For the good luck, and
skill of an expert pilot consists not altogether, to guidevvell the helm,
but rather that he bring it to arrive safe at the haven: even so Chriest
promises not the kingdom of heaven to such only, as are baptized nor to him
that is called a christian, if he persevere not in his service, for the crown
of the triumph, is not bestovved upon him that goes unto the vvarres: but is
vvourthilie reserved forsuch as obtain the victory. although the fi^rie
column conducted the children of Israel out of Aegipt: Number. 14. Exodus 13.
yet it did not bring them to the land of promise. so as none did enter into
the same but such as did in firm hope persevere unto the end of the battle;
by which they overcame their enemies, and so obtained the victory, and gained
the desired land: the labor of Nehemias and Esdras after retourninge from the
captivity of Babylon would be frustrated in buildinge the temple at
Jerusalem, if injuries, threatninges, strong enymies which had all their
forces bent against them, would have either terrrified them from making an
end, ^sth^ 3. c. 2
or persuaded them to give over and truly your christianity, and catholic
religion shall rather procur your damnation, then in any manner help you to
justification, if either for fear of man, or love of the earth, or any danger
of persecution you give it over or be inconstant therein: if it were to gain
the world, or to save our life, we ought not to commit one deadly sin,
or transgress the least of gods comma^dements, much less to make a ship
vvracke of our faith and religion, which we ought to defend with. loss of
life and goods, if we be called in question for the same. If the godly
vvoma^ Susanna would rather suffer death then yield unto the execrable lust
of the wicked judges, that solicited her to defile herbodie, if a valiant
captain, and a gracious matrone ought to suffer death, rather then to commit
treason: the one against his king, the other against her married busba^d. much
more ought we to suffer all extremities whatsoever then to commit treason
against god by forsakinge him, and his church for we be more obliged unto him
and his church, then either the captain unto his king 'or the wife unto her
husband.

Let us therefore abide with god and not suffer our selves to be separated
from him: let us continue in his catholic church out of which we can
neither acknovvladge, love, or serve him, let the end of our labor and
perseverance in his religion to the last moment of our lives be a sufficient
witness of our love toward him, and an evident argument to his church of
our faith and religion. the laborer in the gospel was not revvarded until the
work was finished, nor torment or pain could withdraw Chriest from the
heroical work of our redemption until the eternal father was by his
passion satisfied for our offenses and we miserable sinners redeemed from the
thraldom of the devil. this sufferance and passion of Chriest avails
nothing unto us, unless we follovv him and continue vvithim unto the end as
S. 1. Pe^. 2.
Peter says charissimi, Christus passus est pro nobis, vobis relinquens
exemplum, vt sequamini vestigia eius: most louinge Chriest did suffer for us,
leauinge us example to continue in the profession of our faith which when he
delivered unto us, did suffer all difficulties and reproaches unto the infamy
of the cross. The kine that did carry the arcke of our lord, although there
calves were bellovvinge behind them, they never returned or went on the
right side or the left, 1. Reg. c. 6.
but went directly forwards until they came unto the land of Bethsamis:
even so we that carrye the cross of Chriest upon our shoulders ought never
to leave it of, though our sensible appetites would cry upon us, to leave it
of, while we arrive at the land of rest. Ezech. c. 1
The beasts that Ezechiel did see did direct their course, where the spirit
moved them, and never returned back. If the woman of Lot had gone forvvard
without tourning her head backwards, she had not been turned unto an image or
stone of salt: gods commandment unto her, was to go alvvaies forvvard
without looking back. Nemo mittens manum ad aratrum, etc. none puttinge his
hand to the plovve and astervvardes looking back again is apt for the
kingdom of heaven. If once we purpose to be the servants of god, and to
continue as his adoptiue children within the arcke of his church, we should
never forsake so blessed a purpose not suffer our selves to be cast out of so
sure and so certain a place, If Adam in original justice would have
persisted, neither had he been thrust out of paradise, nor we subject to so
many miseries and tribulations. If Solomon would have perseuered in the favor
so abo^dantlie received of god, his saluauation had not been so doubtful: if
the first angel and judas had continued as they began, the one had not been
thrust out of heaven, nor the other deprived of the apostleship, nor of all
the, fruit and merit of his former labors. if Moses and Aaron had not given
over their hope to obtain the land of promise, they had entered therein with
Iosue and Caleph. many men had great favors of god: but because they vvanted
the blessed gift of perseverance, which is nothing else then a continuation in
the good, and gods gracious favor unto the last gasp of our lives, those
favors are nouv rather an increase of their vvoe, then a diminishing of their
everlasting pain. Con^. A^^^.
And therefore the council says Adiutorium D^i and renatis and sanctis
simpliciter est imploraendum vt ad finem bonum peruenire possini: every one,
though never so liolie and of god adopted, must simply, and sincerlie implore
his special healpe, that he may come to a good end. ^ cl^s. 11
ad qua^cumque partem ceciderit lignum sieve ad austrum sieve ad aquilonem ibi
manebit: vvheare soever the tree falls, whether it be toward the South,
or North, there it remains, if we dye in gods grace we shall be sure to
obtain glory, though we may be in purgatory until the pain due unto the
sin be satisfied, if we die in deadly sin, there is no hope of salvation,
nor of the inheritance purchased for us by the blood of Chriest, which we
ought with fear and tremblinge to procure, being not assured thereof, when it
is said nemoscit vtrum odio vel amore dignus sit: none Knovveth whether he be
worthy either of love or of hatred, and as Job says si venerit ad me non
videbo eum, Ioh. 9
si abierit non intelligam: when god will vvouchsafe to come unto me, I shall
not perceive it, and when he will depart from me by his grace, I shall not
understand it, wherefore says he. si simplex fue to hoc ipsum ignorabit anima
mea: If I be simple it is Unknown unto me and therefore S. Paul says nihil
mihi conscius sum sed in hoc no^ iustificatus sum although my conscience does
not accuse me, 2. Cor. 4.
yet I am not thereby justified, because as the prophet says peccatum contra me
est semper my sin alvvaies opposes it self against me. Therefore in a body
so corrupt, so enfeebled with se^sualities, in a soul so subject unto sin,
in a state so full of temptations, in a warfare against so dangerous an host,
so mighty and so strong, as there is no power upon the earth able to resist
it, without the special grace of god: for which reasons let a man be never so
just, he is not assured of his salvation nisi perseuerauerit vsque ad finem
unless he endure unto the end.

THE VIRTUOUS, and godly people must have adversaries in this world.
CHAP. VII.
NO cause can work without a subject, and when the vicious and wicked are
certain moral causes, that work according to their malice: Arist lib. pri.
pliy. c. 5. and 7.
For as Aristotle says no cause can work but in a contrary principle and
therefore contra bonum, malum: esntra vitam. mors: Evil works against good
death against life. Psalm. 18
Circumueniamus iustum (loquuntur impij) quoniam contrarius est operibus
nostris, and diffamat nos: Let us entrap the just man (say the ungodly) because
he is contrary to our doings, and does discredit us.

Virtue is a certain quality of the mind, which is opposite to vice, and can
never be produced, but by contrary qualities, by which all other qualities are
engendered: So that if in earth so many bloody tyrants had not reigned, so many
blessed Martyrs had not triumphed in heaven, the virtue of whose patience
exceeding the violence of persecution, has gained spiritual riches to the
church, and a crown of glory to them selves.

This contradiction betvveen virtue, and vice continued from the beginning. No
sooner came man into this world, but the devil defied him, as an enemy. The
first two brethren, Adamschildren prefigured this, the one so setting himself
against the other, that he slew him because him self was not so good. The
seed of this discord took root in Jacob, and Esau sons of Isaac, Esau
being a type of the wicked, and reprobate, repining at Jacob in whom the
elect were figured; Genesis 22 and 25.
and as Saint Augustine said. Sicut duo par vuli in ^tero Rebeccae: sic in
viero ecclesia duo sibi populi inuicem aduersantur. Even as the two infants
contended in the womb af Rebecca so two sorts of people do strive, and
struggle together in the body of the church. But what should I recount the
controversy of contrary natures, that is to say of man, and an Angel, or of
diverse persons borne both of one mother, and nourished perhaps with one milk
as of Abel, and Cain, Jacob and Esau, or the enmity of other people, some
fighting under the standard of god, some of the devil: Joseph was sold by his
envious brethren, David persecuted by lunaticke Saul, Elias pursued by wicked
Iezabel, Elizeus mocked by ungodly children, Jerusalem brent by proud
Nabuchadonosor, and Susanna slandered by two adulterous judges. In all this
note that the just had some singular virtue, the unjust subject to some
notorious vice, But what should I recount these contentions of diverse natures
in diverse persons, when the very same is foond in man being but one person,
or one subject? For the like contention was never seen betwixt ennimies as
is daily betvveene the two esse^tiall parts whereof man is composed, and
made; I mean the soul, and the body, the spirit, and the flesh the
superior, and inferior parts; insomuch as the life of the one, is the death
of the other, the food of the one the poison of the other, the gain of the one
the loss of the other, and in brief the weal of the one the vvoe of the
other: And from hence it p^oceedes, that we stand in need of so many graces,
and virtues, which albeit they are conferred unto us in the holy Sacrament of
Baptism: yet the soul cannot without much difficulty exercise them by
reason of the contradiction of the body, whereas if the soul were at
liberty, it might make use of them with great facility. And in good sooth it
is no marvel, that carnal people do so much contradict, and oppugn the law
of grace, which is a spiritual law, if the flesh (being so united, and
joined to the spirit (that of the^ both one humane nature resulteth) does so
eagerly pursue the spirit, and with so much despite, that to destroy it, she
fears not to be her own destruction. Even as Saint Paul says. 1 Cor. 5
Littera (idest) carooccidit. The flesh does Kill, which enmity is also
verified in Isaac and Ishmael, Gal. 4 Genesis 21
the son of the bondvvoman which was borne according to the flesh, daring
to mock, and deride the freeborne Isaac, whose nativity was according to the
spirit.

And therefore the gospel of Jesus Christ being spiritual was with such
vehemence impugned: For against it the Roman emperors be^te all humane forces,
against it the philosophers opposed all worldly wisdom, against this carnal
people vvallovving in sin and concupisce^ce and loath to leave their
delights, made insurrection, also that great Dragon raised all his power.
Apos 12. ^sal. 2.2
Aduersus illud principes conuernerum in vnum: Against it the Kings of the
earth combined them selves, against it first all pagans, afterward all
Heretics, and Schismatickes conspired: a^ngust. de es uit. dri li 3. cap. 52.
Videns diabolus (says Zealous Saint Augustine) daemonum templa deseri and in
nomen liberantis mediatoris and currere genns hu manum, haereticos mouit quisub
vocabulo Christiano doctrinae resistere^t Christianae. The devil seeing his
temples to be left, and all the world run to embrace the svveet name of their
redeemer, and mediator stirred up the Heretics, which under the title of
christians should oppose them selves to the christian doctrine. In con. (...)
It Is.
Per verba legis legem impugnant (says Saint Ambrose) By the very words of
the law they resist the law. Nay but the Caluinistes profess faith also but
Saint Hillary tells them: Fidem sine fide praetendunt, In litr^^a
that they pretend says without faith. The psalmist answers them. Pu. 54.
Molliti sunt sermones super oleum, and ipsi sunt tacula. That their words are
steeped in oil, but indeed they are darts. Psalm. 139
Venenum aspidum sub labiis eorum. That the poison of Adders is under their
lips. Veniunt ad vos (says our blessed savior in vestimentis ouium
intrinsccus autem sunt lupi rapaces. They come unto you in sheep clothing,
but in their hearts they are ravening wolves: to which saying blessed saint
Bernard alluding, tells some of them that they are, Foris candidi, intus
autem sordidi: Though outwardly they seem as white, as snow, yet inwardly
they bear another hue. small difference Saint Augustine puts between
Pagans, and Heretics: Persequitur paganismus (says he) aperte, saeuit vt,
leo, haereticus insidiatur vt Draco. ^^g. in ps. ^9
Paganism persecuteth the church openly, and roreth like a Lion, but the
heretic lurketh as a Dragon: The one compels to deny Christ, the other
teaches the same, the one, uses violence, the other treachery, we must be
patie^t for the one, and vvatchfull for the other. Thus much says Saint
Augustine in the peaceable time of the church. By whose admonition we are
taught how we should behave our selves in these dangerous days, least our
function should be contemned, and simple Catholics scandalized, which may be
an occasion of their ruin, and a provocation of gods wrath against us, if
through our negligence they would be careless of their salvation. Therefore S.
Peter bideth us to vvatch quia aduersarius noster diabolus tanquam leo rugiens
circuit, quaerens quem deuoret because our adversary (says he) the devil
like a roaringe lion goes about seeking whom he may devour.

THAT THE CHVRCH of god from the beginning was persecuted, and against Christ
the head this persecution was intended.
CHAP. VIII.
I Vvil (says Chriest) send unto you prophets, Luc. c. 11. Math. 5.14 Job. 15.
and 16.
and Apostles, which shall be both Killed and persecuted, which falls out as
Christ foretold speakinge unto his Apostles pressuramin mundo habebitis, you
shall be tormented in this world: the devil ever stirs up his wicked
ministers to destroy the church of god but chiefly the pastors as the principal
parts there of: Alexander the great when he did besiege Athens said, vluter: in
vita eiue.
that his quarrel was not against the city, but against the ten orators, that
were within, which if they were delivered into his hands, he would raise
the seige, and join a nevve league of freindship with the Citizens, for all
his quarrel as he said, was against those orators, unto which Demostenes
replied after this manner. The wolves did speak after this sort unto the
sheapehards, all the discord that is betwixt you and us proceeds of your
dogs, and if you will deliver the^ unto us, we vvil be perfaict friends. The
dogs being rendered unto them, and peace established, the wolves rose upon the
poor flock, and destroyed it: even so Heretics in these days go about to
take away religious people, and priests, Bishops, and pastors, and under
color of deceit, seek to deceive, and confound our souls. So Julian the
Apostate with fire, and svvord did persecute religious men, and priests,
although he did not put them to death as S. Naz. said, Oras 1. in Iu^.
enuie^g these blessed saints the crown of martyrdom: yet he spared no out
ragious crueltye, which the malice of man could invent to vex trouble, and
afflict these blessed people, for so the oration of the said Naz: unto that
apostate declared: vvherin he did offer himself a suter for all religious
people (saying) si Philosophorum caetum (sic enim eos appellat) qui nullo vin
cu lo humitenentur, qui sola corpora ac ne ea tota quidem possident; qui
Caesari nihil, Deo omnia debent hymnos, preces, vigilias, lachrimas: hos inquit
si mitius tractauerts, etc. If you deal gentlely (says he) with the school
of Philosophers, for so he called the^, which were tied by noe earthly
obligation which did scarce possess their own bodies, which did owe
nothing unto Caesar but all unto god, unto whom they, by their hymns,
prayers, vvatchinge, and tears were consecrated. if you deal gentlely with
the servants, and disciples of god, whose daily conversation is in heaven,
who are the first fruit of our lords flock, the crowns of faith, the
precious margarits, who are the stones of that temple, whose foundation, and
corner stone is Christ, you shall do unto your self, and unto us a singular
benefit this far S. Naz. In all persecutions of the church the pastors, and
religious people were first set upon: because, as it was said, they barked
against those, that go about to destroy the flock of Chriest; so the prophet
Hieremy says, formido, and laqueus factus est nobis vaticinatio our prophecy
does purchase nothing unto us but the halter, Thren. 47.
and occasion of trembling. so were the prophets of the old law afflicted,
and put to cruel torments, amongst whom Micheas after being terribly
beaten, was cast into prison, Vrias was slain, Hieremias after long
ymprisonment, terrible whipping, Ie. 18.19.20
and after cast into a dirtye puddle of filth, vvherin he was ovvervvhelmed,
was stoned to death; Isaias was cut in tvvaine with a savv, and being sent
by god, they have not omitted their functions, not vvithstandinge all the
forces, and threatninges of wicked princes were bent against them: Sydrach,
Dame^. 3.1 21.
and Abednego for refusinge to adore the idol of Nabuchodonosor were cast
into the burning furnace, and in the midst of the flames of raginge fire, they
praised God. Daniel 6.16.
Daniel was cast into the lions den to be devoured. Saul no sooner fell from
God, then he put to death 50. priests in Nobe, why should then the priests,
1 Reg 22 18
and pastors in the law of grace marvel at persecutions, o^ fear the
troubles thereof? do not they see their head elevated upon the cross, and
nailed there unto? was there not a Dragon before the woman which was to be
delivered of a child, that no sooner the child should come into the world,
but he should be devoured of the dragon, and this was the cause that Christ
says speaking to the persecutors of the church. vos ex patre diaholo estis,
and desideria patris vestri vultis perficere ille homicida fuit ab initio etc.
you are the children of the devil, and ready to execute the vvil of your
father, for he was a murderer from the beginning, which ever labored to
destroy Chriest; so the devil did use the help of Pharo to kill all the sons
of the Hebreues, because he thought that Chriest should descend of that nation
according to the flesh, but Moses was delivered, signifienge that Chriest
should escape harm less, he raised up Aman to destroy all the said Hebreues,
Eze. 7.
which he could not obtain, Reg. 11.
he also made an instrument of Athalia to blot out all the posteritye of David,
from vvhe^ce the Messiah according his humanity was to come into the world,
but Ioas was delivered: he stirred up also Antiochus to take away and
confound the stock of Jacob last of all when the fullness of time came in
which Chriest him self came: i Ma^^
he used all policies by Herodes cruelty to kill him: afterward how many
followers of Chriest, and of his race were put to death under Nero under
Nouitia^, under Traia^, under Adria^, under Anthoni Verus, Seuerus, Alexander,
by the fury of the people under Maximinus, under Decio, Valerius Claudius
Aurelianus, Dioclesianus and Maximianus under Julian in the east, in the vveast
under Vale^s amongst the Goathes under Athanericus, under Arcadius, in Persia
under I^eger, the Vandal persecution under Ge^sericus and Hunericus: what shall
(I say? how many were put to cruel death since that time, in all other
countries, how many blessed martirs did suffer by the sects of Martine Luder
and bloody Calvin, which were excitated, and stirred up to destroy Chriest,
and the side of Abraham, which is the catholic church and the ship of the
apostles in the midest of the sea, and they laboring in the same to save
themselves, which Chriest did behold, Bed. hom's cap. 28
as venerable Beda says la bor discipuloru^ in remigando, and contrarius eis
ventus, labores sanctae Ecclesiae varios designat, quae inter vndas seculi
aduersantis and immundorum spirituum flatus ad quietem celeste^ quasi ad fidam
littoris stationem peruenire conatur, the difficulties, that the apostles had
in bringing the ship to land, and the contrary vvindes they sustained: do
declare the manifold troubles of the holy church: and being so sore
afflicted, and grieuouslie persecuted, as well bythe gentiles, as by heretics,
it seems, if it were possible, that the redeemer thereof for a time would
forsake the same: this much vener. Bed, what shall we say of the sore
persecutions of this age, which brings forth monstrous heretics, so many
bloody tirantes, so many false prophets, Hier. ^^.
of whom Chriest did say, I have not sent them, and they did run, I have not
spoken unto them, and they did prophecy, which do vvatch and labor to
corrupt, and defile our souls with their poisoned doctrine, whose malicious
vvilles poisoned, and infected with all kind of heretical impiety, and
whose understanding furnished with all deuilish policies and
inue^tio^sproceed now so far in their wickedness, and having gotten such
success in their wicked enterprises, that if we had not so firmlie, and so
steadfastly builded upon Chriest his words who promised, that the gates of
hell, should never prevail against his church, we should be afraid, that
now being environed with so many enemies, being afflicted with so many false
prophets, being tormented by so many cruel bloody tyrants, being bought and
sold by so many impious polititia^s, and Machiuailes, being troubled by so
many apostats: and forsaken of her base and rebellious children, it would now
be utterly destroyed.

THE CHVRCH OF god must suffer persecution, and thereby is rather reformed,
then destroyed.
CAP. IX.
IT is expedient, asvvell for the justice of god, as also for the trial of the
good, that there should be heretics, and wicked people, who should bridle
and restrain our passions, and the furious inclination of our sensuality: for
our corruption is such as if by the discipline of wicked people (which are as
it were our tutors) it were not repressed, we would break forth into such
madness, as the state of our salvation should be in danger: no other wise
then a vvild horse breakinge oftentimes the bridle casts of his rider.

By nature we are the children of wrath, and the servants of sin, in
which we be conceived, and by which we be corrupted and inclined to gape
after corruptible things.

This inclination was transfused, and brought from Adam unto us in our
generation, and so in us it is natural: and being deprived of Original
justice, in which, our first parents were created: (which as the diuins do
say) was the golden bridle to curb the flesh from rebellious insurrection
against the spirit, and the same being taken away, by the doleful
transgression of our said parents, without any positive quality thereunto
adjoined, man is carried away, and impelled by the nature of sensual
appetits, which is to follow sensualities and sensible things opposite and
contrary to the rule of reason: this Saint Chry: co^side ringe says as a
ship, that has lost her stern, is tossed too and fro, not whether the pilot
would, but where the tempest drives her so man having lost first this
golden stern of original grace, carried a way not where reason would
direct, but where unruly appetits do mislead (this he said of our unbridled
lust, and disposition unto base appetites) and although this inclination in
those that are baptized is not a sin, yet it provoke and disposes us unto
sin and is called by the diuins) fomes peccati) which is the law of the
flesh, whose desire and affection is contrary to the desires of our spirit:
which witnesses S. Romans ^
Paul saying I have a law in my members which resists the law of my
mind, and laboreth to make me vassal and captive to the law of sin: and
and therefore he says, who shall be able to deliver me, from this body of
death: of which co^playneth holy Job. Job 6.
saing quare me fecisti contrarium tibi and factus sum mihi metipsi grauis:
wherefore have thou framed me contrary unto thee, and displeasant unto my
self: and therefore he said non est auxilium mihi in me. and of my self I have
no healpe, by reason of his inferior part disposed to sin, which do
perturbe and divert us from the true path of the creator, and the rule of
virtue, and also makes war against the superior part, which is his
spirit, which participatinge (as it were) with god, that rightly amongst
reasonable creatures, ought to obtain the place of government, being by nature
endued, and enobled, with a beam of heavenly brightness, and to bring them
to any agreement, or peaceable harmony, the handmayde must obey the mistress,
and the body the soul, which cannot be brought to pass, but by the force of
extreme laws, that must be seuerlie executed upon a lavvlesse, and unruly
servant, 1. Cor. 9
which S. Paul extended rigourously tovvarde his own body saying castigo
corpus meum and in seruitut emspiritus redigo carnem meam, etc. I chastise my
body and reduce my flesh unto the servitude of the spirit: the like all the
sanictes have don, by fasting, vvachinge praye^g, and other austere works of
religion, and penna^ce, and by this mea^s have gotten the upper hand of this
slave, and rebellious servant, not only reuolteth from the spirit, but also
draws the spirit from god, by reason of whose rebellion, we be come
disloyal unto his commandementes, insensible to his inspirations, unthankful
unto his benefits, careless of his divine justice, obliuious of his mercy, and
forgetful of our own salvation, and god almighty, for a just punishment
which we have deserved, permits, for that our soul would not obey god,
should become a slave unto the flesh, which is his own slave which S.
August. does verify quoniam anima superiorem dominum suo arbitrio deseruerat
inferiorem famulum (carnem) ad suum arbitriu^ non tenebat. because the soul,
Decluitas Dei lib. 1^ c. 14
by the liberty of free will, did forsake god our supreme lord, the
inferior which is the flesh renders not that obedience unto the soul
according unto the slavery of the one, and liberty of the other, not that
the soul has no power to command, and constrain the flesh to obey, for it
has free vvil to do and undo what likes it best, and as S. Aug. says
voluntate propria quisque malus and none commits sin but by his free will
and so he said ream linguam non facit nisi rea men's A^ug. de ni. lib. 2. ci. ^^.
our tongue is not guilty, but by our guilty mind, which he confirmed in his
14. Aug. deci l. i3 c. i4 Aug. lib. i4 cap. i3
book nec car^ corruptibilis animam peccatricem: sed anima peccatrix fecit
esse corruptibilem carnem nether the corruptible flesh maks a sinful soul,
but the sinful soul makes the flesh corruptible, for the greatest,
difficulty, that we have to supprise the flesh, and the vnre asonable
concupiscence thereof proceeds of the long custom, and continuance of the
soul in sin as the said S. Aug. says libidini dum seruitur facta est
consuetudo, and dum consuetudini non resistitur, facta est necessitas. our
lust being obeyed is be come a custom, and this custom being not quickly
restrained grows unto an necessity of nature which can be hardly
repelled, D. Aug. Arist. (...)
and so Arist says voluntas adhaerens peruerso fini non potest diu carere
praua electione. our will tending unto an ill end unto which it is impelled
and moved by this said bad inclination cannot be long without bad means to
put it in execution: for the outvvard obiectes, and occasions by which it is
moved, as also the internal passions of our base affection by which it is
daily solicited, and ouerruled, do so pervert our judgment, blind our
understanding, infect our vvilles, as we may say with the prophet defecit me
virtus mea and lumen oculorum meorum non est mecum my force did fail me and I
have not the use of my sight: this he said by reason of his great fall from
gods grace of which being deprived he was blinded with brutish
concupiscence and made a slave unto his passions therefore he said possederunt
nos alij domini absque te: we forsake the o god and do yield our selves to
other lords which are our sinister desires which we follow, and self
will whose unreasonable commandementes we obey, the which has so
grieuouslie vvounded our souls that it can never be cured, but at the great
cost and charges of our said proper will that inflicted the same, and as
swelling ulcers must be healed be hot burning iron, by which the deadly
canker which lies under the flesh may be taken away, so this poisoned canker
which lurketh in our hearts and gnavveth our intrailes, by which we
languish and pine away, cannot be healed but by sharp medicine of troubles
and persecutions, and as the apostle says virtus in infirmitate perficitur the
perfection of virtue is made known in adversity, 2. Cor. i^
for as Roses the more they be pressed the better they smell, frankencense before
it be cast unto the fire shows not his virtue, nor our flesh before it be
seuerlie punished, and restrained of her pernicious, and dangerous liberty
acknowledged either superior, to command it, or law to bridle and direct
it: Alexander the great being vvounded with an arrovve in his side, did
acknovvledge him self to be amortal man, where as before through victories
gotten in so many battles, and the conquest obtained over so many nations,
was so proud, that he commanded him self to be adored as god, Prouer. 28.
therefore the holy ghost said beatus est home qui semper est pauidus. Happy
is that man that is alvvaies fearful of him self. by liberty we become
dissolute, and careless, by restraint vvareful, and circumspect, the Romans
giuinge liberty unto the Bactrians for that they did succor the Consul Rufus
in the spartan vvarres, they refused it, saying that by liberty they should
become slaves. The common wealth of the Lacedemonia^s being so glorious, and
renowned in many excellent virtues, so soon at it began to live at quiet,
presently declined, and at length fell to ruin, the which may be Known and
verified of the Romans, by the contention that was betwixt Cato and Scipio
Nasica: Cato was of opinion that Carthage should be altogether destroid.
Scipio would have it preserved, for that the Romans having no adversaries
abroad through long peace, and quietness, should be weakened: vvoe be vnro
you Rome, says he, if Carthage stand not; for external vvarres being ended,
then intestine variance, and civil discord was renewed betwixt the Romans
them selves, which was the cause of greater calamity among them, then all
the foreign vvarres they had against their foraine enemies.

The universal peace of the church was the cause, that many horrible
dissentions, and dangerous schisms were amongst church me^, among vvho^
through long quietness, the key of knowledge failed in many, iniquity did
abound, and charirie waxed cold vverfore Isaiah, Isa 37. D. Per. ^er. 33 i^
Cant.
cried out in pace amaritudo mea amarissima in peace I am most disquieted, and
as S. Augustine says the persecution of tirantes is grievous, the persecution
of heretics is worse, but that of voluptuous pleasures and quiet rest, is
the most dangerous of all; because as S. Chrysostom. D. Chrysostom.
said tormenta faciebant martyrs: blandimenta vero Epicuros. torments makes
martyrs, pleasures epicures, of which peace the spouse in the canticles
(says) nigra sum sed formosa filie Jerusalem. Cant. 1. v. ^
I am black but well favored (o daughters of Jerusalem) which words
Origenes interpreted to be spoken of the soul of man, which by the grace
gotten in affliction, is purified, and made beautiful, which before by long
quietness, and our corruptible inclination te ^u^to, was deformed. David
through long peace, and tranquillity of spiritual consolation, Psalm. 29.
said, in abu^dantia mea non mouebor in aeternum in abundance of long rest, and
divine consolation I shall never be moved; which was the cause as S. Basil
says that David fell so grieuouslie, and said after wards non est pax
ossibus meis my bones have no rest, Psalm. 37.
and in flagellis paratus sum: and dolor meus in conspectu meo semper?: I
prepare my self for gods discipline, and my grief is alvvaies before mine eyes,
and lest the manifold graces, and privileges of the apostle should be the
occasion of his fall of he should take pride thereof or think himself secure,
and void of any danger, he said ne magnitudo reuelationum extollat me, etc. 2.
Corin. 1^
least the manifold revelations of god should puff me up, the stinge of the
flesh which is the angel of Satan does buffet me; it was said unto Adam by
god maledicta terra in opere tuo: in laboribus co^medes de ea, Gene. 3.
spinas and tribulos, germinabit tibi cursed is the earth in thy work in thy
labor thou shall eat thy bread, thorns and thistles it shall bring forth unto
thee, and altlough there were no devil to tempt us, the flesh that brings
forth the said briers, ad thistles tempts us, and endeuoreth to defile us,
with her raging concupiscence, the world laboreth with his vanity to
overthrow us, the soul with her pride to confound us, and besides there is a
devil that vexes us, and te^pteth us to fall away from god every day quia hic
enim nobis colluctatio aduerfus carnem and sanguinem sed aduersus principes, ad
Fps. 6.
etc. For we do not only struggle with flesh, and blood: but we have our
combat against the power, and strength of the princes of darkness, as long
as we live, in this world we ought not to expect peace, and as long as
we be compassed with so many adversaries we ought not to fear their
inuasio^s, and as long as we are sailinge in the dangerous sea of this
world in which we must pass through the dangerous gulf of death we
must pass by the narrovue way of penance, and mortification, if we mean
to come unto life, and not through the broad vvide way of pleasures, unless
we intend to fall into confusion. there is nothing so hurtefull for a
christian soldiour, as the pleasures of this world, unto which we dedicat
our selves if we had no adversaries to withdraw us from them. the soldiers
of Hanniball after the famous victory obtained in the battle of Canas against
the Romans, through vvanton pleasures and rest, unto which they gave them
selves, at Capua were after so softened, and enfeebled, that they, which
were able to endure great traueles, Plut. in vi ta Hamb.
and sustain much labor vvherby they did win many battles, against the
Romans, were by their own quietness, and pleasures, vanquished, and overcome
by their said enemies: all ecclesiastical histotories do bear witness that
the church of Chriest, is fubiect to confusion, and danger in time of any
peace, Cyp. sermon. de lapsis.
or quietness: S. Ciprian also does verify the same: Dominus inquit probare
suam familiam voluit, and quia traditam nobis diuinitus disciplinam, pax longa
corruperat iacentem fidem and paene dixerim dormientem censura celestis erexit
studebant singuli augendo patrimonio, non in sacerdotio religio deuota, non in
praesbiteris fides integra, non in operibus misericordia, non in moribus
disciplina: our lord, says he, would try his family, and because gods
religion was corrupted by long peace, and our faith which languished, by
long quietness, was by celestial correction raised up: every one did study
how to augment his patrimony: in preisthood no devotion was observed: in
churchmen faith was not sincerlie kept: their works were without mercy:
and their manners without discipline; this infamy, and disorder brought in by
the tranquillity of the church, as the good martyr tells, D. Aug. de vera
relag. ^. 8.
was reformed, by the persecution and troubles thereof, for as, S. Aug. says
multa ad fidem catholicam pertinentia dum hereticorum callida inquietudine
vexantur: the vexations, and disquietnesse of heretics redovvndeth to the
good of the catholic faith, that it may re defended against them, that it may
be more duly examined more diligentie considered, more duetifullie observed,
more clearlie understood, more fervently preached, and being brought in
question by the adversary, may be religiously embraced, so god may be
glorified, Chriest honored, our faith renowned, the constancy of the good
confirmed, the vveake strengthened, the heretic confounded and Satan
overthrown thus far S. Aug. Chry. in Math. 20.
unto which agrees Saint Chrysostom. virtus fidet in periculis securaest, in
securitate periclitatur the virtue of faith in danger, is secure, in security
is in danger, for nothing says he abateth the force o faith, somoch as long
peace, holy Arsenius, after that he obtained of god to be delivered of some
temptations, by which he was attached, and finding him self by long rest, and
quietness to be more negligent, and careless of him self, did reneue his combat
with him self, and sought of god the former temptations, this was the cause
that god gave leave to the devil to vex Job, gods meaning was nothing else,
then to exercise his virtue, which becomes mortified with travels, and
contradiction: the wheat that is not turned, is eaten with vvesels, the
garment that is not worn: is eaten with mothes, the timber that is not
seasoned: is spoiled with costlickes, the iron that is not wrought, is
consumed with rust, bread long rept grows mouldie, the faith of every
christian is the better if it be tried, the goodness of every thing is
known by the exercise thereof, and so your faith shall be now perceived by
your temptation and persecution, which is the fire according to S. Augustine:
quo aurum rutilat, palia consumitur, perficitur peccator ne misere pereat, by
which the gold is tried, the rust is consumed, the sinner purified, and made
perfect, that he should not perish miserably, unto which agreed. S. John
Chrysostom. Chrysostom. lib. 4 sermon. 1. de marryrolog. hom. 3.
vt infirmatur peccator aduersis: sic iustus tentationibus roboratur, as the
sinner is weakened by aduersirie: so the just is confirmed thereby: although
many of you in this persecution shall deny Chriest, yet I hope Chriest shall be
more glorified by such as shall confess him unto their death, then his church
sca^dalized, by such as shall forsake the same: assuring your selves, that there
is no other cause why god does suffer this persecution against his church,
the^ for the good of you, that are the members thereof, and for the exercise,
and practice of your virtue, and manifold influences of gods grace bestovved
upon you by which you may be defended against your adversaries. God did
suffer amongst the children of Israel Iebeseus to exercise there strength, and
to try their vallure: god did assure them the land of promise, but none did
inter unto it, but such as overcame the fierce inhabita^tes thereof, against
whom the Israelites were to fight: no more can we inter into the promised
land of heaven, unless we overcome courageously the deuiles, and his
instruments, which indevvored to hinder us of the passage thereof, for which
they so often provoke us to the skirmish, and therefore god permits
heretics for the trial of catholics, the wicked for the exercise of the
good, and varres against his soldieurs to give them a glorious crown if they
vvil overcome, a pay for there pain, a revvard for there labor, and glory if
they will fight valiantly.

THE BLOOD OF Martyrs is the seed of the church which more increases by the
suffrance of godly people.
CAP. X.
THe natural histories do declare, that there is no better remedy for a
withered tree, to bring fourth fruit: then to sprinckle, and moysten the
body thereof with the blood of man: so the church of god which did seem to
wither away, and decay by long peace and rest with the blood of martyrs
does flourish with saints, and holy men. according to Tertulian: T^rt. in
Ap. Io. 12
sanguis martyrum est semen christianorum: and granum cadens in terram vbi
mortuum fuerit multum fructum affert, the blood of martyrs is the seed of
christians, and the grain that falls unto the earth when it is dead,
brings fourth abundance of fruict, the blessed Ignatius said that he him self
was one of the grains of Chriest: for if the grain be not dead in the earth,
there grows no fruit of it, if Chriest had not died for the church, none
had bin a martyr, and because he suffered for his church being his spouse, she
indeauoreth to revvard him in the same coin, and to give unto him blood for
blood, and so she says in Exodus and in the Psalm. Exo. 4. and Psalm. 115.
quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi what shall I render
unto him for all that he gives unto me: Apo. ^.
qui dilexit nos and lauit nos a peccatis nostris sanguine suo: which loved us
and vvashed us from our sins: the church does both promise, and perform
saying calicem salutaris accipia^, Psalm. 115. Ma^^. 5.26
and nomen Domini inuocabo. I will pleadge him in that bitter challice, which
he druncke unto us. he was the first, that druncke of this cup, and the first
grain of his gospel that was dead in the earth, and primogenitus mortuorum
the first child that intred the celestial paradise, and therefore many blessed
children are also dead with him, by whose sufferance and death god is
glorified, the church honored, sustained, and established, as acertaine holy
martyr says Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguin^ caepit. Sanguine succreuit
sanguine finis erit. by blood the church was funded, by blood it began, by
blood it continued, and by blood shall have an end. as a man cannot live but,
by the death, and blood of many beasts which are ordained for his
sustentation, so the church of Chriest, cannot well be sustained, but by the
the blood of holy martyrs. In the old synagoge, vvilde beasts were offered
unto god in sacrifice, by which god was contented, but now in the law of
grace, not only the blood of Chriest, was abondantlie offered unto him. but
also the blood of infinite blessed martyrs, as the prophet says: Psalm. 78.
effuderunt sanguinem sanctorum tuorum sicut aquam in circuitu Jerusalem. they
have shed the blood of thy saints, as if it were water in the circuit of
Jerusalem, qui sanguinem sanctorum and prophetarum effuderunt: Apo^a. 16.
which did shed the blood of the saints, and of the prophets, for there are
offered more men unto god in sacrifice in the law of grace, then were
beasts in the old law: and as S. Hierom. Epist. ad ^hron and Heliodo.
witnesses for every day in the year five thousand martyrs unto his age:
and since how many thousand did suffer? although the tyrants did indeauoure
to raze the registers of blessed martyrs: yet we find, by such as be extant,
that his computation is true, though it be rather vvonderfull then incredible;
for at one time 200. 300. 400. 600. together was nothing, and that daily,
and oftentimes, 2000. Martyr^r log 12. October.
3000. and more, some times in a^fricke 4966. under Hunericus king of the
Goathes, amongst whom there were many bishops, priests, deacons, and lay
people which did receive the crown of martyrdom. I make no mention of the
6000. that were all put to death with their captain Mauritius, not of the
1000. that were crucified by Adrian, and Antonie imperors in the montaine
Ararar, not of the 10000^. Virgins that were put to death by the Hunns. but I
cannot keep silence, that a whole city in phrigia was destroyed by the
persecutor: so as neither woman nor child did escape the fury of the
slaghter, such was the rage of the infernal dragon, who laboreth to
ouerflovve the earth with the blood of martyrs, Apud Gr^^os 26 december.


In the Calender of February 28. in the city of Nicomedia by the commandment
of Maximinus 200. christians were brent in the 2. of February in the same
Calender 3000. which did suffer at Rome and 3000. that did suffer at
Jerusalem by Cosdore, what shall I speak of all the days of the year of all
other countries, and places: the number that ended their lives by extreme
torments, none knovveth, but he, that predestined them, and has given them
grace to suffer, as also a crown for their sufferance, so as the church may
say unto Chriest that, which the wife of Moses said unto him at the
circumcition of his son sponsus sa^guinis tu mihi es you are unto me the
spouse of blood even as the seed, Exodus 4.
that is sown in the field brings foarth no fruit, but by rain, and heat
of the sun: so the catholic religion, which is the seed, that is sown
in his church brings neither holiness or piety with it, unless it be
watered by the blood of Chriest, and his martirs, neither ca^, it bud fourth,
but by the burning and inflaming heat of the holy ghost which is the fire that
Chriest did say should burn in the hearts of his blessed martyrs: which are
like as S. Augustine says unto the children of Israel in Aegipt the more they
were oppressed, the more they did multiply: and as Leo Papa says: Leo Papa
in sermon de natali aloru^^ Pes. and Pauli.
Ecclesia non minuitur persecutionibus, sed augetur, and semper Dominicus ager
segete ditiore vestitur, dum grand quae singula cadent multiplicata nascuntur,
nam occiso vno martyr plures surgebant fideles. The church by persecution
diminishes not, but rather increases, and our lords feilde is the more
richer, that many grains do fall in it, because that every one does
multiply, for one martyr being made, many christians do rise and S. Amb. lib.
9 c. 10. (...) lucam.
Ambrose says sicut vinea dum ligatur erigitur and rescissa non minuitur sed
augetur ita sancta plebs, etc. as the vine being tied rises up, being lopped
and cut, it increases: so the people of god when they be humbled, they be
promoted unto which agrees Cassiodorus. lib. variar ^.
nouit Ecclesia beneficia Domini: triumphare de suis cladibus, ingrauata
persecutionibus si quidem proficit, afflictione semper augetur, sanguine
martyrum irrigatur, trist^tia magis erigitur, angustia dilatatur, fletibus
pascitur, ieiunijs reficitur: deinde potius crescit vnde mundus deficit. The
church knovveth gods benefits, to triumph for her calamities: for being laden
with persecution she profits, by affliction alvvayse increases, with the
blood of martyrs she is watered, with heaviness she is exalted, with
straightness she is enlarged, with tears she is nourished, with fasting it
is refressed, and in one word it prospers with that by which the world
decaieth: and therefore S. Augustine says, that although by the persecution of
heretics, the church does suffer many tribulations, yet Chriest turns all
that persecution to the good of his servants, which by their tribulation,
Math. 5.
and affliction do obtain those blessings, which Chriest in his gospel
promises: saying blessed be you when you shall be persecuted, for this
persecution, and for his death ended therein, the blessed martyr saint Cypria^
gave god thanks when the sentence of death was pronounced against him.

OF GODS PVnishmentes which he inflicteth upon persecutors, although for a
time they flourish.
GAP. XI.
I Vstus es Domine says Hiere. Abac. 1. Psalm. ^2. Hier. 12 Job. 21
and iusta loquar ad te, quare via impiorum prosperatur, etc. Thou art just (o
lord) and justly I will ask of thee, wherefore do the wicked prosper? here
the holy man would feign put up a bill of complaint against god for suffering
vvic^ed, Aug. Ench c. 11. lib. de ordinec. 7 last. lib. de ira Dei. Isidor. lib
de summ^ hono Iusebde praepa Eua^ gelic^ lib 3 Aug sib de ciui^ c 8 and lib. ^
c. ^8
and transgressors of his law to prosper. S. Augustine answers to this
question saying Deus cuius bonitas est potentia, etc. god whose goodness is
his might and being omnipotent good, out of the evil he vvreasteth good in
disposing, and conuetting the evil unto goodness, and by the pain, and
punishmente of sin, repaireth and amendeth the badnesse of sin, for if
evil were not, there should be no use of vindicatiue justice to punish it,
or of patience to be exercised by it and so he says, aug Euch^ 25.16. tom 3
melius enim Deus iudicauit de malis benefacere, quam mala nulla esse
permittere: it is more convenient to gods judgment to convert the evil unto
good, then to suffer none at all, and therefore he said that evil, and wicked
people are suffered, aug in Ps 54 v 1
that god his vvonderfull goodness may be known, omnis malus aut ideo viuit,
vt corrigatur, aui ideo viuit, vt per illum bonus exer ceatur and so evils are
suffered, either for their correction, that do committ them, or for their
trial, that do suffer them. for as in man there is no goodness without
patience, which evil works: so there is no evil without pain which
follovveth sin as the shadovv the body according to S. Gregory; Rom 2
unto which agrees the apostle, ira and indignatio, etc. anger, wrath
tribulation, and anguish upon the soul, that works iniquity: vvheruppon
S. Aug. says voluisti Domine, Aug. lib. 1. conf. c. 12
etc. it is thy will, o lord, and so we know it by experience, that a
disordered soul is a sufficient punishment for it self. Hier. Hier. 2.
verifieth this also scito and vide, know and behold, what a doleful thing
it is, to forsake god, and not to be possessed with his fear.

God makes a whip of the wicked to punish the faults, and reform the lives
of his children, and as the father casts the rodd into the fire, with which
he corrected his children: so god deals with these wicked people, whom he
permits to increase in their mischief, and wicked plotts until such as be
predestined be corrected, gods wrath appeased, and the reprobate be brought
to their utter confusion, and so cast into that endless fire ordained for them:
Apoc. 22.
qui nocet, noceat a^hu^: and qui in sordibus est sordes^at: he that hurts,
let him hurt as yet, and he that is defiled: let him be defiled as yet. that
god suffers the wicked to go on in their wicked purposes, and to afflict the
good, his principal intention is the reformation, and salvation of the one,
and not the damnation of the other: Isa. 10.
but vvoe be unto the wicked that are ordained to reform the vices of others,
when they them selves are rather deformed then reformed: the like vvoe was
pronounced against Assure, and yet by Isaias he was called the rod of gods
fury, and the club of his anger and yet by the said prophet it is said Assure
shall fall by the svvoerd, Isa. 31.
and his children shall be slaves; god did raise up Saul as S. Cyprian says to
afflict the people of Israel with manifold impositions, Cyp. lib. 3 Epl. 9.
and exactions for contemning Samuel, or rather god in him: afterward the
said Saul forgetting him self, and despising the said Samuel, was deposed of
his kingdom, and deprived of his life, god suffered Achab to persecute the
Prophet Mycheas, but Achab was slain afterward of his enemies; Iora^ the
son of Achab, and all his progeny were put to death by Iehu; I will said
the prophet unto Iehu require the blood of all the servants and Prophets of
god at the hands of Iesabell. ^ Reg. 3i.
When Zacharias the prophet was murdered in the house of god, at his death he
said Videat Dominus and requirat: 3. Reg. 3i.
let god behold and revenge, 3 Reg 22
the servants of King Ioas, by whose will he dyed, insulted upon the said
Ioas, 4 Reg 9
and slew him in his bed. Amasias King of Judah, 2 para i4 2 para 29
for the like offense had no better end, his son Ozias for usurping the
function of the priest, was strocken with a leprosy: who would not fear
asvvell the horrible punishments of the rebellious conuenticle of Chore
Datha^, and Abira^, who for not obeing Moses, and Aaron were svvallovved of
the earth; Ezech 5
as also that of Manasses the persecutor of Isaias, and Zedechias the
persecutor of Hieremie qui vos ta^git etc. Zach ^ 4
which touches you says the holy ghost touches the apple of mine eye. Lu^
il
Chriest says the blood of Zacharias the prophet, whom you have killed
betwixt the temple, and the alter, shall be required at your hands. the most
grieuouse calamities, and horrible punishments of the vagabo^d dispersed
jews throughout all nations, their hardenesse of heart, and obduration in
their infidelity, unto which their vvilfull, and blind passions have brought
them their incorrigible, and intractable humors, which by no reason, or
authority of scripture can be reclaymed, is nothing else then gods just
judgment executed upon them by the Romans, (to avoid whose government they put
Chriest to death) for the blood of our savior, according to their own
decree: sanguis eius supernos etc. saying: let is blood light upon us, and our
posterity. Pilat then president of jury that gave sentence of death against
him and condemned him, was partaker of the punishments inflicted for the same
(as Eusebius and Nycephorus do write) for being in disgrace by Tyberius the
emperor, Euse. Hyst. Eccl. lib. ^. c. 7. Nycep lib. 2. c. 10.
and banished by Caius and being tormented by his guilty conscience, did kill
him self. unto the like miserable end, Anna, and Cayphas were subject as
those authors do wright. It is recorded by all ecclesiastical histories that
persecutors do seldom escape a bad end, omitting pagan princes, I thought
good to set down a fevve examples of heretical tyra^ntes and of some
catholics. Consta^tius the Arrian emperor, Atha. epi. ad solutariam vi^^
agenies
and a greaet persecutor of Liberius the Pope, and of S. Athanasius and other
catholic bishops usurping unto him selue the determination of ecclesiastical
causes, Amiann^ Marcell. lib. 22. Ambr. lib. 31
ended most miserably as the said Ath. witnesses, Vale^s, a cruel
persecutor of the church and of Isai the mo^cke for reproving him for his
cruelty, was by the Goathes with many of his nobility burned in flieng from
them.

Valentiman the younger a great persecutor of S. Ambrose was hanged by his
own servants as the said S. ^^b lib 5 ^pistolaru^ 32
Ambro. declares. Anastasius a great persecutor of priests, and religious
people, and therefore excommunicated by Gelasius the Pope was strocken down
by a thunderbolte as Eutropius vvriteth. Eutrop 4 ^p 34
Mauritius the emperor a great disturber of S. Gregory, who thus writ
unto him, if the sins of Gregory said he be such, as they be insufferable,
the sins of S. Peter are not such, whose place I hold, was apprehended by
an ordinary soldier of his own called Phoca, having exalted him self unto
the imperial throne, after killing his wife, and children in his presence,
did hang him self upon a gibber, and being upon the ladder, he uttered these
words iustus es Domine, etc. Blundus li 3 decad 1 ^aul^sd^^ c^^us li ^8
O lord thou art just, and right is thy judgment, Constance the nephew of
Heraclius, which banished Martine the Pope, was slain in Cicilia of his
own servants: the like end did happen also unto Michael the emperor. what
should I remember the death of Constantius the son of Leo, of Henry the 4.
S^n a^^ to 3 in Cons^^ce (...) Mechaele
the first emperor of the vveast, of Frederick the 2. Frederk Barbarosa,
Philip, Sigober ad ann 778
Otho the 4. Co^radus, Manfredus Lodouick the 4. and other emperors, and
kings that were great persecutors of the church, and of the pastors thereof as
Nauclerus, Gene brard, Caesar Baro. do witness, which also do declare the
miserable end of many kings, and princes of England. for expelling and
banishing bishops out of their several dioces also the said Caesar Baro. Beda
lib 4 cap 26 hist Eccles
anno, Domini 684. and venerable Beda do testify the miserable end of Efridus
king of the North part of England. I will put down the said Beda his own
words translated out of Latin; Elfridus having sent Bertus with an army
into Ireland, waste and spoiled most miserably the innocent nation and
alvvaies most freindlie unto the english, so as the svvorde of the enemy did
not spare church, or monastery, the people of the Island tesisted them the best
they could, and called, on gods help against them and to revenge their
affliction, and although cursers, and ill tongued cannot possess the Kingdom
of heaven, yet it is believed, such as were cursed for their impiety, did the
sooner receive punishment, according their deserte god exacting the same,
vvheras the year follovving the said King rashly, and without advise of his
council, and against the will of Cutbert of blessed Memory, which was of
late made bishop, invaded his neighbors dominions, and being brought unto
great streightnes and difficulty, his army, and him self was slain the
year of his adge 40. and of his reign the 15. and his freindes did prohibit
him to enterprise this war, but be cause the year before he refused to
hear the most reverend father Egebert, that he should not impugn and afflict
Ireland hurting him nothing, it is given him as a pnnishment not to hear those
that labored to withdraw him from destruction, from which time the povvet
of England began to ebb, and decline this far venerable Beda a holy saint
of the english nation if Oza for touching the Arcke of god being a place
vvheare the table of the law, a Reg 7
Moses rodd and other relickes were kept, was strocken down dead with a
thu^derbolt. the beasts wear stoned to death for going upon the montaine. 4
Reg 13
why should not reason nable people be seuerlie punished of god for embrevving
their murdering hands with the innocent blood of his saints, which be not
dead things, as the arck wear, but the living temples of the holy ghoast,
which are mediators betwixt god, and man: whose authority given unto the^
by Chriest exceeds the power and jurisdiction either of kings upon the
earth, or angels in heaven which have power over the souls of monarkes, and
emperors, Io 20 Mat 218
unto whom our savior says whose sins soever you forgive in earth they
shall be forgiven in heaven, etc. of whom, S. Peter says vos autem genus
electum, Pec c 2
regale sacerdotium gens sanctae etc. you are the chosen stock, the hinglie
priesthood, the holy family, people picked out, that you should declare his
wonders etc. although many priests be ignorant, and full of imperfections,
for amongst so many, there must be some good and some bad the church of Chriest
being like unto the net of the gospel, that draws all sort of fishes. for
in this church we say dimitte nobis, etc. forgive us onr trespasses and of
which trespasses the apostles tgem selves being the first fruit of the holy
gkoast were not exempted when they said we offend god in many things,
Psalm. 13 52 Eccle. 7 Prou. 20. Iac. 1 1. Io. 1. Hie 2. Co^c. Nileni.
and if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, as S. John says,
amongst the apostles there was a Judas and among the angels which are puri
actus, pure spirits, and incorruptible there were many that fell among the
children of Adam, the murderer Cain and innoe cent Abel: even so among
priests, and although there are many, by whose evil life, and ungodly
behavior the church suffers great scandal, yet thrankes be to god, there are
many virtuous, godly, co^tine^t, not ytched with ambition, not defiled with
riotousnes, not blinded with covetousness, not infected, or spotted with any
mortal offense, whose conversation is in heaven, and whose glory is the
sincerity of an undefiled conscience, whose continual exercise is the
mortification of their proper appetites, and whose threasure is a soul
decked, and replenished with the influence of grace, and the virtues that do
follovv it, and as S. Augaract. 5. ^^ea.
Augustine says Sacerdos si Luxuriosus est, siauarus, etc. If the priest be
riotous, couetuous, or proud what passes through his hands, is not defiled,
the sacraments that he handles remain vnspoted, for as the purgation that the
physician sends is nothing the worse for the patient, though he that
ministers it unto him, be bad. so the sacraments of the law of grace,
which are send from the phyfition of our souls, by the priest for the curing
of the disease thereof, have not their virtue from the priest, that ministers
them, but by the merits of Chriest his passion, that ordained them: and as the
priests in the old law being but figures of the priesthood of the law of
grace were obeyed of the people under pain of death, Deutr. ^7
much more Chriest his priests, should be obeyed of Christians, of whom him
self spoke these words whosoever despises you despises me, (...)
and whoso ever hears you hears me and as S. Cypria^ says qui Christo non
credit sacerdotem facienti, lib. 4. ep. 9.
postea credere incipiet sacerdoti vindicanti whosoever that believes not
Chriest ordaining and instituting preesthood he must belcue Chriest revenging
the quarrel of priests, and especialie on those that punish them as tray
turs, and banish them as offenders.

THE SECOND BOOK WHEREIN THE doubteful are resolved.
The sanctity of those that planted the catholic religion and the impiety of
the impugners thereof, ought to confirm our religion.
CAP. I.
When faith is a virtue infused by god, by which we do believe, every
thing, that god does reveal unto his church, and the church does propose
unto the faithful to believe, then Calvin, and Luder have noe faith, when they
do not believe in the Catholic church, nor in the communion of Saints, etc.
for according to all the diuins, and to the holy scripturs whosoever
believes not every article of our faith, has no faith, and when these, do
misbeleeue most, or all the said articles they can have no solid, or sound
faith at all. Religion is nothing else then a bindinge, and consecratinge of our
selves unto god in such sort, as we should never forsake him, and when
Luder, and Calvin and the rest of the apostles of their pretended reformation,
or rather of their own confusion and manifest destruction of all religion,
and piety, have quite forsaken god, unto whom by solemn vovv they were
dedicated, have, forsaken their religion, have brocken their promise, have
volated, and transgressed their sacred vows, and have caused others to do the
like. we may easily perceive that there is no religion in them, and when
they have no religion them selves: how may we become religious by them,
when in their dealinges we see nothing but all irreligious impiety: the
effect of good religion are good works according to S. James to visit and
succurre orphans, Iac. ^
and widow in their tribulation, and to keep him self unspotted in this
world, what good works may we expecte of these people, that do say that
all our good works are sinful, that god does not care for them, that
according to Luder his doctrine the more detestable a man is, the more
acceptable before god, and according to Calvin, god is the author of sin,
and all wickedness, not only the efficient or physical cause that works
sin, but also the moral cause that persvvadeth it: that when sanctity
according to S. Thomas is the flovver of religion, 5 Th^i 2 ^.6.
which is nothinh else then to offer unto god our soul with all the powers
thereof unspotted, and void of all filth of deadly sin, and the handmaides
of which sanctity be prayers, and devotion: D. Th. ibid.
by the one we do enjoy gods familiar presence: by the other we obtain
promptitude, and willingness to serve him. what sanctity prayers, or
devotion may we expect of them, when they be impious contemners and
blasphemers theof, when they with all deuilish despite, and ragefull
tyranny persecute not only the professors thereof, but also, churches,
monasteries, chapples, oratories and all other places where the same may be
exercised, disprouing, dissanulling, and despising all religious vows, and
votaries, for by solemn vows, we may become perfect servants of Chriest,
and intimate with him, and become as it were dead to this world, 2. Timo. 2.
according to the apostle, that such should not intermedle with any worldly
business and according to. Naz. in Car ad Hel^.
S. Nazianzen which do segregate them selves from the conversation of this
world, and do consecrate their lives unto god, which being elevated above
the earth, and being without wife or children, their intentive care is to
worship, and honor god with hymns, and prayers both day, and night, and in
another place he said speaking of those religious people, these have nothing to
do with this and yet have all things therein, Ora 1. in Iul.
which are the lords of the world, these I say for their mortification are
immortale, and for their little meddling with the world, are joined unto god,
and for their solitariness in the same do embrace the joy of the other world.
this far Naz. and although many wicked apostates have abused this sacred
institution, by running out of it (as Luder and Calvin and the rest of their
apostles, and teachers of their irreligious doctrine have don) that makes not
the religion bad, but rather good: no more then the 9. orders of angellicall
Hierarchy for that lucifer and the rest of his followers, through priede fell
from it, nor the apostolic order of Chriest, for that Judas through
covetousness, run out of it, nor the mercy of god, the worse though it be
abused by presumptuous sinners, who are the more prone to sin, because god
is merciful. and truly if there were no other reason to confirm and prove
our holy catholic religion, then that such detestable, and abominable
apostates, so vicious in their lives, so impious and blasphemous in their
doctrine, so variable uncertain and faythlesse in their faith, so confused in
their procedings, who without order authority or apostolic spirit or
commission licentiously, and excursiuelie do range abroad preaching their
irreligious heresies condemned, rejected, and anathematized by all general
councels, and specialie by the famous authentical general council of Trente,
which was an a assembly of all the patriarchs, Archbishops, bishops,
prelates, generales of holy orders, Abbotes, doctors, and diuins of all
Christiendome, should (I say) ympugne and disprove the same, it should be an
evident argument to confound the heretic and confirm the catholic.

Now let us come unto the apostles that did first plant our catholic
religion in Ireland, some authoures do write that S. James Mayor was in
Ireland, being by vvind driven thither, Casar Par anno Chrisii 429 is. 5 number. 8.
Paladius the popes legate (as Caesar Baronius witnesses) did preach in
Ireland and afterward Saint Patrick was sent thither by Celestinus pope as
the said Bar. declares anno Christi 431. number. 191. Gigebertus in chronica,
who with an a apostolical spirit, seruent prayers, long fasting, austere
mortification, sharp discipline, religious observation of all spiritual
perfection, and fervent charity, did subdue that kingdom unto the standarte of
the cross and the svveet yoke of Chriest his laws, his most holy life, and
the strange vvounders and miracles, that god did work by him, was an cuident
witness that his doctrine was of god. otherwise how could a poor soul
void of all hmaine forces, and worldly policies subdue in one quarter of a
year, a borbarous, vicious and intractable nation unto such hard laws, both
unto our capacity unreasonable, and unto fleash and blood yrcksom and
intolerable, unless god whose work he had in hand, had helped and cooperat
vvithim, by strange miracles, both vvounderfull to be seen, and ympossible to
be don by human power. what is more dissonant to our gross sensible
judgment and knowledge, then that Chriest should be the son of a virgin,
and that he was god and man, and that being god, whose nature is immortal,
and ympassible should die, should be crucified as a thief, should be dead and
buried, and and that the same god is he, that we receive, under the veil of
accidents of bread and wine in the eucharist, that being fed with Chriest,
we may be purified and sanctified by him, and that Chriest according to his
deity is one with the father, and the holy ghost united in one nature,
substance or essence and perfection, only distinct and different from god the
father and the holy ghost in certain notions, person, or hypostasis: and that
the body being converted unto ashes must appear before Chriest, that was so
crucihed by man to receive according to his deserts. what is more loathsome
unto fleash, and blood, then to be crucified and mortified, unto this world,
and to be deprived of all corruptible appetites thereof, to follow Chriest
crucified, to walk in the straight narrovve way of his cross, and to
despise detest and abhore the broad way of the licentious doctrine of these
heretics, for if we leave of our faith, which according to S. Gregory has
no merit when humane reason gives experience, the doctrine of those
apostates is more agreeable unto our senses and more conformable unto fleash and
blood, and more pleasant unto our corrupt nature, which inclines to follow
lice^tious liberty, and the works of darcknesse, which are voluptuous
pleasures, beastly concupiscence, without any restrainct of any spiritual
law, without observation of vows: without any regard of the sacrament of
penance and the 3. essential parts thereof, as contrition, confession, and
satisfaction, which is the only medicine ordained by Chriest to cure and
heal the wounds of our poor soul corrupted and la^guished with sin,
without any devotion or respect to any religion, religious ceremonies,
sacrifices and sacraments, churches, and oratories ordained by our ancetoures
for the service of god: all which they do destroy, vvher they have any
poavver: and in steed thereof, do endeavor to plant a negative religion,
which according to the phplosopher est maligna^ it is naturae quicquia ante se
inueuit destruit: is of a malignant nature whatsoever it finds besor, it
does destroy the same, for there is no religion, order, observation, that the
church of god had at any time but this infernal heresy laboreth to abolish
and overtrovve it quite.

Now having heard and to your greatest grief felt the works and
endeauoures of Luder, and Calvin: vvherin they applied them selves, I thought
good to speak a little of our cuntrie saints whose zeal, charity,
holiness of life many nations were converted unto the faith of Chriest. of
which I will put down some fevv examples, if if we may believe venerable
Beda that did write the life of S. Patrick and of other saints of Irland
(said) that they were a mirour and spectacle of all religious perfection. Beda
lib. 3 na. 4. histo. Aug^.
and sanctity. of S. Columbanus he vvriteth thus. Columbanus came out of
Ireland in his habit, and life a famous mo^cke to preach christian religion,
unto the Pictes Meilochon being a most mighty king of that nations the year
of our lord 565. and converted that nation by word and example unto the
faith of Chriest before he was come into England, he founded a most famous
monastery in Ireland, which for the abundance of oaks, is called in the Irish
tongue deragh that is to say the field of oackes out of which monasteries many
other monasteries were made by his disciples in England and Ireland. anno
Chrisli 365. nu. 30. Bed. lib. 3.27. hist. anno Christi. 64.
the same does Caesar Baro. confirm. In Ireland says the said Beda many noble
and mean people when Finan and Colman were bishops there, departing out of
England for obtaininge of divine knovledge and for embracing a co^tinent life:
some did enter into religion, consecrating them selves unto the service of
almighty god: others did labor to get and purchase knowledge, and science,
for whom Irishmen most gladly erected seminaries furnishing them with
bookces, and all other necessaries for their purpose vvithot money or reward.
this far venerable Beda of the charity of Ireland toward Englisme^. D.
Ber. in vita S. Malach.
S. ^ern. also in the life of S. Malach. bishop of lismore says that there was
a monastery in Ireland which was the mother of many thousand monasteries, he
added also a most holy place and fertle of saints, which most abu^da^tlie
did fructify unto god so as one of the children of that holy monasteries
ercted 100. monasteries: of this we may gather how many were the rest, that
Ireland, yielded so as S. Ber. Psalm. 64.
says: the verse of David unto Ireland may be applied visitasti terram and
inebriasti eam multiplicasti eam: o lord thovve have visited the earth thoue
have ovverflovve it with sanctity and thou have abundantly enriched the same
with holiness, and the svvaremes of sa^ctes did not only multiply in
Ireland, and in the contries adjoining, but also they made their inundatio^
into external nations, of which Columbanus came into our pattes of France,
and made the monastery of Luxouia so great and so religious, that the quier
thereof was never any moment both day and night without praising of god. thus
far, S. Bern. of the religion of Ireland, which calls S. Malachias a
second Moses, and a second Aaron, who was a sufficient witness of his
life, and death, for he died with him in his monastery of Clareuall, whose
body is keipt there until this day as amost precious relicke, what shall I
say of the blessed S. Romoaldas the king of Ireland his son Atchbishop of
Mekline in Flanders and Patron of that cuntrie, of Dymna the king of Leinster
his daughter, that was martyred in Fla^ders, of S. Folianus the brother of
holy Furseus the apostle of Austria, of holy Brandon that has conuetted unto
Chriest so many Islands in the Ocean sea, and some of them this day are called
the Islands of S. Plath. de bono status religiosi lib 2. c. 27
Brandon so holy in his life and so miraculous in works, that it is a
vvounder so hear thereof: of the 3 sons of Vrbian king of Ireland which
were called Froseus, Folianus, and Vltanus all blessed sanctes, which ann.
DCL. came into France and were received most courteously of King Clodoueus
and obtained of him license to erect a monastery in France, apud Ta^iniac.
what shall I speak of Killian of whom Laurentius Surius speaks thus,
Killian of the scottish nation, truly I mean Ireland, it is a fertile Island in
the Ocean sea but more fertile of Saints and holy men of which Irelie
rejoices for Columbanus, Germany is enriched with Gallus, ^. Iulii.
France is renowned for Killian, which did suffer martyrdom and conuetted
unto the faith all Languedock and the cuntris adjoining. this far Surrius
thiese godly people in nothing did labor so much, as in converting souls
unto god, by mortifieng their bodies, by shevving virtuous examples of good
life unto all those with whom they did converse, for Ireland in multitude of
sanctes, in austeritie of life, in heavenly conversation, was not inferioure
to any nation in the world, exceipt for martyrdom. the reason vvherof the
Archbushopp of Cashall being demau^of Geraldus Cambrensis secretary to king
John in Ireland, wherefore Ireland having so many sanctes, yielded no martyrs,
did show, that Irish people, although they were barbaro', yet would never
embrevv their hands with the blood of such people: but now (says he) when
you are come among us. we shall not want martyrs, truly you have had of
late days constant martyrs, as you cannot be ignorant thereof, and perhaps ere
long you may have more, if your persecution shall continue, and also if you be
as resolute, and determined to persevere in your ancient faith, as your
persecutors be cruel to try your patience by the effusion of your blood. this
is the time of your merit, by your sufferance, now you are brought unto the
field of your combat, and unto the skirmish of your coronatio^, if you be
determined to dye, rather then to make a shipwreck of your faith, which have
brought forth so many blessed saints of your own nation, by whose godly
example your faith is confirmed, your country renowned, and god glorified.
hold it for certain that thiese holy people and the brood of Calvin can
never take rest in one Kingdom, Jacob and Esau could never agree. and although
they had one father called Isaac and Rebcca to their mother, yet they never
possessed one inheritance, nor enjoyed one patrimony, and although they were
in one belly, and were borne at one time, Exodus 32.
yet they have not one heaven, Jacob for obeing his mother had the benedictio^
of the father, who prayed unto god, that his posterity should multiply as
the sands of the sea, thiese blessed saints forobeing the catholic church,
which signified Rebecea have the fatheres benediction, and are multiplied as
the sands of the sea and the stars of heaven. what are the virtuous
religious gentleme, that despise the world, forsake lands and great
possessions, deny them selves. and embrace the cross of our savior in
humility, in voluntary poverty, perfect obedience, and perpetual
continency, but the posterity of these blessed saints is the fruit of this
benediction, and the effect of their religion seeing that euety cause is
known by his effect, every tree by his fruit, and the faith of every
Christian by his charity, we must think that the catholic religion is the
only true religion, that procures such heroical resolutions in men's breasts,
by which they be so austere in their mortification, so mortified in their
passions, so euangelical in their conversation, and so charitable in their
works of which we have many blessed examples: was that not a great
charity of F. Thomas whit natural of Clo^mel seeing many poor scholars of
his nation in great misery in Valodolid in Castile having no means to continue
their study, nor language to beg, having given over his own private
commodity, did recollect and reduce the^ to one place, which he mayntained by
his industry and begging, until by his petition to Phillip the second anno
domini 1993. a college of Irish students was founded. the like charity f.
John Huling natural of wexford did exercise in Lisborne, for by his
industry, and the charity of godly people did releue a cetaine number of
Irish youths and in the time of plague in Lisborne sought license of his
superior to serve in the hospital of the plague vvherof he dyed. which was a
sufficient sign of his great charity. master Chrystopher Cusake did imitate
thief good people, for he being co^ unto Flanders to study, and finding many
virtuous youths of his nation of ripe vvitte and sharp judgment, not able to
go forvvard in their learning, for want of exhibition: did give unto them
what money he had, as also did give over his intended purpose of study, and
by his industry great chatihe and begging sustayneth, 100 poor scollers in
Flanders who will not admire the charity of S. Morris Ke^t priest natural
of Kill malock, who publicly appeered before S. John Norrice then lord
president of Munster, to tedeeme his host m. Victor whit of Clonmell out of
prison: in which he was Kept by the said L. President for Keeping the said
priest in his house, master whit was enlarged and his guest was hanged and
quartered: this great charity cannot come but from a good faith. thiese
exextraordinarie vvorckes do declare a sound religion. thiese be they that are
ordained vt completentur muri Hierusalim to make up the number of such that are
appo^nted for Hierusalim. so as by this means you may perceeae vvhither thiese
blessed people or the vkhelps of Calvin have the true catholic and apostolic
religion.

THE CONTINVANCE of our religion in Ireland almost these 1^02. by lavvfull, and
apostolic succession, is an evident pro^f that it is the right catholic
religion.
CAP. II.
IT is decreed, Does ^ued l. 12. ar. ^5 Scot. in 4. d 15. q 2. (...) lud omuth
Adrta. g. de pr^seripti^^e Soto 4. deiust q S. Medic^ d ce deres^ Canno. 16. q.
3. ex c an ne^i vir go cap ^^uali de prescr^p ^ege premade^ff^de vsutupion
and ennacted by all ca^non, and civil laws that whosoever possesses any
land or immovable goods the space of. 20. or. 30. years which is the
greatest time that any law does give. that so long a possession does
prescribe, viz. that he is the right owner and lord of the same of which he
has the possession, so as he be possessor bonae fiaet. 1. bonae conscientiae
that is to say, that he is certain all that time of the just title theof, to
be his, and none else during that time should have any claim, or just challenge
thereunto, and if after that time of. 20. or. 30. years any claim, or challenge
be made against any such lands possessed bona fide so long time, though the
said challe^ge be never so just, it cannot remove the defendant from his
possession, and he may with a safe conscience Keep the said lands, or any
such immouable thing, and this is called prescripsio^ if it be mouable thing,
the said laws do give no more then. 4. years and this is called vsucapio.
when we have possession of our religion 1202. years from posterity to
posterity, from council to council, from age to age, which was fortold by
the oracles of the prophets, that was signified by the faith of the
Patriarchs, which was declared and delivered unto us by the creed and
preaching of the apostles, which was sealed by the blood of so many millions
of martyrs, which was beautified by vows of so many blessed virgins vvhic
was established by miracles and vvunders, which was by charity increased,
by the judgment, and sentences of the universal catholic church defined by
the decrees, and definitions of all Saints, and general councels approved,
by the mutual and uniform consent of all nations tried, by the co^uersio^ of
all Kingdoms and provinces made Known, and illumined, by the heretics of
all ages impugned, and persecuted, and by their persecution made firm perfect,
and steadfast, and which by the lavvfull, and continual succession of Popes
and bishops from. S. Peter unto Paulus 5. Au. epistola 165 and 42 Item contra
epi stola^ funda c. 4
that now reigns confirmed: if S. Aug. only by the succession of S. Peter
unto Anastasius that was Pope in his time did prove the catholic religion to
be in the church of Rome. if S. Ambrose did prove it from S. Peter unto
Damasus: if S. Cypr. lib 1 ep 6 Ber li 3 de consia ad Eu Am sup 1 T^ 3
Cypria^ did prove it from S. Peter unto Fabian, and Cornelius, if S. Bernard
did prove it from S. Peter unto Eugenius if every one of them did prove it by
apostolic succession from. S. Peter unto their time, have not we greater
reason to believe our catholic religion to be at Rome, and from thence to come
unto our cuntrie and unto other places of Europe by apostolic and oderlie
succession, issuing from the same church, if we can shevve the same
succession, from S. Peter unto Paulus Quintus now Pope, for we have no other
religion then that, that S. Patrick brought from Rome: of which thanckes be to
our redemer we have the possession almost 1202 though we be of late years
by Luder and Calvin and by their followers disturbed, and disquieted therein.
will not you account him a vvra^gler, and a troublesome mate, that would go
about to take a way your living from you, of which you have not only the
possession, but also the just title thereof avovvched unto you by the verdit of
all the iuries of Ireland, and confirmed unto you by the general decree of all
statutes, and courts of parliament of the same, but our religion being
confirmed unto us by all the gegenerall parlementes not only of one Kingdom,
but of all Christendom, ought to be unto us vndoubt full, and certain, and all
such mates to be reputed for vvranglers, that do endeavor to take yt from us,
for which this late persecution is intended. but I would they had follovved
the grave counsel of Gamaliel, Act^ 5
who being consulted vvithall, by the Jews concerning the apostles and
christians, that wear at Jerusalem: said if they wear not of god, they
should shortly come to nothing as many false prophets (said he) gave unto us
experience, and if they be of god in Kaine you strive against them, be cause
there is no counsel, nor policy says the holy ghost against god which does
overthrow the counsel of sinners. Prou. 28 p^. 3. H^h 7. Luc 26 1. Cor. 11
Conc. Trid Malach. 1 Dent 14.24 and 26 1 para. 17 12 and 22. and 2 para 6 and
psalm. 77 68 69 Ioh. c. 4 ^uc 22. i Cor ii ie.
our religion sactifice, sacrament and preesthood is of Chriest and therefore
the force of man cannot prevail against it if. by the prophecy of Malachias,
there must be a sacrifice offered unto god alvvaies and in every corner of the
world which was not mea^t of the sacrifice of the old law, for by many
places of scripture that sacrifice could not be offered but at Jerusalem,
therefore it must be verified of the sacrifice of the mass, which is the
sacrifice of all sacrifices, for which Chriest has ordained priests, when
he said do this in remembrance of me; unto whom S. Paul, said, they could not
drinck the chalice of Chriest, and the devil, and consequently this sacrifice
must be offered by priests in Ireland, which according to the said alachias
are Angels of god, that must offer sacrifice, and shall apply the universal
sacrifice of Chriest unto our particulier miseries, and calamities: for as
universal causes never work unless they be applied by particular causes, by
which they be determined: so the oblatio^ of the sacrifice of Chriest though
it was a sufficient expiation for all our offenses, yet being an universal
cause must be applied by particular causes to work his effect

THAT THE PRIMAcie of this church, by which the apostolic succession, and
continuance thereof is established was founded by Chriest, reason and
authority confirming the same.
CAP. III.
IN all things we see a subordination of an inferior, to a superior: in
the celestial, and angelical Hierarchy the inferior order concerning their
intellectu call operation or supernatural revelation, do depend of the
superior, which are called Archangels, every corpulent substance in his
corporal motion depends of a supreme body, which is called (primum
mobile): amongst lightsome bodies, the sun has the preeminence, without
whose influence, no such thing has any light: so as there is nothing in this
world according to the philosopher, and as experience teaches, that is not
reduced unto his Kind, by which the perfection thereof is measured: amongst
sensible creatures the reasonable creature which is man, is the chiefest, by
which every such living thing is measured amongst Christians, Chriest
according his humane nature, (...)
has a supreme jurisdiction de cuius plenitudine nos omnes accepimus of whom
we depend in our supernatural being. why should not in the church of god
this order be observed, that there should be one church, by whose direction
all churches should be governed and by which all churches should be tried and
ordered: so among the apostles there was. S. Peter which made the first
profession of our faith on vvho^ the superiority was instituted, and the
church founded, Math 16
as upon a firm rock Chriest speaking unto him, Math (...) Iuc 12
thou arst a rock and upon this rock will I build my churck, and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it, etc. Tu es as S. Hieron. Mart (...).
expounded upon thee, and unto thee I will give the Keys of the Kingdom of
heaven this authority is confirmed by many prerogatives, Math ^7 Luci^ Io 20
and privileges that he has in the gospel, that christ did pay the tribute
for him self and S. Peter, where he prayed that S. Peter's faith, should never
fail in the world, where he said unto S. Peter thou being once confirmed
strengthen thy brethren: of the successors of S. (...). p. 190
Peter this is demanded (says S. Bernard,) that Chriest commended unto him
thrice the feeding of his flock, Actorum 1.2.3.4.5.6.8, 9. (...) 5
also the authority he has in the acts. this primacie of S. Peter is
avouched, and approved by S. Cyp. lib. 4 epist. ad Pa pianid and lib. 1. ad
Coruel Orig Sup. Mat. ^ier. lib 1. Pelag and in ser^d Petro ad Am^. in ser 47
Chrysostom super ^o 8 and ^omi sup Math.
Cyprian by S. Hieron. by S. Amb. by S. Chrysostom. by S. Aug. contra Ep. Donati by
S. Hilarie upon S. Math. by S. Leo in the anniuersarie sermon: by S. Greg. in
moralib. and in registro ad Mauritium Aug. by S. Cyp. de simplicitate
praelatoru^ by S. Aug. in his quest: of the nevve and old testament by S. Leo
ser: asce. Dominic. Bed. in homi Ath. ^n Ep. ad Marcu^ Liber. Foelt: Eus. Caes.
lact, Paul, Ansel.

First the faith was taught in Judea, Actor. ^. 8 and Heb. 26
and so came unto Samaria and to other places, omitting the east and the south,
it is certain that S. Peter did send unto Germany to teach the faith
Cresce^tes, Eucharius, and Valerius, unto France he sent Sixtus. Sinitius,
Amansius, Mennius, and Martialis, and S. Clement did send Dionysius Areopagita
with Rusticus Eleutherus, Sa^ctinus. Exuperius, and Eutropius unto Paris and
Guyen. the rest of S. Pe. successors did send in all ages pastors unto other
parts of the world to convert them unto the faith, unto Eng. Eleuth the Pope
did send S. Getmanus in the time of Lucius King of Kent, afterward by S. Greg.
were sent unto England holy monckes S. Aug. and his brethren to reclaim
England for that it fell from the first faith, as S. Patrick and Paladius by
Scelest: unto Ireland and Scotland and as these days many are sent unto the
east and vveast, South, and North by S. Peter's successors, so as no nation was
ever, Io.
converted but by the lavvfull mission of S. Peter, and his successors, unto
vvho^ Chriest committed the charge and feeding of his Flock; we never red,
that any nation was brought unto Chriest by heretics, saving the Goathes
which wear converted or rather subverted, by the Arrians, and did not
continue therein. this care and charge of feeding of Chriest his flock, was
not only committed unto S. Peter, but also unto his successors, otherwise
Chriest had no care of his flock nor of his church, but during. S. Peter his
time, and he being dead this charge and government of his church was ended
with him, which should be absurd to think, when his church must continue
to the worlds end. for if the church should not have a head under Chriest, by
whose order and direction the same should be prude^tlie gouuerned, it
should, be a body without a head, a flock without apastour, a church
without a vicar, a multitude without unity, which being without any
subordinatio^ of an inferior to a lavvfull superior, is nothing else, then a
chaos without order, and a certain confusion of a popular tumulte without
orderly direction or discretion, and if the church of god be one as it is said
in the canticles vna est colu^ba mea perfecta mea, C^^. ^
vna est matri suae, my dove is one, the mother has but one daughter,
perfection of love consists in unity, all this unity is spoken of the
church of Chriest, without which unity it could not be called castrorum
acies ordinata an army well trained, Ibin ^
a battle well ordered, and if chriest prayed unto his father that his
flock should be one, and S. Paul says that his church should be one body
mystical, Ioh i^
Ephesians. ^^
so there should be says he one spirit to quicken it, one lord to direct it,
one faith to walk therein, and one baptism to cleanse it, that we should not
says he, bevvauering in our faith like enfantes and lead away with every
vvind of doctrine in the wickedness of men in subtilitie through deceit of
error, and turbulent spirits, how can this unity of faith, unity of
direction, unity of spirit be preserved where one is not admitted to govern,
and where every ones fantastical spirit, and furious passion, is his leader
and d^rectour for preventing of which inconuenie^ce. it is necessary there
should be in the church of god one moderatour, one judge, and one head, by
which the body and members thereof should be directed, and as S. S. Bern. lib.
3. decouns. ad Eng.
Bernard says as in heaven Archangels, and angels seraphins, and cherubins
are disposed under one head, which is god: so also here under one bishop, be
primates, Patriarchs, Archbishops, bishops, priests, abates with the rest,
which head in how many places of his boockes does he call the bishop of Rome,
and as S. Cy. l. 4. (...)
Cyp. says every kingdom has his several king, every people, city,
town, village, house, and so forth have their several head or governor
ergo. lib. de (...) (...) 1 ep. 3. ep. 8 and in op. (...) quinius
the whole church which is but one divided unto many members, must have one
head asvvell as has one Kingdom, one people, one city. and in other places
he says as in Earth many rivers have one spring, many branches one root,
many members one body and one head: therefore says he in the mystical body
of Chriest there is one head to rule the same, Aug (...) 1 con^ Io^
which he says to be S. Peter quem Dominus (says he) optimu^ elegit super
que^ aedificauit ecclesia^ sua^ which our lord has chosen to be the first
upon whom he builded his church and as S. Aug ibide
Aug. says vnus eligitur in ter 12. capite constituto scismatis tollatur
occasio amongst 12. one is chosen to take away all occasion of schism and
division. the effect of which unity, and jurisdiction by ordayning of one
head we see in the church of Rome, by which all schism, and heresy was
taken away. was not the Arria^ and the Pelagian heresy taken away by this
auctoritic, was not Ireland among other countries absolved from the Pelagian
heresy by the church of Rome as Ces. Baro. vvriteth Irish bishops (says this
author) touching their faith or rather oppressed with troubles do submit the^
selves unto S. Bar (...) ^hr 56^ (...) 5 n 6
Gre gorie whose answer unto them I thought good to put down.

The copy of S. Greg. his epist. unto the bishops of Ireland many of them
being infected with the pelagian heresy.
SCripta vestra summa cum gratulatione suscepi, D Greg (...) 2 episto; ^
inductio^e (...)
sed ^rit in me vberior valde laetitia, si mihi de vestra contigerit reuersione
gaudere. prima itaque epistolae vestrae frons, graves vos pati persecutiones
innotuit, quae quidem persecutio dum non rationabiliter sustinetur, nequaquam
proficit ad salutem. nam nul^i fas est retributionem praemiorum expectare pro
culpa. debetis. n. scire (sicut D. Cypr. dixit) quia martyrem non facit paena,
sed causa dum igitur ita sit, incongruum nimis est de ea quam dici it is
persecutione gloriari per quam vos constat ad aeterna premia minime prauchi.
reducat ergo charitatem vestram tandem integritas fidei ad matrem quae vos
generauit ecclesiam: nulla persuasio vos a recto itinere defatiget, nulla vos
animorum intentio a concordiae vnitate dissociet. quod autem scribitis quia ex
illo tempere inter alias prouincias maxim flagellatur Italia: no^ hoc adeius
debetis retorquere opprobrium. quoniam scriptum est quem diligit Dominus
castigat, flagellat autem omnem filium quem recipit; si igitur ita est, vt
dicitis co tempore magis dilecta apua Deum and modis omnibus approbata, ex quo
Domini suimeruit sustinere flagella.


I am made joyful for receauinge your letters, but I shall be more joyful, if I
shall hear of your conversion. by the preamble thereof I understand that you
suffer a heavy persecution, which if it be not aceordinglie sustained
avails nothing for your justification. none should expect a revvard, when
his demerites desherue punishment, you ought to Know as S. Cyprian says pain
makes not the martyr, but the cause, therefore it is not conuenie^ that you
should glory in that persecution, by which you cannot arrive at the Kingdom
of hea^e^. let the integrity of your faith reduce you unto your mother church
that engendered you: let no opinions disioine you from the unity of concord let
no persuasio^ or weariness cause you to forgo the right way. and that which
you write of Italy to be afflicted amongst other provinces you ought not to
object the same unto it as a reproach, be cause it is vvritte^ god
chastisethvvhom he loves, for he vvhippeth every son, that he receaueth,
seeing as your selves do write that then he begins to be gods elect when
he sustayneth gods crosses and afflictions. this far S. Greg. unto the
bishops of Ireland being infected with the pelagia^ error, of which being
sore afflicted they sought absolution first of Pelagius the Pope: but the same
was not effectually don until S. Greg. did it. D^ut. 17.


Very reason without authority of Chriest or his saints should persuade
us, that there should be in the church of god this principality. in the old
law there was a high priestvvhose commandment was obeyed, and whose rule
was esteemed, and by whose order the sinagoge was directed and as Moses
was careful thereof: why should not Chriest provide for his own spouse.

And although by nature we be all equal yet as S. Greg. li. 21. mora
says by the secret work and dispensation of nature it self one has more
merit then another, and so more pre-eminence. we see one more rude and
lu^pish the^ another, which should be directed, by one that has his judgment
more ripe, his understanding more pro^pt, and his experience more perfect, and
so Plato says thatvvoemen are the servants of men, Plato li^. 3 de vep.
because ordinarily they be not so capable of government or sovvell able to
manage weighty affairs.

Chriest therefore being a provident spouse for his church, to the end that
order may duly be observed therein, has committed our charge to one, by
whose ordervve should be directed, by whose watch we should be defended
from the wolves, and by whose holy doctrinevvee should be fed: but the
heretic (as S. Gregory says) to take away this order from gods church,
barketh against the chief pastor, that it may fall out, as it did among the
Israelits, when they had no King: every one did what liked him best: and
therefore as S. Aug. says, Aug li co^tra collaiorem c^. 41.
supremus pastor ad imptorum detruncationem gladio petri dexteras omnium
armauit ^ntisti^um the pastor did arm the right hand of all bishops with
Peter's svvord to the cutting of wicked me^, Aug lib i^ conir ep p^lag
Aug co^tra dona and page 4
and therefore he said that he had the preemine^ce in the bishoplie care above
all others against whom the proud gates of hell should never prevail, this is
the church says he in qua semper viguit principalitas, Etist i6 i.c. 4 con^ra
etc. the principality of apostolic chair ever flourished: Epist. fund
this is the church says he that in all the world may challenge unto her self
this word catholic, Cyp. lib.i ep 6 ad magnad Math ^8 Cyp lio 4 ep ^
without whose authority he would not have believe the gospel. this is the
church according to S. Cypr. that whosoever would not obey, should be holden
as an ethnicke, this church of Rome he called catholicae fidei radicem and
matricem the root and mother of the catholic faith: Aug de Fidead Petre
this is the church according to S. Hierom, that whosoever would eat the
lamb out of it should be profane: this is the church says S. August.
without which neither baptism norvvorkes of mercy can do us good. this is
the church of which the general council of Chalcedo^ having received letters
from Rome said these words* haec est patrum fides. haec apostolorum fides:
Chal act 2
ita omnes credimus. anathema sit, qut ita no^ cre dit: this is the faith of
our fathers etc. this is the faith of the council of Florence vvherin the
Grecia^s and Armenia^s did forgo their old erroures, and submitted them selves
unto the church of Rome, did decree speaking after this manner definimus sanctam
apostolica^ sede^, etc. Conc^lium Flo Roffen sis (...) 25 Bl^ndus
we do define and decree that the holy apostolic sea and the bishop of
Ro^edo hold the primacie of the whole world, and that he is the successor of
S. Peter prince of the apostles, and the true vicar of Chriest, and the head of
the whole church, the father and the doctor of all christians, unto vvho^ was
given full power by S. Peter his authority, to feed, direct, and go uerne the
universal church as it is contained in the acts of the holy councels, Math.
16.18. Ephesians. I^^. ^0.
and sacred ca^nost. his far the said council. this is the church that was
founded by Chriest and builded upon a firm rock and as he promised so we
ought to believe, that hell gates shall never prevail against it. the
certitude of which truth, we know by experience and by the vvou^derfull
co^tinua^ce, and succession thereof these 1606. not with standing all Pagans,
Sarasins, Goathes, Va^dals, Longobards Turks Jews and heretics do labor
to destroy it: this is the church not without gods vvounderfull mercy, and
special providence to your immortal glory you obey. and when all these
Northen nations have revolted from the obedience thereof which like the
generation of vipers or the brood of Pa^ther, do endeavor to kill and destroy
their mother, that did inge^der the^ of whom the prophet faieth filios
enutr^ui, etc. Isai. ^.
I have brought up children yea and I have exalted the^ to high vocations, but
they have despised me, and being compassed with these rebellious un natural
children yet you profess your catholic faith and ac-Knovvledge your mother
in your greatest troubles and miseries, of which you are a spectacle to all
nations. and as certain rivers in the midst of great seas do retain their
fresh waters, which they have brought from the mother spring: so you in the
midst of thiese te^pestuous waves of bitter heresies do observe and Keep the
milk of your catholic religion, Beda in vi ta ^ Patric
which you have suck^ from your mother by the preaching of S. Patrick, who
obtained of god by his fervent prayers in which he spent many nights, that
the inhabita^tes of Ireland should never forsak their faith, S Vintent sermo de
antechrisso
and that the power of antechriest should never co^ thither, so as it is an
infallible consequence an Irish man ergo a Papist, that any noble man or
gentleman to be a protestant or an heretic to be rara auis astra^ge bird.
wherefore as S. Romans 1
Paul gave god thanckes for the faith of the Romans, and that the same
should be declared, and preached in the universal world, so I ought to give
thanckes unto god, that this Roman faith is not extinguished in poor
Ireland, let your neighbor cuntries abou^d in wealth, and pleasures of this
world and do you hold your faith in your poverty and calamity: better it is
to be rich in faith, and poor as Lazarus, and to be in the bosom of Abraham,
then to be tormented in hell as the rich glutton was. Moses did choose to be
poor in the desarte, rather then to be rich in Pharaos palace, better be in
prison with Baptista the^ to be daunsing in the court with cruel Herod and
his concubine, better it is to weep with Chriest, in the guard en of
Gethsemani, that was put to death by the mighty princes of this world, then
to be advanced unto the office of a promoter with Judas: he that came to be
borne of a poor simple virgin that was delivered in a crib his purpose was
not to give us vain and corruptible riches, but rather to dissuade us from
them, which he despises when they be great impedimentes, to our salvation.
therefore hold, and embrace the riches of your catholic faith for as S. Aug.
and S. Chrysostom, do say, Rom 15 acto. 5. Moth. 13
there is no greater riches of this world, nor no greater felicity, then the
catholic religion. Chrysostom hona. 50 ad popuium Antioch. Aug. ser. de
verlasapost and ^ern^de ^^p 181. c. 12 in ancoran. Vict lib 3 de per^ecu
vandalica Hist. Eccles. lib. 7 c. ^ in mar R^ m^^^ an uar^ Su^tom. 1
therefore the aapostle says Deus replet vos omni gaudeo in credendo you have
a diu^ne and heavenly consolation by your faith. how glad was the Eunuch for
receiving his faith? it is the treasure that was found in the gospel and for
joy thereof, and to buy it, the man that found it, sold all that he had. neither
can there be greater plague, pestilence, or misery then heretics, and the
same to be vvourse then pharisees, publica^s or any other sinners what o ever:
S. Aug. proves it lib. 2. de ciuitate Det cap c. 25. and Chrysostom. and as Victor a
voucheth Euagrius and Surius do confirm. god te^pteth you says Moses unto
the people of Israel by false prophets that it may be known whether you
love him with all your hearts Deuteronomy. 13. and as the apostle says 1. Cor. 11.
that heretics must be that such as be good may be tried. in this occasion
show your selves the servants of almighty god, that should make more account
of his honor, and of the profession of your faith, the^ of all the world, and
the pleasures thereof, which do pass a way in an instant, Exodus 4 leuit 2 27
but the pain for the same co^tineueth for ever which is like Moses his
rod, when it was in his hands it did seem as a rodd, but when he did
cast it from him turned unto a serpent: so that our joy in this life passes a
way quickly as the scripture does say gaudiu^ hypocrytae adinstar puncti the
joy of a sinner ended in an instant, but his pain does a lvvaise continue* let
not the vain hope of humane favor: or the doleful blaste of earthly
vanities, separat your selves from Chriest, or alienate you from his sacred
spouse the catholic church: Knovving that by your death there must be a deuorse
betvvxit you, and all the world. but now rather, then there should be a
separation bet vvxit you and god forsake all things whatsoever. ^n vita and
Ant
and as S. Em. says nec si toto mundo renu^tiantes possumus recompensare
aliquid dignu^ caelestibus: if we forsake the whole world, it is not a
sufficient recompense for the heue^lie tabernacles. therefore offer your selves
unto god preventing the necessity of your death as old Abraham did offer Isaac
unto him, which was the dearest oblation he had, and as Chriest did offer him
self for us, 1. Pet. c. 3
Chriest by his blessed oblation was glorified and you redeemed, and the
father eternal satisfied: and as S. Peter says Chriest suffers for you,
giving us an example to follovv hi^: let us follovv his blessed cross. which
is our sta^dart for by it we shall overcome our enemies, more strength
therein, the^ in all the power of the devil: more force in the rod of
Moses: then in all the army of Pharao, more valor in poor Judith: the^ in
all the power of Holophernes: more kingdoms did your faith subdue, then all
the emperors of the world, more divine authority yt has, the^ all the
heretics that ever were, more reason have you to profese it, the^ they have
to impugn it: therefore fear nothing for the Lion of the tribe of Judah did
overcome: who trjumpheth over the power of antichriest: who overcomes all
the army of darkness, and now, is crowned for the victory he has gotten
by his blessed combat, which be holds your strife, and is ready to give
every one that fights ma^fullie a blessed revvard which I humbly crave for
you and my self, Amen.

FIN.
THE EPISTLE OF Saint Cyprian to the Thibaritans written unto them in the 2.
persecution of Affrique, vvherin he exhorted them to suffer martyrdom.
I Have often wished (most loving Brethren) if time and leisure would so
permit, Epist 56. is. 4. Epist. 6.
to come unto you, according to your desire, that I may strengthen, and
confirm you with my presence. but because I am detained: as well, by urgent
occasions: as also, by the charge of the flock committed unto me by almighty
god: I do send these letters my attorney unto you, and seeing our lord
vouchsafed to stir us up, and also to admonish me; that I should be careful
of your conscience. Be it known unto you, and believe certainly, that the
days of affliction do hang, and houer over your heads. the ruin of the
world. and the time of antichrist approaches, that every one of us, should
prepare him self for the battle: and that we should meditate nothing else,
but the glory of eternal, life and the crown of the confession of our faith,
neither should we think, the danger to come to be such as vve^t before, for
now the fight is more fierce, and harder, unto which the soldiers of
Christ, with a steadfast faith, and a stout courage ought to prepare them
selves, consideringe, that, as they drink the blood of Christ, so they ought
to shed their blood for Christ and as S. 1. Ioh. 2.
John says whosoever will continue with Christ ought to walk as he did
walk: Romans 8.
the like the Apostle exhorted, saying, then are we the children, and heirs
of god, and fellovv heirs of Christ, when truly we suffer with Christ,
that we may be glorified with Christ, all which ought now at this time to
be considered of us, that none should desire any thing of this world, which
perishes, but that he should walk and follow Christ, which lives for
ever: and also gives life to his servants, for the time is come (most loving
brethren) of which Christ long since forevvarned us, Io. 1^.
saying, the hour shall come, that all that shall kill you, shall think he
does great service to god: but these things they shall do because they know
not my father not me. let none therefore marvel, that we should be
ouerpressed with persecutions: turmoiled with anguishes: afflicted with
greef: oppressed with sorrovves, seeng that Christ, by the authority of his
words, did foretell these troubles to come, and so did instruct us against
the battle S. i. Te 4.
Peter also his Apostle have taught, that there must be persecutions, that we
by our death and suffering should be united unto the love of god through the
example of the just, that vve^t before, for he has written in his epistles
saying, most loving do not marvel, that evils do come upon you, which are
for your trial, neither be dismayed, as though they were strange and
unusual, and whensoever you are partakers of Christ his passion, let it be
unto you the greatest occasion of joy. blessed are you, if you be reviled in
the name of Christ. because the name of his majesty and virtue does dvvell in
you. which is blasphemed by them, is honored by us the Apostles have
delivered unto us those things, which they them selves did receive from the
mouth of our lord saying whosoever shall forsake house or home, pare^tes or
brethren, wife, or children for the Kingdom of god shall receive in the
world to com life everlasting. Blessed (says he) you shall be, when men
shall hate you, and shall speak evil of you, and shall banishe you for the
son of man his sake.

Our lord vvoulde have us rejoice and be glad in persecution. for then the
crowns of faith are given, the soldiers of god are tried. the heavens them
selves stand open for Martirs.

Are not we for this end pressed to the christian warfare, we ought not to
expect a continual peace, but rather arm your selves for a daily skirmishe,
seeng that our savior him self hat he first given the onsett: and being the
master of humility, patience, and long suffering, what ought to be don he
put it in execution.

Before he exhorted us to take up his cross, him self was crucified upon
the same. have before your eyes most loving brethren that he only, which
has received all judgments of his father, and he which is to come to judge:
and which has al ready pronounced his judgment, and fore knowledge:
fortellinge, and making protestation that he will confess before his father,
such as confess him, and deny such as will deny him.

If we can eschevve death, then we may lavvfully fear death. but saying
such as are mortal must needs die: let us e^brace such a present occasion
of a blessed death, that god his faithful promise may be accomplished: and the
revvard of immortality by the end of our death performed. Let us not fear to
die, when by our death we shall be advanced unto a crown, let neither any
be troubled, if happily he sees the people of Christ scattered, or the holy
assemblies of the church to be broken up, or the bishops or priests not
teaching according to the custom, for if any brother be separated through
necessity from the flock of Christ in body, but not in spirit: let him not be
dismayed nothing at all: and though he be alone in the wilderness, let him
not be afraid. he is not alone, who has Christ for his companion, and although
in his flight he shall fall to the hands of thieves, brute beasts should set
upon him, hunger, cold, and thirst should afflict him, or the rage of the sea
should ouervvhelme him, let him be assured Christ beholds the soldier
wheresoever he fights and does reward him which dies for his name sake.

In persecution it is no less glory for martyrdom, to die alone, the^ to die
publicly amongst many, for Christ is a sufficient witness to a martyr,
Gene. 4.
that does acknovvledge and crown the martyr.

Let us therefore loving brethren imitate the just Abel, Gene 22.
which was the first martyr that suffered for justice. Let us embrace the
example of the three children, Ananias, Asarias, and Mysael, which neither
being terrified by there tender years, nor broken by there captivity in the
thraldom of Jury, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: with the virtue of a
constant faith refused to adore the image, which Nabuchodonosor the king
caused to be made, whose threatninge and torments could not force them to do
against there conscience, saying we ought not o King to displease god whom
we serve to please man, for our god whom we adore, is able to deliver us
from the fury of this fire: and if not, be it Known unto you, we will not
obey your unlawful command, they did believe that according to their faith,
they could be delivered, and if not that the king should know that they
were ready to die for his honor whom they worshipped, for in this
consists the strength and virtue of faith, to believe that god can deliver us
from this present death, and yet not to fear the same, nor to be overcome by
it, that the force of faith may be known. Daniel also, when being
streightlie commanded to worship the Idol in the defense of gods honor, and
with full liberty of faith burste out saying: I honor nothing but my lord
god, which made heaven and earth. what should I speak of the most blessed
martyrs mentioned in the Machabees: and the manifold pains, and torments of
the seven brethren, and their mother comforting, and stre^gthning them, in
the midst of there outrageous torments, and her self likewise dieng with
her children. Do not these great examples of virtue and faith witness and
exhort us to the triumph of martyrdom, what shall I say of the prophets,
which the holy spirit did inspire to foretell things to com, as also the
apostles which god has chose^. do not the just which are killed for justice
teach us also to die? Christ had his begininge from the martyrdom of the
infantes, that from too years dovvnvvard and under, were all put to the
svvorde, whose age being unfit for the battle, was found fit and made
worthy of a crown, that it may be knovve^, that they were innocents that
were Killed for Christ, by which it is manifest that none is exempted from
the danger of persecution, when such do suffer martyrdom: what a grievous
thing it is for a christian that the servant will not follow the master,
and disdaineth to do, that which his master has don, and that we will not
suffer for our sins which was the cause of Christ his sufferinge. the son
of god, did suffer to make us the sons of god, and the son of man will not
suffer, that he may continue the son of god, if so we be troubled that the
world hates us, it hated Christ before, if we sustain reproaches, torments,
banishmentes: more grievous the^ these Christ did suffer being the lord and
maker of the world, if the world hate you (says he,) Know you it hated me
first, if you had been of the world, the world would love that which is
his own: but because you are not of the world and I have chosen you out of
the world, and therefore the world hates you. remember the speeches I had
with you, the servant is not greater then the master, if they have persecuted
me: they shall also persecute you, what soever our lord has done, or taught,
ought not to excuse the disciple, if he should omit the same. I mean such,
as do learn and do not accordingly. Let none most loving brethren be
terrified for fear of future persecution or the coming of antichrist, and let
every one be armed, both by evangelical exhortatio^s, and divine precepts,
against all occasions: antechrist comes: but Christ shall overcome. Let the
enemy exercise his malice upon us: our lord does follow to revenge our
death and sufferinge. our adversary threateneth in his fury, but there is one
that can deliver us from his hands. he is rather to be feared, whose anger
none can eschevve, him self vvillinge us not to fear those, that killed the
body, but they can not Kill the soul. but rather to fear him, that can
destroy both soul and body in hell. and again whoso ever loves his own
life, shall loose it and who soever hates his life in this world, shall
preserve the same for life everlasting.

When men do exercise them selves for a secular combat, they think it a
great honor and glory if in the view of the emperor, and presence of the
people he be crowned.

Behold an honorable vvourthy combat, the revvard vvherof is no less vvorth
then an everlasting crown: god beholds us fighting, and casting his eye
upon such, that he vouchafeth to make his own children, does enjoy the
spectacle of our strife.

In this challenge of our faith we be made a spectaclevnto god, unto Christ,
and his holy angels. how great an honor is it to enter into the battle in
the presence of god, and to be crowned by Christ the judge of our challenge,
let us arm our selves most loving brethren vvithall force and strength, and
let us prepare our selves for the fight, with an incorrupt mind, sincere
faith, and devout affection. as the army of god marched in the vantgard, let
those that did ever stand arm them selves, least they should fall Let those
that are fallen, prepare them selves that they may recover what they have
lost, let the honor of the victory gotten, provoke the one unto the battle,
and grief of the battle lost solicit the other unto the combat. the Apostle
admonishes us: saying our war is not against fleash, and blood, but against
powers, and princes of darkness of this world against the wicked spirits,
that are in the air, for which cause put on gods armoure, that you may be
able to resist in the evil day: that having ended your troubles, you may stand
with your loins girded in truth, and having put on the helmet of justice: and
being shod in the preparation of the gospel of peace, taking unto your selves,
the shield of faith, wherein you may extinguish all the fiery darts of the
wicked, arm your selves with the sallet of salvation, and the svvorde of the
spirit, which is the word of god these be the weapons we should take in
hand.

Let us defend our selves by is the spiritual and heavenly armor. Let us put
on the helmet of justice, that our heart may be defended and guarded against
the spear of the enemy. Let our feet be shod and armed by the evangelical
authority, that when we shall begin, to tread under foot the serpent, she
shall not be able to bite, nor to stinge us, let us bear manfully the shield
of faith, being covered vvithall, that whatsoever darte the enemy shall cast
may be extinguished: Let us receive the helmet of salvation for the defense of
our head, that our cares may not here the cruel edictes. let us make a
covenant with our eyes, that they may not see detestably simblances, let us
arm our forehead, with the sign of the cross, let our mouth be Kept, that
our invincible tongue may confess our lord Christ Jesus. Let us fortifye our
right hand with the spiritual svvord that it may reject all abominable
sacrifices. and being mindful of the eucharist, that such as receive our
lords body, they may afterward receive our lords revvard of an everlasting
crown. o day how happy thou shall be when our lord shall begin to reckon
his people, and by due examination of his divine Knowledge to acKnovvledge
every our deserts, to cast the guilty persons unto the flames of everlasting
fire, and our persecutours unto endless pains: and to satisfy and pay unto us,
the revvard of our faith and devotion. what great joy will you feel, to be
admitted to see god, to be honored with the joy of salvation, and eternal
light, with Christ our lord? to salute Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
patriarchs, and prophets, and Apostles, and martyrs; and to rejoice with the
just and friends of god in the celestial Throne, to enjoy the pleasure of the
imortalitye promised, and the eternity desired, to possess that which the eye
can not see, neither the ear ca^ hear, neither the heart of man can conceive,
for the tribulatio^s of this time (as the Apostle says) are not answerable
unto the glory which shall be received, when the brightness shall shine upon
us, then we shall be blessed, and joyful, that god has vouchafed to honor
us, as like wise the wicked, that have forsaken god unto whom they are
rebels, and perfourminge the will of the devil, shall be tormented by an
unquenchable fire with him: have these alvvayes in your hearts. Let this be
your continual meditation to have always before your eyes, the punishments
of the wicked, and of such as deny Christ, what glory is promised unto
those, that confess their faith. if in meditation of these things the time of
persecution shall come the soldier of Christ being sufficiently instructed,
with his precepts, and admonitions shall not tremble at the fight, but shall be
prepared for the crown; farevvell most loving brethren.

FIN.

