THE ODCOMBIAN BANQVET:

Dished forth BY THOMAS THE CORIAT, AND Served in by a number of Noble Wits in
praise of his CRVDITIES and CRAMBE too.

ASINVS PORTANS MYSTERIA.

Imprinted for Thomas Thorp.

1611.

Anagramma.
Thomas Coriatus.

Homo Cristatus.

THy mother town that bred thee in her womb,
Has for thine even head, found out an Od-combe.
Mr. LAVRENCE VVHITAkers Elogie of the Book.
THis Epistle ensuing was written by my dear frind M. Lawrence Whitaker to a
learned neighbor of mine in the town of Evil, one M. John Seward a reverend
Preacher, as his censure or Elogie of my Book, to the end the said M. Seward
might include it in a letter that he wrote to one Doctor Mocket, Chaplain to
the Bishop of London that then was, for obtaining his approbation that my Book
might be printed. Therefore seeing it is a witty and elegant Epistle, I have
thought good to insert it in this place, and to prefixe it immediately before my
Book, though the Author thereof be disposed in some places to be merry with
me.

SIR,
I Have with some difficulty at length traced over the high Alps of this
lofty Work of that worthy Orator, Traveler, and Historiographer, M. Thomas
Coryat: In which long journey though I have met with many a rough and rockie
passage, yet I have been so eased with the delight of many smooth and level
allies of his own pleasant invention, that they have been to me in stead of
an Alpine chair to carry me at case over the difficult and inuious
precipices. Shall I commend the work unto you? Shall I use any reasons to
press, and to prove the fitness of it for the Press? No, in stead of good
juice to give it a sweet relish, I should press out tarte ver-iuyce to give
it a distaste, and a suspicion of defect, as if it had crackes and flawes in it,
that needed to be playstered up with the mortar of commendation. All I will say
of it, shall be this: it is a garment of many colors so curiously and
gracefully intermixed; It is a garden of fair flowers, so pleasantly planted
and ordered; it is a ship of rare outlandish commodities, that has landing,
yea and ballasse of such worth and price, that no disgrace can it be to it,
though in this garment were found some rent, in this garden some weeds, in this
ship some trash. I will say of the Author no worse then Horace says of Homer,
-- Sic veris falsa remiseet,
Primo ne medium, medio ne discrepet imum.
What said I? Veris falsa? Nay more, sacra profanis, lascina modestis, ludicra
serijs: Nay, I will say with Ovid, that there be in it, Mollia cum duris, sine
pondere habentia (...).
No Apothecary could have observed a more judicious symmetry in the mixture of
his potions and electuaries; no Cook in the decent composition of his sallets
or stewed brothes. Nay both symmetry and mixture is here such, that though I
said I would not commend the work; yet I cannot hold, but for the one and the
other, I must say as Horace says, he is. Primus ad extremum similis sibi --
And again Omne tulit punctum, etc. --
Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo.


How strongly has he fortified his book with many a fortress and Citadel?
How loftily has he adorned it with many a high tower and steeple? Nay, how
richly and pompously has he set out all the Countries he has passed through
(being, as his title speaks, in number seven, equal with the wonders of the
world, the Wise men of Greece, and the mouths of the monster-breeding Nile)
having allowed to every one of them, a hundred and odd Pages to attend them;
nay for every mile almost seven lines to describe it, as by his exact
Arithmeticke he can make it appear to you? To conclude, if the Pearl of the
Netherlands Lipsius were living, I know he would not think me too bold, if I
gave of these Monita and exempla Hodaporetica, the same censure, that the
Regius and Apostolicus Censor does of his Monita and exempla Politica; (...) ea
pralo digna non (...), cum erudita sint, cum (...) (...) lectorem mirifice
oblectent, cum ad illustrationem antiquitatum multum conferant, and nihil
contineant, quod. Catholica fides (...) And so commending the Author to your
accustomed favor, and his work to your best furtherance, I rest.

Your very loving friend. Laurence Whitaker.

THE CHARACTER of the famous Odcombian, or rather Polytopian, Thomas the
CORYATE, Traveler, and Gentleman-Author of these Quinque-mestriall Crudities.
Done by a charitable friend, that thinks it necessary by this time, you
should understand the Maker, as well as the Work.

HE is an Engine, wholly consisting of Extremes, a Head, Fingers, and Toes. For
what his industrious Toes have trod, his ready Fingers have written, his
subtle head dictating. He was set a going for Venice the fourteenth of May,
Anno 1608. and returned home (ofhimselfe) the third of October following, being
wound up for five months, or thereabouts: his paises two for one. Since, by
virtue of those weights he has been conveniently able to visit Town and
Country, Fayres and Mercats, to all places, and all (...) a Spectacle grateful
above that of Nineueh, or the city of Norwich; and he is now become the
better Motion, by having this his Book his Interpreter: which yet has expressed
his purse more then him, as we the rest of his Commenders have done, so
unmercifully charging the Press with his praise. But to that Gale, he sets up
all sails. He will bear paper (which is cloth) enough. He has ever since
the first design of printing hereof, bin a Deliciis to the Court; but served
there in his own clothes, and at his own costs; where he has not bin
costiue of acquaintance to any, from the Palatine to the Plebeian; which
popularity of his (it is thought by some of his Odcombians) may hurt him. But
he free from all other Symptoms of aspiring, will easily outcarry that; it
being a motly and no perfect ambition: the rather, because when he should
have been taken up for the place (though he hastily prevented it with a tender
of himself) he conditioned to have no office of charge, or neerenesse cast
upon him, as the Remora of his future travel; for to that he is irrecouerably
addicted. The word Travail affects him in a Waineoxe, or Packe-horse. A
Carrier will carry him from any company that has not been abroad, because
he is a Species of a Traveler. But a Dutch-post does ravish him. The mere
Superscription of a letter from Zurich settes him up like a top: Basil or
Heidelberg makes him spinne. And at seeing the word Frankford, or Venice,
though but on the title of a book, he is ready to break doubler, crack
elbowes, and ouerflow the room with his murmr.

He is a mad Greek, no less then a merry: and will buy his J mean when he
traveled. A thing that I know he scorned to do since he same home.
Eggs, his Puddings, his Ginger-bread, yea cobble his Shoes in the Atticke
Dialect: and would make it a matter of Conscience to speak other, were he
trusted alone in a room with an Andiron of State. The greatest Politic that
aduances into Paul's he will quitte, to go talk with the Grecian that begges
there; such is his humility; and does grieve inwardly he was not borne that
Countreyman for that Not to beg, but to talk Greek the better with the
natural Grecians.
purpose. You shall perceive a vein or thread of Greek run through his
whole discourse, and another of Latin, but that is the courser. He is a great
and bold Carpenter of words, or (to express him in one like his own) a
Logodaedale: which voice when he hears, it is doubtful whether he will more
love at the first, or envy after, that it was not his own. All his Phrase is
the same with his manners and hauiour, such as if they were studied to make
Mourners merry: but the body of his discourse able to break Impostumes,
remove the stone, open the passage from the Bladder, and undo the very knots
of the Gout; to cure even where Physic has turned her back, and Nature hung
down her head for shame; Being not only the Antidote to resist sadness, but
the Preservative to keep you in mirth, a life and a day. A man might undo the
College that would practice with only him. And there is no man but to enjoy
his company, would neglect any thing but business. It is thought he lives
more by letting I mean the foreparts, not the binder.
out of air, then drawing in; and feared, his belly will exhibit a Bill in
Chauncerie against his Mouth for talking away his meals. He is always
TongueMaior of the company, and if ever the perpetual motion be to be hoped
for, it is from thence. He will ask, How do you? Where you have been? How is
it? If you have traveled? How you like his book? with, what news? and be
guilty of a thousand such courteous impertinences in an hour, rather then want
the humanity of vexing you. To conclude this ample Traveler in some bounds,
you shall best know him by this: he is frequent at all sorts of free tables,
where though he might sit as a Guest, he will rather be served in as a Dish,
and is loath to have anything of himself kept cold against the next day. To
give the Non vltra of him in a word, he is so Substantive an Author as will
stand by himself without the need of his Book to be joined with him.

Here ends the Character, attended with a Characterisme Acrostich.
To the Right Noble Tom, TellTroth of his travails, the Coryate of Odcombe,
and his Book now going to travel.
Try and trust Roger, was the word, but now
Honest Tom Tel-Troth puts down Roger, How?
Of travel he discourses so at large,
Marry he sets it out at his own charge;
And therein (which is worth his valor too)
Shows he dares more then Paul's Churchyard durst do.
Come forth thou bonnie bouncing book then, daughter
Of Tom of Odcombe that odd Iouiall Author,
Rather his son I should have called thee, why?
Yes thou were borne out of his traveling thigh
As well as from his brains, and claimest thereby
To be his Bacchus as his Pallas: be
Ever his thighs Male then, and his brains She.
Ben: Ionson.

CERTAIN OPENING AND DRAWING DISTICHES TO BE APPLIED as mollifying Cataplasmes
to the Tumors, Carnosities, or difficult Pimples full of matter appearing in
the Authors front, conflated of Stiptike and Glutinous Vapors arising out of
the Crudities: The heads whereof are particularly pricked and pointedout by
letters for the Readers better understanding.
A
FIrst, the Author here glutteth Sea, Haddock and Whiting
With spuing, and after the world with his writing.
Or,

Ye Haddocks twixt Dover and Calais, Imperat.
speak Greek;
For Tim filled your mawes with it in Whitsun Viz. An. 1608. when he began to
travel.
week.
B
THough our Author for's Venery felt no whips smart,
Yet see here he rides in a Picardy cart.
C
THis Horse pictured shows, that our A word that in the Heluetian tongue
signifies a ragged traveler.
Tatter-de-mallian
Did ride the French Hackneyes, and lie with the Italian.
Or,

Our Author in France rode on horse without stirrup,
And in Italy bathed himself in their syrrop.
Or,

His love to strange horses he sorteth out prettily,
He rides them in France, and lies with them in Italy.
D
HE has crossed he four Elements.
Sea and he four Elements.
Land, now the clouds the text
Of he four Elements.
the Air he is climbling; ware Tom, he four Elements.
fire is next. says
E
HEre to his Land-friggat he is ferried by Charon,
He bords her; a service a hot and a rare one.
Or,

Here to a Tutch-hole he is rowed by his Gondelier,
That fires his That is, the beauty of her countenance, and sweet (...) of her
lips did inflame his tongue with a divine and fiery enthusiasme, emptied the
Bandolier of his conceits and inventions for that time.
Linstocke, and empties his Bandolier.
F
HEre his Friggat shootes eggs at him empty of Chickens,
Because she had made his purse empty of Chicquins.
Or,

Here she pelts him with eggs, he says, of Rose Water;
But trust him not Reader, it was some other matter.
G
IN vain here does Coryate pipe and dispute,
His wench was, Jews will not be caught with his flute.
Or,

Thy Cortizan clipped thee, ware Tom, I advise thee,
And fly from the Jews, lest they circumcise thee.
H
HE longs for sweet grapes, but going to steal 'em
He finds sour graspes and gripes from a Dutch A Rascalin; Dutch.
(...).
Or,

Here is the combat our Author may glory at,
With Halberd the (...) lays on, and with Greek Coryat.
I
HEre is his Trophee victoriously dight
With case, shoes, and stockings, and lice put to flight.
Or,

See here his poor case, his shoes clowted with cunning,
His stockings strong-smelling, and lice away running.
Or,

See our louse-bitten Travelers ragged device,
Of case, shoos, and stockings, and Canniball lice,
Or,

This Gibbet the false case and hose does require,
That harbored the vermin that their Master did bite.
K
THis should be his picture, it is rather his Emblem,
For by As being the first letter of his name in Greek.
(K) it notes him, though it little But you differ in opinion ( Mr. Laurence)
from all my other friends that have compared together the counterfeited and the
living figure.
resemble him.
Or,

This picture unlike him, shows he is not come home as
He went, but changed, and turned traveling Thomas.
Or,

This picture unlike him, shows he is not himself,
But changd since he proved a traveling Else.
Or,

Know Reader, the notes and contents of this book,
Are not to be guessed by the Authors carved look.
L
THese be the three countries with their Cornu-copia,
That make him as famous, as Moore his Vtopia.
Or,

Here France gives him scabs, Venice a hot Sun,
And Germany spewes on him out of her Tun.
M
THe horse he bestrid till he mounted his chair
Does kindly bestride him at Bergamo fair.
Or,

He courted a wench, but penance for his game O
He does by lying with horses at Bergamo.
Or,

The Italian horse more then the French his love feels,
For he rod on the one, and lay at the others heels.
N
MOst Politic Thomas, now thou art no The French word for a fool.
fol I see,
For wanting no money, thou beggest in policy.
Laurence Whitaker.

Here follow certain other verses, as charms, to unlock the mystery of the
Crudities.
A
HEre, like Arion, our Coryate does draw
All sorts of fish with Music of his maw.
B
HEre not up Holdborne, but down a steep hill,
He Is carried' twixt Montrel and (...).
C
A Horse here'ts sadled, but no Tom him to back,
It should rather have been Tom that a horse did lack.
D
HEre up the Alps (not so plain as to Dunstable)
He Is carried like a Cripple, from Constable to Constable.
E
A Punke here pelts him with eggs. How so?
For he did but kiss her, and so let her go.
F
Religiously here he bids, row from the stews,
He will expiate this sin with converting the Jews
G
ANd there, while he gives the zealous Brauado,
A Rabbin confutes him with the Bastinado.
H
HEre, by a Boore too, he is like to be beaten
For Grapes he had gathered before they were eaten.
I
OLd Hat here, torn Hose, with Shoes full of grauel,
And louse-dropping case, are the Arms of his travel.
K
HEre, finer then coming from his Punke you (...) see,
Not meaning by F. and K. as the vulgar may peeuishly and wittingly mistake:
but that he was then coming from his curtesan, a fresh. man, and (...) having
seen their fashiens, and written a description of them, He will shortly be
reputed a knowing, proper, and well traueled scholar, as by (...) starchd
beard, and printed ruff may be as properly insinuated.
F. shows what he was, K, what he will be.
L
HEre France, and Italy both to him shed
Their horns, and Germany pukes on his head.
M
ANd here he disdaind not, in a foreign land
To lie at Liuory, while the Horses did stand.
N
But here, neither trusting his hands, nor his legs.
Being in fear to be robbed, be most learnedly begs.
Ben: Ionson.

An introduction to the ensuing verses.
I Here present unto thee (gentle Reader) the encomiasticke and panegyric
verses of some of the worthiest spirits of this Kingdom, composed by persons
of eminent quality and mark, as well for dignity as excellency of wit; such as
have vouchsafed to descend so low as to dignifie and illustrate my lucubrations
without any demerit of theirs Mistake me not Reader. I refer this word to
the word Lucubrations.
(I do ingenuously confess) with the singular fruits of their elegant
inventions, which they have expressed in the best and most learned languages of
the world, two only excepted, which are the Ironia.
Welsh and Irish. But in that I exhibit unto thy view such a great multitude
of Verses, as no book whatsoever printed in England these hundred years had
the like written in praise thereof; ascribe it not I entreat thee to any
ambitious humor of me, as that I should crave to obtrude so many to the world
in praise of my book: For I can assure thee, I solicited not half those
worthy wights for these verses that I now divulge; a great part of them being
sent unto me voluntarily from diverse of my friends, from whom I expected no
such courtesy. At last when I saw the multitude of them to increase to so
great a number, I resolved to put above a thousand of them into an Index
expurgatorius, and to detain them from the press.

Whereupon the Princes Highness (who has most graciously deigned to be the
You shall (...) the meaning of this word in a marginal note upon the verses
immediately ensuing.
Hyperaspist and Moecenas of my book) understanding that I meant to suppress
so many, gave me a strict and express commandment to print all those verses
which I had read to his Highness. Since then that inevitable necessity has
been imposed upon me, I have here communicated that copious rhapsody of
poems to the world that my learned friends have bountifully bestowed upon me;
wherein many of them are disposed to glance at me with their free and merry
jests, for which I desire, thee (courteous Reader) to suspend thy censure of
me till thou have read over my whole book.

Jncipit (...).
LOrdings, full well I hope you know
I never shot in Phoebus bow,
Or climbed Parnassus hill:
Yet must I needs in doggrell rhyme
Crave your sweet patience for a time,
Full sore against my will.
I am not now to tell a tale
Of George a Green, or lack a Vale,
Or yet of Chittiface:
But I must be the Chanti-cleere
Of one that is withouten peer,
A horn replete with grace.
For he at Odcombe was y-bore,
Whereas the Fates were heard to score
The fortunes of his birth:
Go pretty Dandi-prat to school
(Said they) thou shall no little fool
Be counted for thy mirth.
The child in time was waxen great,
And all the Sophists he did threat
Their Problemes to confound;
Grammarians sore did stand in fear
The coynage of his words to hear,
So uncouth was their sound.
For by a natural instinct
The Graces to his lips were linkt,
(Forsooth his lips were fair.)
His mouth did open ere he spoke,
And swifter far then Ducke or Drake
His words flew through the air.
The stony hearts that could not bide
A Church-ale at a Whitsontide,
He suppled with his speech:
And like a Captain bold and stout
He did advance his Eagles snout,
Fair thrive it I beseseech.
Not Mahound, no not Tarmagaunt
Could ever make half their avaunt
Of deeds so stern and fell,
As cau this child, Sir Thopas Squire,
Inspired with a spark of fire
Stolen out of Wisdoms cell.
He (...) words upon his teeth
(Rhyme thereunto I can vnneeth)
Yet still I will proceed;
Like as a Bear does lick her whelpe,
Their roughness so his tongue does help,
When polishing is need.
Now Lordings mercy I do ask,
That since I underwent this task
His name I have concealed;
He keeps the Magazine of wit,
And bears the privy key of it,
Which may not be revealed.
Yet in despite of bread and ale,
Vnbuekled now shall be the male,
Betide what may betide.
His name is Coryate I wis,
But whether he be flesh or fish,
I cannot yet decide:
For like the errant Knight Ulysses,
Through the Seas amongst the fishes
He lanched forth his hulke:
The sides whereof were heard to groan
No less then tweuty miles and one
Under his grievous bulk.
Then either (...) scrippe or bag
He vide his ten-toes for a nagge
From Venice for to hie.
Thorough thick, and thorough thin
Until he came unto his Inn,
His winged heels did fly.
He trauail'd North, he trauail'd South
With A word that the author once used in an Oratroil to the Prince,
metaphorically signifying (as being derived (...) these two greek words (...),
that signisieth above, and (...) a shield, that it, one that opposes his
shield in the defense of his friend against the blow of an enemy) a Patron or
Protector. Which word by a kind of conversion may be not improperly applied
(as a certain conceited gentleman lately said) to the author (...). Hyperaspist
(...) hyperhorspist, that is one upon whom never Asses pist, but Horses once
pist on him, as when he lay upon straw at their (...) in (...) a city of
Lombardy.
Hyperaspist in his mouth
A word of his devising.
For Nature letters pattents gave
To him the privilege to have
Of words naturalizing.
To trees and sleeples as he went
He did his homage verament,
And salu-ed them each one.
He registered their names always;
Contrary if that any says,
The book is to be shown.
A Curtizan then Lycoras
More sweet in Venice town there was
That wished him for her own:
But she could never him hand-fast:
For as a Gelding he was chaste,
Thongh Gelding he were none.
The Barcaruolo appetite
His Gondola directed right
Unto a female Else:
Yet would he not play Cupids ape,
In Chancers jest, lest he should shape
A Pigsnye like himself.
This wandering Squire full (...) I heard
The circle of his Beard had squard,
And scowred every hair:
That sweeter then the Eglentine,
And then the purple Columbine
He did appear more fair.
He had a kind of simple blush
That kept him still for being flush
When Ladies did him woo:
Though they did smile, he seemed to seowle,
As does the fair broad-faced Foul,
That sings To whit to whooe.
It was no crochet of his brain
That put his legs to so great pain
In passing to and fro:
But sure it was the quintessence
Of study, that beyond all sense
Had made his wits to crow.
With Latin he does rule the roast,
And spowteth Greek in every coast,
Never may his wel-spring fade:
He ouer-speakes the English tongue,
And picketh gold out of the dongue
That ancient Poets made.
If any Zoylus will carpe,
Or take upon him for to harp
Upon his learned strings:
On foot to Venice let him go,
And then at his returning show
What fruit from thence he brings.
For had our Coryate been a Jade,
In half the journey that he made
He had been foundred clean.
But now by foot, by cart and fail
Tom Coryate is come from Itaile.
From Italy I mean.
The squeazie humor of his brain
Before he parted from this maine,
Near perished his scull:
Now since the Sun began to sup,
And drink those grosser vapors up,
He is no more a Gull.
Oh let the sardels of his leaves
Be held more precious then the sheaues
Pitched up in harvest time:
Ne ever any man alive
May see them sailing from Queene-hiue:
Now Muse stay here thy rhyme.
Explicit (...)
Jncipit Henricus Neuill de Abergeuenny.
GOldilockt god that do on Pernasse dwell,
O thou that sweetly playest on a fiddle
To Sisters Nine, that Aganippes Well
Do much frequent, there bathing to the middle:
Lend me thy notes, that I may sweeter sing
Of Tom of Odcombe then does Odcombe ring.
Oh that some errant Knight could now be seen,
That he might dub thee, crying; Up Sir Thomas:
Their dangers and adventures less have been
That erst did wander to the Land of promise.
Thou make Sir Beuis and Sir Guy a fable,
With all the daring Knights of the round table.
Unto thy shoes, thy shirt, thy fustian case
That hang at Odcombe, trophies of thy travails,
Join this fair book of thine, which makes thee pass:
Great Merlin Cockay in recounting maruailes.
Whilst pendant scut chions others tombs adorn,
Over thine these fair atchieuements shall be borne.
Explicit Henricus Neuill de Abergeuenny.
Incipit Ioannes Harrington de Bathe.
THou glorious Goose that keptst the Capitol,
Afford one quill, that I may write one story yet
Of this my new-come Odcombe-friend Tom Coryet,
Whose praise so worthy wits and pens inroll
As (with good cause) his custom is to glory it:
So far am I from judging his a sorry wit,
Above earth, seas, air, fire, i will it extol
To Cinthia's sphere, the next beneath the stars.
Where his vast wit, and courage so audacious
Of equal worth in times of peace and wars,
(As Rowlands erst) encombring rooms capacious
Lie stored some in hogsheads, some in iatres.
This-makes the learned of late in foreign parts,
Find Phoebe's face so full of wens and warts.
Explicit Ioannes Harrington de Bathe.
Incipit Ludovicus Lewknor.
OLd wormie Age that in thy mustie writs
Of former fools records the present wits,
Tell us no more the tale of Apuleius Ass,
Nor Mydas ears, nor (...) eating grass:
This work of (...) so far them all exceeds,
As Phoebus fiddle did Pans sqneaking reeds.
He writes not of a gnat, nor frog, nor woodcockes bill,
Of steeples, towns, and towers, entreats his gooses quill.
Among the rest he of a wondrous tub does tell,
The wine whereof more Poets made then Tempes Well.
In Odcomb'd Toms regard the Homers Virgil.
Cyclops herds were thin,
Our Tom quick cattle fed whole legions on his skin.
So did poor bare Philosophers in former times,
And so do Poets now that make the lowzie rimes.
Five months with this in childbirth lay Toms labring Muse
In all which time he seldom changed his shirt or shoes.
The care and toil was his, thine are the gains,
Crack then the nut, and take the kernel for thy pains.
Explicit Ludovicus Lewknor.
Incipit Henricus Goodier.
IF in an evenness all wisdom lie,
Tom thou art wise, thon do all euenly:
Once thou did wench, and thou were carted once,
Once thou did (...). (...)
steal, and once they beat thy bones.
Once did thou beg, and if thou then did get
Nothing by begging, thou art even yet.
What only he saw he only writes, if than
He only read it, he is an even man.
Our spies write home no ill of him: he went,
He stayed, he came an even A (...) man.
Innocent.
The Jesuits could not shake him: for he would not
Take Orders, but remain an A layman, or private man, as being deri-ued srom
the Greek word (...), which signifies a private man.
Idiot.
If any think him dull or heavy, know
The Court and cities mirth cannot be so.
Who thinks him light, ask them who had the task
To bear him in a trunk unto the mask.
He is so equal, that if he were laid
Into those scales, whereby the proof is made
Whether the woman or the plume prevail,
He and his book would hardly turn the scale.
Explicit Henricus Goodier.
Incipit Ioannes Payton junior.
MAgnifique Caesar that in worth surpasses
The greatest of our greatest Turkish Bassaes,
All the long night ost times did waking tarry,
And made the night the day his Secretary:
Yet is in little volumes you revoke it,
His work of many years lies in your pockit.
But thou O Coryate (...) Caesar but a (...) (...) vapulante.
Iauell,
And writest huge volumes of twice ten weeks travel:
Twice twenty weeks a dwarfish birth will ask,
Thou in twice ten brought forth this mighty task:
Then if abortiue birth had not prevented,
What Atlas would thy Gyant-braine invented?
Since seven such countries noone so soon could pass
As thou the learned Coryate Thomas.
Yet thy large writings wonder more I at,
Thou Odcombs only Grace Tom Coryat:
For of the twain much rather would I miss his
That wrote the ten years travels of Ulysses:
For who considers well, he quickly find should
That thou wrot'st perfect, seeing Homer blindfold.
Explicit Ioannes Payton junior.
Jncipit Henricus Poole.
DOn Coryate once I saw, but his book never,
Yet mean I to commend them both together:
Him for his book, his book for him I praise:
The workmans fame the workmanship does raise
To great esteem, no foul tongue can defile it,
The work's of worth, for Coryate did compile it.
The goods wherewith this western barge is fraught
Thou (gentle Reader) shall enjoy for naught:
They cost thee nothing but a thankful mind,
Which thus our Author hopes in thee to find:
Who in his travel has observed more,
Then ever any wizard did before;
And what he has observed, with his pen
He here presents to his countrymen:
That he whom five months travel made so witty,
Should live obscure at home, were it not pity?
Then Coryate feed thy Muse in foreign parts,
Swallow their secrets, and devour their arts;
Whereof when thou saturitie shall gain,
Come home, and then disgorge thy self again.
Explicit Henricus Poole.
Jncipit Robertus Phillips.
SInce every pen is pressed to praise,
Thee traveling Wonder of our days,
My Muse would chide, should she not sing
The praise of thee most wandering thing,
Who with thy restless fcete and paineful wit
A book of wonders now have writ;
In which thy work we plain do see
How well thy feet and wit agree.
What others thought too heavy and too high,
As Tombs, Steeples, with the Butter-flie,
Thou have brought home, though not in solid stuff:
For which let not our carping Critics huffe:
For thou the substance would not bring
Of ought which might be termed a If you mean solid stones, you are in the
right Sir. If sold Observations, I reserre my self to the Readers censure
after he has thoroughly perused my book, whether I have brought home any
solid thing or no.
solid thing.
Alas poor Tom, they do mistake thy age
Who think thou art not past the making sage;
Or that thy journey had some other ends
Then to delight and recreate thy friends.
And if perhaps some man shall call thee fool
For this thy end, good Tom pull out thy tool,
Thy book I mean, demand if that an Ass
Could have observed so much as he did pass:
Or could have got such praise in rhyme,
As thou shall show to future time;
By which thou shall so lively pourtraied be,
As that the I mean any critical carper that shall tax thee for thy book.
Ass himself himself may see.
Thy danger with the (...), thy hazard with the Jews,
Thy scabs at Turin, and solace in the (...),
Let others chaunt; I list not tell them over,
Nor of thy liquid case 'twixt France and Dover;
Though there thou made so great a savor,
That few received it for a favor.
I only will commend thy constant nature,
Who did return the Not composed of the vices of those countries through
which thou traueldst, which does often happen to many of our Englishmen that
return home corrupted in manners and much worse then they went (...).
simple creature
That thou wentst forth; and having trudged
Much ground, at length art judged
By the full praise of every Muse,
Which vshereth in in thy book of news:
Therefore brave Champion of the Whitson-ale,
Let thy fair Iournall to the press hoise sail,
That after-ages too may know thee,
As well as we that now enjoy thee.
Who, to the end that grateful we may seem,
Thee of the That is, the Laurel, so called from one Marrot a French Poet.
Marrot worthy do we deem.
Explicit Robertus Phillips.
Incipit Dudleus Digges upon the Author and his pains.
Our Author will not let me rest, he says,
Till I write somewhat in his labors praise
I thinking straight upon Delivery,
Proteft his labor such a Prodigy:
As may a Mountebanke Man-midwife gravel
To see a man that was five months in travel,
So faitely brought a bed, and of a birth
(...). As that in the first Aenei. of Virgil. Ques (...) --
So -- but of that judge by these gossips mirth.
Joy to the glad Dad, who such This is that which the Latins call Indulgentia,
the Grecians.
fon (...) shows,
That by a hundred marks the wise child knows;
Who 'twas, and can in print already call
Coryate the kind Father, and the Natural.
Ingeuium liber iste (...) Corlate sepultum (...)

Continet, inde petat qui caret ingenio.
Explicit Dudleus Digges.
Jncipit Rowlandus Cotton.
COlumbus, Magelan, and Drakes brave story
Are yet remembered unto their glory.
But thy high deeds with theirs when I compare,
I say thy travels have with theirs no share.
I wonder then this writing age has failed
To tell ere this how far Tom Coryate sailed
In five months time, and most or al on foot.
What man alive that ever else did do it?
It cannot be but that the world did look
That thou thy self hereof should write a book;
What good acceptance such a book shall find,
Thou need'st not doubt, there is no man so unkind
That will make scruple for to be thy half,
Since thou the heifer art that bears the calse.
It Is thy first borne Tom, I pray thee love it;
And whosoever shall thy issue covet,
I wish there may befall him this one curse,
To tread thy steps again, and with thy purse.
Yet one thing Tom I do dislike in sooth,
Thou do not spare thy self to tell a truth.
What need'st thou in thy story be so nice,
To tell thy child of all thy nits and lice?
Yet it becomes thee well, and much the rather,
The son, I think, will prove so like the father.
But pardon Tom, if I no further tell
Those gifts which in thee do by nature dwell.
Who tells the Ass that he has two long ears,
Or Chanti-cleare that he a coxcombe wears?
Why, all the world does know as well as I,
That never any did as much descry,
So many nations, manners, and so soon,
Except alone the man that is in the moon.
Let other wits that with a nimbler wing
Do cut the empty air, thy praises sing;
My Muse entreats thee to resume thy pen,
And to relate (...) thy countrymen
Whether thy father Iouiall were or sad,
And what complexion thy fair mother had
When they were linked in wedlocks lovely band,
And whether of them had the upper hand:
How many months thy mother did (...)
Thy tender body in her fruitful womb:
What milder planet governed in the sky
In the Horoscope of thy nativity:
Thy mothers midwife, and thy nurses name,
The shire and household whence thy lineage came:
Who trained up thy, youth, and in what place,
Whether where Isis hides her dewie face,
Or where the silver streams of Chame do glide,
Shaddowed with willowes upon either side;
That other men may learn to get a son
To see those countries which thy self have done:
This calculation yet would breed a danger,
And 'twere not fit to teach it every stranger;
Lest when the world thy learned book should view,
A fool might get as wife a child as you.
Explicit Rowlandus Cotton.
Incipit Robertus Yaxley.
IF the Author had a curious coat,
With cap of costly die,
And crown of cock for crest thereon,
With whetstone hanging by,
Then might he tell of travelers,
And all the thrift-lesse train,
Which proudly forth on Asses prick,
Twixt Italy and Spain.
For Thomas is by travel tried,
And truth of him to tell,
There Is few of them that now go forth
Return home half so well.
Then buy this book ye Brittans bold,
But read it at your leisure:
For it and he, and he and it
Were made to show you pleasure.
Explicit Robertus Yaxley.
Jncipit Ioannes Strangwayes.
THou crau'st my verse, yet do not thank me for it,
For what (...) can praise enough Tom Coryate?
Kemp yet does live, and only lives for this
Much famous, that he did dance the Morris
From London unto Norwich. But thou much more
Do merit praise. For though his feet were sore,
Whilst sweaty he with antic skips did hop it,
His treading were but friscals of a poppet.
Or that at once I may express it all,
Like to the Iacks of iumbled virginal.
But thou through heats and colds, through punks and trunks,
Through hills and dales have stretched thy weary stumps,
Feeding on hedge-row fruits, and not on plum-trees,
Only through zeal to visit many countries.
But stay a while, and make a stand my Muse,
To think upon his everlasting shoos.
Come to my help some old-shod pilgrim wight,
That I of you may tread the way aright
Which leads unto his same, whilst I do style
How he did go at least nine hundred mile
With one poor pair of shoos, saving alone -- a
He only once did sole them at You should have said Zurich.
Verona.
So that it grew a question whether
Thy shoos or feet were of more lasting leather.
Which at that time did stand thee in most use,
When as the Jews would cut off thy prepuce.
But thou that time like many an errant Knight,
Did ft faue thy self by virtue of thy flight.
Whence now in great request this Adage stands;
One pair of legs is worth two pair of hands.
Excipit Joannes Strangwayes.
Jncipit Gulielmus Clauel.
COryats travels do bewitch my pen,
Work (...), making the dumb to speak:
My dumbe-borne Muse yet never known to men
Does by his charms her silent custom break.
For if his worthy acts had not been such,
The world could not have drawn from me thus much.
They only force from me both praise and wonder,
Who past belise have conquered many dangers:
It can not be described what he brought You mean some merry matter Sir.
under,
Leaving the skars of his renown with strangers.
Then frolike man and in thy country rowse thee,
Although abroad thou scorn'dst not to be lousy.
Send out thy copious book to common view,
Make many laugh, some scorn, move most to pity.
Those that travel, (as no man has his due)
Shall still confess with shame, thy book is witty;
And after ages will admire no doubt
This Gog-Magog thy Gyant-wit brings out.
Explicit Gulielmus Clauel.
Jncipit Ioannes Scory.
THat thou a traveler may called be,
Thanks to thy brains that traucl, not to thee;
That thou a rare read-scholler clepyd art,
Give more thanks to thy tongue, then to thy art.
Yet have thy feet in five months passed more eities,
Then ere thy Poetry will make good ditties.
Ballets unfit to stand before thy book,
Wherein who so with judgments eyes will look,
May see a monster of five months begetting,
More rare then that of thine own Sires begetting.
Some say, when thou were borne (O wondrous hap)
First time thou pist thy clouts, thou drew'st a map,
But that thou spakest as soon as thou were borne,
There is no doubt. For else how could thou learn
In so short time to talk so long and much,
And to such purpose? Yet I hear no Dutch,
Nor French, nor Spanish, nor the Italian tongue;
So might thou do thy Greek and Latin wrong:
Of which thou vtterst such abundant store,
That thy full brains can now contain no more.
Well Tom, since Europe thou have seen in part,
Now into Asia and Afric make a start.
Boldly encounter all the monsters there:
For seeing thee they needs must fly for fear:
But still be sure thy buckler be thy book,
Modusaes shield had never so grim a look.
Explicit Ioannes Scory.
Incipit Ioannes Done.
OH to what height will love of greatness drive
Thy leauened spirit, Sesqui-superlatiue?
Venice vast lake thou had seen, and would seek than
Some vaster thing, and foundst a Curtizan.
That inland sea having discovered well
A Cellar-gulfe, where one might sail to hell
From Heydelberg, thou longdst to see: and thou
This Book greater then all producest now.
Infinite work, which does so far extend,
That none can study it to any end.
It Is no one thing; it is not fruit, nor root,
Nor poorly limited with head or foot.
If man be therefore man, because he can
Reason, and laugh, thy book does half make man.
One half being made, thy modesty was such,
That thou on the other half would never touch.
When will thou be at full, great Lunatique?
Not till thou exceed the world? can thou be like
A prosperous nose-borne wenne, which sometime grows
To be far greater then the mother-nose?
Go then, and as to thee, when thou did go,
Munster did Towns, and Gesner Authors show,
Mount now to Gallo-belgicus: appear
As deep a Statesman, as a Gazettier.
Homely and familiarly, when thou come back,
Talk of Will Conqueror, and Proster Jack.
Go bashful man, lest here thou blush to look
Upon the progress of thy glorious book.
To which both Indies sacrifices send;
The (...) sent gold, which thou did freely spend,
(Meaning to see it no more) upon the prosse.
The East sends hither her deliciousness;
And thy ieaues must embrace what comes from thence,
The Myrrh, the Pepper, and the Frankincense.
This magnifies thy leau's; but if they stoop
To neighbor wares, when Merchants do vnhoope
Voluminous barrels; if thy leaves do then
Convey these wares in parcels unto men;
If for vast Tomes of Current, and of Flgs,
Of medcinall, and Aromatique twigs,
Thy leaves a better method do provide,
Divide to pounds, and ounces subdiuide;
If they stoop lower yet, and vent our wares,
Home- manufactures, to thick popular Faires,
If omni-praegnant there, upon warm stals
They hatch all wares for which the buyer calls,
Then thus thy leaves we lustly may command,
That they all kind of matter comprehend.
Thus thou, by means which th'Ancients never took,
A Pandect makst, and Universal book.
The brauest Heroes, for public good
Scattered in diverse lands, their lims and blood.
Worst malefectors, to whom men are prize,
Do public good cut in Anatomies,
So will thy book in pieces: For a Lord
Which casts at Portescues, and all the board,
Provide whole books; each leaf enough will be
For friends to pass time, and keep company.
Can all carouse up thee? No, thou must fit
Measures; and fill out for the halfe-pint wit.
Some shall wrap pills, and save a friends life so,
Some shall stop muskets and so kill a fo.
Thou shall not ease the Critiques of next age
So much, at once their hunger to assuage.
Nor shall wit-pyrates hope to find thee lie
All in one bottom, in one Library.
Some leaves may paste strings there in other books,
And so one may, which on another looks,
Pilfer, alas, a little wit from you,
But hardly I mean from one page which shall palle strings in a book.
much; and yet I think this true;
As Sybils was, your book is mystical,
For every piece is as much worth as all.
Therefore mine impotency I confess;
The healths which my brain bears, must be far less;
Thy Gyant-wit o'rethrowes me, I am gone,
And rather then read all, I would read none.
In eundem Macaronicon.
QVot, dos haec, (...) persetti, Dislicha sairont,
Tot cuordos Statesmen, (...) liver fata (...).
Es sat a my l'honneur estre (...) inteso; Car (...)
L'honra, de person nestre creduto, tibi.
Explicit Ioannes Done.
Jncipit Richardus Martin.
To my friend that by lying at the sign of the Fox, does prove himself no
Goose, Thomas Coryate the Traveler.
A SONET.
OFor a bonny blithe and bounsing balled
To praise this Odcomb'd Chanti-cleere, that hatched
These Crudities which (with his shoes) he patehed,
All hitting right as it were with a mallet.
Before us here he sets both bag and wallet,
Where met are many scraps (you see) unmatched:
His feet, hands, head (days and nights) walked, wrote, watched:
And hardly did he lie on any pallet.
Much oil he fau'd both from his shoes and sallats,
Which thristily he are while they were cobled;
Then (for his fruit) these Crudities he gobled,
Which since he seasoned has for sundry pallats.
To him therefore veil Travelers your bonnets,
Of him write Poets all your Songs and Sonnets.
Explicit Richardus Martin.
Jncipit Laurentius Whitakerus.
Adlectorem bipedem de Authore Vel quia Polypodis instar crebra loci mutatione
mul tos passus prosectus, vel quia (...) animalcularu^ multos morsus perpessus
est.
Polypode, deque Prouerbio ipsi vsitato, (...) Demosthene citato, scil. (...)
(...) (...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Ad Odcombiam (niminm, bona si sua norit, foelicem) de indigena ipsius
celeberrimo, Pedite celerrimo, Ob validam (...) cum (...) Veneto, and Vangione
rustico luctam.
Pugile acerrimo, Ob maciem ex nocturna lucubratione, bodaeporetica monitione,
and (...) molitione contracta^
Vigile macerrimo, Tomo compacto Coriaceo, Thoma Coriato.
ERige (...) praerupta Odcombia (...),
Egremio Monstrum prosilit ecce tuo.
Prosilit histericus, vates, rbeter, peregrinans,
Cui non dant foetum Punica regna parem.
Bisque biceps author prolem dat (...),
(...), mirts, rhetoris art, metris.
Neu monstri (...) (...) quis dixerit (...):
Rectius hoc (...) potuisse scias.
Monstrum a monstrando Criticus (...), ecquis
Tot veltanta alius qua tibi monstret, (...)
To mundo monstrat, notum facit and (...) mundum;
(...) (...) extera miratuis.
Visere sed vatis terras magis (...) remotas
Pluraque fert animus mira refer tui.
Hunc posse emensos tantos, Odcombia, cursus
Exceptum gremio, (...), foueto tuo.
Semper vt hoc cunctis Portentum nobile monstre,
Visere qui cupient Theseos oratus.
To the most peerless Poetical Prose-writer, the most Transcendent,
Tramontane Traveler, and the most single-soled, singlesouled, and
single-shirted Obseruer the Odcombian Gallobelgicus.
VVOnder of worlds, that with one sustian case,
One pair of shoes, have done Odcombe the grace
To make her name known past the Alpine hills,
And home returned have worn out many quils
In writing fair thy large red-lin'd Rehearsal
Of what thou sawst with sharp eyes which did pierce all
Stone Tombs, great gates, and manners of the people,
Besides the height of many a 113. 5. 451: 20. 183. 10.
Tower and steeple,
68. 34.
Snailes, 76. 16.
Butterflies, black 68. 2.
sheep, ibi.
black hogs, and
And the neat use of eating meat with 90. 22.
forks: 41. 4.
Storks,
And, that of stuff thou mighst leave out no odd piece
To raise thy work, thou have writ o'th Switzers 386. 30.
codpeece:
Thou sawst the Venice 261. 18.
Donna's, and did quarrel
With the Dutch 524. 26.
Boore: thou sawst the monstrous 486. 27.
barel:
But O thy temper! seldom wast thou drunk,
Nor had but one nights solace with thy Punke:
Nor in thy pilgrimage were much a sinner,
But when thou did Believe him not Reader, he brings this in only to make up
the rhyme.
steal bread to save a dinner.
Thou in all sorts of travel had thy part,
But most on foot, and sometimes in a cart 9. 29.
.
Nor did thou scorn for all spruce Critics mockings
T'accept of a gift, a Prussians aged stockings.
Thou saw st the field of many a famous battle,
And home thou cam'it well furnished with quick cattle;
Yet must I say thy fortune therein was ill,
For thou wentst nakt to wash thy shirt at Basil;
And having scene cloisters, and many a Munke,
Becam'st thy self a Recluse in a trunk.
But i will not write thy labors Inuentory,
I Will say but this of thee, and of thy story,
Thou well describ'st the maruels thou did see,
And this thy book as well describes thee.
Sonnet compose en rhyme a la Ascauoir sellon le sty'e de Clement Marot vieil
Poet Francois.
Marotte, accommode au style de l' Autheur du liver; faict en louange de cet
Heroique Geant Odcombien, nomme non Pantagruel, mais Pantagrue, c'est a dire,
ny Oye, ny Oyson, ains tout Grue, accoustrency en Hochepot, Hachis, ou
Cabirotade, pour tenir son rang en la Librairie del' Abbaye S. Victor a Paris
enter le liver de Marmoretus, de baboinis, and cingis, and celuy de
Tirepetanus, de optimitate triparum; and pour porter de nom de la Cabirotade de
Coryat, ou, de l'Apodemistichopezologie de l'Odcombeuili Somerseti (Soti) en,
etc.
SI de'ce pais le pourpris spatieux,
(D'ou est sorti ce Cest a dire, (...), (...) (...) (...), (...).
Badin (...))
Ou bien la Suisse, ou mesme l'Alemagne
Pouroit fournir quelque douce compagne
D'esprit pareil, and de condition
Semblable a luy, le vieil Deucalion,
Et Pyrrhe en eux seroient resuscitez:
Car ne nasquit de nasquit cailloux iettez,
Que tas de gens, and un monde (...):
Ainsi des pierres, ou nestre Un certain animal, (...) la veue (...) (...).
Blaireau
A (...) (...) (fut-ce aux ponts, ou Potences,
Clochers, statues, qui tiennent balances)
Est ne soudain un grand hideux volume
De bean discourse, qui s'est rendul'enclume
De nos esprits, un monde de fadeze,
Don't le goutteux se resiouir soit (...),
Tay toy Rablais, rabbaisse (...) l orgueil
De tes Endouilles, qui d'vn bell accueil
Receurent ton Pantagruel.
Geant en la (...) (...) ainsi appellee par Rablais.
Farouche,
Ace Geant d'Odcombe pierre and souche
Parla, fournit des comptes, l' (...)
Le muguetta, voire and son sens maintint
En (...) (...) Mais scais-tu bien pourquoy?
Son Chef Creste luy donna ceste loy,
Que des hommes du lieu ne scachant le language,
Parmy troncs et cailloux il (...) sa rage.
Explicit Laurentius Whittakerus.
Jncipit Hugo Holland.
In personam and laudem Authoris.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
SONETTO.
QVi puo mirar ognun, chinon e (...),
Vu gallant buomo (...) Italia (...)
Ma del parlare ha (...) (...) (...),
Troppe peccante era portar si seco.
Egle pur brauamente parlar Grace,
Hauendo may la Gracia (...):
Ma quel viaggio, di (...) (...),
Gli a (...) gran stento, e (...) lode (...).
E (...) vodere i lidi del Leuante;
Vel signor Turco, e'l (...) prete Gianni:
Donde tornardo un Paladin (...),
Con qualch (...) quatrinie d'anni:
Ne (...), fra cosetalie tante,
Il Turco un pantalon, e'l prete un Zanni.
To Topographicall Typographicall THOMAS.
ISing the man, I sing the woeful case,
The shirt, the shoes, the shanks that served to trace
S^euen Countries wide, the greater was his pain,
That two to one he ever came again,
Yet two for one he came: O Muse, O Maid,
(If Maid or Muse) say what has so beraid
This silly ( Insignem pit tate (...) (...).
) soul, and drove him to such labors,
As had his hide bin only made for tabours?
(...) my Girl, what did he with the French,
Before he courted the Venetian wench?
How could he leave his well-boyl'd beer, and escape,
To drink the raw blood of the Germane grape?
Where with his watrie teeth being set on edge,
He nigh had lost of teeth his double ( (...), (...)
) hedge.
At home much did he suffer, much abroad,
And never once (poor ( Note reader that a (...) must have the back of an a
(...), the mouth of a (...), the eye of a hawke, a merchants ear, etc.
) ass) did cast his load,
Yet further went then Scaracalasino,
And after littl'd lay at Bergamo.
This usage did he be are abroad uncivil,
At home too was he borne not far from Evil.
In Odcombe parish yet famous with his cradle,
A chicke he hatched was of an egg vnaddle.
Whence a young Cockrell he was sent for knowledge
To Winchester, and planted in the College:
Not there to prove a goose (for he is none)
But that he might with other cocks come on.
Where lo a dwarf in stature he so (...)
Grew in the Greek, that he became a Giant,
Pronouncing then (...) each letter
More plain, and reading all then Honder better,
This Prince of Poets, that of (...).
His Latin too deserves more praise then Priscians.
For Coryate brake, and Priscian he is dead,
No marvel; Coryate brake so often his head.
Now when in Greek and Latin he could grauel
His school fellows, (...) (...) he needs (...);
Not for bare language, but his charges earning
On the by) on the maine, for real learning.
Be Basil proof and Zurick too, and (...).
As thou in print (...) (...), if thou (...) thank for it.
What would he with more tongue? He (...) enough,
That which he has is fine neat-leather tough:
And yet at Calais to confound the Mass
Some say he spoke the tongue of (...) Ass.
And others, that with Sampsons Asses (...)
He slew whole hoasts: so is he rough and raw bone.
It Were but a srump to name the Asses back,
Each common traveler bears thereon his pack:
I therefore leave the Ass for fear he doubt,
Or others for him, that I should him (...).
But as the Serpent (not the (...)) (...) hisses,
So is he wise; and equald with (...).
Who towns of many men has seen and manners:
The more was he (...) to the (...).
If he had but one (...) pair of shoos,
Then how much leather think ye could he loose?
He has seen Paris (...) (...) (...) Lions,
And Paris Garden of all France, and Lions,
With all the towns that (...) (...) this and Venice,
Where (how beit some say he played at tennis)
He more preual'd against the 'xcoriate Jews,
Then Broughton could, or twenty more such Hughs.
And yet but for one petty poor misprision,
He was nigh made one of the Circumcision.
But holla, that is a part that must be privy,
Now go we to the town of learned Liuy.
Where being before Licentiat, he proceeded
To beg like a poor Paduan, when he needed.
Then through Vicenza and Brescia does he go
Among the Cogleons, those of Bergamo.
Who made him lie in litter like a Villan:
Then viewes he, in his case of sustain, Milan.
(Not Milan sustain though) yet such a trophae
As might become a Sultan or a Sophae.
Which in his frontispice he does extol,
Like those of Marius in Romes Capitol.
And well the case was lined with poudred Brmin:
Though others think it was some stranger vermin.
Now should I tell his travels with the Dutch,
But that my Muse does fear to drink too much.
For, if the water of poor Hippocrene
Does make her drunk, what will the wine of Rhene?
Both Heidelberg I pass, and the great hogshead,
Which he bestdir himself, like a great hogs-head.
Who list the pains or pleasure take to look,
Shall this and more find printed in the book.
Whose merits here I will no further raise:
That were my friend to sell, and to praise;
Perhaps I know some that have seen the Turk,
Yet would be whipped ere they wrote such a work.
But what a volume here will rise anon,
When he has seen both Turk and (...) John?
Enough: yet in his Crudities behoose,
This will I say: it is a book of proof.
Wherein himself appears (I will be plain)
No fool in print, not yet (...) in grain.
Aparallel between Don Ulysses of (...) and Don Coryate of Odcombe.
The Preamble to the Parallel.
IF moral Plut areh had done nothing else,
Yet should we praise him for his parrallels;
Where he with every Greek does match a Roman.
I that would be his Ape, can fancy no man,
(Though learned Hackluyt has set many forth)
Amongst our English, who for wit and worth
May be compared with the Ithacan,
Unless that Brute the brave Odcombian,
What do you tell me of your Drakes or Candishes?
We never were beholding to their standishes.
This man has manners seen, and men outlandish,
And writ the same: so did not Drake nor Candish.
If Drake be famous because he did wander
About the Seas, Tom may be well a Gander,
That rauisheth with his harmonious quil
More ears then any Swan on Parnasse-hil.
The Parallel it self.
Ulysses was a merry Greek they say,
So Tom is, and the Greeker of the tway.
Ulysses left at home an aged Sire,
And Tom an aged mother by the fire.
Ulysses was an Islander I trow,
How then? I pray you is not Coryate so?
Perhaps Ulysses did in wit excel,
Our Coryate though does of more learning smell.
Ulysses had a ship of no great bulk,
And Coryate went to Calais in a hulke.
Ulysses in the Troyan horse was hid,
The Heidelbergian barrel Tom bestrid.
Good harness did Ulysses guarde and grace,
Where Coryate (...) had but a sustian cafe,
Ulysses hardly from his Ciree sluncke,
As hardly Tom from his Venetian Punke.
By land Ulysses in a Charlot rode,
And Coryate in a cart, the greater lode.
Ulysses with stern Ajax had to do,
With the Dutch Boore so had poor Coryate too.
At home lest Vlix store of beasts and chattel,
And Coryate home came guarded with more cattaile.
Ulysses used to drink the Aethiop wine,
With whitson-ale his cap does Coryate line.
Just twenty years Ulysses with his Greeks
Did wander: Corya'e just as many weeks.
Ulysses all that while had but one caruel,
Tom but one pair of shoos, the greater marvel.
Minerua help Ulysses at a lift,
And Patience Coryate, for there was no Because hce came from Venice (...) one
shist.
shift.
Ulysses heard no Siren sing: nor Coryate
The Jew, least his praepuce might prove excoriate.
Ulysses had a wise to lust upon,
But Coryate has a chaster, having none,
Ulysses seemed a (...) to (...),
So Coryate did; and was, I dare be sworn.
Ulysses in his travel builded Flushing,
Where Coryate ending, over the Sea came brushing.
One Homer only sung Ulysses praise,
But Coryate all the Poets of our (...).
The Epilogue of the Parallel.
TAke Reader with a laughing sooke
This Odcome-new-come wel-come book.
Look with the like thou take these parallels,
In sober sadness we shall mar al else.
For Coryate with us both will quarrel,
And tear himself out of his parel.
In each point though they do not iumpe,
I trust they do yet in the lump.
Nor would I join them head and feet;
Lines parallel do never meet.
Yet one day meet may thou and I,
And laugh with Coryate ere we die.
Englyn vn-odlinion.
YNody mourglod ae am arglwydh mawr,
Sir Francis Drake.
Hwuad-mor cyfarwydh:
Dymma' nawr DWM un arwydh,
And thydan gwaith (...) wdwn gwydh?
Ad Ianum Harringtonum Badensem, Equitem: non Equitem Badensem, sed aur at um.
These Latin verses following were written to be sent to the worthy and learned
Knight aboue-named, by the Author of the former, for the obtaining of his
encomiasticks upon my book: but though they never came to that worthy Knights
hands, I have thought good to insert them here, because it was the authors
pleasure to have them printed with the rest of his Panegyricks.

OBone, cuitranslatus olet miserabilis Ajax,
Qui sat es (...) and (...) notus eques.
Inficiat (...) vis ne fumosa Tobacci,
Neu piper attactu mordeat acre sue:
Ne scombros metuant ((...) quoque carmin a sco^bros
Thusue graui Diceum condat odore regum.
His concede precor (...), feruenter Itaneamieum (...) (...) ( mi Hollande)
cuntuis (...) and graucolentibu face ijs? number tu stercurie dedicabis, quae alij
mei amiei (...) and Palladi consecrant? absit, absit.
olentis
Sub Clypeo Aiacis posse latere tui.
Explicit Hugo Holland Cambro-Britannus.
Jncipit Robertus Riccomontanus.
COryate, thou Corypheus of Odcombe Whitson-ale,
Who since art our Choregus over many a hill and dale:
Thy skill in Arts and Arms do to us euenly show,
As thou art borne to Mirs, so to Mercury.
Others write books profane, and others that are holy,
But thine a Dosis is against all Melancholy:
A work of worth, that does all other works out-(...)
A furlong at the least, thou needst not bate an ace.
A book of price it will be, if (...) there were any,
A hundred Sowses is thy due, thou shall not bate a penny.
The Mayor of Hartlepoole upon a day,
Hearing King Harry was to come that way,
Put on's considering cap, and Kendall gown,
(...) (...) his (...) of the town,
What gift they should present as he came by:
A Skate-fish (quoth his council) sweet and dry:
Nay (quoth the Mayor) we will give him half one more:
Soft (quoth another) now your mouth runs o'ret
" As there Mass Mayor, who could not do but ote-doe
" So Corly ate (...), who (...) al, and more Not more then truth, but more
then other travelers,
too:
Of mounts, of (...), of rocks, of stocks, of stories,
Of Boores, of whoores, of tombs, of dead men's bones,
Of bowers, of towers, and many a stately steeple,
Heluetians, Rhetians, and many an uncouth people:
Nothing escapes his note, that is worth due observation,
The For the Author has written of some of special note in his book.
Gall (...) scapes him not, without due salutation.
Speak O thou clock at Strasbourg, and stones at Fountain-beleau.
If Coryate you forget, and not your wonders show:
Weep Rhenish drops O Palsgraues Tun, if thou be here forgotten,
No, no, he has thee hoopt so well, thy ribs will n'ere be rotten.
The Ladies of (...) that live in the Bordello
Are painted in their proper hew by him that is sans fellow:
He lively them decyphereth, he does them naught forbear,
He strips them to their petticotes, he hits them to a hair.
Who to refresh his grauer Muse did often walk per spasso,
Sometimes to hear the (...), and sometimes to the Ciasso.
And yet herein my ventrous Sir, ywis ye were to curious,
Such places oftentimes do make most temperate men, most furious.
And who dare swear for you, I pray, that went for satisfaction,
(You say your self) and so may be euicted of the action?
So that by your confession, sans verdict of a Jury,
In each place else you show your wit, but there you showed your fury,
Say what you list, swear and protest, for all this great Brauado,
It will be said, at least be guest, you were the Puncks Priuado.
And so you will loose great store of those, whose verse may give you glory,
Especially the female fry, the learned Signiory.
You Will have none such to praise you much: they will suspect the we^ch
Has turned your Greek and Latin both into a perfect French.
Change then thy word (to satisfy) being alone with Sfogare,
And then thy work I Will dignifie, to be ad omnia quare.
For who could say so much as thou (whereof thine be the thanks)
Or of the refractary Jew, or of the Mounte-bankes?
The stubborn Jew (if it be true) was by thee catechized
At Venice: which at Rome is since by Bellarmiue baptized.
For sure that Jew from Venice came, we find it so recorded,
In late Gazettes: which or lies, or trifles never afforded.
In which great act to doom aright. and not as partials,
The greater share is Coryats, the less the Cardinals.
Now, who shall read thy worthy work, and hear thy large discourses
Will swear thou know the Mounteba^ks and tracest al their courses.
Thou hit'st the nail in all things else aright: But O the Boore him.
That caytif-kerne, so stout, so stern, il thrive he evermore,
That capt thee for a bunch of grapes: ten tousand (...) supplant
I see well science has no foeman, nisiignorantem,
Had thou had courage to thy skill, and with this Giant coped,
(But O such skill and courage both in one can not be hoped.)
Thou might with Guy and Beuis bold in martial praise have shared,
And Odcombe might with Hampton, and with Warwick have compared.
Oh then my Muse a higher pitch had flowne, and had thee set
All pari to Sir Lancelot tho, before Sir Dagonnet.
Yet brave I grant is thy revenge for that his gross abuse,
Thy poynant pen has (...) him in, O piercing lance of Goose!
Record we in the roll of same the Goose and Ox together,
Whose shoos did bear him hence, and home, O everlasting leather!
Some news ye shoos, for you did use with Coryate still to be,
And might us give (if you could speak) some notes as well as he.
Twere meet that now from shoos I go, to sockes and slippers next,
And yet its fit I them omit, I find them not ith Text:
And one bare word of one bare shirt I hope shall be enough,
He loves the naked truth too well, such shifting to approve;
For naught fears he back-biters nips, in doublet or in canyons,
He holds them ever as they are, the travelers companions.
Courageous Coryate, for one Dutchman that thee sore assailed,
Thou have a hundred Picquardes slain, and to the table nailed.
Some men may think that this is strange: well, he that list may cauel,
Wise Coryate thinks no luggage light for him that means to travel.
Leave we the baggage then behind, and to our matter turn us,
As Coryate did, who left at home his socks and his cothurnoes.
For now of wonders must I treat, wast not think you a wonder,
To go two thousand miles at least, in five months space, not under?
And of strange notes, four hundred leaves, twenty thousand lines to write,
This sarre surpass (...) Horcules his fifty in a night.
Besides, rare man, he tell you can, the manners of each stranger,
Yet, to understand one word they speak, he never was in danger.
Then lanch thee forth (thou man of worth) when this thy work is done
According to thy great defigne, as far as shines the Sun.
And bring us notes of all the world, when thou have past it through,
We Will have a Caske to put them in, shall put down (...).
Explicit (...) (...).
Jncipit Gualterus Quin.
In lode dell Autore.
La Cornamusa di Gualtero Quin.
SE'l gran guerrier, chi tanto fece and scrisse,
Se stesso, e lmondo (...) ingarbugliando,
Per commandar a tutti, montre ei visse,
De'suoi gran vanti andana (...);
Ben e ragion, Tom-asino galante,
Ch'altiero e brauo tu ti (...),
Poiche nelfar, e scriuer stranagante,
Vinci il gran Giulio, non che lo pareggi.
Di quel, ch'egli (...) in parecchi anni oprato
Con schiere armate, scrisse un libraccinolo:
Ma dal ceruello tuo un libraccio e nato
Di quel, c'hai fatto in pochi (...) solo:
Latino and Greco sapeua esso assai;
Ma del l'Ingleseera affatto ignorante:
Tu'lvinci in questo, (...) (...) sai
Greco e Latino, per far un Pedante.
Un gran rumor e terrible fracasso
Fece ei, per metter sottosopra il monde:
Di dar da rider con solazzo and spasso
Atutti, fu de'tuei dissegni il fondo.
Molte (...) de schiere (...)
Morir (...) con (...), dardi, e (...):
May non ti piaequer Archibugi, O Piche,
Ne morte alcuna, fuor che de pidocchi:
Quei chi scamparon l'vnghie tue prigions
Portasts addosso, (...) quel (...)
Disquadre (...) e (...) and padrons
Menossi (...) trionfante e altiero.
Ei (...) ascese in Campidoglio,
Con pompa e boria, in carro trionfale:
Contadinesco carro senza orgoglio
Per trionfar tipiacque; manco male,
Coluimostrando, come andaua ratto
Nel vincer, serisse, Io (...), viddi, (...)
L'hai detto meglio tu vincendo il patto,
Che tife scorrer e quinci, e costinci.
Francia, Lamagnia, Italia, Heluetia, Rhetia
Non scorse gia senza armi quel (...);
Come scorresti tu ratto a Venetia,
Eindietro a casa tua con poco impaccio.
Solo un Vilan Tedesco, imbriaco, e (...),
Con bastonate ben (...) gli (...)
Forse ch'es sceso dal vecchio Ariouisto
Dicasa Giulia penso che tu (...).
Maper disgratia se'n valor attiuo
A Giulio alcun sopra te desse il vanto;
Egli e pur forza ch'in valor passino
Voto e sentenza egli dia daltuo canto.
Ne (...) viaggi gran fatica ci prese,
Non pero senza Canai, Muli, and Cocchi:
Tu sempre (...) a pie, mal in arnese,
Vincendo i cingani, staffieri, and scrocchi.
El quel ch'a schiuo bauria per (...),
Bastotti un par di (...) in quel (...),
Che rattoppasti spesso con destrezza;
De Lefinesca industria vero saggio.
Questa lode (...) (...) (...)
(Di che quel prodigo non fu may degno)
Ch'una camiscia and vest, da bvon (...):
Sola portasti allhor senza aschio, O (...)!
Parsa a lui peste saria la (...) rogna,
Che nel gratterla (...) sol zzo,
Ballar ti fe come al suon di sampogna,
O Violin di quel francese pazze.
L'haurlan vcciso i tuoi stenti, and disagi
Nel mangiar, beuer, dormir, appiccarti
Pulci, pidocchi, et cimici maluagi,
Guaster le gambe, el culo scorticarti:
(...) Nel tranagliar col corpe il capo ancora,
Quindi il ceruello ogn'hora lambicando;
Perciascun passo, che pria facesti, ora
Righe altretante dal ceruel stillando.
S'ei questi affanni may sofferti haurebbe,
Manco gl'affronti, ente, et scorni, ch'omai
Non (...) sordo et cieco, soffrirebbe;
Trastullo a te si fan pur questi guai.
Poiche in oprar, dungue, en patir (...),
Anzilo vinci, Tom-asino inuitto,
Qual Cornamusa si gonfi, et trauagli,
Chi vuel cantarti con decoro et dritto.
Explicit Gualterus Quin.
Incipit Christopherus Brook Eboracensis.
As for these titles that follow, bestowed upon me by this worthy Gentleman, I
would have thee know (Reader) that as I acknowledge my self utterly unworthy
of them, so I meant to have suppressed and concealed them, but that it is the
Authors pleasure to prefixe them before his verses. Therefore for obeying of
his will I have thought good, much against mine own will, to express them in
this place, even these:

To the no less learned, then wise and discreet Gentleman, M. Thomas Coryate.
In some few months travels borne and brought up to what you see, vz.
To be the delight of a world of noble wits, to be a shame to all Authors, as
the Gout and Quartan Fever have beeene to all Physicians.
This playne-song sends Christopher Brook his poor friend, to attend the
descant of his famous book, through all hands, tongues, arts, trades,
mysteries, and occupations whatsoever.
THe subtle Greek Ulysses needs must travel,
Ten years, for sooth, over much sand and gravel,
And many cities see, and manners know,
Before there could be writ a book or two
Of his aduentutes: and he traueld still
(Else there are liars) sore against his will:
But this rare English-Latin-Grecian,
Of Orators and Authors the black Swan,
A voluntary journey undertook
Of scarce six months, and yet has writ a book
Bigger then Homers, and (though writ in prose)
As full of poetry, spite of Homers nose.
If he lived now that in Darius casket
Placed the poote Iliads, he had bought a basket
Of richer stuff (...) thy volume large,
Which thou (O noble Tom) at thine own charge
Art pleased to print. But thou needst not repent
Of this thy bitter cost; for thy brave Precedent
Great (...) is, who penned his own gests,
And (as some write) recited them at Feasts.
And at's own charge had printed them they say,
If printing had been used at that day.
The Press has spent the three for one you got
At your return: what is that? poor thing God wot.
Manure this land still with such books my friend,
And you shall be paid for it in the end.
For I (me thinks) see how men strive to carry
This Iouiall Iournall into each Library.
And we ere long shall well percelue your wit,
(Grave learned Bodley) by your placing it.
Therefore lanch forth great book like ship of fame,
(...) Hopewel of Odcombe thou shall have to name.
Explicit Christopherus Brook Eboracensis.
Jncipit Johannes Hoskins.
Cabalistical verses, which by transposition of words, syllables, and letters,
make excellent (...), otherwise (...), In (...) Authoris.
EVen as the waves of brainelesse buttered fish,
Wih bugle horn writ in the Hebrew tongue,
Fuming up flounders like a chasing-dish,
That looks asquint upon a three-mans song:
Or as your equinoctial pasti-crust
Proiecting out a purple chariot wheel,
Does squeaze the spheres, and intimate the dust;
The dust which force of argument does (...)
Even so this Author, this ( This word gymnosophist is derived from two Greck
words (...) and (...), which signify (...) Sophister. And (...) refore calls
the Author so because one day he went without a (...) at (...) (...) it (...)
washing.
) Gymnosophist,
Whom no delight of travels toil dismayes,
Shall sympathize (think Reader what thou list)
Crowned with a quinsill tipped with marble praise.
Encomiologicall Antispasticks cosisting of Epitrits, the fourth in the first
(...), which the vulgar call Phaleuciac (...) syllabes; (...) Catalecticks,
with Antispastic Asclepiads, trimeters (...) (...) of two (...) comma's of some
learned named choriambicks, both together dicoli, (...), (...) and
hyperrythmicall, amphibologicall, dedicated unto the vndeclinable memory of
the antarkisticall Coryat, the only true traveling Porcupen of England.
ADmired Coriat, who like a Porcupen,
Do show prodigious things to thy countri-men.
As (...) (...) when he kills does use his own darts,
So do thy pretty quils make holes in our hearts.
That beast lives of other company destitute,
So wentest thou alone every way absolute.
That beast creeps a foot, (...) (...) pennis,
So did thou trot a journey hence to Venice.
Live long foe to thy foe, (...) as a (...),
Live long friend to thy friend, kind as a Porcupen.
Henceforth add to thy crest an armed Histrix,
Since thy carriage has resembled his tricks.
The same in Latin.
SEiaculo, sesepharetra, sese vtitur (...), Claudian. (...) (...),

In reliquas Histrix (...) parat arma feras.
Se co (...) ad Venetam tendens Coriatius vrhem,
Se duce, se curru, se fuit vsus equo.
Et decantat iter se nunc authore (...),
Nec minus a reditu se quoque test (...).
Ergo non immerito (...) (...) Histrix,
Et lauds a se, non aliunde capit.
NO more but so, I heard the cry,
And like an old hound in came I
To make it fuller, though I find
My mouth decays much in this kind.
The cry was this, they cride by millions,
Messengers, Curriers, and Postillions,
Now out alas we are undone
To hear of Coryats pair of sho'ne;
There is no news we are more sorry at,
Then this strange news of ( A great Giant (...) on (...) of whom mention is
in Polychronicon.
) Rawbone Coryat.
Who like an Unicorn went to Venice,
And drinking neither Sack nor (...),
Home in one pair of shoes did trample,
A fearful and a strange example.
But what is the news of learned people
In Pauls-church-yard and near Paul's steeple?
Hang up his shoes on top of (...),
Tied to his name in parchment (...),
That may be read most legibly
In Tuttle fields and Finsbury.
Fame is but wind, thence wind may blow it
So far that all the world may know it:
From Mexico and from Peru
To China and to Cambalu:
If the wind serve, it may have luck
To pass by South to the bird Rucke.
Greater then the Stymphalides
That hid the Sun from Hercules.
And if Fames wings chance not to freeze,
It may pass north nintie degrees,
Beyond Metaincognita,
Where though there be no holiday,
Nor Christen people for to tell it,
Horrible Bears and Whales may smell it.
Thence may it on the Northren seas,
On foot walk to the Antipodes,
Whose feet against our feet do pace
To keep the center in his place.
But when those fellows that do wonder
As we at them, how we go under
From clime to clime and tongue to tongue,
Throughout their (...) along,
Have tossed these words as bals at tennis,
Tom Coryate went on foot from Venice.
This traveling (...) this walking sound
Must needs come home (...) coming round,
So that we shall (...) out upon him,
His fame in (...) has out gone him,
When all have talked, and time has tried him,
Yet Coryate will be (...) idem.
SCilicet haud animum (...) (...) mutat,
Et patriam (...) se quoque nemo fugit.
Thersites Phrygiis Thersites perstat in oris,
Nec Plato in Aegypta desinit (...) Plato.
Nec Thomas Nec vir peregrnians soemina, nec Anglus Romanus fiet.
(...) (...) (...) (...) ab Indis,
Nec (...) qui Coriatus (...). I mean egregie cordatus (...) Catus Aelius
Sextus.

When all have talked, and time has tried him,
Yet Coryate will be (...) idem.
Explicit Ioannes Hoskins.
Incipit Ioannes Pawlet de George Henton.
These ensuing verses lately sent unto me by my tight worshipful and generose
countryman and neighbor in Somersetshire Mr. John Pawlet of George (...), had
such a glorious title prefixed before them that I meant to have excluded it out
of my book, because I am altogether unworthy of those (...) terms. But
because this worthy Gentleman does crave to have it placed before his lines, I
do with his elegant verses present the same also unto thee, viz.

To the Darling of the MUSES and Minion of the GRACES, my dear countryman and
friend M. THOMAS CORTATE of (...).
SOme call thee (...) by comparison;
Comparisons are odious, I will none:
But call thee (as thou art) Tom (...),
That is; The Man the World does wonder at.
Whose Braine-pan-hath more Pan then Brain by ods,
To make thee all Pan with the semi-gods,
Which pan, when thy fleet wits a wandering go,
Is Discretion bears upon his braine-pan to keep his wits together.
rung to keep the swarm together so.
So (recollected) thou with them did (...)
To the worlds Gardens, France and Italy,
Where (like a Be, from every honied flower)
The That is, (...).
oddest sweets did; which makes thee scowre
At home for life: where, in a Od-combe, the place of his birth, the hungry
(...) whereof first digest his Cruditics, as he himself affirms in his
Title Page of this present work.
Comb as odd
Thou (...) it, to feed those that fly abroad.
Explicit (...) Pawlet.
Incipit Lionel Cranfield.
GReat laud deserves the Author of this work,
Who saw the French, Dutch, Lombard, lew, and Turk;
But speaks not any of their tongues as yet,
For who in (...) months can attain to it?
Short was his time, although his book be long,
Which shows much wit, and memory more strong:
Anyron memory; for who but he
Could glue together such a rhapsodie
Of precious things? as towers, steeples, rocks;
Tombs, theaters, the gallows, bells, and clocks,
Mules, Asses, (...), Churches, gates, Towns,
Th'alpine mountains, Curtezans and Dutch clownes.
What man before has writ so punctually
To his eternal fame his iourneys story?
And as he is the first that I can find,
So will he be the last of this rare kind.
Me thinks when on his book I cast my (...),
I see a shop repleate with metchandize,
And how the owner ielous of his (...),
With precious matter (...) the same.
Many good parts he has, no man too much
Can them commend some few i will only touch.
He Greek and Latin speaks with great ease
Then hogs eat akornes, or tame pigeons pease:
His ferret eyes do plod so on his book,
As make his looks worse then a testy cook.
His tongue and feet are swifter then a flight,
Yet both are glad when day resignes to night.
He is not proud, his nature soft and mild,
His complements are long, his looks are wild:
Patient enough, but oh his action!
Of great effect to move and stir up passion.
Odcombe be proud of thy odd Coryate,
Borne to be great, and gracious with the State;
How much I him well wish let this suffice,
His book best shows that he is deeply wise.
Explicit Lionel Cranfield.
jncipit Ioannes Sutclin.
Whether I thee should either praise or pity
My senses at great Dilemma are:
For when I think how thou have trauail'd far,
Can Greek and Latin speak, art courteous, witty,
I these in thee and thee for them commend;
But when I think how thou false friends to keep
Do wear thy body, and do leese thy sleep,
I thee then pity and do discommend.
Thy feet have gone a paineful pilgrimage,
Thou many nights do wrong thy hands and eyes
In writing of thy long Apologies;
Thy tongue is all the day thy restless page.
For shame entreat them better, I this crave,
So they more ease, and thou more wit shall have.
Explicit Ioannes Sutclin.
Incipit Inigo Jones.
All Mol. Mag.
Tho. Cor.
Odd is the This is a figure called by the Grecians (...), that is, a
division, when the word is so divided a sunder as here: Odd is the Comb, so:
Odcombe is the place from whence etc as in Ennius, (...) (...) comminuit brum,
for cerebrum:
Comb from whence this Cock did come,
That Crow'd in Venice against the skinlesse Jews.
Who gave him the entertainment of Tom Drum;
Yet he undaunted slipped into the stews
For learnings cause; and in his Atticke rage
Believe him not Reader: Read my Apology in my discourse of the Venetian
Cortezans, Page 270, 15
Trod a tough hen of thirty years of age.
Enough of this; all pens in this do travel
To tracke thy steps, who (...) like do vary
Thy shape to place, the home-borne Muse to grauel.
For though in (...) thou not long did tarry,
Yet thouth' Italian soul so soon could steal,
As in that time thou eat'st but one good (...).
For France alas how soon (but that thou (...))
Could thou have (...) thy beard ruffl'd thy (...))
Worn a foul shirt twelve weeks, and as thou (...) (...),
Sung (...) through thy Persian (...)
For faces, cringes, and a (...) (...),
And been as scab'd a Monsieur as the best.
Next, to tho sober Dutch I turn my tale,
Who do in earnest write thee Latin letters,
And thou in good not paper never did fail
To answer them; so (...) you neither (...).
But sympathize in all, save when thou drink'st
Thou makst a The modesty of the Author being such, and his temperance
indrinking, that he sometimes frowneth. when a health is drunk unto him.
crab-tree face, shakst head, and winkst.
Last, to thy book the Cordial of sad minds,
Or rather Cullis of our Od comb Cock
Sodden in travel, which the Critique finds
The best restorer next your Venice smock.
This book who scorns to buy or on it look,
May he at Sessions crave, and want his book.
Explicit Inigo Jones.
Jncipit Georgius Sydenham Brimptoniensis.
Upon the cloying Crudities chewed in the brains of the Author, and cast up in
the press of the Printer, by the sole travel and proper charge of Cordate
Coryate, My conceited Countryman and Neighbor.
COuld any one have done this but thy self,
Oh thou most peerlesse most renowned else?
Regardlesse of thy stockings and of thy shoes,
Afoote to wander through a vale of woes;
Where though thou venturdst for to walk alone
Like Hercules; so it is of Coryate known,
That he did n'ere in all his journey fly once
From Dogs, from Bears, from Bulls, nor yet from Lions.
In France I heard thou meeting with a Boar,
(I do but tell it as it was told before)
His fearful head thy sword at one blow cuts
So cruelly, that out came al his guts.
At Hey delberg thou did (...) the Tun,
And boldly (...) the brauest Dutchmans Son
Come sit with thee, and drink until there were
Notleft a drop for any other there.
An act worthy thee, save who saw thee ride
Twixt Odcombe cross and Iuil, and bestride
Like Alexander Philips horse, would swear,
Thy former deeds with this might not compare.
Coming to Venice, thy unmatched feature
Made straight a wench think thee a louelier creature
Then thou thoughst Mary, when thou know poor Tom Her cheek or hand, a
Chaucerisme.

How glad thou were to come and kiss her a bomme,
These things of travelers all make me to say,
That wandering (...) bears the bell away.
Now being returned unto thy native land,
Here thou have drawn with thine own curious hand
A work more strangly praisd, and by more,
Then ever work was yet by many a score,
A work that all the world has longed to see,
And now send post to fetch this rarity.
A work that has long time expected been,
And now beyond all expectation seen;
A work that serves men for all kind of uses,
Mistake me not, I mean not for abuses;
A work that none but thine one self could handle,
Nor thou have done it without many a candle:
A work that will eternize thee til God Til Doomes day.
come,
And for thy sake thy famous Parish Odcombe.
Explicit Georgius (...) (...).
Incipit Robertus Halswel.
Had thou been still (in (...), (...) brought forth,
How grear had (...) shy praise, how great thy worth.
Dame Admiration has but one true mother,
Peruse this work, and thou shall find her brother.
Explicit Robertus Halswell.
Jncipit Ioannes Gyfford.
In praise of the Praise-transcending ( mine old friend) Thomas Coryate.
IF any ask, in verse what soar I at?
My Muse replies: The praise of Coryate.
He, who the immense straight passing over
Twixt sandy Calais, and twixt chalkie Dover,
With observations strange does edge you on,
To steal the fruits of many a region.
And teaches, without travail, how to travel,
Over spuing billows, and over gaulling grauel.
Mount then Pierian Bards, or proudly strut,
In praise of's brain more fresh then freshest nut.
Again for old acquaintance.
WIt now or never help me to renown
The oddest Comb that Od-combe ere did crown:
The wonder of this age, which does admire
How Travel, Wit, and Art do all conspire
To make him Table-talke, and pointed at,
Filling men's mouths, and eyes with Coryate.
And yet he is to none he lives among,
Moate in their eyes, nor blister on their tongue.
Nay he is a spectacle unto all eyes
That makes great things of small (in wordy wise,)
And unto tongues, most idle in their talking,
He Is like Greek wine that sets them still a walking.
Never did Time, since first he held the Sith,
Produce Art such a Cutter of Queene-hithe.
We style him so; because that Hithe, or Bank,
Whereon the Queens of Art their Pupils rank
Does yield such Cutters, that is, such as are
The most acute, as thou art ( Tom) and spare.
For proof whereof, lo here a book as full
Of cut-worke, as of hot brains is his scul.
Here he cuts out with sharpest edge of wit,
(That Through the subtle hnenesle of the edge.
blunts when ought that is hard does meet with it)
Many a fair collop from the CONTINENT,
To broyle on wits fire, Trau'lers to content.
Of France he makes a rasher on the coals:
And casts such salt of wit into her holes,
That he does make it saurie to the pallet
Of Pilgrims, traveling with bag and wallet.
But this, (O this) I muse at most (perchance)
That thou should note such pretty things in France;
Since (when I crossed it in my wanderings)
I could not see the same for greater things.
But it was my fault such small things to decline
That might have made my fame as huge as thine:
Of Italy, and al things (every way)
That lie in compass of five months suruay,
He so has chopped it out to us in parts
(With liberal pen the tool of liberal Arts)
That, in each part, we see, as in a stream
(O eloquence) the lively face of them:
Munster put up thy pen, thou art put down
By Odcombs issue; then come Comb his crown:
Or stroke him on the head for showing thee
Each Gallows Munster shows not where one Gallows stands in all his book.
hid in thy Cosmographie.
Ponponius Mela, and Ortelius,
Nay, Pliny, with thy books voluminous,
Go get ye gone, or lowly too him fall;
For his now Goose-quil farte out-flies ye al.
Well may thou Germany upon him spue,
That to thy stomach bitter is as Rue.
Since he obscures the glory of thy men
That glorified thee with their grosser pen:
For he is more particular by ods
In his descriptions, nay, he turns the clods
Of every soil to see what vnderlies,
And that expresses, be it worms or flies:
And, not a Gibbet, wheel, nor ought beside
Whereon (for some offense) a man has di'd,
If near his walk, (nay though far off it lay)
But to it he went, and does the same display.
England rejoice, who now a man have bred
That is all wit, and learning, save the head,
And that is al Sconce the powers of sense too keep,
Where they, from wits incursions, safely sleep.
Then O ye gallants of the English Court,
Let Coryats travels travail you with sport.
And as great Alexander, Homer making
His pillowes bolster (for his pleasure waking)
Made sport with him: so, let our Coryats work
Under your bolster or your buttons lurk
To sport, and pleasure you by night and day:
For, it is a Sermon better then a Play,
Sermon we call it, (...) it is a speech
Of all that lay within his travels reach.
Then to this Sermon of those holy things
(For he (among) does talk of God and Kings)
If any be disposed t'apply their care,
Or that about them rather it would bear,
They shall be saved from woe, in words of mirth,
By Coryats book, his wits sole Heaven on Earth.
Explicit Ioannes Gyfford.
Incipit Richardus Corbet.
Spectatissimo, punctisque omnibus dignissimo, Thoma Cariate de Odcombe, (...),
Pedestris ordinis, Equestris samae.
QVod mare transier is, quod rura (...) Pedester,
Iamque colat reduces patria lata (...):
Quodque idem numero tibi calceus here:, and ille
Cum corio redeas, quo coriatus abis:
Fatum omenque (...) miramur nominis, ex que
Calcibus and soleis fluxit (...) tuis.
Nam quicunque eadem (...) (...), (...)
Excoriatus erit, (...) Coriatus eat.
In librum suum. De tepollicitus (...), es, sed in (...)
Est magnus (...) hic liber libe^llus.


I Do not wonder Coryate that thou have
Over the Alps, through France and Sauoy past,
Parch't on thy skin, and foundred in thy (...),
Faint, thirsty, lowzie, and didct live to seet.
Though these are Romaue sufferings, and do show
What creatures back thou had, could carry so,
All I admire, is thy return, and how
Thy slender pasternes could thee bear, when now
Thy observations with thy brain engendered,
Have stuffed thy massy and voluminous head
With mountains, abbeys, churches, synagogues,
Preputiall offals, and Dutch Dia ogues:
A burden far more grievous then the weight
Of wine, or sleep; more vexing then the freight
Of fruit and oysters, which lade many a pate,
And send folks crying home from Billing (...).
No more shall man with mortar on his head
Set forwards toward Rome: no. Thou art bred
A terror to all footmen, and all Porters;
And all laymen that will turn Jews exhorters.
To fly their conquered trade. Proud England then
Embrace this ( I mean his book.
) (...), which the Man of Men
Has landed here, and change thy welladay
Into some homespun welcome Roundelay.
Send of this stuff thy territories thorough
To Ireland, Walcs, and Scottish (...) (...).
There let this book be read and understood,
Where is no theme not writer half so good.
Explicit Robertus (...).
jncipit Joannes Dones.
LO here is man, worthy indeed to travel;
Fat Libian plains, strangest China's graucll.
For Europe well has seen him stir his stumpet:
Turning his double shoes to simple pumpes.
And for relation, look he does afford,
Almost for euey step he took a word;
What had he done had he (...) (...) (...) Ocean
With swimming Drake or famous Magolan?
And kissed that vnturn'd ( Terra incognita.
) cheeks of our old mother,
Since so our Europes world he can discover?
It Is not that ( Rablais.
) French which made his ( Pantagruel.
) Gydns see
Those vneouth Islands where words frozen be,
Till by the (...) next year they (...) again;
Whose Papagauts, Andouilers, and that train
Should be such matter for a (...) (...)
As he would make? (...) makes ten times worse,
And yet so pleasing is shall laughter (...):
And be his vain, his gaind, his (...) (...), (...)?
Sit not stid then, keeping (...) (...) (...):
But get thee (...) some land (...) (...).
From (...) (...) thy wisdom with those woders,
Rarer then summers (...) (...) (...) (...).
And take this praise of that (...) (...) done (...) die.
It Is pity ere thy flow should (...) (...) (...).
Explicit Ioannes Dones.
Incipit Ioannes Chapman.
To the Philologue Reader in commendation of our Philogracicall Writer,
Topographicall Tom Coryate of Odcombe.
Our Odd Author has combed the sertile pate
Of his knowledge, that thou might learn to prate
Of travel, his heels bearing thy head over
Too and again from Venice unto Dover
Though thou sit still, and at his simple charge
Pays for thy mirth, more then in Graues-end barge,
Tilt-boate, or the Tauernes thou can find:
For here is music without noise or wind.
A volume which though it will not in thy pockit,
Yet in thy chest thou may for ever lock it,
For thy childrens children to read hereafter,
Being disposed to travel, or to laughter.
Nor must thou wonder so much stuff should come
From (...) Tom (...) quill of (...).
His little eyes set in his living head
See farther then great eyes in one that is dead;
So he a scholar, but at Winchester,
Does take men's ears more then did Stone or Chester.
They could do naught but ruyle, or flatter all;
His ieasts and acts are purely natural,
Stuffed full of Greek and Latin whipped into him.
Hau'ng learning just enough to undo him,
Unless thou pity on his charge do take.
And help buy of his books for thine own sake.
Here is not (...) much (...) few words;
His ( Mistake me not Reader, I therefore callit little, as having relation to
the (...) (...) these of the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) traules, viz.
five months, in which short time, though an ordinary traveler would have
written but little: yet if you read his book, you may perceive, that in that
short space (...) found matter enough to afford many lines of Observations to
his Countri-men.
) little (...) many lines affords
Buy then, and pass not by the writers glory,
That for thy sake has penned this learned story;
Wherein he has three travels undergone,
To pace, to pen, to print it too alone.
Few Orators so copiously indite,
So thou but read, he cares not ( I mean how much he writes or his
Observations in (...) countries.
) what he write.
He tells all truth, yet is no (...), nor child,
No liar; yet he is the Traveler styled:
But brought no more tongs home then set him forth.
Now let his book for me commend his worth;
Of whose full merits I could write much better,
But that I fear to make his work my detter.
Explicit Ioannes Chapman.
Jncipit Thomas Campianus Medicinae Doctor.
In Peragrantissimi, Itinerosissimi, Montiscandentissimique Peditis, Thomae
Coryati, viginti-hebdomadarium Diarium, sex pedibus gradiens, partim vero
claudicans, Encomiasticon.
AD Venetos venit corie Coryatus ab vno
Vectus, and, vt vectus, pene (...) erat.
Naue vna Dracus sic totum (...) (...),
At rediens retulit to Coryate minus.
Illius vndigenas tenet vnica charta labores,
Tota (...) sed vix bibliotheca capit.
Explicit Thomas Campianus.
Incipit Gulielmus Fenton.
SHeeloosht (...) convey alefill;
Emnanght elslopen seraght emneghtill;
Ofaghth contraltight erpon emselah,
Prutalt artennah semank semnelah.
Jn English thus.
Fair starte of learning which on us do shine,
With beauteous luster and aspectfull cheer,
Go lend thy light a while beyond the line,
And blaze on th Antipodian hemispheare.
Explicit Gulielmus (...) de Knockesergus.
Jncipit Ioannes Owen.
To his ingenious and judicious frind M. Thomas Coryate, in commendation of
this learned Work.
An Epigramme.
CHrysippus Colwort, Lucian (...) lie
Commend in learned writ above the sky;
Fannius the Nettle, Fauorin the Fever;
Whose praise with Sun and Moon endure for ever.
In spite of some that seem, but are not holy,
Erasmus spent much wit in praise of Folly.
Some later wits have writ the Asses praise,
O that those Lads were living in thy days!
For if they praised base things in learned writ,
How much more would they praise thy learned wit?
In laudem eiusdem Distichon.
TOt liber hic lands, quot habet vnlpecula frauds;
Vix humeris tantum sustinet Atlas onus.
To the Reader. Jn praise of this worthy Work, and the Author thereof.
THe Fox is not so full of wiles
As this book full of learned smiles:
Come seek, and thou (...) find in it
Th'Abridgement of great Britains wit.
Explicit Ioannes Owen.
Incipit Petrus Alley.
CAnnons, Culuerings, Sakers and Slings,
Curr ers (...), and warlike (...),
Breath forth your bowels, make the air thunder
Of Coryate of Odcombe, Somersets wonder.
Sound (...), beat Drums, sing merrily life,
Bellona's music encouragers of strife.
Awake men of war, Ulysses appears
Whose travels report more dangerous fears.
Send in your Sentinels, your Corporals call,
Examine your Sergeants and Officers all.
Nor Captains, nor Colonels, nor Generals great
Have made the like journey, or like setreate.
Twixt Venice and Flushing on foot he went
With one pair of shoes (...) they were half spent;
Over hills, dales, valleys, and plains,
Until his iourneys end he attaines.
But what mishap to him there besell,
His book who shall read, is able to tell.
His dangerous encounter with cruel Jews,
His courting a Curt zan in the slewes,
His perils in cities, towns and (...),
His fearful climing of the steepie Al es;
Above the clouds through the middle region,
With adventures more then beyond a legion.
His bickering with the barbarous Boore,
Was one of the least by many a (...);
But his politic handling of the clown
Is very well worth the setting down:
And cunning recovery of his hat
With humble hauieur and gentle chat.
Many more hazards he leaves to express,
Only to make the volume the less.
For if he should all to the press send,
His book I doubt would never have an end.
Then Soldiers sit down, let your ensigns be torn,
Coryate has conquered you with his shoes but half worn.
Let no man mursnur ( Pythagoras dixit)
Against Coryats attempts que supravixit
Et viuat and (...) with a famous style,
He and his shoes that trod many a mile.
Explicit Petrus Alley.
Incipit Samuel Page.
To the most worthy Patriot, his most desired friend M. Thomas Coryat of
Odcombe, Gentleman and (...).
ISing the man, help me ye sacred Nine,
A fitter task sor you to undertake
In your own numbers and immortal line,
His numberless deseruings to partake
To his own natives, whose expecting eye
Now stands wide open for his history.
Drink your springs dry you Heliconian Dames,
Here Is work for nine such nines to write his praise,
Whose variable eye his (...) somes
For strange ingrossements made in so few days.
Put al your wits distillement in your pen
To do him right that shames al other men.
No curious ambition moved our friend
TO exhale the secrets of a sorraine slate,
He scorned to make a tongue or two his end
To come a diphthong home; it betrer sat
With his proiection and intendements wise,
To turn his Microcosme all into eyes.
His eyes on all have set all eyes on him,
Whose observations past whose present pen
Whose future circlings of this globe, will dim
The wondered glory of al other men,
And give the world in one synoptick quil,
Full proof that he is Britains Perspicil.
Go on brave goer, and grave writer write;
Thy farre-sight eye, and thy long-hearing ears
Shall prompt thy tongue to speak, thy pen t'indite
Thy Vlyssean travels of ten years.
Thine is thy gentry, and thy virtue thine.
But thy experience ( Britain says) is mine.
Thy first walk was the surface and outside
Of some choice rarities in stranger earth:
Thy second travels promise far and wide
Of greater wonders yet a nobler birth:
Thou did but shave the lands thou sawst of late,
Thy future walks will them (...) CORIATE.
Explicit Samuel Page.
Jncipit Thomas Momford.
WEll may his name be called Coryate,
Not of the outward pelt or hairy skin,
But of the heart, or very (...) of wit.
For his conceits show that his heads within
His wit, and in his travels and his works
Most strange adventures and experience (...).
When he feared thieves in policy he begs,
To save his purse and self from further danger;
He did escape the force of rotten eggs,
Thrown out by whores upon an innocent stranger,
Upon the monstrous Tun he (...) (...) de,
In all these things his wit was soundly tri' de.
His worthy deeds can never be exampled,
That in a stable lodged himself al night,
Ventred his bones with wild iades to be trampled,
And there endured many a bloody bite,
Our English travelers with all their (...),
Cannot compare with (...). (...).
How much are we bound to him for his (...),
That for our sakes as plainly as he can
Writes all these things, not for the hope of gains,
But to the capacity of an English man.
He might as well have set us all to seek,
If (as he speaks) he had writ his mind in Greek.
Explicit Thomas Mimford.
Incipit Thomas Bastard.
PVt down, put down Tom (...)
Our latest rares, which glory not:
Since we thy (...) did peruse
Fraught with the quintessence of news.
On several subjects thou have grated,
Of men, of books yet vnrelated.
There Is nothing left for traveler,
Nor for the trimmest Caualier
For table talk, in my poor sense
Thou putst's down all intelligence.
The like of things as thou have noted,
Nor is, nor was, nor shall be quoted.
Nor in the chanting Poets theames,
Nor in the wisest sickmens dreams:
Nor in the books of Pacon Friar:
Nor in Herodotus the liar:
Nor in the mud of Nilus thick,
With wormy monsters crawling quick.
To thee give thanks for thoughtlesse skill,
Reports which never dropped from quil.
Which could if thou would vnderborne it,
Have spoke of state, but thou did scorn it.
Thou have seen Kings, there is no doubt,
But wisely did thou leave them out.
Choosing by judgments aim to hit,
What all have mist for want of wit.
Whilst snow on lofty Alps shall freeze,
And paint the dales rich butterflies,
Thy name shall live, nor be forgotten,
When Siuil Oranges be rotten.
And thou shall wear our English Bays,
And surfeit, yet not die of praise.
Explicit Thomas Bastard.
Incipit Gulielmus Baker.
The Anatomy, dissection, or cutting up of the great Quack-saluer of words, Mr.
Thomas (...) our (...) Mercury.
TO praise thee or thy work (which is the moddel
Of most the wit enskonfed in thy noddell)
Were madness; since the Poets of our days
Run giddy in the circle of thy praise.
When thou wast borne, some say, and all do think,
The urine that thou made, was perfect ink.
Cosmographers bespoken have thy head,
(The ears first pared off, and polished)
For a terrestrial Globe: and Coryate,
Thy -- shall serve to be a Promontory at
Nicest exactness: precious is thy life,
When ares and nature for thee are at (...):
So full of Iouial glee, that men hereafter
Shall term thee eldest son to wrinkled laughter,
Better then Rhubarbi purging melancholy.
One that has got of words the monopoly:
That eues-drops a phrase, and like a spy
Watches each bumb (...) word, as it does fly.
His presence is more grateful unto al
Then a new play, or on some festiual
Strange squibs and fireworks, which do clime the skies,
And with their glaring sparks mate vulgar eyes.
It Is thought if longer he in England tarries,
He will undo cooks shops and Ordinaries.
For who, to (...) a (...), an him steals,
Forgets hunger, and out-laughes his meals.
He knew and felt the Boores, yet was not boorish,
He knew and selt the whores, yet was not whorish,
As Phoebus in his full of noone-tide pride,
Passing through muddy clouds, does pure abide.
He is a gemme most worthy to be hung
And worn in choicest ears: but his blown tongue
With talk sets ships agoing on their ways,
When they lie bedridden, and becalmd on seas.
Upon this unmatched work, the true hieroglyphicke of that obseruatiue, and
long-winded Gentleman Thomas (...).
Our traveling (...), liquorous of Novelties,
Enquire each minute for thy Cindities;
And hope, that as those haddocks took refection.
Cast from thy sea-(...) stomachs (...) (...),
And straight grew travelers, and forso oak our Maine,
To (...) on the (...) (...) of (...)
So they by thy disgorgement, at their will
Shall put downo Web, or Sir John (...).
For such an itch of (...) (...) begotten,
(To the (...) good, and thy (...) be (...) spoken)
Thy book shall (...) the kingdom better far
Then erst the Irish or Lowcountry war.
Here native Graces carelessly do lurk
Skorning Arts borrowed dressings: and thy work
Simple as truth, not artificial,
But like thy self naked, and natural.
Yet here a riddle is, will pose the wise,
Tom speaks truth, and yet was full of lice.
And for his volume, this I date to say,
When he did make this work he did not play;
For such huge meritorious pains he took,
That if he be saved, it will be by his book.
Explicit Gulielmus Baker.
Incipit (...)
AWake thou Cock of great renown.
And Crow the praise of Odcombes town,
For breeding such a world of wonder,
Whose writings move the air to thunder.
Thou art the Thief of travelers treasury,
By bartring thy wit for extreme usury.
Which is as fine as cobweb-lawne,
And runs like the stream of Dawne.
Thy Goate-like sense the rauisher of fame
Has parcel-gilt thy memory and name.
The inuentory of thy brains endeavors
Has plumed thee with the Peacocks feathers.
Which made thee fire to learn out news,
And brought thee home from Venice (...).
Where Emilia fair thou did frost-bit,
And she inflamed thy melting wit;
Thy brain like (...) does ebb and flow,
But fixed is thy wit by standing in the snow
To keep out the Connies from leaping the (...),
Which proves chee a Priest of the Order of Baal.
Thou art the Siren that those inchaunt
That with their ears thy Muse do haunt.
Thou are the (...) that in the (...) nest was borne,
Whereby thy birth high mounted has thy horn.
If thou (sweet Tom) such (...) must have,
What then must he (...) got the (...)?
But let him be as he may be,
Thou art his honey, and hony-combe, men (...),
Explicit (...)
Incipit Josias Clarke.
Anagramma in nomen Authoris Thomas Coriatus.
Hoc totus amaris.
VRbes (...) (...), Cosmopolita,
Cortoris aut animi quis mage quaso (...)
(...), (...) (...) memoranda fideli,
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) amor patriae, permiscens (...) (...),
(...), describis (...) (...), (...).
Nomen and omen (...) (...), HOCTOTVS AMARIS.
Digna notanda (...), (...) legenda (...).
Explicit Josias Clarke.
Jncipit Thomas Farnaby alias Bainrafe.
IN verdant meadows crowned with springs fresh pride
The paineful Be tastes every fragrant flower;
His thighs full (...), on (...) wing does glide
Home, to store up his wealth in honey bower.
From travails strange, so Coryate late come home,
With flowing Nectar filles this honey Comb.
LYcurgus, (...) and (...)
Have by their trauails taught learned Thomas,
That an (...) is not borne at home,
But made abroad. Wherefore he leaves (...),
And the Transalpine country visits. Where he
By horse, by cart, on (...) full (...) a weary
Journey (...), with curious observation
Noting the lives and manners of each nation.
Whence with wing-footed speed making return, all
His right and left adventures in this iournal
Has Gobled up in have. And simply true
Shames not to write how he at sea did vomit.
There shall you read of (...) surpassing (...),
Clowd-touching hills, Alcinous PARIS Garden.
Strange Butter-flies. (...) (...) (...) and (...)
Pelting the Greek in his Venetian (...).
But past the besieging of his she Pergamo
An Irish lodging takes with lades at Bergamo.
Of Epitaphes and Letters he cites volumes,
Measures Pyramide (...) and high columns.
Scapes the Dutch (...), th Irus or (...) --
(...) Heydelberg (...) the (...), Cadh.
Which with dimension (...) (...) (...) (...).
In brief from (...) he to Flussing hobled
With no more shirts then backs, shoes seldom (...)
Which shirt, which shoes, with hat of mickle price,
His (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(Like some world-circling ship, or (...) shield
Of (...), or trophey of (...) field)
Hang Monuments of euiternal glory, at
(...) to the honor of Thomas (...).
So that when death his soul and body (...),
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
Explicit Thomas (...) (...) (...).
Incipit Gulielmus Austin.
HOw shall my pen describe thy praise
Thou only wonder of our (...)
Since it is a task that best befits
Our Poets chief, I mean the wits.
I wish, since I to write (...) (...),
My style as high as those in Kent.
But shall I praise thy book or person?
The grauest lines of learned Gerson,
Or smoothest verse (...) came from Ovid
Unable is to tell us of it.
For none can do it among living men,
Just as it is but Coryats pen.
To him alone belongs the glory
Of all ye see written before ye.
To him that far and near has trauaild,
Gone, and returned, his wit vngrauel'd;
Slept in his clothes; like western Pugge,
Sans Monmouth cap, or gown or rugge;
And now for trophey of rich price
Hangs up his garments full of lice,
Which heretofore like weeds of proof
Served him to keep the cold aloof.
When as he past the lesuit parts,
Who were not able with their arts,
And all their arguments to find
One hole to (...) his constant mind.
But conquering still along did pass,
Nor could they all make him an As
Sassinate of his Prince or Peer,
For still his conscience kept him clear.
But if his purpose do hot vary,
He means to fetch one more vagary.
To see before his coming back,
The furdest bounds of (...) Jack.
When going on I hope he will work
All Christendom against the Turk
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
In China or Jerusalem.
Oh may he go, that they may there
Admire his wit as we do hear.
Whose Chastity and Temperance
Italy knows as well as France.
A curtizan, or courteous one
He hates like Punke of Babylon.
He never learned of bright Apollo,
The Dutch Garraus or German Swallow.
Nor ever have I heard him noted
For drinking drunk with (...) bloted.
Learning's his love, and he a scholar,
In Greek and Latin does extol her.
By whose pure help and sacred art,
(Which he long since has learned by heart)
He Will guard himself if foes enuiron,
As well with verses as old iron;
And sting a man with ink and paper
More Satyre-like, then with a Rapier.
And now of late a book has writ
In praise of learning and his wit.
From Odcombe do his (...) flow,
Then must there Come Ode tricks I trow.
The famous book of Mandeuill
Tell not of things so strange and evil,
Of jests, mistakings and misprisions,
Of Pagans, Jews, and (...).
Of Tombs, Sepulchers, dead men's bones,
Of Epitaphs, of stocks and stones.
And how in Venice at a supper:
But why should I thy praises slubber?
Since thou thy self in lines of worth
Have writ it down and set it forth
At thine own proper cost and charge,
As the Churchwardens do their large
And spacious windows in the church,
Where schoole-boyes bummes are (...) with burch.
Besides, thy front shows not a little
Thy rare conceit, For in thy title
Whole sholes of Gudgins gaping skip
To catch thy larges from the ship;
And dance for joy in hope to win thee,
Because they seele there is some what in thee.
Nay more then this, thy very picture
Seems of it self to read a Lecture
Between three comely Virgins placed,
Figuring the countries where thou wast.
Italy diet, wine from France,
Germany gives thee utterance.
The world ere long on same shall raise thee,
Then what need my poor pen to praise thee?
Yet ere I end, i will prophecy,
If any shall (like thee) fly hie,
And touch Pernassus in discourse
With flying pen like winged horse:
Thy name above shall him renown.
For all the wits about the town
Shall honored Laurel on him set,
And call him second Caryet.
And thus adieu, since time does bar us,
I take my leave, Thine vsque ad-aras.
Explicit Gulielmus Austin.
Jncipit Glareanus Vadianus.
De THOMA CORIATO Odcombiensi apud Britanno-Belgas ciue, homine Heteroclito and
Anomalo, atque Planeta extra suum (...) (...), Legenda (...).
Hemist'chion hoc (...) (...) readendum censent (...), viz. ( I (...) the
harmles man) (...), (Oration pro Archia Poeta) A prayer for the Arch-poet Si
quaeratur, quo (...) in dictione ((...)) (...) ((...)) (...) (...) a esse
(...), (...) itaimplicare ( harmless) vel ( without harm:) Si vltcrius (...)
quare (...) (...) particula que prafigi debet, (...), (...) est in voce (...)
(...) in (...) velle Au (...) coriaticam (...).
A (...) virumque cano, (...) quiraptus ab (...)
Armoricosque sinus rostratis nauibus (...),
Multa tulit fecitque miser; longoque peracto
Terrarum tractuque maris, per inho (...) mundi
Littoraque, and rigidis loca (...) imperuia (...),
In proprium tandem redijt: (...) viarum
Consedit, repetens luctus (...) labores.
Quos dum (...) at, pleno Nimis me perstring is mi Glariane. Arbitraris enim
(sed perperam) illud (...) (...) in ver nacula nostra lingua, esse verum.
Travelers may lie by authoritle
and (...) folle
Spirat, Magnatum (...) condire secundas
Sueuit, and immodico pnlmonem extendere risu;
Vnus moeroris Medicus; laterum vnus Aliptes,
Unica Theriace (...) noxia toxica pellens,
(...)
Postquam conscendit (...), (...) solutus
In mare monstriferum ventorum irremigat alis,
Protinus hic Pelagi and Telluris inutile Scio te alludere ad illud Homericum.
(...). Sed non mihi arridet tua allusio.
pondus,
Sarcinaque ipse sibi, ructat, singultit, et vdis
Prospiciens oculis late (...)
" Decorto Coryate tuo nunc, inquit, aguntur
" Iudicia, O Odcomba vale, mulctralia, mactra,
" Armamenta mei ruris; mutasse dolemus
" (...) (...) cimba, en in remos ramus abiuit:
" Arbor in antennas et (...), hortus in aquor,
" Mobile pro fixo; pro terra, tergora Ponti,
" Pro clino clauum (...) pro mergite mergos.
(...) (...) (...), stomache (...) cerebrum,
Nauseat, et nutat, tussit, screat, oscitat, ager
(...) vomit quantum (...) alta (...)
Apta bobus mittunt steriles (...) in agros.
Compellat (...) subito (...) stupentes,
Tolli e (...), (...); (...) (...).
(...)
Atque it a perlotum (...) in littore (...).
Conualet Anaeus, duplicataque robora sumit.
Egreditur, tactaqu semel tellure, repent
Inde velut Xerxes inflixit verher a ponto,
Et iussit cohibere minas, compescere fluctus.
Tum porro perrexit iter, cinctuque (...)
Induit interulam (...) (...) (...) tinctam
Sexipeds contra vermes, (...) rotundos.
Quam per tot menses pedicoso in corpore gessit,
Quot solet in matris puor efformarier (...).
Baltens iniectus pugili latus alligat (...),
Ense Medusaeum quali caput abstulit olim
Perseus, huic Harp nomen; (...) quale sacrauit
Pausanias ferrum quod Myrtalis (...) vocatum est.
Hoc vnum interer at, Coryatidi quod sua Gladius Guidonis (...) censis.
Morglai
Non acies, non cuspis erat, sed plumbea lamna
Nescia bellorum, (...) and pacis amatrix,
Hanc non Herculeum pectus, non dextera vibrat,
Brachia fulta toris, validis (...) mota lacertis,
Sed vir Ceruinus, (...) fugacior vlle,
Perpectua glacie cu'us praecordia frigent,
Tergaque qui gladiis potius quam pectora vertit.
Aemulus Alcidae (...) (...)
Clamari titulo, sed non (...)
Ut cui nec vestis, nec velamenta superbis
Apta sedent humeris, pedibus (...) mollis aluta,
Ocreaue (...) suras solitus vincire cothurnus,
Empta sed a verpis (...) bissina diplois,
Calceus aut (...) quem supra fibula mordet,
Et been suppactas soleas cui subula iunxit,
Hirtaque seta suis docti cerdonis ab art.
Non alio hic (...) iumento fortiter vsus
Viribus infractis Gallos penetrauit and (...),
Victor hyperboreos populos superasset and vltra,
Sinon audisset gentem (...) tremenda
Torpentes mactasse asinos ad Apollinis aras.
Flexit iter, tumidum guttur (...) ad Alps.
Long a per (...) tenuit via mollis (...).
(...) diu, (...) and multa morantem,
Dives ager fructu, generosa vite, (...)
Expleuit pingui mensa, fluidisque racemis.
Ante etenim generis gentisque (...), and exors
Ipse sui decoris, mendicos inter, agyrtas,
Erronumque greces, perhibetur adoppida circum
Ostiaque a populo Valde erras mi Glareane, semel enim dun taxat in (...) mea
(...) emendicani, idque occasion quadam inusi: ata impulsus Quod tum (...) in
Itinerarii mei frontispicio, (...) etiam in libri mei contextu disertis verbis
expressi, viz. (...), 23.
stipem (...) viritim,
Furfure contentus, siliquis, and pane secundo.
Quacunque incedit pedibus retinacula solnit,
Fertque sub axilla soleas, vt rusticus agnum,
(...) claram (sic spes est) (...) Sar (...), ita dictam ob specie quam habct
pcdis and calces hu nani.
(...).
Dum Cimicus, Cynicus, pede (...), asymbolus, excors,
Calcat (...) per deuia lustra ferarum,
Quarudunt Onagri grunnit amica luto sus,
(...) generis (...) as in puluere plant as
Bestia quaeque sui, simul et vestigia lambunt.
Nam Coryate tuo Ceruus, Lepus, Vrsus, et Vius,
-- Olidusque caper, (...) clauduntur in vno.
(...) loca (...) qua brachia porrigit aequor
In terrae gremium, cingitque (...) (...) arctis;
Spectat vbi Venetos vrbs inclytaditat et ornat,
Quae procul in saxis extructa a margin (...),
Inconcussanatat turrita in gurgite salso.
Pro portis illi est Nereus; pro (...) equor;
Prata, maris campus; (...), pons; (...), caballus.
Huc conuertit (...), portasque ingressus, (...)
Ore stupens, oculis circumspicit omnia limis.
Miratusque gradum (...); secumque locutus
Nil vltra est, inquit, Gades hic, sunto laboris:
Erroris (...) mei (...) in littore ponam.
Venit ad illuuiem populi, putidumque lupanar,
Scortorumque greges, nimium (...) ibi fortiter (...),
Cereus in vitium, capitur (...) (...) (...) tuo more sigmeata cudis, and rem
vehementer (...) gerat, Vadiane nec is it (...) mea ad meretricem a Vadiano meo
(...) atam aratiuncu'am (...) subsequentem aliter (...) (lector) existimes quam
rem o (...) fictitiam.
neretricis amore.
" Qnam sic aggreditur; Medea, Empusaque mundi,
" O sexus cremor vne tui, tremo vne virilis,
" Liliaque et lolium, (...) spica et spina, silexque,
" Motacilla salax, et plena cruoris hirudo:
" Que quia te matulam purgandis (...) offers,
" Italus, et Calaber, Siculus tibi (...), et Afer:
" O lux cruxque hominum, natura Ehs mobile, Res, In.
" Diuiduumque vagum, Transcendens, class reponi
" Quod nequit, et noles, nisi (...) vincta, teneri.
" (...)
" Sum parallelum me nunc tibi, sum Colurum,
" Ipse tibi Centrum, Circumque ferentia dicar,
" Si mensa dignere tua, dignere cubili;
" Paparum numismzta.
Julius and Paulus pacto annumerabitur isti.
" Illa refert court a, Balatro, barathrumque macelli,
" Cumanumque pecus, furfurque and furcifer idem,
" Vapulo, Vappa, floces, and oliuae lenis amurca,
" Quis furor est (...) meos vage castor amores?
" Non mea sic lodix, nitidi neque culcitra lecti
" Tam vili prostant; Tibi sin marsupia turgent,
" Ingredere, and strumam facile vomicamque leuabo.
Succedit tecto; cui fic lupa (...) infit:
" Turde malum tibi nempe cacas, viscoque teneris
" Ipse tuo: Bulgamponas, tumidamque (...),
" Ex ibis lenior, nec sarcina tanta grauabit.
" Quorsum haec drachmarum grando, nullius in vsum?
Ponere cunctantem, baculo been fustigat, aede
Exturbatque suapluuia lotioque madentem.
" Inclamans, cite pes fuge Dactyle, nec tibi tardi
" Inijciant remoras Spondai, aut claudus Iambus.
Quodque vnum potuit, meretrix, Valedicit amante,
Et blandita breues versus cantillat eunti.
Animule, vagule blandule,
Quos nunc abibis in locos?
Pallidule, rigide, nudule,
Nec, vt soles, dabis iocos.
Mean deseris petulce?
Mean praeteris subulce?
Pergin ire per Britannos?
Ebrios per Alemannos?
Scythicis premi pruinis,
Corporisque (...) ruinis?
Cursitare per culin (...),
Latitare per popinas?
Pulices pati nigelles,
Homines vbi miselles
(...) sueuit alligare,
Loris texga perfricare.
Ergo mihi ne sit male;
Coryate vale, vale.
Sic post Iliaden, aestumque, Aetnamque malorum,
Et (...) Odissaeam grauium leuiumque laborum,
Vnctus and imunctus, variis functusque periclis,
In patriam remeat peregrinis moribus auctus,
Hyberno bombyce scatens and lend (...).
Atque it a sandaliis (...) laqueare repostis
O Crispinus Sutorum and Cerdonum (...) Tutelaris.
Crispine tuo, crepidarum quiregis artem,
Et qui mustricolae monstras Sutoribus vsum,
Clarus in Odcombae (...), mage claras in ipsa
Metropoli Regni, decantatu sque per vrbis
Compitaque and vicos, camposque, viasque, domosque,
Fit Procerum risus, iocus Anlae, fabula vulgi.
Ad Curiatiorum familiae abortiuum Embryonem, Thomam Coryatum.
TErgeminos inter fratres e Curibus ortos,
Romanos totidem qui pepulere Duces;
Quisque suum, in pugna praeceps, and ahbelus in armis,
Hostis mortiferum vulnus ab ense tulit.
Tu genus O Coryate tuum (...) ab istis,
Inflexoque parum nomine, (...) habes.
Degener hoc tantum, quod (...) tibi vilior algaest,
Nec quaesit a (...), sed pede parta salus.
De cute, de corio pernox and perdia (...),
Vix tamen in toto est pectore mica Verum est salis (...) (...) stquod (...)
(...).
salis.
Cum sic particulam divine negligis (...),
Corporis obueniat iam coriago tibi.
A declaration of Nereus prophesies touching the fall of Glassenbury Abbey, and
the rising of Odeombe, by two fishes the Whiting and the Pilchard to the tune
of Pastor cum (...) per freta nauibus.
SOme This is one of the Oracles that Sybilla Cumaea stitched up in her leaves.
And therefore, Credit me vobis sulium recitare Sybillae.
Barde a bird of Merlins ayrie
Of Glassen Abbey (...) forespeld
That it should stand, and not be feld,
Till Whiting over it did ferry.
Whiting a Monk, vassal to Rome
For treason meant against his King
Upon the A Terrasse or Mount of earth near Glassenbury.
Torre in a rope did swing,
And so fulfild the Wizards doom.
Of This prophecy is yet to be seen in one of the tauernes, as you travel
upon via lactea, where Erigene, Doggechased Arctopbylax his Bear so fair
North, that they were both frozen into hery stars.
Odcombe it was said of yore,
That it in darkness long should sit,
Unknown to men til unto it
Should come of skalie Pilohards store.
Tom Coryate made all this good,
Borne on a shole of herring fry,
As once, poor groom, half wet, half dry,
On Dolpins back Arion stood.
The This is no jest, but res feliciter gesta; for upon a nouerint (...) he
recovered a hundred Marks. And (...) (...) matriculated amongst those to whom
God sends good fortune.
Country Boores dashed with the matter
Began on him to skance awry,
But he with bil in Chancery
Shot them clean through twixt wind and water,
Paul's chain for joy did stretch and yawne,
Saint Mary Oueries shot the bridge,
And gald-breech same rode post bare-ridge
To spread the news on Antwerpe Pawn.
The The seven stars of Greece are by Isacius reckoned to have been.
Theocritus, Aratus, Nicander, Apollonius, Homerus Tragicus, Andiomaches
Byzantius and Lycophron. Which are easily put down by our Pleiade of English
Poets, Chaucer, Sir Phillip Sidncy, Spencer, Daniel, and those others who have
made their Diatribes upon Tom Coryats Parua naturalia.
Pleiade of Poets fell a quassing
At Hippocrenes fountain head.
London her self fell sick abed
Surfetted on a iole of laughing.
And as the purple-wing'd King-fisher
Sitting upon a willow stumpe,
For a poor Minnow in does plumpe,
And eats her raw, yet one can dish her.
So (...) Tom, the traveler Trip-goe,
Who feasting fasts, and sitting walks,
And waking dreams, and silent talks,
Whose spirits always stand on (...)-toe;
Whose mind on travels still indockt
Eats observations by the eyes,
Has spu'd a book of Crudities,
Which Vu'cans forge will not concoct.
And as about the time of Prou. At Easter the wind is at Chester. Because it
is good for Ireland.
Easter,
To Enrich the town and trade of shipping,
The wind which evermore is skipping,
Is said to come and dwell at Chester:
So Tom the iaile from Ilchester
(To grace his town out of pure love)
Will by repliuy soon remove
To Odcombe now called Pilchester.
L'enuoy.
OLet the Hurly-Burly Fate
Requite thy love with lasting fate;
Long live, late come to thy enterring,
Nor flesh, nor fish, nor good red-herring.
And thou O Odcombe laugh and tickle
To see thy Pilchard in his pickle,
Who late in Court, both wet and shrunck,
Lay close embrined in a trunck.
Francois.
Asne-Bucephalaeosis ou Recapitulation and Sommaire du gros fatras du Sieur
Tho. Coriat.
Les poets a leur Muses.
C'Est ass z, belles Muses;
Bouch zles eseluses,
Al Aganippee:
Ou pour leur lippee,
Les Poets grenouillent,
Et puis y gazouillent
D'vne extreme rage
Leur doux chant ramage.
Eux faisans leur Feste
Au coq porte-creste:
Et lauants la test
Ala lourde best:
Ont perdu toutes-fois
Et leur charbons and bois
Leur peine excessive,
Sauon and lessiue.
Leur rimes roulantes
Et carmes coulantes,
De belle cadence.
Comme sault en potence.
Sus doncq, belles Muses
Bouchez vos escluses,
Car Tom le bon drole,
Ha jove son role.
La farce est finie,
Tai toy, Poesy,
Ital.
Risposta delle Muse.
TAccte matti che messer Thomasso,
D'vn Meuio efatto un Torquato Tasso;
Il cui spirto gentil en un batter d' occhie,
Trascorre dal capo, fin al ginocchio;
I piedi dan' salto, la testa capricci,
Quelli fan' il (...), questa, (...)
Pouaro viandante chipresone' lacci
D'amor, seen torno coperto di stracci,
Chiper no tener piusale in Zucca
Che Cauallo di Bergamo, o bue di Lucca;
Partissi sciocce, volgendosi pazze,
Delmondo il scherzo, trastullo, e solazze.
Espan^ol.
Concierto de los entrambos.
EApues, acabense los chistes y pullas,
Cantada la missa quedem las casullas.
El Chronista Thomas pone fin al trauajo;
Despues de auorse mostrado badajo:
Y dicho donayres y mil disparates,
Que hazen ventaje de muches quilates
A quantos (...) crito, Quien (...) tal mosts,
De poca cosecha (...) su Agoste.
Y digan los ninos; Tata, madre, coce,
He aquipassa Tom tonto yloco.
Explicit Glareanus Vadianus.
Jncipit Joannes Iackson.
Can it Be possible for A natural man To travel nimbler then Tom Coryate ca?
No: though You should (...) to his horne-peec'd Shoes, wings fether'd more then
Mercury did use. Perchance he bottowed Fortunatus Hat, for wings since Bladuds
time Were out of date. His purse he has to print What he did write, (...)
who had read of thee O Wandering wight? who else had known what thou Have felt
and seen, where and with whom, and how far Thou have been, Ere thou to
(...) could thy Trophyes bring? Thy hungry praysea in this I gge I sing, At
thy request, else in another (...) I would Have pointed at thy commendation:
(...) other Heliconian friends bring store of (...). of Pepper, and Vinegar
sour, to surnish thy Italian banquet forth, whereby is Plainly shown thy (...)
worth. Feast Coryate feast the world (...) with thy travel, discharge The
Press, and care Not then who (...).

Explicit Ioannes Iackson.
Jncipit Michael Drayton.
A brief Prologue to the verses following.
Dear Tom, thy Book was like to come to light,
Ere I could gain bus one half hour to write;
They (...) before whose wits are at their noones,
And I come after bringing salt and spoones.
MAny there be that write before thy Book,
For whom ((...) there) who would ever look?
Thrice happy are all we that had the Grace
To have our names fet in this living place.
Most worthy man, with thee it is even thus,
As men take (...), so (...) thou (...) us.
Which as a (...) his (...) (...) does (...),
So this (...) (...) (...) will like wise (...) (...)
Thou art the (...) and do show us shapes
And we are all thy (...), thy true Apes,
I saw (...) (...) (form what it was at first)
Swollen, and so (...) (...) it was like (...) burst, I
Grown so (...), so quite (...) (...),
That who will (...) must hazard his damnations
Sweating in panges sent such a horrid mist,
As to dim heaven: I looked for Anti christ
Or some new set of Diuets to (...),
Worser then those, that (...) Chaos fell:
Wondering what fruit it to the world would bring,
At length it brought forth this: O most strange thing;
And with sore throws, for that the greatest head
(...) (...) (...) to be delivered.
By thee (...) Coryate we are raught to know,
Great, with great men which is the way to grow.
(...) a new (...) the (...) finely in,
Making thy self like those thou meant'st to win:
Greatness to me seemed ever full of fear,
Which thou foundst false at thy arriving there,
Of the Bermudos, the example such,
Where not a ship until this time durst touch;
Kept as supposed by hels insernal dogs,
Our fleet found their most honest courteous hogs,
Live virtuous Coryate, and for ever be
(...) of such wisemen, as are most like thee.
Explicit Michael (...).
Incipit Nicholas Smith.
It Was much all Country wits to ouershine
At Court, where there are hundreds just like thinee
How sound they thee? how keep they thee? except
As Rome being told that only (...) she kept
The target fallen from heaven, her state should grow,
Made many like, that none the right might know:
So, to possess and keep thee precious man,
They make themselves as like thee as they can.
Hence flow those verses. In this ( Tom) appears
Thy greatness, thou art (...) by thy Peers.
Explicit Nicholas Smith.
FINIS.
I Am persuaded (Reader) thou will censure me for a most absurd writer, to add
unto these precedent (...) that have the word Finis subscribed unto them, more
Panegyricks upon my book. Neither indeed can I altogether free my self from
an imputation of some absurdity committed herein. But let this I entreat thee
a little excuse the matter, that after al these former verses were printed, I
was most importunatly persuaded by the that have no small interest in me, to
adioyne these ensuing unto the rest, by way of a supplement or over plus.
Therefore seeing I could not conveniently give the repulse unto the Authors of
the verses fo lowing to (...) their lines into my book; take them I entreat
thee in as good part as the former, especially seeing many of them do express
(besides much merry matter) very elegant and witty conceits.
Jncipit Laurentius Emley.
These verses immediately following were lately sent me by a learned Gentleman
of (...) College in Oxford: who though he never saw me, has vouchsafed to
grace my book with his Encomiasticks.

To the neuer-enough wondered at Mr. Thomas Coryate.
ITching desire has causd us long to know
Thy face (dear Coryate) admired so:
Which that we might the better view at ease,
The Pencil speaks (...) offigies.
But, let th'ingrauer know, it is not true,
Since of thy mind it gives us not the view,
It well may show the draught of flesh and bone,
But that may be applied to many one.
The (...) of Man is it most glory bears,
Since by the mind himself himself appears:
To show thy mind, thy self have thought it meet
To make us most beholden to thy feet:
Thy feet, whose soles employment who so mocks,
Does il, for it appears that they wore (...)
For'tis discovered by the sweet effect
That thou to keep them sweet (...) never neglect.
Thy feet sought forth what thy fair (...) describes,
God shield those hands from chilbiaines, feet from kibes.
Let those be vexed with such that private lurk,
And suffer shoes, sails, Printers to want work:
But thou the friend of Arts, manure thy wit:
Thine Odcombe live in thee, not thou in it.
Harsh was the handling of the halberd-swaine,
Who grutched grapes to thy diuinest vain;
And little knew the threatening turbant-slaue,
The grace that thy return with us should have.
Though we may doubt much of the pencils grace
That drops but lowzie matter from thy Case.
Faire-flowry France, and ful-gorg'd Germany,
With their third sister sweet-lip t Italy.
Loath for to leave him whom they held so dear,
Sweet company with thee to us would bear.
But being fixed that they cannot move,
They send with their fair face, impressed their love:
And Germany, since thee she needs must miss,
In kind remembrance blows thee a full kiss.
Then if thou please more Countries yet to see,
Thou (...) find thousands more in love with thee:
In love with thee, whom thy digested books
Will make as well known as thy carved looks.
There shall thou find many an horse or affe
To help thee, that thy chariot may pass.
There shall thou find many a double droane
Which under thy wits burden (...) shall groan.
But, though thou travel through the (...) round,
Let not thy impe, thy babe, thy book change ground.
Though thou discover strange lands by thy wit,
Let them send hither and discover it.
For pity it is but that the world should know
That it is thine own dear Babe that thou love so,
And the true braine-bred child of Coryate,
As Pallas was begot of (...) own pate.
Thus (...), write thy friends as thou (...) fee:
For none, but their own foes, will envy thee.
Expl. Laurentius Emley.
Jncipit Georgius Griffin.
Anagramma:
Thomas Coriatus Tu cos arnatoris vel Tuta cos amoris.
COses amatoris; quis non probat? esset amator
Siquisquam, exemplar Te petat ille (...).
Cos es amatoris, nec tantum hoc, cos es amorit.
Nam tibi fautrices tot, quot habes, dominas.
Et been succedant cum tot ( Coryate) puella,
Cos and amatoris cos et amoris eris.
Explicit Georgius Griffin.
Jncipit Joannes Dauis Herefordiensis. In the loud, allowed, or wel-deserued
renown of our Brittaine-Vlysses: his present Work, together with a
description of the particulars of the Vinet, Title Page, or Frontispice.
IF Art, that ost the learned has stammered,
In one Because like iron it is strong to contain the remembrance of so many
dear Observations.
iron head-peece (yet no hammer head)
May (joined with Nature) hit Fame on the A Metaphor for the head.
Cocks-comb
Then, it is that Head-peece that is crowned, with Crowned together with Od comb
for producing him.
Odcomb:
For, he hard Head (and hard, since like a Whetstone
It gives (...) edge, and draws them too like Ietstone)
Is caput mundi for a world of schoole-trickes,
And is not ignorant in the learnd'st -- tricks.
H'hath seen much more then much, I assure ye,
And will see New-Troy, Bethlem, and Old-Iury:
Mean while (to give a taste of his first travel,
With streams of Rhetoric that get golden gravel)
He tells how he to Venice once did wander;
From whence he came The word (more) for the reason of excellency: and Gander
for the Rimes neccsiry
more witty then a Gander:
Whereby he makes relations of such wonders,
That Truth therein does lighten, while Art thunders.
All Tongues fled to him that at Babel swerued,
Lest they for want of warm Mouths might have slerued:
Where they do revel in such Passing-measure,
(Especially the Greek wherein's his pleasure)
That ( Iouiolly) so Greek, he takes the He pleasantly prescrucs it in
pristine puri (...).
guard of
(...) he is the merriest Greek that ere was heard of:
For he as it were his Mothers Twittle-twattle
(That Is Mother Tongue) the Greek can prittle-prattle.
Nay of that Tongue he so has got the Body,
That he sports with it at Russe, Gleeke or Games at cards, whereby is meant
all ma nor of sports.
Noddy.
For his Invention in his Books The frontispice graucn in brass.
Brass-face
Is seen the glory of it, that does pass Excels the grace of all other for
esronis or Title-pages.
Grace.
The The first shewcs how he sailed out of England in a ship.
first does show how in a ship he sailed,
When out of England he (go -- ing) tra -- uailed:
For, as he notes himself (and right well notes)
No man goes out of England but he boatcth:
Where he (halse over board) sprawleth like a Paddocke;
And spues into a VVhale by the figure Hypcrbole, or rather Meiost
Whales mouth called a Haddocke.
Right over against it, there is seen The second shows his (...) (...)
relinhis travel
(...) Apparel
Which he did wear when he found out the Barrel
Of Heidelberg: shoes, stockings, (...), and dublet,
With so much of his blood as sils a goblet.
Dropping in creepers from his Travels Trophie;
Lice i will not style theru, lest you should cry, O fie.
But, that which is most wondrous to consider
Is, one so lean so long should be their feeder:
And that the clothes which he went out with all too
Should serve him and the Lice (which were not small) too
Till his return, with but a little patching,
When Is Rags (like catch-poles) greedy were in catching:
So, like an (...) in Desere wast-land.
His His clothes which like weeds were now good for nothing but to be thrown
away.
Weeds held out till he had fully trac't-land:
And for a Manument to After-commers
Their Picture shall continue (though TIME Canker or rust the Brass whereon it
is graven.
scummers
Upon the Effigy) to make Eyes delighted
With that which by no Art can be more sprighted;
And show the marvel of this Because they hold out (as it were) supernaturally.
metaphysicke,
That would have filled some Trau'ller with the Going so bare.
Tyssicke.
And so it would have him done, but that his Senses
Were Desire of glory made his mind not feel what his body (...).
senseless in pursuit of Excellences.
Then (from that Trophey to descend a little)
Ye see when he his Gorge with The third shows how he fed upon the Boores
grapes without leave.
Grapes did vitrie,
Was out-rag'd by a Boore, who did abhor it,
Till Tullies golden sentences paid for it
Disburs'd by Coryats Tongue, which so did roll it
That Cicero himself could not control it:
Which filled the Boore with wonder to the wozen,
That made him vomit sweet words by the dozen
In Toms dear praise, whilst he most like a Wag-with,
Took of his Grapes as much as he could wag with.
Then ye descend, where he sits in a The fourth shows his suruaying of Venice
in a Gondola.
Gondolow
With Egsthrowne at him by a wanton Room-be-low;
Who looks so masculine as she were some Boy,
Playing the pleasant Tomboy with her Tom-boy.
Within which Eggs was water sweet immured,
That he to her there by might be allured:
Which shows the manner how he went in Venice.
When as he took surueigh of that strange Sea-p^^ce.
Then doye fall upon a goodly The fifth, a goodly woman representing Italy.
Woman,
Which for her stature, you would take for some man
Dressed in The Italian fashion, and does stand for
Fair Italy it self, and (...) is scand for:
Who on the one side serves for a supporter
Of that An Oval round wherein he is pictured to the wast.
long Round, wherein he is made Short
By half (at least) then his length natural,
And looks as if he danced a Caterbrall,
With Ruff about his neck set on so finely,
That you would swear be nothing does supinely.
On the other side the Round stands one as tall too,
Dressed like a French-Fem, in a sarthingall too,
Upholding (as the other did) the Rundle
Whose clothes, about the Bumme, tuckt like a bundle,
Do make her stand for France; and so she may well,
For she has (...) to make her Do and say well.
Then, O ascend, before your last ascending,
And look on that that is far above commending.
A dainty The sixth, a woman ore his head with the tun of Heidelberg on hire
casting upon him, representing Germany.
Dame (not dainty of her vomit)
Powers down upon him (like a blazing-commet)
The stream of her abundance from her Gullet,
And hits him on the A familiar name for the head.
Noddle, like a Bullet,
From whence it glanceth all those Fruits to water
That in his way he gathered, like a Cater;
Which Damsel, with her free (...),
Does lie, or sit, or stand for Germany:
Upon her head she wears (beneath it smirking)
Of Heydelbergs the fore-remembred By the figure Tapinosis.
Firkin.
This, this is it that is Cream of all Invention,
And far surmounts the milk of wits intention.
Then veil your eye again that is aspiring,
And see the The seventh, the horse be sometimes used in his travel.
Horse and Cart he had for tyring.
On one side stands below an horse, or hobby
Or hobbi-horse (I mean no hawke called hobby)
Sadled and bridled ready for his travel,
When he is own feet spur-gald had with gravel.
On the other side the The eight, the Picardicall cart he traveled in.
Picardinian chariot
Which some call cart, that That is, conveyed him from place to place.
carted wandering Coryate,
Whence, if we look up, first our eye is meeting
How Coryat from the The ninth shows how be fled from the Jew, lest be should
have circumcised him.
Jew is Gentilly fleeting,
Lest if he stayed he should be made a Praepuce;
And so of men, the only woman's Refuse.
From whence look up, and next shall your beholders
See Coryate carried on the Atlas shoulders
Of such strong The tenth, shows how he was carried in a chair over or on the
Alps.
Porters as do help him over
The Alps within a chair without a cover:
All which (expressed so far past wits regality)
Do show the power of Coryats singularity.
Then, on the top, but yet without the Vinet,
He lies at the heels of many a The eleventh shows how he lay on litter at
the borss heels in the stable of some (...).
Ginnet,
As then in stable stood on points of litter,
To show, his lodging was as hard as bitter:
For, both together he (most senseless) feels there,
And so on litter lies he by the Horse heels.
heels there.
Right over against these proud brave Spanish stallians
Is seen how he does beg of thieves The (...) and last, shows how he begged
of Italian thieves, left they should (...) robbed him.
Italians,
With cap in hand, and lowly genuflexion,
Lest they should sink him to the Resurrection:
So, shunned the fatal hands of the Banditie
With wit that lack't not all of most almighty.
Hold Muse, no more, unless thou will be martyred
Within his world of fame that never was quartered;
For, if thou seek'st in numbers to contain it,
It Will make thy brows sweat, and thy nose to taine it.
But though we cannot in this Frontispice
Number thy Stations, yet may we count-thy-lice;
Which (Tom) from one that (roauing) had no resuge,
Drop down, to make the Glories flood a Deluge.
Within which Flood my Muse (like a Diue-dapper
In Fames wide mouth wagging my pen, her clapper)
Is so o're-whelm'd, that as she (...) for more breath,
The Flood engulphes her, and her words deuoureth.
So farewell Tom (she says) great Natures wonder,
I lie thy Fame a thousand fathoms under:
For, it preuayles above the Alps (high mountains!)
But when it ebbes, I Will spring, in Castall Fountains.
All to bewet the earth with streams of praises
Running to none but thee in fluent (...);
Until I make a second Inundation,
To wash thy purest, Fames Alluding to that (...) which men bore to women in
the old world, (...) like (...) our Author bears to men: for whose love and
commodity be has put himself to this cost and pains.
Coinquination;
And make it fit for final (...) in flames of glory and wonder, as in the
judgment day.
Conflagration,
So to prevent fell Enuies indignation,
Explicit (...) Dauis Herefordiensis.
Incipit Richardus Badley. In praise of the most obseruant traveler, M. Thomas
Coryat of Vid. CambBri, an ancient village within the county of Somerset, about
six miles from another village called (...).
Odcombe, and of his most (...) all Hodaepory.
Dear friend (this attribute he will not deny,
That thy great Book shall in the Churchyard buy;)
If to admire, and to commend were one,
Thou should not need this poor Encomion.
For thy stupendous pains so me amaze,
That (as thy self) I can do naught but gaze:
Not wondering, thou obserud'st so much by day,
As that thou writ, and could bear all away:
This is thy praise, some Travelers lament
Their better notes to have been from them rent.
Yet in thy book the module is descried
Of many a city and castle fortified,
Of towns, of turrets, and their trenchers deep,
Of rocks, of rivers, and the mountains steep,
The camps where Roman fields were fought,
And where their lives so dearly many bought.
If Schedules of this nature had been found
About Sir Politic, 't would have made him swound.
The fruits of France thou nowhere do conceal,
Nor those of Germany thou mean to steal;
The Italian rarities are here depainted,
So are their Alps, on which thou never fainted.
In brief, thy book's an universal Chart,
Wherein the works of Nature, and of Art,
So prodigally there thou do contain,
That thou shall hear ( No niggard of thy pain.)
Upon that subject those immortal Rimes
(Which shall outface the endless bounds of times)
Thy honored friends composed, I cannot prize,
Whether thy name, or theirs t'immortalize:
In which their candor and syncerity
Toward thee, will shine to all posterity.
Howse'uer yet they at thy labors least.
I justly think the art greatest in the least:
For many things (I hear (...) friends report)
Do more augment my wonder, then their sport.
And pray, what Traueller's so obseruatiue,
That does us not of worthy things deptiue?
As the French fashion of their Gallows rare,
The Switzers cod-peece, with their Nuns so faires
That curious cage of birds in Amiens town:
Their Fool at Whitsontide, who put thee down.
But (...) brave pictures! France, or Italy
Whether, think thou, deseru'st the Masterie?
There was that masterpiece of such perfection,
Apelles need not scorn to have laid th'complexion:
Wherein proud Art (dame Nature to excel)
Within an Alehouse painted had full well,
The pilfring pastime of a crew of Apes,
Sporting themselves with their conceited lapes,
About a Pedlar that lay snorting by,
Not dreaming of their theeuish (...);
Whose pack (...) his trinkets on the twigs
Some fasten, whilst the other dance their (...).
This piece did please, and so (...) thy eye,
Thou iudg'st it worthy immortality.
Another picture was that Non-(...)
Which a Venetian shop had then to sell,
In which luxurious Art did so surmount,
That now the French piece thou did (...) count,
And this the Paragon, which did reueele
The lively picture of a Shoulder of (...).
This did so far excel you of the Apes,
That well it might compare with (...) (...)
And thou those Birds decei ud might parallel,
If thy then-(...) stomach truth would tell,
The Ducal Gallows there (I heard) you saw,
Which twich him up, when he offends their law:
These are beyond those serewed ones of France,
Where men do pass away, as in a trance.
Thy bitter journey over the clowdy rocks,
Deserved the sweetest wines Piemont vp-locks:
For he no sweet has merited (they say)
That has not tasted of the sower by the way;
Yet had that wine an undeserved effect,
Which did so on thy hands and face reflect,
That stone at Padua, whereon Brankrupts sit.
On into England thou had transported it.
As he his brazen torment first did prove,
So might rhou this have hanseld, for thy love.
Briefly, for trial of a religious lurch.
Thou nimbd'st an image out of Brixias Church.
Yet cannot I suppress, without disgrace,
The love thou bare thy Natalitical place,
For in the midst of thy most Alpish ways,
When ruinous rocks did threat to end thy days,
No doubt, thou could have (...) thy self at home,
To live, and lay thy bones in sweet Odcombe.
But after thou had past those (...) pikes,
Which fear and terror to the Pilgrim strikes;
And did the Garden of (...) (...) desary,
Within the womb of (...) Lombardy.
Immortal Mantua could not steal thy love,
Nor once from Odcombe thine affections move.
Wherein, Viysses-like, thou did display
Such love, as he bore (...) his (...).
What should I speak of that rare Patience,
When thou wast forced (with no small expense)
To exercise it on those Hackneyes vile,
Which rather would lie down, then ride a mile.
Thy continence no Lais could (...),
For thou came forth, unburned of the flame:
But oh! how prouidently did thou cant,
When thou did play the crafty Mendicant?
This trick (they say) did stahd thee then in stead,
Or else thou might have hopt without thy head.
Now if these notes may immaterial seem,
To them that know (...) how to deem,
I pardon crave in thy behalf and mine,
If in our judgments we have mist the line:
For with thee in this point I sympathize,
Often vainer objects do my sense surprise.
But whither, Muse? two long Mid-sommer (...)
Are not enough for to depaint his praise:
Think thou not near his industry to come,
Who in five months saw most of Christendom:
Reserve thou rather thy Poeticke vain
Him to salute, when he returns again
From that victorious voyage he (...)
To the utmost confines, where the round world ends.
Or if Dame Nature has some world in store,
Which never was discour'd heretofore,
Yea thither our (...), with his lance,
Thy conquring colors (O (...)) shall advance.
BUT

I sear that whilst I sing his praises hie,
Many will tax me for prolixitie:
If for this fault my (...) pardon give,
I will not them desire me to relieve.
For of thee only ( Polypragmon great,)
I pardon for my (...) (...)
The sesquipedal belly of thy Tome
Pleading for me, to stop the mouth of Mome.
Explicit Richardus Badley.
Iucipit Ioannes Loiseau de Tourual Parisiensis. D
Elegy encomiastique, a Maitre Monsieur Thomas Coryare, don't (...) Anagramme
est ca, ho, Maitre. (...) le (...) detrois lettres

TOusces Gallans esprits do quil' Artiste Muze
Change un Sot, en Socrate en Febus, vne buze,
Qui d'vn fat, d un batard, d'vn animal sans yeuz,
Font un superlatif des hommes and des Dieuz;
Sur les maigres seillons d'vne (...) arene,
Perdent (...) a credit and leur tens and leur pain.
Mais puisqu a dire, vray, ie nesuis pas meilleur
Que tant de gens de bien ce mest beaucoup d' honneur
De danser auec euz, comme le bal me meine,
Et, quoy qu humble and de (...), suyure leur belle vein,
Silz sont folz, l estre aussi; les consciencieuz
Auoir noz beauz ecrits n'en jugeront pas mieux:
Mais le grand C'est pource qu il est parent des Sybiles, en Grec, ou bien a
lenuy de ce grand Filosofe qui (...) en France, souz Henry III. a la grande
joy de toute la Cour, and etoit (...) vetu de couleur de Laurier.
Sibilot que (...) voulons decrire
Est bien tell voirement qu'on n'en peut assez dire;
Et certes ne croy (...) qu'onques du monde loeil
Ait veu, ou puisse voir un qui luy soit pareil.
Vray bon homme, sidouz and siplein d innocence,
Que (...) plus haut savior luyest comme ignorance: Pource qu il estrare: en
tout sauoir, oubien, rare de sauoir, ou biende sauoir rare, ou bien, quil a le
sauoir, ou le (...) rare, Ou bien, pource qu ilnous montre, ou plutct desmontre
a (...):

Nouueau Vlgsse a pie, don't les voyages Lns,
Ont bien montre qu'il al esprit insque auz talons,
Voire (...) auz SOVLIERS, tant cette (...),
Se delecte de emplir un double cuyr de best:
SOVLIERS iudicieux, SOVLIERS qui clair-voyans
A force de seruir au C'est pource qu il est parent des Sybiles, en Grec, ou
bien a lenuy de ce grand Filosofe qui (...) en France, souz Henry III. a la
grande joy de toute la Cour, and etoit (...) vetu de couleur de Laurier.
Monstre de noz ans,
Quoy qu' aver maints (...), maints trouz, maints petassages,
Nel ont (...) voulu guitter en ses voyages;
Sages comme loyauz, afin d' entrer en part
De l' honneur qu' (...) huy a leur maitre on depart,
De estre (...) (...) enson brave Epitafe,
Etaulieu de eperons mis sur son Cenotafe,
Remportans eet hononner verse la Posterite,
Qui'lz etoyent SOVLIERS preuz, and de grand' loyaute.
SOVLIERS (...) SOVLIERS, a qui bien j'accompare
De tous ces beauz esprits la brigade tres-rare;
Car comme ces SOVLIERS en voyages, sejours,
Tauernes, Cabarets, le porterent tousiours;
Ainsitousiours quelcun de la band subtle
Le port a son corte tout du long de la Vile,
Et, pensans tell fois se sauuer a repos
Dedans leur Cab. net, le portent sur le dos:
Et n'y a bon repas, bien qu' abande la soupe
Sile Ioyeuz n'y est pour defrayer la troop.
Voire de telz eutor ay-ie (...) raconter,
Quiont tant affecte ces SOVLIERS imiter,
Que ne (...) si bien de leur (...) luy fair offer
Pour en fair chaussure, ilzl ont mis dans un coffre,
Port, comme un cors Saint, jusque deuant le Roy,
Don't le bon homme fut peu en desarroy;
Et moy mesme (...), tout plorieuz, y attache
Mes verse a ces SOVLIERS and deveau and de vache,
Pour matasche d'honneur; car de (...) plus bas,
Petit commie ie suis, il ne (...) (...),
Aussi ie ne pourreis. Or quant a sa doctrine,
Son savior mirlifie, digne qu'ant Non comme un Enfant, non: ny comme al'hotel
de Bourgonge, mais les plus anciens and sausas (...) de (...) portent pour
ornement and prerogative vne coiffe de linge delie, comme vne elpere de beguin
(...) leur (...).
lembeguine,
Son liver exuperant, fruit d' un pareile sprit,
Ian' auienne pour moy qu'il en soit trop peu dit:
Iay (...) (...) fair comme les eut (...),
Pardonnez moy, Messieurs; Et comme l'vn des votres.
A sagement love Siluester en son Bartat,
Ie confess, simplet, que ie ne l' enten pas;
Et bien qu' onques ailleurs mon nom nay' (...) mettre,
Ie suis content quil soit ymis en (...) lettre.
Explicit Ioannes (...) de (...) Parisiensis.
Jncipit Henricus Peacham.
Ad Thomam nostrum.
CVr Coryate (...) (...) (...) Daphne
(...), and (...) (...) (...) (...)
Insanos mundi for san contemnis Honores,
(...) and (...) es (...) (...) Authoris amicae Venetae:
Aemilia.
Verius at capitis (...) (Coryate) miserta
In calces imes (...) reiecit onus.
To the famous traveler ever to be esteemed the joy of his Somersetshire,
Thomas Coryate of Odcombe, professed enemy to the GentleCraft or Mystery of
Shoemakers.
WHy do the rude vulgar so hastily post in a madness
To gaze at (...), and toys not worthy the viewing?
And think them happy, when may be showed for a penny
The Fleet-streete Mandrakes, that heavenly Motion of Eltham,
Westminster monuments, and Guild hall huge Corinaeus,
That horn of Winsor (of an (...) very likely)
The cave of (...), the skirts of old Tom a Lincoln.
King John's sword at Linne, with the cup the Fraternity drink in,
The Tomb of Beauchampe, and sword of Sir Guy a Warwick:
The great long Dutchman, and (...) (...) Barwicke,
The Mummied Princes, and (...) wine yet (...) Dover,
Saint James his Ginney Hens, the An East Indian bird at Saint James in the
kepinge of Mr: Walker, that will carry no coals (...) eat them as hot as you
(...).
Cassawar way moreover,
The Beauer in the Park (strange heast as er e any man saw)
Downe-shearing willowes with teeth as sharp as a hand-saw.
The Lance of John a Gaunt, and Brandens still in the Tower:
The fall of Niniue, with Norwich built in a bower.
King Henry's slip-shoes, (...) word of valiant Edward,
The Couentry Boares-shield, and fireworks seen but to bedward.
Drakes ship at Detford, King Richards bed-sted in Leyster,
The White Hal whale-bones, the silver Basin in Chester;
The liue-caught Dog-fifth, the Wolf and Harry the Lion,
Hunks of the Beare-garden to be feared, if he be nigh on.
All these are nothing, were a thousand more to be scanned,
( Coryate) unto thy shoes so artificially tanned:
That through thick and thin, made thee so famous a Trotter,
And bore thee over the Alps, where side (...), long, like an Otter
Thou climb'dst and clambredst, there single solie recounting,
(Another Alcides) thy labors lustily mounting.
And as Alcides did scorn to wear any linen,
So Coryate (...) did as well as if he had been in
The brauest Lions hide, with the tail down fairly depending:
But matchless Coryate since now thy labor has ending,
And since thou art welagaine unto thy Country returned:
Thy very heels by me shall be with Laurel adorned.
In the Vtopian tongue.
NYihalonin ythsi Coryate lachmah babowans
OASIAM Europam Americ-(...)
Poph-himgi (...), Hessen, Rhetia, Ragouzie
France, Germanien dove Anda-louzie
Not A-rag-on O Coryate, O hone (...)
Einen tronk Od-combe (...) Venice (...)-mascar.
Explicit (...) Peacham.
Jncipit Jacobus Field.
OF all the Toms that ever yet were named
Was never Tom like as Tom Coryate sam'd.
Tom Thumb is dumb, until the pudding creep,
In which he was incomb'd then out does peep,
Tom Piper is gone out, and mirth bewailes
He never will come in to tell us tales.
Tom fool may go to school, but nere be taught
Speak Greek with which our Tom his tongue is fraught:
Tom-Asse may pass, but for all his long ears
No such rich jewels as our Tom he wears.
Tom Tell-Troth is but froth, but truth to tell
Of al Toms this Tom bears away the bell.
Explicit Iacobus Field.
Incipit Glareanus Vadianus A Sceleton or bare Anatomy of the Punctures and
Iunctures of Mr. Thomas Coryate of (...), in loose (...) called by the
Italians, versi sciolti, because they go like Tom-boyes, scalciati without
hose or shoe, bootlesse and footlesse: Perused this last quarter of the Moon,
and illustrated with the Commentaries of Mr. Prim-rase Silkeworme, student in
Gastrologia and Tuffmoccado.
A shrunk word of two into one such as are. Hardyknowt, or Hogssnout, the name
of Pope Sergius. So Atome for Ah Tom.
BEauclerke of The (...) of this second (...). A village before (...). Now by
him raissed to ten (...) of plate, and of which himself is the Choro
graphicall Maspe.
Odcombe, Bellamy of Fame,
Learnings quick Atome, wits gloss on Natures text,
A musital note containing four add humored crotchets, and sixteen (...)
mad as March hares.
Sembriefe of time, the five finger of game,
Ambs-ace of blots, sweep-stake of what comes next.
March pane of mirth, the (...) means a pantric (...) made of paste, in which
the white Blackmoore (as (...) de (...) (...) the Genouesi Moros blancos) stew
certain powerful words called (...) intoineate to (...) me Bridegroomes
points nouer (...).
Genoua past of love,
The Graces It is a (...) into which women's tears blended with loves (...) are
distilled through a (...) or (...) into a pure (...), to (...) (...) (...)
heete.
gallipot, The (...) (...) or bended (...), (...) (...) in the scale of (...)
(...) men take the (...) and (...) of a (...) (...) (...) (...) in (...) (...).
Musicks fiddle-sticke,
The (...) The spout of sport as a chimney is of smoke.
of sport, and follies turtle Dove,
Noddyego, being (...) is Don Diego, who was a famous reader in the Bay of
Mexico, where in steed of the (...) (...) the (...) deadly sins are publicly
read and (...).
Noddie turned up, al made, yet lose the trick.
Thou Chesse-board pawn, who on one pair of shoes,
Have trod the foote-bal of this worlds Center,
Discovering places He means the Gallery of Donna (...) the old countess of
(...) Arabia (...), which is a mcer magazin of verdugals, whither those
courteous Dames called cortesans (as M. Thomas himself has elegantly vnshaled
the word unto us) that do enter to barter or chaffer, else perdent (...),
mais la galle leur (...).
couched between the poles,
Where honest virtue never yet durst enter.
How should I sing thy worth in fitting lays,
With (...) verses of an hide bound Muse,
And crown thy head with misletoe for baies,
Unless thy He means a soldiers or a travelers trusse or sardle or
budget, which the old Romans called mulos Marianos.
knap-sacke did new thoughts insuse?
Such Gallo-Belgicke Mercuries are not chipt
From every billet, nor each axle-tree:
Nature her self in thee herself out-stript
When she produced this vagrant Humble-Bee,
Whose buzze has filled this worlds circled round,
Hing'd on the Articke and Antarticke star,
And whose great fame finds now no other bound
Then from the Magellan strait to Gibraltar,
Whose glorious deeds outface and fiercely daunt
These stories are found Written in the Annalcs of (...) (...) and (...) of the
Caspian sea, and in the third Tome of the wars between the Milt and the (...).
Tit. Diaphragma, cap de Rumbis, whither forbreuities sake I remit the Reader.
For to set tales upon Fables is as directly against the Pragmaticks of Spain,
as to wear seda 'obre seda, (...) upon silk, or cream upon milk.
Guzman of Spain, and Amadis of France,
Vterpendragon, Vrson, and (...),
Great Don Quixot, and (...) of Orleance.
Ludgate the floud-gate of great Londons people,
With double doors receives a wight so dapper:
Bel-man and knel-man gentry of the steeple,
Do peale thy praise with Rousse and Bow-bel clapper.
Whiles I thy goodly frame do seek to scanne,
How part to part does mortise, knit, and link,
I boulted have my spirits to the branne,
And left my wits fast (...) in the Clinke,
For Tom's a cap-stone, and a turne-spit lack,
A skrewed engine Mathematical,
To draw up words that make the welkin crack
Out of a wit strangly dogmatical.
Tom D. Stapleton (...) written a book de (...) (...) (...) this is a Tom fit
to be comprised in tribus (...).
is an Irish Harp, whose heart strings tune
As fancies wrest does strain or slack his cord,
Sometimes he warbleth sweet as a (...) prune, This is a term in the Art (...)
or Hydraulicke water works, according to which (...) faith of an old man that
he does (...) (...) (...): He (...) (...) tough (...) (...) with a (...) and a
Pulley.

And sometimes iarres out of a cracked sound board.
(...) read in Thomas de (...) of one Thomas surnamed the (...) (...), the
(...). of that name, who for special merit was chosen Tribune of the wether,
cocks of (...), a man nobly and lineally (...) from great Solon, because on
one pair of soles he fooled it to Venice.
Tom is the padlocke of all secrecy,
Whose tong's the tel-tale of what is done and more,
Vents out the barmy froth of surquedrie,
By thirteen to the dozen, thirty to the score,
Tom's a A French Quelque chose farced with (...) holes, and (...) and the
first blossoms of candid (...).
Bologna (...) lovely fat,
Stuffed with the flesh of a Westphalian sow,
The shoing-horne of wine, that serves pat
To make the feeble strong, the strong to bow.
Tom is a Tom in Hebrew (...) a twinne.
twinne, and yet an Odd, and both,
Twinne shoes, Odd shirt, and both by combination:
Which odd twin-triple-one to speaken troth,
Has run a wild-goose race, a pilgrims station:
This, and all this, is Tom, and yet He is the Retracian side of Fortunes
title page, who is said vtramque pugnam implete.
much more,
A Mandrake grown under some A land-marke near Excester, disterminating life
and death to those pilgrims that upon the high ways bid men stand, in stead of
bidding them good-(...).
Heauy-tree,
There where S. Nicholas knights not long before
Had dropped their fat (...) to the lee.
The The herb knot-grasse called in Greek (...), or Stop (...), (...) they
were wont to give the Commonwealth a vomit, vide (...) de (...) (...), page
44000. paulo (...) finem.
neck-weed-gallow-grasses sapling plant,
A Mushrum (...) with a thunderclap,
Which without noble stock or such like vant
In one nights space grew out of Flona's lap.
Yet for all this, Tom, thou had proved soon
Abortiue, and a (...) worth but little,
Had not thy fire, the man's that is in the Moon,
(...) fed thee in thy youth with Ma' it please thee Reader to be advertised
out of Germany, that this is nothing else but (...) called syderum (...).
Cuckoo spittle.
Then tread the steps of the Author of thy birth,
Who once does every Month surround the earth.
Explicit Glareanus Vadianus.
Incipit Richardus Hughes CambroBritannus Reg a Pedibus.
Englyn vnodl inion.
I Candish a Drak i gwendid lhywiai^
^ewn lhawer a^lendid^
^y scai^ ^wy mewn dwy eskid,
Yr hell gorph, ^a ^hain i gid.
Explicit Richardus Hughes CambroBritannus Regi a Pedibus.
Thomae Coryati huius operis Authoris ad Beneuolum Lectorem de (...) (...),
(...) and Macaronici Scazontes.
(...) a Vox admirantis.


Ille ego qui didici (...) andare (...)
Vilibus in scrutis, (...) pede, (...) (...)
Cyclico-gyrouagus coopertos neigibus Alps
Passaui, transvectus equo cui nomina, (...).
Nulla viandanti mihi fit (...) vestis;
Non cum pennachis (...) (...) veluts
Bambalea in testa; (...) est guippona satini
Toscano de more nitens; sed plena pidocchis,
Et de fustagana squalens pourpointa Milana
Courans espaldas, (...) (...) faldas.
Vna capatorum (...) paia est, vna camisa.
His ego comptus, iter capio, rodeando per acres
Grisonas and Rhaetos, me tessaco-trochlea raptat
Esseda, (...) syluas, (...) sierras.
Menses bis binos, valles (...) supinos
Transegi superans. Video te grassa Verona,
Bergamaque Italiae noua Pergama, qua stabulatus
Succidus vrina madui been lotus equina.
Venegiam ingressus, spatiosam Diue Piazzam
Marce tuam lustro, (...) Rialtum.
(...) suis scalmis Golfum mea (...) verrit,
Aestu barca Maris nuotat; nouus (...) amoris
Aemyliana tuas subito me truccat ad aeades.
Vlcera bubarum, terret me paura verollae
(...) intrare vetans, and rumor honesti.
Me torret tua bionda Chioma, and tua guancia bella
Purpureas (...) rosas; duo giglia pura
Mortidae (...) manus; (...) vas, poppa bianca
Lactis (...) (...), lactisque cremorem: (...). (...). Smooth.

Crapula me cepit, quare conuersus, (...)
Parturij, crudos boccones ore momordi:
Pectoreque evomui, quos nunc submittere stampae
Allubuit: Tu Lector aue, nostraeque Cucinae
Cruda, (...) stomachifoculo, been digere frusta.
Explicit Thomas Coryatus.
Nouerint (...), etc.
KNow (gentle Reader) that the book, in praise where of all these preceding
verses were written, is purposely omitted for (...), and (...) (...) good:
partly for the greatness of the volume, (...) 654. pages, each page (...) lines,
each line 48. letters, besides Panegyricks Poems, Epistles, Prefaces, Letters,
Orations, fragments, posthumes, with the comma's, colons, ful-points, and other
things (...) apperraining: which being printed of a Character legible without
spectacles, would have caused (...) Book much to exceed that price, whereat
(...) (...) witty days value such stuff as that: (...) for that one, Whose
learning, judgment, wit, (...) (...)
Are weight with Toms just to a (...).
Having read the book with an (...) (...) it, could he but have melted our
(...) (...) (...) lump, so much matter worthy the (...) (...) (...) filled
four pages: but finding (...) (...) (...) his hope therein fallen short, (...)
(...) (...) the Author of the Crudities (...) (...) (...) (...) travels; which
being (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), is likely to produce (...) (...) (...)
greater (...): (...) which being (...) (...) (...) (...) exact Compend, as
Munster, Baronius, the (...) (...) burgians, and other famous Chronologers have
been, may perhaps afford something either worthy thy reading, or supply thy
need in such cases of extremity, as nature and custom oftimes enforce men
unto. (...).

FINIS.

