THE Art of Navigations.

Containing a compendious description of the Sphere, with the making of
certain Instruments and Rules for Nauigations, and exemplifyed by many
Demonstrations.

Written by MARTIN CORTES Spanyarde.

Englished out of Spanishe by RICHARD EDEN, and now newly corrected and amended
in diverse places.

At London printed, at the charges of Richard Watkins. 1589.

To the right woorshipfull Sir Wylliam Garerd Knight, and Master Thomas Lodge,
Aldermen of the City of London, and governors of the honorable Fellowship or
Society, as well of certain of the Nobility, as of Merchants Adventurers,
for the discovery of Lands, Territories, Islands, and Signories unknown, and
not before their first adventure or enterprise by Sea or Navigations commonly
frequented.
And to the right Worshipful the Consulles, Assistents, and Comminaltie of the
same Society, RICHARD EDEN Wysheth health and prosperity.
WHat so ever he was (right Honorable and Woorshipfull) that first believed
that the frame and coaptation of the body of man, with the functions, offices,
and duties of the parts and members of the same, knit together in a certain
unity to a common ministration, did represent a lively image and similitude of
a perfect Common wealth: I think that he was a man of no vulgar judgment, or
object mind, but rather of singular wisdom and prudence, in the
contemplation of divine and humane things. For he saw, that as in the small
native seed of all growing or living things, is contained the form that
brings them to their perfection: so in certain small and obscure members of
the Common wealth, consists no small increase to the perfection of the whole.
He saw likewise, that herein, as in the body of man, representing the parts
and members of the world (as I have said) are diverse parts of diverse and
sundry actions and motions, greatly differing in form, number, and quantity,
yet all the same to be so knit together, and so to consent in one uniformity,
to the common profit of the whole, that a greater concord and harmony can not
be imagined, then is proportioned by the friendly unity of diverse and
contrary. He saw likewise in the same, such a mutual compassion of part to
part, and member to member, by one common sense exi^tent in them all, that no
one part or member can feel either joy or pain, but that in manner all the
other are partakers thereof more or less, if they be lively members, and not
withered, or otherwise vnsensate by reason of dead flesh, which only by cutting
and burning ought to be divided from the sound and whole. But as in man (whom
Plato calls the less world) the vigor and agilitie of the immortal soul
and mind never ceasseth from continual moving, but is ever exercised in
excogitations and inventions of great things (herein resembling God, whose
caract it bears) by providence foreseeing, and by intelligence understanding,
and devising what is to be done, and what to be eschewed, does immmediatly
move and raise up the faculties, powers, and members of the body to execute
the same: Even so, in the greater world, the providence of God, and universal
counsel and consent of men, has elected and appointed certain principal
men, to bear like rule and authority in the body of the Common wealth, as
has the intellectiue soul in the members of our body to move and command
the same. To Princes therefore, Counsaylours, Rulers, Governors, and
Magistrates, as to the most intellectiue and sensitive parts of the society
of men, has God and Nature given preeminence and governance of the Common
wealth, that by their providence, wisdom, and aid, it may universally
florishe, not only by just administration of good laws, with due correction of
malefactors, but also by lyberall rewarding of such as have well deserved,
and especially by maynteinance of such Arts and Sciences, as the Common wealth
can not well be without. And to draw nearer to the applying of my similitude,
I say, that what so ever Virtue, what so ever Art. or the ingenious industry
of men, has to this day invented, all the same is to be imputed to the
benevolence and liberality of such as have honorably mainteyned, and freely
rewarded the trauayles, pains, and charges of them that have spent their
lives, goods, and wits (as many have done) in the inventions of necessary and
profitable Arts and Sciences. For even as wholesome and temperate air, with
seasonable weather, and favorable influence of the heavens and planets,
causes fruitefulnes on the earth, and contrariwise, barrennes by the contrary:
Even so the favor of Princes and Magistrates, nourishes, augmenteth, and
amplifyeth, all Arts and Sciences by liberality, and extinguisheth the same
by miserable covetousness and parcimonie. And although in some men of rare and
noble nature, the desire of honor and fame, only for virtues sake, and study
toward their Country and Common wealth, have moved them (in manner to their
own undoing, through their great loss and hinderance) to set forth and
invent diverse things for the commodity of the common wealth, and other, rather
then for their owne^ yet undoubtedly, who so well consydereth, and
indifferently wayeth that I have said, shall find and see by daily experience,
that in manner only munificence, liberality, and reward, or the hope thereof,
gives spurs to them that attempt great and virtuous enterprises, as I could
more largely prove by so many testimonies of hystories, both holy and profane,
that the rehearsal thereof should be but tedious, and not greatly necessary for
my purpose, especially writing unto your Honors and Worships, of whose
munificence, and liberality, I have had great experience, both in my self,
and others, who by your aid and mayntenance, have attempted, and performed
many goodly inventions, vyages, nauigations, and discoueries of lands and seas,
heretofore unknown. Wherein, what great charges you have sustained, and how
liberal and constant you have bee^ in furthering the same, does well declare,
that hitherto you are rather losers then gayners thereby. The whcih thing
doubtless, is more to your commendation, in that it may hereby appear that
you have attempted the same, rather for knowledge and virtues sake, then for
covetousness of gaynes: as is furthermore well known by your first vyages of
discovery attempted to Cathay, by the Northeast seas, upon certain loss and
detriment, for uncertain hope either of gaynes, or of any such way to be
found, otherwise then by certain likely conjectures: not much unlike to the
shining flowers of Marchasytes, which outwardly appearing in mineral
mountains, are signs and tokens whereby is coniectured what metal is
contained therein, and whether the same be to be followed or not. And although
it sometime so chance, that such signs are fayleable, showing more in
appearance, then they contain in substance: yet are not such signs, tokens, or
shows to be contemned, but rather earnestly to be followed, for as much as it
has been often proved, and found by experience, that by following the same,
have been found great and rich mines of mettalles, as Georgius Agricola in his
books De rebus metallices, does largely declare and prove by many examples.
But to write at large what great things have proceeded of small and obscure
beginnings, and in manner mere conjectures, it would so far exceed the
measure of an Epistle or Preface, that it would rather increase to the just
quantity of a book. For in manner all the late discoueryes both of the
Spaniards and Portugales, had their beginnings of such small conjectures, with
uncertain hope (as it were praeter spem sub spe) until God and good hap, by
the constant travail and valiant mind ^f such as first attempted the same,
gave them to enjoy that they hoped for. But what so ever they have obtained,
and do enjoy, this may I boldly say in your behalf (right Honorable and
Worshypfull) that there has not lacked in you, either the like or greater
promptness of mind, forwardness in attempting, magnificence in expenses, or
liberality in rewardes^ For beside the great charges, and losses that you have
been at otherwise, what should I speak of the great gifts that you have sent
to the Emperor of Russia? What of your last chargeable vyage of discovery
among the innumerable Rocks, Islands, and moveable mountains of yse in the
frosen sea, by innumerable lands and Islands unknown to the Antiques, even
under and far within and beyond the circle Articke, where they thought that
no living creature could draw breath or life for extreme cold? whereas
nevertheless the same has been by you discovered, even unto the mighty river
of Ob, that falls into the Scythian Ocean, or Oceanus Hyperborei, not far
from the mountains called Hyperboreus, so named, because they are situate
almost under the North Pole, and thought therefore to be inaccessible. A voyage
doubtless of such difficulty, and in manner impossibility, that considering
the infinite dangers thereof (as I have learned by the information of Steven a
Borough, that was then the chief Pilot of the same voyage) it may seem
impossible that they should ever have escaped, except the mighty hand of God,
by the expert skylfulnesse of so excellent a Pilot, had delivered the^ from
those dangers. And although in deed (as religion binds us) it is convenient
in all things to give all honor, glory, and thanks to God: yet are we not
thereby restrained to be thankful to such men, as by their art,
ingeniousnesse, travail, and diligence, have dese^ued both just commendation,
and large reward. And therefore referring the reward to you (right Honorable
and Worshipful, to whom it apperteyneth) if I should not here give him at
the least such commendation as in my judgment he has well deserved, I might
seem both to defraud him of his worthy deserts, and also to forget the
friendship and good will I bear him, only for his virtues and excellency in
his profession. For certainly when I consider how indigent and destitute this
Realm is of excellent and expert Pilottes, I can do no less of conscience,
then, in respect of your own commodity, yea rather for the commodity of the
Queens Mai^stie, and the whole Realm, to exhort you, and put you in
remembrance (although I may herein seem to put the Spurr^s to a running
Horse, as says the Proverb) so to regard him, and esteem him, and his
faithful, true, and paynefull service toward you, that he may thereby be
further encouraged, and not discouraged, either for lack of mayntenance, or
otherwise by the injurious assaults of such his enemies, as only his virtues
and excellency have moved to bear him displeasure: as envy does ever follow
virtue, as says the Latin Proverb, Virtuti comes inuidia. And how true a
sentence this is, is well verified by the saying of a certain Philosopher
(whose name I do not remember) who hearing one vaynely rejoice that he had no
enemies, answered, that that was a token he had done little good: meaning
thereby (as daily experience p^oueth) that if he had excelled in any virtue, he
could not have lacked some enemies. And having here touched ^o speak of envy,
I remember that when I was a young Scholar, I have read in the Poet Hesiodus
of two kinds of envy, whereof the one is called Inuidia, and the other
Aemulatio, which is more tolerable then the first, for that it is joined with
some virtue, and enuyeth that any should excel him in any excellent quality
that he professes. But for as much as this envy of emulation proceeds of
some singular virtue of them that are so maliced, they may herein rejoice, that
they shall ever have a hundred friends for one enemy: yea, and although they
had none, yet is virtue a reward to it self, and to be embraced for it self
only, as the Philosophers affirm. What then shall we say to such, as
forgetting this reward of virtue, do not only favor, but rather hinder the
preferment and mayntenance of such expert men, more esteeming certain
Fyshermen that go a trawling for fysh in Catches, or Mongers, and Dradgies for
Oysters about the sands, between the South furland and Wyntertonnesse, and
the sands about Temmes mouth, then they do such excellent Pilotes as are
able without any Rutter or Card of Navigations, not only to attempt long and
far vyages, but also to discover unknown lands and Islands, as have done of
late years many excellent men, to the great honor and enriching of their
Prince and Country. But as touching Ste^en a B^rrough, the chief Pilot of
your vyages of discovery, it may hereby well appear, that he is neither
malicious nor envious of his Art and Science, in that he desires the same,
for the common profit, to be common to all men: and for the same intent was
the first that moved certain Worshipful of your company, as Sir Wyllyam
Garrerd, Master Wyllyam Mericke, Master Blase Sanders, and Master Edward
Castlen, to have this work translated into the English tongue: Who of their
own good nature, favoring all virtuous studies, and the professors of the
same, did soon enclyne to his ho^^st request herein, and therewith not only
desired me, but also with liberal reward enterteyned me, to take in hand the
translation. Which being now finished as well as my poor learning may
perform, I desire your Honors, and Worships, to accept in good part, as I
have meant herein to grat^^^e you, and do such service as my ability may
suffice. Now therefore this work of the Art of Navigations, being publyshed in
our v^lger tongue, you may be assured to have more store of skillful Pilots.
Pilots, (I say) not Pirots, Rulers, nor Rouers, but such as by their honest
behavior and conditions, joined with art and experience, may do you honest and
true service: Which is not to be looked for of such as being destitute as well
of the fear of God, as of all moral virtues, superabound in all notorious
vices, accompting desperatnesse for boldness, rashness for hardines,
impudency for stoutnesse, and cruelty for manhood. What other thing (I say)
is to be looked for of such, then of such trees, such fruits, Et mali corui,
malum o^um. But f^rasmuch as these have no place appointed them in the body of
our common wealth, which we have here before compared to the members of the
body of man: therefore are they no otherwise to be esteemed, then as excrements
of the body, to whom Nature has appointed no place in the same, but lab^ureth
continually to cast th^^ forth diverse ways, least by their filthynesse they
should infect the other members, even as the pomp of the Ship, if it be not
avoided, is noyous to the Ship, and all that are therein. But the wise and
honest Pilotte, first having before his eyes the fear of God, and putting his
chief trust in him, shall secondarily trust in his Art and Science, without
any such vain observations, as the supersticious Horoscopers (Astrologiers I
mean, and not Astronomers) are accustomed to use in the elections of hours,
times, and days, by constellati^ns and aspectes of the Stars and Planets, as
many fond men have done, thynkyng thereby to have escaped such dangers, as they
have thereby the rather fallen into, through contempt of Art and Science, by
foolish confidence in superstitious Astrology: which for the vani^ie and
uncertainty thereof, the right Worshipful, and of singular learning in all
Sciences, Sir Thomas Smyth, in my time the flower of the University of
Cambridge, and sometime my Tutor, was accustomed to call Ingeniosissimam artem
mentiendi, (that is) The most ingenious art of lying. Omitting therefore the
superstitious and fantastical observations of the judicials of Astrology, it
shall be better and more necessary for all Pilottes that desire to excel in
their profession, to learn and observe the principles of this Book, whereby
they may have such knowledge of the Sphere, as may instruct them the making and
use of diverse goodly Astronomicall instruments pertaining to the art of
Navigations, by knowledge of the moouings of the Sun and Moon in their
Spheres, and the other Planettes and fyxt Stars: thereby to attain to the
true knowledge of hours, times, and tides, with the variation of the Compass,
and many other goodly natural observations of weather, tempests, and calmes,
by certain infallible signs and tokens of the same, very necessary to be
observed, and this by the true principles of Astronomy, and not of Astrology.
And this is the true Astronomy, whereof the divine Philosopher Plato has
written so divine a sentence, that I have thought the same here worthy to be
alleged, that by the authority of so famous an aucthour, we may know what is
true Astronomy, with the use and commodity thereof. Therefore in his book
entitled Timeus vel de Natura, these are his words.

Rerum autem optimarum cognitionem, nobis oculi attulerunt. Nam haec que de
mundo disputantur, nunquam inuenta fuissent, si neque Sydera, neque Sol, neque
Coelum, suscipe potuissent. Cognitio vero diei ac noctis, ab oculis orta, fecit
vt dimensione quadam mensium, annorumque ambitus metiremur, tempus
cognosceremus, a^ vniuersae naturae ordinem scrutaremur. Quibus ex rebus,
Philosophiam adepti sumus.

That is to say, Our eyes have brought unto us the knowledge of most excellent
things. For whatsoever is disputed of the world, had never been invented, if
neither the Stars, neither the Sun, neither Heaven, could have been seen.
For the knowledge of the day and night, taking beginning at the eyes, cau^ed
us, as it were by certain limits and bounds, to measure the circuites of
months and years, whereby we came to the knowledge of times, and the order
of universal nature. And hereby also we obtain the knowledge of Philosophy.
etc. And thus by the authority of divine Plato, (whom for his excellency
Cicero called Deum Philosophorum, that is, the God of Philosophers) we may
understand, that the true Astronomy, is the perfect knowledge of the
miraculous mouings of the Planets, Stars, and heavens (and especially of the
Sun and Moon) whereby is caused the variety of times, and diversity of all
natural things, by natural causes: as by the qualities of Elements, as hot,
cold, moist, and dry, which are augmented or diminished by the more or less
influence of these two Luminaries, as they come near unto us at sometimes, or
depart farther from us at other times, with diverse motions in diverse climates,
which causes not only variety of times in sundry climates, but also the
variety of diverse complexions, fourmes, and disposit^ons of all creatures
under the face of heaven, none other accidental, contingent, voluntary, or
violent cause, to the contrary notwithstanding. And this is it that Plato
means by these words, Vt tempus cognosceremus ac vniuersae naturae ordinem,
etc. That is, to know the times and universal order of nature. And
doubtless, who so well consydereth the marvelous effects that are caused,
especially by the variable moving of the Sun in the Zodiac, must needs
acknowledge it to be the chief instrument and mean that God uses in the
generation, preserua^ion, and alteration of all creatures that are contained in
the world of generation and corruption. And for this consyderation, certain of
the ancient Philosophers called it the soul of the world: Other, the eye: and
other also the heart of the world. Plato also affyrmeth, that the soul of the
world is the Sun, and that all other living things receive life from thence.
And hereof comes the saying of the Philosopher, Sol and homo, generant
hominem: (that is) the Sun and man, beget man. And therefore (as writes
Marcilius Ficinus) of all Idolaters they are most tolerable that honor the
Sun for God. The which, although it be not, yet undoubtedly are his effects
so great and wonderful in this inferior world, that it may seem in manner to
be Gods Vicegerent, Liefetenant, and Viceroy, in all the works of nature,
except where and when it pleases him in any thing miraculously, otherwise then
by the common order and course of nature, to command the contrary.

And if it may not be tedious unto you (right Honorable and Worshipful) it
shall be a pleasure unto me, for the better declaration hereof, to make a brief
discourse of the marvelous and strange effects that are caused by the Sun:
which perhaps few have done, otherwise then dispearsedly here and there, as
occasion has served. First therefore let us consider what it has done over
the Equinoctial line, and under both the Poles at one instant, diversely and
contraryly the one to the other. For so has the infinite wisdom of the great
God of nature, the supreme Architecture of the universal world, disposed all
things in such perfect order, that to them that are under the Equinoctial, and
have their Horizon passing by the two Poles, the day is of twelve hours, and
the night as much, and their year also is divided into twelve months: But
they that dwell just and perpendiculerly under our Pole, and that have their
Horizon passing over the said line, have the day of the six months: That is
to say, beginning from the tenth day of March, when the Sun comes over the
said Horizon, until it return to pass under the same at the tenth of
September. And contrarywyse, one night of six months have the inhabitants
under the Pole An^articke: whose year (that is to say, all the course that the
Sun makes by the twelve signs of the Zodiac) is accomplished in one day
and one night: a thing doubtless most wonderful and marvelous. Likewise,
when we have summer, they that are under our Pole, have the day of six
months, and they of the opposite or contrary Pole, have their night of the
same length. Again, when it is winter with us, then under our Pole is the
night of the said six months, and under the opposite Pole, is the day of the
same length. So that, as it were, course by course, when we have the night,
they have the day: and contrarywyse, when we have the day, they have the night.
The which, although it be so long, and of so great space of time, yet is it not
continually obscured with darkness. For the Sun makes his course in such
order, that the inhabitants of that part, live not during that time altogether
in darknesses, as Moles live under the ground, but as other creatures that live
upon the globe and face of the Earth, they have such light as may suffyse to
sustain and maynteyne their life. For the body of the Sun declyneth no more
either beneath the Equinoctial line, either above the same line (which is the
Horizon to both the Poles) then 23. degrees, that is to say, no lower or higher
then the Tropikes, which are no more then 23. degrees, or there about, from the
said Equinoctial, that is their Horizon, as is aforesaid. And yet in these 23.
degrees, he makes not his course by the opposite Diameter, but goes
continually round about in circuit: so that his beams reuerberating heaven,
represent such a manner of light, as we have in Summer two hours before the
Sun rise. And this example which we have taken of the diversity of the
Horizons of the Equinoctial, and under the two Poles, is to demonstrate the
marvelous effect that the Sun makes, departing from the xij. hours of the
Equinoctial (that is to say, from Aries to Libra) and coming by little and
little, illuminating the Globe of the earth, and so reducing the year of xij.
months, into one only day, and one night, as is said before. Under the
infinite variety of the which course, sometime with long days, and sometime
with short, all the Inhabitants of the world are fourmed and disposed, of such
strength and complexion of body, that every of them are proportionate of the
Climate assigned unto them, be it hot or cold, and may dwell and abide there,
as in their natural place and temperament, not lamenting, or desiring to dwell
elsewhere, so great a love rests in them to their native situation. But not
to depart from the vyage which the Sun makes in one whole year, as sometime
approaching near unto us, and sometime departing from us, I say, that at one
self same time, in diverse parts upon the round Globe of the earth, it causes
the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter. And nevertheless, at the same instant
and punct of time, it makes day and high noone in one place, and night and
midnight on the opposite part. The which variety, although it appear
incomprehensible to the slenderness of our wits, yet beholding the same with
the eyes of understanding, and therewith considering the inestimable moving
that the Sun makes continually, we shall find it to be true, having respect
to the diverse situations of the earth, as it is continually illuminate more or
less by the Sun. And this variety is made with such a harmony and
consonancie, and such a law perpetual and immutable, that if any point or
prick thereof should fail, it is to be doubted lest the Elements should be
confounded together, and return to their first Chaos.

And to have said thus much of the wonderful effects of the course of the
Sun, it may suffice for an example to prove how necessary a thing it is, not
only for all Pilots and Sea men to have the knowledge hereof, but also for
all other such as shall attempt great and far voyages in unknown lands, and
strange countries, as did of late Master Ienkinson, a worthy Gentleman, set
forth by you, and maintained at your charges, more like an Ambassador sent
from any Prince or Emperor, then from a company of Merchant men. Wherein, what
commendation you have deserved, to the increase of your perpetual fame and
honor, I refer it to that I have said before. And as touching Master
Ienkinson, what trauayles, pains, and dangers he has sustained, and hardly
escaped, and what diligence and art he has used in the searching of strange
countries, and in the description of those his voyages, it were but in vain
for me to write much unto you, unto whom the same is better known then to me.
And therefore to conclude, with rendering just commendations both unto you and
him, I can say no more, but as Plato writes in his Book De Legibus, Decens
est eos ciues laudibus ornare, qui corporis vel animi viribus, res arduas
praeclaras que gesserunt, and legibus libenter paruerunt. That is to say, It is
decent to commend those Citizens, that by their industry of body and mind,
have done great affairs, and have wyllyngly obeyed good laws. And thus
eftsoons desiryng your Honors and Worships to accept in good part whatsoever I
have said of good will and affection toward you and your proceedings, and with
your shield of justice and authority, to defend me against the assaults of
such as are enemies to virtue, and captious of other men's doings, I rest at
your commandment to the uttermost of my power, to do you what service I may.

The Epistle dedicatorie of Martin Cortes, to the most mighty and victorious
Monarch CHARLES the Emperor, the fyfth of that name, King of Spain.
SO greatly were esteemed the inuentours of certain Arts and Sciences in
ancient time (as writes Saint Augustine in his The first inuentours of Arts.
books De Ciuitate Dei) that they took them not for mortal men, but honored
them as immortal gods. Isis.
Isis arriving in Egypt, ordained commonweals with just governance, gave
them laws, and k^owledge of letters, and taught them also the use of Flax. In
consideration whereof, she was honored of such as then knew her, and
reuere^ced of them that came after her: In so much, that they establ^shed a
capital penalty or pun^shment of death, against all such as either in sport
or in earnest affyrmed her to be an earthly woman, and not rather a d^uine
Goddess. Ceres.
Ceres being of lively wit and clear understanding, The Cicilians.
beholding in the Cicilians humane similitude and shape to the outward
appearance, and inwardly the fiercen^sse of brute beasts: brideled their
customs, and reformed them with new Statutes, teaching them to tame Oxen to
bear the yoke, to sow Whe^te for their great commod^tie, to grind in the
Myll, to kneade in the horse, and to bake in the Oven. In recompense whereof,
they made sacrifice unto her, and builded many sumptuous Temples in honor of
her. Saturnus coming from Creta, Saturn gave Laws to the Latins.
gave laws unto the Latins, whereby they might govern them selves, and
^r^scr^bed them manners of living, teaching them to Till and Manure the ground,
Tillage of the ground.
and sow Corn, and to geather ripe fru^tes in due season. And if Saturn were
profitable to those nat^ons, and they not v^thankefull unto him, in that they
builded him aulters, celebrated unto him festival days, and accounted him in
the number of the heavenly Gods, naming him also the father of the Gods. And
(if I say) he was to them so profitable, and that world judged so happy and
prosperous for having so valiant a King, and so just a Law geuer, that it was
therefore by the mouths of all men called, The Golden World, The g^lden
worl^e, and ^aigne of Sa^urn^. The woort^y factes of Charles the fy^th. Sicilia.
and Reign of Saturn: Certes, except I greatly deceive my self, this our
time is nothing inf^riour to that. For we know certaynely, that your Majesty
has been more profi^able to Spay^e, then ever was Saturn to the Latins: and
also a more excellent Law geuer, in manner to all Europe, and further, to the
new World, lately d^scouered, then he that gave laws but only to a l^ttle
corner of Italy. Whereby I consider, that the felicity of your Majesty's
time, ha^h been ^o l^ttle commendation to your doings, in that you have
banished v^ce, honored virtue, punished offenders, and favored innocente^:
so that the quiet have thereby lived more peaceably, the unquiet restrained,
the good exalted, and the evil chast^sed: In so much that now, by reason of
just ministration of good order in your Majesty's d^minions, they that walk in
the night, go in safet^e, wh^reas we know, that in other Provinces, such as
walk in the day go in danger and peril. And therefore in the most happy
time of your Majesty, it appears that Spain is renewed, Spayn^ reformed.
not only in the excellency of Mechanical or handy crafts, but also in the
knowledge of letters, and discipline of war: In so much, that she that
sometime lacked her self, may now abundantly minister to her neighbors that
have need. And whereas to your imperial Majesty, it should not suffice to
ordeyne laws, if power and arms should fail to defend and punyshe: who,
comparable to your Majesty, The triumphs and victo^ies of Charles the fy^th.
enjoys the one, and wants not the other, having tryumphed over Ky^ges and
Kingdoms, enlarging also the name of Spain in many unknown and barbarous
Lands and Nations? Greater duty therefore owe your Subjects unto you, then
ever did the Egyptians to Isis, or the Cicilians to Ceres, or the Latins to
Saturn, for as much as they have received of your Ma^estie more common and
profitable benefytes.

It is not long since your Majesty has forbidden and abolyshed the use of
Mules, Mules.
and restored again the exerc^se of Arms, so long out of use, that the one
with the other, has been no small profit and commodity to your Subjects and
Domini^ns. For by taking away the use of Mules, is so increased the ^umber of
Horses and Horssemen, horses and horsemen.
that such as before never durst or could in manner light up upon a Horse,
can now easily and aptly manedge them. So that you s^eme to have revived the
d^yes of Belle^ophon the son of King Glaucus, Belleropho^.
and likewise the time of Saturn, when men had first the knowl^dge how to
make Horses to abide the bridle, and to bring them up to serve for diverse uses
and necessit^e^ of men. And right sure I am, that by reason of such laudable
Statutes and Ordinances in your Dominions, shall fail neither Horses nor
Horssemen, as well for the Court, as for the Camp.

Who knew in manner how to g^rde a Swoorde, Wearing of weapons and armor.
before that your Ma^estie permitted Weapons and Armor to be worn, even in
your Court, and that elsewhere all men might do the like? before wh^che time
dexterity failed, where courage abounded. Over and beside the profit and
commodity that has risen hereof, what honor you have obtained by the same,
is man^fest by Frauncis the French King, Frauncis the French king taken
prisoner.
who by your Majesty being taken pr^soner in the Park of Pauia, was brought
to Madrid, in the year a tho^sand five hundred twenty and five, where seeing
many young men in manner without beardes, and yet laden with Armor and
Weapons, said, O happy Spain, that bry^gest forth and nouryshest men of
War. In your most happy days also, the Christian Faith is amplyfyed, The
Christian faith ^nlarged.
and in manner whole Spain florisheth daily more and more in sumptuous
buyldyngs, The sumptuous buyldings and riches of Spain.
and is abundantly enryched in treasure brought from your Ind^es, far
surmounti^g the riches of Solomon brought from Ophir. Yea, and to say the
tru^th, consyderi^g the Nauies of Gold and Silver, The Indies nauies of gold
and silver.
which have been ord^narily brought from thence to your Majesty, this time may
rather be called the golden age, then that of Saturn. Not omitting also, that
by your prosperous attemptes, have been discovered so many Lands and Islands,
New lands and Islands discovered.
heretofore so unknown to the Cosmographers, Geographers, and
Historiographers, that they never heard of their names. Which neu^rthelesse,
a^e now so well known to your Subjects, that they have trodden them with their
feet, and measured them by pases. Who before this time ever heard any
ment^on of the rich and large Prou^nce of Peru, Pe^u.
or of the straights of Magalianes, The straights of Maga^^anes.
or of the river of Silver, called Rio de la Plata. They in times past seemed
to have done no small thing, when they had knowledge of the fortunate Islands,
Rio de la Plata.
the which, since they were conquered by your Majesty's Graundfather, have
been called the Islands of Canaria. The fortunate Island, or Canaries.
And ^f it be, and has been much to discover and subdue this new world: it
is doubtless no less glory to your Majesty, not only to possess and enjoy
it, but also that you daily procure to send thither Judges to govern with
Laws, Religion in the Indies.
and Preachers to instruct in Doctrine, to bring those Indians to the
knowledge and honoring of the true GOD. And therefore consyderyng your
Majesty's godly desire and purpose, as touching these Nauigations, and the
dangers of such as go to discover this new world (although it be not new
to the Spaniardes to travail into far Countries, The Spaniardes have ever
travailed into f^r countries.
for as much as in the days of Caius Caesar, the son of Augustus, were
found broken pieces of Spanish Ships, lost in the Gulf of Arabie, as also
Celius Antipater affyrmeth, that certain Ships of Spain were accustomed to
sail for Merchaundize to the East parts of Ethiope) in consyderation hereof,
have I the more willingly published these my trauayles, for the furtheraunce of
all such as shall hereafter attempt the like Navigations.

The antiqui^i^ of Navigations.
And here do I not say that Navigations is not a thing of antiquity. For we
read that in old time, the Argonanti sailed to Colchos, Argonanti.

Colchos.


and Danaus brought the first Ship from Egypt to Greece. But I say, that I
am the first that have brought the Art of Navigations into a brief
compendiousnesse, giving infayleable principles, The Art of Navigations.
and evident demonstrations, describing the practice and speculation of the
same, giving also true rules to Mariners, Things parteyning to navigations.
and showing ways to Pilottes, by teaching them the making and use of
Instruments, to know and take the altitude of the Sun, to know the Tides
or ebbyng and flowing of the Sea, how to order their Cards and Compasses for
Nauigations, giving them instructions of the course of the Sun, and motions
of the Moon: teaching them furthermore the making of Dyalles, both for the day
and for the night, so certain, that in all places they shall show the true
hours without default: and have likewise declared the secret property of the
Lode stone, The lod^stone falsely called in English Adamant, is in Latin called
Magnes.
with the manner and cause of the Northeasting and Northwesting (commonly called
the variation of the compass) with also instruments thereunto belonging. And
that, that which I shall say or do, be not accounted to be presumpteously done
or spoken, I acknowledge that whatsoever I have well done or written, it is
from above by the help of the divine grace, and by the favor and prosperous
fortune of your Majesty. And thus shall they that now live, and likewise they
that shall succeed us, see and perceive, how much more the world owes and is
behoulding to your Majesty, then were the ancient Egyptians to their Isis.
Charles the 5. greater then the h^roes of old ^yme. Universal b^nefites.

Comparison with the antiques.


She gave them letters to read, but your Majesty has given rules and orders
to sail on the Seas. The profit of Isis was only for one Province. But the
commodity that ensues of your doings, is universal for all Provinces and
Nations, and for all Seas, as well to go to places discovered, as also to
discover Lands and Regions yet unknown. Pliny.
If they of ancient time had reached that we have obtained, Nauigation^ of
old^ tim^.
the Indies had not now been to discover: neither should it be esteemed a
miracle unto us, as at the time when Carthage flourished, that one Agnus went
forth from the Baye of Cadiz, and sailed to the end of Arabie. Neither would
Cornelius Nepos have written it for so famous a thing, that a certain man
flying from King Latinus, came from the gulf of Arabie: Whereby it is
manifest, that as well Navigations, as other Arts, does from day to day
increase, and by little and little is come to perfection. For in those days they
had neither compass nor card of sailing whereby to govern them selves. The
perfections of arts at this day.
They lacked the consideration of the Stars, until the Phenitians found the
knowledge thereof, and were the first tha^ understood (that to such as should
travail by sea) i^ should be necessary to lift up their eyes to heaven, The
rudeness^ of the antiquie^.
and consider the motions thereof. They that sailed to the Island of Tabrobana,
(whih in old time was called Antitono) carried for their voyages living byrds.
Aug^rium.
And when they thought good, let certain of them flee: and by the flight of
their wings^ directed the h^lme and sails of their Ships. They sailed only
three months in the yeer^. To them therefore it was necessary to observe
(...) the time, until they found it to s^rue with a for^ wind. They k^ew^ ^o^
how (...) h^lp^ themselves with the bow ly^e, or side wind: neither saw they
the North Star, The North Star.
or sought it, or had a^y knowledge thereof. And I believe verily that this was
the cause of so long a voyage which the Ships of Solomon made, The voyage of
Solomon to Tharsis and Ophir.
saylyng to Tharsis and Ophir, wherein they spent three ye^res: although in
deed that was no short voyage which they mad^^ compassyng about ^^d^a, and
ma^y other Provinces. And whereas before I said, that Nauigat^on by little and
little came to perfection, I find by ancient hystories, that Tipho first found
the Gouernale or Rudder, The first inuentours of ^^^igation.
Dedalus the Maste and Shrowdes, and Icarus the Sails, the Thirreni found the
use of the A^ker of one graspe or stooke, and Palaminus brought it to
perfection, adding the other. And thus may it manifestly appear, that in these
prosperous and fortunate days of your Majesty, it has pleased God to bring
the knowledge of Navigations to perfection, with this my brief discourse as
touching the same, as well profitable and necessary for them that travail by
land, Commodities and difficulties of nauiga^i^^.
as by Sea. What can be a better or more charitable deed, then to bring them
into the way that wander? What can be more difficult, then to guide a ship
engoulfed, where only water and heaven maybe seen? One of the four most
difficult things, whereof Solomon makes mention in his Proverbs, is the
voyage of a Ship by the Sea. The which Galfrede expounding, says, that in
humane things, none is more fearful or more dangerous, then to adventure
life in a thin and weak piece of wood, or for a man to comm^t himself to
the rage of furious winds, among the tempests of the Sea, and there to hazard
that be loves so well. O how much more should the same seem difficult to
Solomon, if at these days he should see that few or none of the Pilottes can
scarsely read, The igno^^nce of Pilot^.
and are scarsely of capacity to learn? And whereas in the first Chapter of
this Book, The goue^^^^^.
I have made mention, that the gouernall or sterage ought to be com^itted to
expert men, and of good understanding, he should see, that now adays, the
ignora^^t presume to govern other, which were never able to rule or govern
themselves. I most humbly desire your Majesty; to receive in good part this my
poor service, which, although it be little, yet being ded^cate unto the
greatness of your regal person, it shall be much more the^ great. The profit
and commodity thereof (...) notorious, and the b^nefite that thereby may be
received, is universal. If therefore, when your Majesty shall find your
self released from greater affairs, it may please you to feed your eyes with
these my travails, you shall find therein many new, delectable, and witty
things, with also many profitable and certain rules, both to read and
understand. To conclude, I eftsoons make humble petitions to your Imperial
Majesty, not so much to consider what I write, as to respect the intent of my
writing: and not the gift, but the affection and good will that remains in
me to serve your Majesty.

The first part of this work, which entreats of the composition of the
world, and of the universal principles for the Art of Navigations.
The first Chapter, of the general distinction of Creatures.
THE infinite GOD, the beginning, and cause of the whole universal world,
created three orders of creatures, differing in kind: Three differences of
creatures.
that is to say, Corporal, as the Elements, Spiritual, as Angels, and
compounded of these two, as Man. The corporal nature is divided into bright
and shining bodies, Corporal ^^^^tures.
as the Stars: or into dark and thick bodies, as Earth and Me^^alles:
either into D^aphane or transparent bodies, as Air and Water. Of these
creatures (as says Saint Gregory) some have (...) being, as S^ones, some
live, as Trees, and other have sense, as Beasts, other understanding, as Man,
who in holy Scripture is called all Creatures, Man is called all creatures^ and
the less world.
according to the sayi^g of Christ to his Disciples, where he says, Go and
preach the Gospel to all Creatures. And therefore not without good cause was
Man called of the Greek Philosophers, Microcosmos, (that is) the less World.
Man compared to the wo^ld.
In the which we contemplate things of no less admiration, then in the great
World. The similitude between them both, is, that even as the great world, and
the whole Globe or Sphere thereof, is moved by the voluntary motion of an
intellectiue substance, or an Angel: even so is this. For (as Aristotle
writes) What so ever is moved, All that moo^eth, is moved by an other
immo^eable.
is moved by virtue of an other: As, Man is moved by the internal or inward
form that is within him (that is to say) by the intellectiue soul that is
proper unto him. In like manner, in the great world are found diverse mooueable
things: All which, are reduced to one immovable moouer. So in man are found
many things moved by diverse motions, The intellect^^e soul.
which are all referred to his intellectiue soul. The great world conteyneth
the creatures within it self, and consequently is all really, as having
nothing without it. Even so, man by knowledge is all, and knows all things,
Man knows part of all things.
and nothing naturally is ^id from him, or unknown to him. Again, in this
less humane world, are two motions, Intellectiue, and Sensu^^^. Two motions in
man.
(...) the great world has two local mot^ons: the one, wherewith the first
mooueable is moved, and draws with it all the other Spheres from the East to
the West, Primum mobile.
and is called Rational moving. Rational motion.
The second, is the moving of the other Spheres, from the Weast into the East:
and is called Irrational moving. Irrational motion.
But now leaving to speak of the less world, we will proceed to speak
further of the great.

The second Chapter, of the definition of the world.
THE world (as says Isodorus) is Heaven and Earth, What is the world.
and the other woorks of God that are contained therein. It is compounded of
things visible, and yet unsearchable. Moses and Saint John the Evangelist
witness, that it was made by God. The Philosophers called it M^ndus a mouendo,
Or Mundus a Munditi^.
because it is in continual moving, and never in rest. The Greeks called it
Cosmos, That is, clearn^sse or fair^^nesse.
which signifies, Fair, or Beautiful, and so named it, because of the
marvelous ornament thereof, and diversity of Elements, with the resplendence
or shining of the Sun, Moon, and Stars. And doubtless, nothing may be
seen with the corporal eyes of man, more beaut^full then it is. In so much
that the divine Philosopher Plato affyrmed, Eyes were given to men to behold
the fa^renesse and beauty of the world.
that eyes were given to men to behold the beauty thereof, and to take
pleasure in the contemplation of the heavenly bodies, and roundnesse of the
world, which also for the roundnesse thereof, is called Spheri^all, The
roundn^^ of the world.
because that Sphera in the Greek tongue signifies a round body.

The third Chapter, of the definition of the Sphere.
Definition of the Sphere.
THeodosius says, that the Sphere is a whole and corporal figure, under one
superficial: in the midst whereof, is a point or prick, from the which all
right lines drawn directly to the circumference, The center of ^^e Sphere.
are equal.

This poyut or prick, is called the center of the Sphere: according to
Euclide, it is the passage of the circumference of h^lfe a circle, which is
turned round about his Diameter that is fixed, until it return to his own
proper place again, as where it was at the first. By the center of the Sphere,
passes a right line, and thextremities or ends thereof, touch in the
circumference. And this line (imagined) is called the Axis, The axis and Poles
of the world.
or Exeltree of the Sphere, and the ends thereof are called the Pales. Upon
this Axis is the Sphere of the world moved.

The fourth Chapter, of the division of the world.
IT is to be presupposed, that there is ^ difference between Element, Quinta
Essentia. Aristotle cal^eth it the fifth ^lement.

The fifth essence is incorruptible.

What is element.

The inferior ^lements are not pure nor ^^mple.


and Elementate, and the fyfte, being cal^ed Quinta Essentia. The Quint
essence, or fyfte substance, is a body of it self, differing from all
Elements, and things Elemental, as well in matter as in form, and no less in
nature and virtue: and having in it self no contrariety, is certainly without
corruption. And hereof com^eth it, that the Philosophers called the heavens and
heavenly bodies, the fyfth substance, or fyfth essence, by reason of the
inco^ruptibilitie thereof. Element is that, whereof any thing is co^^ounded. It
is the first of compositions, and of it self is not compounded. W^ereby it
follows, that neither the earth, the air, the water, nor the fire, that are
near unto us, or about ^s, are pure and simple Elements. For these Elements do
sometimes mingle themselves one with another, and especially where they are
near together, and touch one another. Of these elements every part is named
by the name of the whole: As every part of fire, is called fire, and every part
of earth, is called earth, and so of the other. They are called simple bodies
in respect of other compound and mixed bodies. The elemen^^ are diuisible into
parts. The commi^^tion of elemen^s.
They are diuisible into parts of diverse fourmes: and of the commixtion of
them, are made and engendered diverse things of sundry kinds. These four (that
is to mean, Earth, Air, Water, and Fire) although they are named simple, but
in respect as aforesaid, yet are they the Elements (that is to say)
beginnings and principles of all other compoundes and mixtes. A pure Element
can not be seen, Pure and simpl^ elements ca^ not be seen. The division of
elements. What is ^l^^mentate.
forasmuch as that that is pure, lacks color: and that that has no color,
is not visible. The Elements (as says Isodorus) were divided by the hand of
God. The imperial Heaven was replenished with Angels, the air with birds,
the sea with fyshes, and the land with men, and other beasts. Elementate, is
every body compounded of the four Elements. Not that they are Elements
formally, but vertually in myxt bodies. This known, we will show how the
world is divided into two regions: Celestial, and Elementall. Division of the
world into Celestial and eleme^tall.
The region Elementall, which is continually subject to alterations, is divided
into four Elements: which are, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire. These El^ments,
the Greeks call Yctogia, for the communion and concord that they have be^weene
themselves. The heavenly or etheriall region (called Quinta Essentia Quintae
Essentia.
) compasses and contains the Elementall world within it.

The fyfth Chapter, of the number, order, and property of the Elements and
Heavens.
The orders of Elements.
THE Earth (after the Philosopher) is a prick or point in the midst, called
the center, to the which they assign the lowest place. Next unto the earth,
Earth.
and about it, the Water occupyeth the second place, VVa^^^.
and the Air the third. Air.
The Fire is higher then any of the other elements. Fire.
And it is to understand, that the water has two superficials. The four^^ of
the wat^r.
One, which is called concaue, or halow^: the other, conuex or embowing. You
may compare the inward part of the concaue to a dyshe or a bolle, whose outward
part is called conuex. As touching the concaue, the water compasses about the
earth, leaving discovered that part that serves for the respiration and life
of men, and other beasts. As concerning which, The Ocean S^^.
sam^ think that the Ocean Sea is higher then the earth: and ask the question
why the S^a covers not the whole earth, and why the earth is not sunk in the
water: To this it may be a sufficient aunsweare, that it has so pleased the
will of G^d, according to the saying of the prophet D^uid: Psalm. 107.
Terminum posuisti quem non transgredietur, neque conuertet^r operir^ terram.
Job. 38.
That is, Thou have appointed limits, which it shall not pass, neither shall
it return to cover the earth. Beside the will of God, The will of God, is the
cause of (...).
which is the chief and sufficient cause thereof, we say that nature fails
not in her necessaries. For she sometime admits a little inconvenience, to
avoid a greater evil: as when heavy things, which natu^ally should descend,
do not only not descend, but rise up: And a^ also so^^time it chances that
fire descends, and w^ter aryseth to fill the void or empty places, least any
where should be found void or empty, which nature so greatly abho^reth. Nature
abhors emp^^^^s.
T^ this pu^pose, nature foreseeing the kinds of many things that could not
elsewhere live then on the earth, neither be conserved w^thin the water (as
men, and other earthly beasts) determ^^ed before to m^ke the earth not
perfectly round, The earth is not p^^fec^ly round.
contrary to the nature thereof: whereof it follows, that it is not
altogether covered of the water. And as (says Origin) the earth remains
discovered of water, that it might bring forth fruits, trees, Division of the
ayr^ into thre^ Region^
and plants. As touching the conuex aforesaid, the water and earth
discovered, are contained under the concauitie of the air, which is divided
into three Regions, as the lowest, highest, and middlemost. The lowest is hot,
by reason of the reflection or rebounding of the beams of the Sun, stryken
back by the earth. The highest also is hot, by participation of the fire, and
nearenesse thereunto. The myddle region is cold, as is manifest by the snow
and hayle, The highest air is incombus^ibl^.
engendered in the same. The air near unto the region of the fire, which is
pure heat, does neither burn nor lighten, because it has no combustible
matter, and so has it power, and not act. It is near unto, and reaches the
circle of the Moon, which compasses it about. The heaven, The order of the
heaue^^.
or circle of the Moon, is next unto the heaven of Mercuri: and Mercuri unto
Venus: Venus, unto the Sun: the Sun, to Mars: Mars, to Jupiter: Jupiter, to
Saturn, which is next, and reaches unto the heaven of the Stars, called the
Firmament, The Firmament.
because that in it are all the Stars (except the Planets) firm and fyxt as
a knot in a table. The knowledge of the Planets was had by seven sundry motions
they have among themselves, The Pla^ets.
and by their course, not vnifourme to that of the Stars of the eight heaven,
because that sometimes the Planets appear unto us joined together, and
sometimes divided. The Christaline heaven, The Chri^^aline heaven.
compasses about, or conteyneth within it the heaven of Stars. This
Christaline heaven, is transparent, and p^rspicuous, as clear water or glass
that may be seen through, by reason of the cleerenesse and pure substance
thereof. It is by an other name called, the heaven of water, The heaven of
water.
whereof holy Scripture speaks, saying, Aquae quae supra caelos sunt, laudent
nomen Domini. Psalm. 148.
That is to say, Daniel. 3.
Let the waters that are above the heavens, praise the name of the Lord. The
moving of the first mooueable.
It was created for the conservation of corporal things, and to temper the
heat engendered of the moving of the first moveable, which being so great of
body, that it not only compasses all the Elements, but also all the inferior
heavens is moved so swiftly, that it daily perfectly moves all the aforesaid
Spheres. And least by reason of the great heat thereof, caused by his swyft
motion, it should consume inferior things, God ordained this Christaline
heaven, The cold^esse of the Christalin^ ^^a^^n. The heau^n of the first
moveable.
that the coldness thereof might temper the extreme hea^e of the other. This
Christaline heaven, reaches unto the first moveable heaven, called Primum
mobile. And this reaches to the Imperial heaven, which is the twelfth, called
Emperium, The hea^e^ called Emperiu^, is not moved, and is the habitatio^ of
Angels.
by reason of his cleerenesse and resple^^^^^^. T^^^ is (...), a^^ is most
p^^fect. The Philosophers had no kno^ledge hereof. B^^ we believe by holy
Scripture, that such a heau^n there is, and the same to be the habitation of
A^gelles, and Spiritual creatures. It is also called Coelum Coelorum, that is,
The heaven of heavens: because it conteyneth and includes within it all the
other heavens. It is of greater cleerenesse then all the other heavens, and was
created immediately with the Angels. In this also remains the humanity of
Jesus Christ our GOD, The ^^^ani^ie of Christ in ^he Imperial heaven.
and in dignity above it. It conteyneth three holy orders or principalities,
called, Hierarchias. W^ereof the first is called Supercelest^all, Three orders
of angels.
and has in it al^o three orders, Seraphims, C^eru^ims, an^ Thrones. The
second is called Celestial, and conteyneth D^minations, Principates, and
Potestates. The third, called Subcelestiall, contains Uirtutes, Archangells,
and Angels. And to conclude, it has abundance of all goodness and perfect
felicity, with privation or want of all evil. The ^^periall ^eauen pr^seru^th
^ll the (...) he^ue^^.
The heaven also gives influence of constancy, steadfastness, and durabilitie
to things, against the fluxabilitie and inconstancy of the other heavens: the
order whereof, does appear in the demonstration followyng.



The vi. Chapter, of the immutabilitie or immobilitie of the Earth.
THE Pythagorians, and other ancient natural Philosophers (as says
Aristotle) were of opinion that the earth did move, Opinion that the earth
moves.
yet not by a right forth motion, Molus in loco.
but circulerly about the midst of one place. The which error, both
Aristotle himself, and the Astronomers do^ confute and reprove by evident
causes, and manifest demonstrations: For circuler motion, is proper to the
heavens. And as the earth differs from them in nature, The ^arth is
immoou^able.
so likewise in moving. And although it be so that the earth may naturally
move by certain of his parts, yet to move in the whole, and without the
circuit of his Sphere, it is impossible, being founded and established upon
his own center, the which of it self is naturally immooueable: for as much as
in it the reason of all heauynes consists. All heavy things enclin^ to the
center of the earth.
Whereas otherwise, every part that is moved should ascend, contrary to the
nature of all heavy things. B^t there is found nothing heavy that does not
naturally enclyne directly to the center of the earth, and would actually
descend thither, if it had no impediment of some other thing to resist it: and
when it touches there, or is come thither, would still rest and remain there.
And hereby it follows, that the earth, The earth is founded upon his own
center.
being founded upon his own center, is not moved. The which thing the
Prophet David also affyrmeth, saying: Fundasti terram super stabilitatem suam,
(that is) Thou foundedst the earth upon his stabilitie. Psalm. 130.


The vij. Chapter, of the roundnesse of the Earth and Water.
The roundnes of the earth.
THAT the Earth is round, it appears by manifest evidence: For if it were
plain or flat, the dawning of the day or day spryng, should equally and at
one time appear to them in the West, The rising of the Sun.
as to them in the East. But we see the contrary, that it appears first to
them that dwell in the East, and afterward to them in the West. This is proved
by the Eclipse of the Moon, The Eclipse of ^he Moon.
which beginning at one instant, they of Jerusalem see it begin at four a
clock of the night, and we of Andalusie in Spain, at one a clock of the
night. It follows hereby, that to them it nighteneth three hours sooner then
unto us in Spain: and this is caused by the roundnesse of the earth.

It is also as well known to be round, from the pole Artyke, to the pole
Antartyke: for by the roundnesse thereof, is caused the equality and
inequality of the days and nyghtes. The equality of the days and nyghtes.
The same is likewise known by the raising of the Pole above our Horizon. And
that the superficial part of the earth and water, is all one round and
sphericall Globe, The earth and the wa^^r a^e one round Globe^
is manifest by the shadow thereof, being a certain dark body, reflected
from the Earth in the Eclipse of the Moon. For by this, as by plain
demonstration, may we know that the Earth is round, as may more manyfestly
appear by this Figure. The water is a round body
It is also proved, that the water is a round body, as is seen by
experience. For if you erecte a mark upon the Sea bank of a Port, and a
Ship depart from that Port a certain space: then standing in the Poupe or
Stern of the Ship, you shall not see the mark aforesaid: but if you stand
in the top of the Ship, then may you see it. Whereas notwithstanding (if that
portion of the bendyng Arc of the earth, did not hinder the sight) you should
see it better being in the Poupe, forasmuch as it is nearer to the mark then
to the top of the Ship, as by this demonstration following appears.



But here some may move a doubt, saying, that on the earth we may see many
Mountains, how the earth is round.
and consequently many great Uallyes and P^aynes, with many diversities of
sundry other deep and unequal places, by reason whereof, the earth can not
truly be called round. To this I say, that in two manners, the earth is
called and understood to be round. As after one manner, speaking precisely,
it is called round, as a Ci^cle or a Sphere, which we call round, because
that all right lines drawn from the center thereof to the circumference, are
equal. The other roundnesse, is considered without this preciseness: and is
such, as not by all his parts is equally distant from his myddest or center,
but has some parts higher, and some lower, yet not in such quantity as may
destroy the roundnesse of the whole. As if in a Bowl there we^e certain
clyftes or holes, it should not thereby leave to be round, although not
perfectly or precisely round. And for this cause says Auerrois, that although
both the heavenly bodies and the Elements are of round form, yet differ they
in this, that the heavenly Spheres have perfect roundnesse, and the Elements
not. As the earth, by reason of his Mountains and Uales, the Sea by his
increasing, and decreasing, the Air also for his nearenesse to the fire, and
by his contrariety does sometime do, and so^etime suffer (that is to say) is
sometime active, and sometime passive. The air is actiu^ and passive, and not
perfectly round.
So that following the one, it flees the other, by reason whereof, it also
lacks perfect roundnesse. But the fire, for as much as it is near to the
concaue of the circle of the Moon, which is Sphericall, may therefore be
called Sphericall or round. The fyr^ is ^ound.


The viij. Chapter, of the motion of the Heavens and Elements.
IT is not to be forgotten, that all the Elements are wholly mooueable by
local motion, except the earth. The water is moved by the motion of the
Moon, or tossed by the Wyndes. The fire (as says Aristotle) is moved
circulerly by the motion of the day, how the fyr^ is moved.
and is drawn of the circles^ that embrace it, or compass it about: as is
manifest by the Cometes, or blazing Stars, and other fyerie exhalations,
contained and engendered in it: Which being carried with this motion, conclude,
that the fire moves in like manner. And with this motion is the superior
part of the air violently carried about, how the air is moved.
as the other impressions therein do show. The inferior part is moved by
diverse motions, (that is to mean) laterally, as by experience we see when the
wyndes blow. The Moon.
The Moon with her Heaven or Sphere, by her proper motion gives her turn
from the West to the East, in xxvii. days, and vii. hours, with xv. minutes.
Venus, Venus.
Mercuri, Mercuri.
and the Sun, The Sun.
in a year, which is the space of three hundred threescore and five days,
with five hours, and forty and niene minutes. Mars.
Mars in two years. Jupiter in twelve years. Saturn in xxx. years. The
eight heaven, which is the Fyrmament, or Starrie Heaven, The Starrie heaven o^
fyrmament.
by his own proper motion is moved by the nienth Heaven, upon the beginning
of Aries and Libra, and upon these two points accomplysheth his Revolution in
seven thousand years.

This motion is called Motus trepidationis (that is to say) The Christaline
heaven.
the tremblyng motion, or motion of access and recesse. The nienth heaven
ends his motion from the West to the East, in forty and niene thousand
years: And by this motion moves the eight heaven. The tenth heaven, called
Primum mobile, is moved from the East to the West: First moveable.
and in twenty and four hours (which is a natural day) perfourmeth one
revolution, and with the mighty force and swyftnesse of his motion, caryeth
with him all the other inferior heavens, and makes them to give the same turn
in twenty and four hours, where as nevertheless they cease not in the
mean time to keep the course of their own proper motion. how the first
moueabl^ draws the other hea^^^s.
As (for example) if an Ant or Pismi^e should go about the wheel of a Myll,
contrary to the moving of the wheel: before the Ant in going still forward,
should come again to the point from whenee she first departed (which is once
about, or one turn) the wheel should in that space make many turns.

The ix. Chapter, of the division of the Sphere into formal parts.
THE Sphere of the world, is divided in two manners, (that is to say) by
substance, and by accident. By substance into ten Spheres, as we have
said. By accident, The right and crooked or obliqu^ Spher^.
into a right Sphere, and oblique or crooked Sphere. They have the right Sphere
that dwell under the Equinoctial line, and is called right, because to them
the P^les are equally in the H^rizon, as appears by this Figure following.

They have the oblique Sphere that dwell either on this side or the other side
of the Equinoctial, The obliqu^ or crooked Sphere.
unto whom is ever one of the Poles above the Horizon, and the other under it,
as appears in this Figure.



The x. circles of the Sph^re.
The Sphere is compounded of ten circles imagined. And (as says John de sacro
bosco in his book of the Sphere) six of them are greater, and four less.
The greater Circle, is that which deuideth the Sphere into two equal parts,
and has his center with the center of it. These are the Equinoctial, the
Zodiac, the two Coluri, the Horizon, and the Meridian. The less Circle, is
that that deuideth the Sphere into two unequal parts.

These are the two Tropykes, and two Poler Circles.

The x. Chapter, of the Equinoctial Circle.
THE Equinoctial, is a Circle that deuideth the Sphere into two equal parts,
The Equinoctial.
and is by every part equally distaunt from both the Poles. It is one of the
greate^ Circles in the Sphere, and is the greatest Circle of those which are
described in the Sphere, by the motion of Primum mobile, or first moveable.
This Circle, for his equality, and regularitie, is more noble then the
Zodiac, which we have described in the eight^ sphere, and also then any of
the other. It is imag^ned to gyrd the world round about by East and West. The
equality of the day and night.
It is called Equinoctial, because this word Equinoctium, signifies equality
of nyghtes and days, whereof the cause is, that the Sun coming to this
Circle, the Arc of the day is equal with the Arc of the night, and then is
the Equinoctial. It is also called the Zone, or gyrdle of the first mooueable.
The first moue^ble.
For even as a gyrdle does gyrde a man by the myddest, so does this Circle gyrd
in the midst between both the Poles, upon the which the first moou^able is
moved. One of these imagined on our pa^te of the Sphere, is called Polus
Arcti^us, because it is near unto certain Stars, which the Astronomers
call Arcturus, which is the great Bear. The Pole A^tyke.
It is called Septentrional, or Septen^rion, because that round about it are
moved the vij. Stars, which make the less Be^re, commonly called Bozina,
(that is, the horn. The hor^e.
The Star which is in the tail of the lesser Bear, is called the North
Star, North Star.
because it is nearest unto the North Pole: the which Pole is a certain point
in the Firmament, which can not be seen, although the night be never so
clear. This Star (as the Poet Homer says) does move little or nothing,
Pole Antar^ike.
because of his little distance from the Pole. The other Pole is imagined on the
other contrary part, and is called Polus Antarticus, of the word Ante, which
signifies against, contrary, or opposite, because it is on the contrary pa^te
from the Pole Artyke. It is also called the South Pole, because that from that
part of heaven comes the Wi^de, commonly called the South: and is likewise
called Meridional, because it is right South from us. The cross^ ^eer^ unto the
Pole Antartike.
This is never seen to us. They that dwell under the Equinoctial, or come
near unto this Pole Antartike, have for a sign or mark to know it, four
Stars, in form of a Cross. And when the greatest of these is lowest in the
foot of the Cross, they say it is xxx. degrees above the Pole. And as we can
not see their Pole from hence, so they can not see our Pole from thence.

The xi. Chapter, of the Zodiac Circle.
Zodiac.
THE Zodiac is defyned to declyne or bend it self from the Equinoctial. It
is a great Circle, which deuideth the Sphere in two equal parts, cuttyng
the Equinoctial by oblique or crooked angles: So that being thus cut or
divided by it into two equal parts, one part thereof declineth toward the
South, and the other toward the North. This Circle is called the Zodiac, of
this word Zon, The twelve signs of the zodiac.
which in the Greek tongue signifies life, because that according to the
moving of the Planets under it, is the life of inferior creatures: Or is so
named of Zodion, which signifies a living beast. And is therefore divided
into twelve equal parts, whereof every part is called a sign, and every
sign has an especial name of some beast, in respect of some property
agreeable to the same: or for the order and disposition of the ^ixt Stars in
those parts, somewhat representing the similitudes of such beasts, it is
called Zodiac.

The Latins called this Circle, how the Sun is cause of generation and
corruption.
Signifer, (that is) the sign bearer, because it caryeth these signs or
images in it also, because the twelve parts, Division of the twelve Signs.

Division of the signs into degrees.

Division of the zodiac by latitude.


into the which this Circle is divided, are called the xij. Signs. That part
which declyneth to the North, conteyneth vi. Signs septentrionall, and the
other that declyneth to the South, conteyneth other vi. called Meridionall.
Furthermore, it is to consider, that the zodiac may be divided in two manners.
One, by longitude or length into the xii. signs aforesaid, and every sign is
divided into xxx. degrees, which make CCClx. degrees, likewise, every degree is
divided into lx. minutes, and every minute into lx. secondes, and every second
into lx. terces, and so to ten. The other division of the zodiac is, by
latitude or breadth. By latitude it is divided into xii. degrees, and in it we
imagine a line that deuideth his latitude by the myddest, having vi. degrees on
every part or side. And this line, The Eclip^ike line.
which deuideth into two equal parts the breadth or latitude of the
zodiac, is called the Eclyptike line, because that when the Sun and Moon
are directly divided under this line, either joined together by conjunction,
or divided by opposition, then is the Eclipse of the Sun or of the Moon.
Under this zodiac the seven planets are moved. The Sun also moves in the
myddest of the said zodiac, alongest the Ecliptike line, not enclyning more
to the one part then to the other. But the other Planettes do sometime go
toward the North, and otherwhyles toward the South, and sometime also toward
or trauerse the Eclyptyke. It is likewise to be noted, that these signs
whereof we have spoken, are not the constellations or stars that make those
figures, The moving of the Sun and the other Planets in the zodiac.
which the ancient Astronomers did appropriate to certain Beasts, and other
things: For these figures are moved according to the motion of the eight
Sphere, and pass from one sign of the zodiac to another. As we see that the
Star, called Oculus Tauri, (that is) the Bulls eye, is in two degrees of
Gemini. And the two Stars that are the head of Gemini, The figures o^ beasts
and other things imagined in heaven besides the xii. ^ignes.
are in xiii. and xvi. degrees of Cancer. And Spica verginis (that is) the
spyke of the Uirgin, is in xvi. degrees of Libra, and the heart of Scorpio^ in
two degrees of Sagittarius. And by this order do they pass from one sign to
another: so that we may not understand the signs by these stars, but the
xii. parts of the Arc of the Zodiac, taking the beginning of the
Equinoctial of Aries. The names of these signs, with their Caractes and
qualities, are described in this table here following.

Numb. Names. Charact. Qualities. 1 Aries. Hot and dry. 2 Taurus^ Cold and dry.
3 Gemini. Hot and moist. 4 Cancer. Cold and moist. 5 Leo. Hot and dry. 6
Virgo. Cold and dry. 7 Libra. Hot and moist. 8 Scorp. Cold and moist. 9
Sagitt. Hot and dry. 10 Capri. Cold and dry. 11 Aqua. Hot and moist. 12
Pisces. Cold and moist.

The xii. Chapter, of the Circles^ called Coluri.
THere are two circles in the Sphere, called Coluri, so named of the Greek
word Colon, which signifies, a member: And of Vros, which signifies a
wild Ox. The tail of this beast, makes a Semycircle, or half Circle, not
perfect. And as this beast moves his tail laterally or side ways, and not
by longitude: even so do the Coluri move to us, and are cut in right
sphericall Angles, upon the Poles of the world. The one passes by the Poles of
the world, and by the points of the Equinoctials, and is called the
Equinoctial Colure: The E^uinoctial Colure.
the other likewise passes by the Poles of the world, and also by the Poles
of the Zodiac, and by the points of the Solstitialles, and is called the
Colure Solstitiall, The Solstitia^^ Colur^.
called Solstitium, as Solis statio (that is) the standing or staying of the
Sun: because that when the Sun comes to this point, it declyneth no more,
but turns toward the Equinoctial. These circles divide as well the
Equinoctial, as the zodiac into four equal parts, by the points of the
Equinoctialles, and Solsti^ialles. In the Colure Solstitiall, The greates^
declination of the Zodiac,
are the greatest declinations of the zodiac, which are two Arkes of this
Colure, contey^ed between the Equinoctial and the zodiac. And these Arkes
are equal to the other two of the same Colure, included between the Poles of
the world, and the Poles of the zodiac.

The xiii. Chapter, of the Meridian Circle.
THE Meridian, Definition of the Meridian Circl^.
is one of the great Circles, imagined to trauerse the sphere by the Poles of
the world, cutting the same in two equal parts by the zenith or vertical
point. It is called Meridian for this effect, that wheresoever a man becomes,
and at what soever time of the year, when the Sun (by the moouyng of the
first mooueable) shall come to his M^ridian, The mydday or noone.
to him shall it be high noone at mydday, and is therefore als^ called the
circle of the mydday. It is also to be noted, that there are as many Meridians,
Diverse Meridians.
or Meridian lines, as are differences or habitations by longitude: so that
they that dwell in the East, have other Meridians then they that dwell in the
West: So that the interposition of the arc of the Equinoctial, between the
Meridian of one City, and the Meridian of the other, is called the difference
of longitude from one Region to another, and from one City to another, as we
will further declare hereafter.

The xiiij. Chapter, of the Horizontall Circle.
THE Horizon (after the Astronomers) is a Circle which deuydeth that part of
the heaven which we do see, from the other part which we see not, so that
the said Horizon deuideth the Sphere of the world into two equal halfes,
Definition of the horizon.
called Hemispheres. The half which we do see, is called the Hemisphere
superior, and it which we see not, is called the Hemisphere inferior.
hemisphere or horizon.
This Horizon, changes to them that move: for as one does move, his Horizon
does change. And hereof it comes, that how many places are upon the earth,
Diverse horizon^.
and the circumference thereof, it is possible there should be so many
Horizons. The Astronomers suppose the Horizon, after two manner of sorts, that
is to say, a right Horizon, and an oblique, or crooked Horizon. The right
Horizon, is to them whose zenith or vertical point is directly in the
Equinoctial: and this right Horizon, passes by the Poles of the world, and
deuideth the Equinoctial in right sphericall angles. The right and oblique
horizon.
The other oblique or declyned Horizon have they, unto whom the Pole of the
world does rise above their Horizon. This Horizon is also called oblique,
because it deuideth the Equinoctial in unequal and oblique or crooked angles.

Also it is to be understood, that the Pole of the Horizon is called Zenith,
or the vertical point of heaven, perpendiculerlye, or directly over our head.
Whereby is inferred, that as much as is the elevation of the Pole of the world
above the Horizon, so much is the distaunce of the Zenith from the
Equinoctial. Distance of the zenith from the Equinoctial.
For the Zenith by all his parts, is distaunt from the Horizon by ni^ntie
deg^ees. And all other impediments excluded, we may ever see half the heaven:
And in as much as any shall pass from the Equinoctial, toward the one Pole or
the other, so much falls the Horizon under or beneath the Pole, toward the
course he entendeth, and likewise as much shall it be raised above the contrary
Pole, as shall appear by a demonstration in the end of this Chapter. how the
horizon is divided by the Meridian.
This Horizon is divided by the Meridian into two equal parts, that is to
say, the East and West parts of the said Horizon. The E^st part is, where the
Sun and Stars begin to arise to us, and appear in our sight. The West
part is, where the Sun and Stars does set and begin to be hid out of our
sight, under the said Horizon. Moreover, it is to be understood, that there
be two manners of the East and West, that is to say, the true East and West,
The true and untrue East and VV^st.
or the untrue. The true East, is the point in the East part of the Horizon,
where it does cut with the Equinoctial: for when the Sun is in the points
of the Equinoctial, then he ryseth in the point of the true East. And likewise
is to be understand of the point of the true West, to be in the West part of
the Horizon, where the Equinoctial does cut with the said Horizon. The
untrue East and West is variable, according as the Sun ryseth and sets
daily in diverse points of the Horizon, which is distant from the points of the
true East and W^st, sometimes more to the Northward, and sometimes more to the
South.

The xv. Chapter, of the four less Circles.
Having entreated of the vi. biggest Circles, it remains to speak of the
four less Circles.

The less Circles.
A less Circle (as we have said before) is that, whose superficial divides
the Sphere into unequal parts, not passing by the Center thereof. And of
these, two are named Tropikes: Tropykes.
so named of Tropo the Greek word, which signifies Conuertion, because the
Sun coming to any of these Tropikes, is converted, and turns toward the
Equino^tiall. These Tropikes are described by the motion of the first moveable,
with the points of the Solstitials. The one with the beginning of Cancer, and
this is called the Tropike of Cancer, or E^tiuall, or Summer Tropike: The other
is described with the beginning of Capricorn, and is called the Tropike of
Capricorn, or Hiemall, or Winter Tropike. These two Tropikes and the Pola^
Circles (whereof I will say more hereafter) are called Paralelles: Paralelles.
so named, for that they are equally distant by their circumferences one from
an other, as well as from the Equinoctial. The Polar Circles are described in
this manner: The Polar Circles.
so that as the Zodiac declineth from the Equinoctial, so do the Poles of
the Zodiac decline from the Poles of the world. The Poles of the zodiac,
and Poles of the world.
And as the eight Sphere is moved at the motion of the first mooueable, so
shall the Zodiac move, which is part of the Sphere. And the Zodiac being
moved, his Poles shall likewise move above the Poles of the world. The
great^^^ declination of the Sun.
And as the Poles of the Zodiac are distant from the Poles of the world
xxiii. degrees and a half (which is as much as the greatest declination) they
shall describe certain circles distaunt from the Poles of the world, in the
self same xxiii. degrees and a half. These Polar Circles, take their name or
dominion of that Pole of the world that is most near unto them, and therefore
is the one called Artyke, The Artyk^, and Antartike.
and the other Antartyke.

The xvj. Chapter, of the five Zones.
THE ancient Astronomers divided the Sphere into v. Zones. The Sphere divided
into five zones.
The first, from the Pole Artyke, to the Circle Artyke. The second, from the
Circle Artyke, to the Tropike of Cancer. The third, from the Tropike of
Cancer, to the Tropike of Capricorn. The fourth, from the Tropike of
Capricorn, to the Circle Antartike. The fyfth, from the Circle Antartyke, to
the Pole Antartyke. Of these five Zones, Zones habitabl^ and uninhabitable.
they have certain knowledge, that two of the Poles were uninhabitable for
extreme cold: and also that the burnt Zone (called Torrida Zona) whereby the
Sun passes by the midst of them, should be uninhabitable for extreme heat.
That from the Tropike of Capricorn, unto the Circle Antartyke, they called
desert, because they knew not that it was inhabited. And this our Zone, The
division of the earth according to the five zones of heaven.
that is, from the Tropike of Cancer, to the Circle Artyke, they called
inhabited, or habitable. And to have more perfect knowledge hereof, it is to
imagine, that the earth is divided proportionally into five Regions or
Portions, which answer directly to the said five Zones, as says the Poet
Ovid in this Uerse.

Totidemque plage, tellure praemuntur. ( That is)
And so many Regions, are on the earth beneath.
Every of these Regions or portions of the earth, is situate under one of the
five Zones aforesaid. But whereas certain men of authority have moved the
question, whether the earth under the Zone, from the Tropike of Cancer, to the
Circle Antartyke, is desert or no: Ptolomie, An error of Ptolomie and the
Astronom^^.
and the Astronomers affirm, that it is unpeopled. But Aristotle, Ovid in the
second of his Metamorphoses, Pliny also, and John de Sacro bosco, affirm the
contrary: as for the more certainty thereof we know the experience of such as
go and come daily from those parts. Moreover then this, we know that that
land is not only well replenished with people of good corporature, and of
white color, but the same to be also very rych in Gold. For they that sail
to the East Indies, touch in the cape of Buena speranza, or Caput bone Spei,
which is in this Zone. Likewise the land of Brasile, The land of Brasile.
and the confynes of Rio de la Plata, with all the coast, unto the straights of
Magalianes, even unto the 54. degrees of the south part. The straights of
Magalianes
This land was discovered by Magalianes, in the year 1520^ or 1521. whereby
that is now we^l known by sight, whereof Ptolome had no knowledge by hear
say. The ^^rnt Zone (called Torrida Zona) they also described to be
uninhabitable, by reason of the great heat thereof, as Aristotle, P^inie, and
in manner all other ancient aucthors affirm: whereof the Poet Virgil writes
thus. Quinque tenent coelum Zonae, quarum vna corrusco.
Semper sole rubens, and torrida semper ab igne.
Which in the English tongue is thus much to say in effect. In Zones five, the
heavens contained be,
Whereof the one with burning Sun is red:
Scorching the Earth subject to his degree,
That for the heat thereof it is uninhabited.
Likewise Ouide in his Metamorphoses, touches the same, saying. Quarum quae
media est, and torrida semper ab igne. etc.
Yet that the burnt zone is inhabited, and well replenyshed with people that
live there, we know so certaynely by the number of them that daily pass too
and fro the Indies of your Majesty discovered, The West Indies.
in your most happy days, that to say any thing to the contrary, it should be
a manifest error, and therefore is it greatly to be marueyled, that certain
wise men have affirmed these parts to be uninhabitable: whereas nevertheless
they had knowledge of Arabia, Foelix, Aethiopia, Tabrobana, and diverse other
Regions situate under the burnt Zone. Pliny writes, that a Ship came from the
sea of Percia by the Ocean, round about Ethiope, and came to the pyllers of
Hercules, which is now the City of Cadiz, where at this present I write this
brief treatise. They of Guinca, Calicut, Gatigara, and Malaca, live all under
the burnt Zone, People of long life under the zone.
and many of them live very long. And doubtless, many things ought to persuade
us, that under the burnt zone, the earth is furnished with all things
perteyning to the life of man: for that in that region, or portion of the
earth, is in manner continual Equiuoctiall, and the coldness of the night does
sufficiently temper the heat of the day. Again, they that inhabit under that
Zone, have two Summers, and two Winters in the year: Cold Regions habitable.
whereby is concluded that the ancient aucthours erred, not only in affyrming
this Zone to be uninhabitable by reason of the great heat thereof, but in like
manner erred, in affyrming the Zone that is between the circle Articke, and the
pole Articke, to be also uninhabited by reason of great cold. The contrary
whereof, we may well affirm, knowing as we know, that Island, Island.
with part of Gothland, Gothland^
Norway, Norway.
Russia, Russia.
and diverse other Lands, are inhabited and well peopled.

This is the figure and demonstration which follows.



The xvij. Chapter, of longitude and latitude, and of the proportion which the
less circles have to the great circle.
THE Sphere or globe of the earth, is also divided in breadth, The division of
the Sphere by longitude and latitude.
and in length. The breadth (which is called latitude) is by degrees: for from
the Equinoctial, to either of the two poles, is 90. degrees. The length (which
is called longitude) is by the degrees of the Equinoctial, which is divided in
^60. degrees. The first degree of longitude, does begin at a certain Meridian,
which passes by the Islands of the Canares, called the fyxed Meridian: and the
order of the numbering of the said longitude, is always toward the East. By
every degree of the said longitude in the Equinoctial, may be understood a
great circle (called Meridian) to pass, each one of them passing and meeting
the poles of the world, so that the said great circles, or meridians, does
divide every parallel or less circle, proportionally into 360. degrees: The
degre^^ of the Equinoctial circl^.
but we must not understand these degrees to be equal (that is to say) as
great in one circle, as in another: for the greater the circle is, the greater
is the degree in it: and the greater the parallel is, the nearer it is unto the
Equinoctial line. Every degree of the Equinoctial, conteyneth in longitude
60. minutes, so likewise it is to be understood of the degrees of latitude,
which be divided each one into 60. minutes of latitude, because the degrees and
minutes in the great circles, do not differ in their bigness the one from the
other: but the degrees in the paralels, as they are distaunt from the
Equinoctial, and come near to either of the two Poles, they diminish
consequently, so that one degree in the parallel, of 7. degrees of latitude,
does make in quantity but 59. minutes, and 33. seconds of the Equinoctial
circle: and to one degree in the parallel of 12. degrees of latitude, goes but
58. minutes, and 41. seconds of the Equinoctial, and to one degree in the
parallel of 16. degrees of latitude, there goes 57. minutes, and 41. seconds.

The Table of minutes, which every degree conteyneth in every of the paralelles.
G M S G M S G M S G M S G M S G M S 1 59 59 16 57 41 31 51 26 46 41 41 61 29 5
76 14 31 2 59 58 17 57 23 32 50 53 47 40 55 62 28 10 77 13 30 3 59 55 18 57 4
33 50 19 48 40 9 63 27 14 7^ ^2 2^ 4 59 51 19 56 44 34 49 45 49 39 22 64 26 18
79 11 27 5 59 46 20 56 23 35 49 9 50 38 34 65 25 21 80 10 25 6 59 40 21 56 1 36
48 32 51 37 46 66 24 24 81 9 23 7 59 33 22 55 38 37 47 55 52 36 56 67 23 27 82
8 21 8 59 25 23 55 14 38 47 17 53 36 7 68 22 29 83 7 19 9 59 16 24 54 49 39 46
38 54 35 16 69 21 30 84 6 16 10 59 5 25 54 23 40 45 58 55 34 25 70 20 31 85 5
14 11 58 54 26 53 56 41 45 17 56 33 33 71 1^ 32 86 4 11 12 58 41 27 53 28 42 44
35 57 32 41 72 18 32 87 3 8 13 58 28 28 52 59 43 43 53 58 31 48 73 17 33 88 2 5
14 58 13 29 52 29 44 43 10 59 30 54 74 16 32 89 1 3 15 57 57 30 51 58 45 42 26
60 30 0 75 15 32 90 0 0

The xviii. Chapter, of the circuit or compass of the Earth and Water,
according to the opinion of the ancient and latter aucthours.
IT may here appear to be necessary for our purpose, to declare what space
of the superficie of the earth or water, the ancient writers di^ suppose to
aunsweare to one degree of a greater circle in the heaven: for in diverse
countries, they used to count by diverse sorts of measures: as, the Latins
counted by miles, Myle^.
the Greeks by furlongs, Furlongs.
the Spaniards and Frenchmen by leagues, Leagues.
the Egyptians by signs or marks, and the Persians by saguas. But they all
agree, that four graynes of Barley make a finger breadth, Grain.
four fingers, Finger.
a hand breadth, four hands a ^oote, five foot, Foot.
a Geometrical pase (for two simple pases, Pase.
make five feet.) Also 125. Geometrical pases, make a furlong, eight
furlongs, one mile, which is a thousand pases: and three miles, one l^ague. In
Germany they make leagues of more feet, and in some places more then in
other. In France, they count thyr^ie leagues, to one degree. The Spaniards,
count sixteen leagues and two terces, and seventeen and a half for a degree
of the great ci^cle: this difference that one league is bigger then another,
may come hereof, that one Barley corn is bigger then another. But to our
purpose, let us give to every league three thousand pases, and to every pase
five foot, and so shall every league have xv. thousand foot. In the Cards of
the sea, that have their degrees of xvi. leagues and two terces, The degre^^ of
the sea Cards.
we say, that of these, the roundenesse of the land and the water conteyneth
six thousand leagues. And in the Cards that have seventeen leagues and a
half for a degree, of these we say that it conteyneth six thousand and three
hundred leagues. And who so desires to know how much is the Diameter of the
earth and water, The diameter of the earth and water.
may know it by multiplying the circumference by seven, so that dividing the
sum that rises thereof by twenty and two, the part that ryseth of that
calculation, shall be the Diameter: and the half thereof^ shall be the
semidiameter.

The xix. Chapter, of the seven Climates.
THE ancient aucthours did also divide that part of the superficie of the
earth, Division of the earth and water by Climates.
on the North side of the Equinoctial, which they supposed to be most
habitable, into seven Climates, wherein they did find to be diverse conditions
and customs of men, Diversities of things in diverse Climates.
and diversities of beasts, and of other natural things: the which things
they perceived to have a diuers^tie in the countries, as where the day of the
one did increase or differ above the day of the other by half an hour, so
that the space of the superficial of the earth between two paralelle lines,
wherein the longest day does increase or differ by half an hour, is called a
Climate. The place where they suppose the first climate to begin, What is ^
climate.
is distant in Latitude from the Equinoctial by 12. degrees, and 45. minutes,
where the longest day is 12. hours, Differenc^ of days.
and 45. minutes, and the place where the last climate does finishe, is in the
Latitude of 50. degrees, and 30. minutes, where the longest day is 16. hours,
and 15. minutes, The space of s^^^n climates
so that the increase of the longest day in the end of the seventh climate,
does exceed it in the beginning of the first climate by three hours and an
half: and the whole compass of the earth, with all the seven climates, does
conteyne in breadth 37. degrees, and 45. minutes, but their length is supposed
to extend to 180. degrees of longitude. In that manner, a climate, the near it
is unto the Equinoctial, the more it conteyneth of the superficial of the
earth, because the paralelle circles, the nearer they be unto the Equinoctial,
The quantiti^ ^f the l^ss^ circl^^.
the greater is the compass of the earth which they make in length, and the
lesser the compass is, the nearer they be unto the poles, as does appear
evidently by the Meridians, where they do all concur, and meet in the
poles, their distaunces waxes continually lesser and lesser, the nearer they
be unto the said poles, so that the nearer the climate is unto the pole, the
lesser it conteyneth of miles in the length. In like manner shall you
understand, that greater is the breadth of the first clime, then of the second,
and the second then the third, and likewise of the other. For in how much the
more the Equinoctial you come near to the pole, so much the more is the Sphere
oblique or crooked, and consequently the day increases more: by reason
whereof, The Latitude of Climates.
in less space is found the increases of half an hour, in which the climate
makes difference and does varye. Which thing shall be more manifest to him
that beholds the Latitude of them all, as may appear by the Table here
following: In which you may see the hours which the greatest day conteyneth
of every climate in his beginning, midst, and end, with also the elevation
of the Pole, or dista^nce from the Equinoctial, and also the degrees of
Latitude, which every Climate conteyneth.

The longest day. The elevation of the Pole. Differences of the latitude.
Climates. Beginning. Midst. End. beginning. Midst. End. Ho. M Ho. M Ho. M G M G
M G M G M 1 12 45 13 0 13 15 12 45 16 40 20 30 7 45 2 13 15 13 30 13 45 20 30
24 15 27 30 7 0 3 13 45 14 0 14 15 27 30 30 45 33 40 6 10 4 14 15 14 30 14 45
33 40 36 24 39 0 5 20 5 14 45 15 0 15 15 39 0 41 20 43 30 4 30 6 15 15 15 30 15
45 43 30 45 24 47 15 3 45 7 15 45 16 0 16 15 47 15 48 40 50 30 3 15

The first Climate, is called Dia Meroes. Dia M^r^^.
Meroe is a City of Aphrike, under the burnt Zone, on this side the
Equinoctial, 16. degrees.

The second, is called Dia Siena. Dia Sien^
Siena is a City in the con^ines of Ethiope, where there is a well that
shows the Summer solstitiall, because that place is under the circle of the
Tropike of Cancer, and the Sun seems to stand directly over that place at
mydday of the solsticiall, whereby the well is then very clear, and has in it
no shadow at all: as the Poet Lucan makes mention in Farsalia, where he says.

Vmbras nusquam flectentes.
That is to say, Shadows no where reflecting.

The third is. Dia Alexandros. Dia Alexandros.
Alexandria is a famous City in Aphrike, builded by great Alexander, and is
the chief City or Metropolis of Egypt.

The fourth is, Dia Rhodos. Dia Rhodos.
Rodes is an Island of Asia the less, where were sometime the Knights of the
Rhodes, called the Knights of the order of Saint John, knights of the Rhodes.
or Knights of Jerusalem, who were driven from thence, when the Island and
City was taken by Solton Suliman the great Turk, The Rhod^^ taken by the
Turk.
in the year 1522. Philippe Vrlerio Frencheman, being then graund Master of
the Rhodes. Within this fourth Climate, is the City of Jerusalem, within the
holy land called Palestina, and also a great part of Spain, with many other
Provinces.

Dia Romes.
The fyfth, is Dia Romes. Rome is the most famous City of Italy, and most
notorious of all Europe, sometime the head of the world, dommatrix of Nations,
and now the Sea of the Bishop of Rome.

Dia Boristhenes.
The syxth, is Dia Boristhenes. Boristhenes is a great River of Scithia, the
fourth arm of the river Istro. It falls into the sea Euxinum: and where as
all other rivers of Scithia are troubled, this is clear and fair, also
^olesome to be drunk, and full of Fyshes.

Dia Rifeos.
The seventh, and last Climate, is called Dia Rifeos. The Mountains called
Rifei, are famous in the part of Europe called Parmatia, and are cont^^^lly
covered with Snow. Out of these, spryngeth the river Tanais, The river Tanais.
well known in the world by fame. When it is written with ph, it is the name
of certain Mountains of Archadia. And here ought we not to be ignorant,
that whereas the aucthours assigned only seven Climates, they might have made
many more. And for that they judged the part of the Pole Antartike not to be
inhabited, they assigned no Climates thereto. Stoflerine added the eight
Climate, Stoflerine.
counting from the end of the seventh Climate, unto 57. degrees: and other
added more. In like manner describing Meridionall or South Climates, The
Meridian or South Climate.
we call them by the self same names, as we did the aforesaid Septentrionall,
or North Climates: saving that it is necessary to put before every of them
this Greek proposition Anti, which in the Latin tongue signifies Contra, or
Contrarium, (that is) contrary, or against. So that as we named the first North
Climate, Dia Meroes, we must to the first of the South, add this word Anti,
and so shall the first South Climate be named Anti Dia Meroes: The second,
Anti Dia Sienes, and so forth of the other, as is seen in the Figure here
following.



The xx. Chapter, of certain principles, that ought to be known for this
science.
Entreating of the Sphere, we have spoken of Circles, Circumferences, Centers,
Diameters, Lines, with such other words, appropriat to this science: The which,
what they are, it is convenient further to declare.

A right line, A right line.
is a short extention from point to point.

An angle, An angle.
is the touching of lines in one superficial, whose touch shall not be direct:
for if it be, it shall be a line, and not an angle. (...).
Solid is a body, which by deuisions has length, breadth, and depth.

A circl^.
A circle is a plain figure, contained under a line drawn in compass, in
whose midst is a point or prick, from the which all right lines coming
forth to the circular line that compasses it about, are equal.

The circumference of a circle, is a line that conteyneth the circle, The
circumference of a circle.
(that is to mea^e) that line to the which all right lines that proceed from
the center of the circle unto it, are equal: and this is called the roundnesse
of the circle.

The center of a circle.
The center of a circle, is that point or prick from the which all right lines
proceeding unto the circumference, are equal.

Di^meter
The Diameter of a circle, is a right line, which passing by the center of the
circle, and extending his ends to the circumference, divides it in two halfes.

Se^icircle
The half circle, is a plain figure, contained between the Diameter of the
circle, and the half circumference.

Zenith.
Zenith, is a point or prick imagined in the heaven, directly over the ^oppe of
any thing, as if we should imagine a right line to pass by the center of the
earth, extended from thence directly to heaven, and passing through the feet
and head of a man standing vpryght, so that the extremities or ends of this
line, should reach unto and touch the circumference of heaven: then the
imagined point or prick of heaven, where the end of the line touches, is
called Zenith, o^ point of the head, or vertical point. The same is to be
understood of a City, or any other thing, when we speak of the Zenith
thereof.

Ecc^ntricke.
Eccentricke, is a circle, which has his center distant, or divided from the
center of the world, and is described in the heaven of the Su^ne, imagining a
line from the center of the Eccentricke, to the center of the Sun, making a
complete revolution at the proper motion of the Sun, in the other heavens,
imagining a line from the center of his Eccentricke, to the center of his
Epicicle, and being moved a whole revolution at the proper motion of the
Epicicle.

The Epicicle, Epicicle.
is a circle, or little rundell fyxt in the deapth of the Eccentricke: in which
the Planet fyxed, and near to his center, is moved circularly.

The Auge, Auge.
is a point in the circumference of the Eccentricke, nearest unto the
firmament: or it may be said, that the Auge is a point fardest distant from
the earth. Aux in the Greek tongue, is as much to say, Oppos^^^ of Auge.
as the greatest longitude, or greatest elevation from the earth. The Opposite
of Auge, is an other point in the circumference of the Eccentricke, nearest
unto the earth, and fardest distant from the firmament.

Here ends the first part.
The second part, entreating of the motions of the Sun, and the Moon, and
of the effects caused thereby.
The first Chapter, of the course of the Sun in the Zodiac, and the
effects caused by the same.
WE have briefly spoken of the Sun, The Sun^e is the guide in Navigations.
and of the other heavens. But for as much as the Sun must be our mark,
guide, and governor in Navigations, whereof we intend to give perfect
instructions, it shall be necessary especially, and preci^ely, to declare the
course and motions thereof.

Therefore (as we have said) the Sun is moved under the Zodiac, The
moving of the Sunn^ under the zodiack^.
and upon his poles in the line Eclipticke, passing by the xii. signs,
beginning in the first degree of Aries, where he makes Equinox, that is to
say, he makes the day equal unto the night in all places. Then from Aries, he
enters and moves into Taurus, approaching nearer and nearer unto us on the
North part, whereby the length of the days are increased with us, and the
nyghtes are shortened. Then enters he into Gemini, and from Gemini into
Cancer, where in the beginning of the first degree he makes Solstice, and
touches the Summer or Estiuall Tropike, The Summer Tropicke.

Declination of the Sun.


and then are the days longest with us, and the nights shortest. Then
declyneth he no farther from the Equinoctial: but returning toward it,
passes by this sign, shortening the days to us, and lengthening the nights.
From this sign of Cancer, it enters into Leo, and passes by it into Uirgo,
and by it enters into the first degree of Libra, where he is in the
Equinoctial, and then he makes the other Equinox, so that the night is then
equal unto the day over all the world. And passing by this sign, goes
declyning from the Equinoctial toward the pole Antartike, increasyng the
nyghtes to us, and shortening the days: and so enters into Scorpio, and from
thence into Sagittarius. And passing by it, enters into the first degree of
Capricorn, to the Hyemall or Winter Tropike: The Winter Tropike.
and then are the longest nyghtes unto us, and the shortest days. From hence
he returns toward the Equinoctial, shortening unto us the nyghtes, and
lengthening the days. He passes by this sign of Capricorn, and enters into
Aquarius: and passing by it, enters into Pisces: and passing from thence, The
cause of increasing and decreasing of the day and nyghtes.
returns to his first point of the Equinoctial of Aries, wh^^e he beg^n.
Hereby it follows, that as the Sun goes the half of the Zodiac on this
part of the Equinoctial, and the other half on the other part of it, and in
these halfes has diverse declinations, is caused the increasing or decreasing
of the days and nyghtes, to one more, and to another less, according as every
one with his Horizon discovers of the course of the Sun, by the little or
much that he is departed or distant from the Equinoctial, or as the pole is
raised above his Horizon. So that when as to them that are on this part of the
Equinoctial, is the longest day and the shortest night: even so to them on the
other part, is the longest night, and shortest day. And contrariwise, when unto
us is the shortest day, unto them is the longest, which shall further appear
by evident demonstration in the last Chapter of the third part.

The discreet Reader shall here note, The moving of the Sun in the center
of his Sphere.
that the Sun is not moved regularly in the Zodiac, making so much by his
proper motion in one day, as in the other, because his reguler motion is in
respect of the center of his own proper sphere or orb wherein he is moved,
whose center is distaunt without the center of the world, toward that part of
Cancer, so that the greater part of his orb eccentricke, is toward the
septentrionall part, where the Sun passing by the septentrionall signs, is
more distaunt from the earth, and has more to go of his orb eccentricke,
then being in the South signs: for passing by the North signs, he ^aryeth
nine days more, to describe that half of the Zodiac, then the other half
toward the South part, and for that cause the Sun is more swifter in his
motion in the Zodiac one time then another, for his motion in one day in the
South signs, shall be greater then it is in one day in the North signs, as
shall appear in the table that follows: whose use is, for the fynding of the
motion and true place of the Sun in the Zodiac for every day of the year.
And hereby it follows of the said unequal moving of the Sun, and by the
obliquite of the Zodiac, certain days of Wi^ter, with their ^yghtes, are
longer then certain other of Summer, with their nyghtes: that is to say, that
the day natural in the Winter, does surmount that in the Summer, because the
right assension, which answeareth to one days motion of the Sun, being in
the South signs, is greater then the assension for one days moving, being in
the North signs.

The ij. Chapter, of the true place of the Sun in the Zodiac.
THE true place of the Sun is a point or prick in the Zodiac, To find the
true place of the (...).
which is thus found: that drawyng a right line from the center of the world,
to the center of the sun, and carrying the same continually right forth unto
the Zodiac, where this line shows or touches, that is the true place of the
Sun. This place is found in three manners. One way, by a table: another way,
by an instrument: and the third way, by a certain rule, to be borne in
memory. To find the true place of the Sun by a table, The equ^^ion of the
ye^re.
seek in the table following, the month that you are in, in the front or head
of the table, and the days of the month, on the left side of the table. Then
directly against the days, under the little of the months, you shall find
two numbers, which are the degrees and minutes of the sign which you shall
first find, named over the head, or above the said numbers. T^en to the
degrees and minutes which you shall find, you shall add the equation, that is
directly of the year in the which you are, or seek to know. And this shall
you seek in the table of equations, which is after this: and that which does
amount or rise thereof, shall be the true place of the Sun. And here is to
be noted, that in the com^on years (which are they that have not the bisextile
or leap years) from the end of February, until the end of the year (I
say of December) shall ever one degree be diminished or taken away: and the
degrees and minutes that shall remain, is the true place of the Sun. How to
know this by an instrument and by memory, shall be said in the seventh
Chapter.

The Table of the true place of the Sun.
Months January. February. March. Apryll. May. June. Signs. Caprico. Aquarius.
Pisces. Aries. Taurus. Gemini. Days. G M G M G M G M G M G M 1 20 22 21 53 20
55 21 24 20 21 19 55 2 21 24 22 54 21 55 22 22 21 18 20 52 3 22 25 23 54 22 54
23 21 22 16 21 49 4 23 26 24 55 23 54 24 19 23 11 22 46 5 24 27 25 55 24 53 25
17 24 13 23 43 6 25 28 26 56 25 53 26 16 25 8 24 40 7 26 30 27 56 26 52 27 14
26 6 25 37 8 27 31 28 56 27 52 28 12 27 3 26 34 9 28 32 29 57 28 51 29 10 28 0
27 31 10 29 33 57 29 50 8 28 58 28 28 11 35 1 57 49 1 6 29 55 29 25 12 1 36 2
58 1 48 2 4 52 22 13 2 37 3 58 2 47 3 2 1 50 1 19 14 3 38 4 58 3 46 4 0 2 47 2
16 15 4 39 5 58 4 45 4 58 3 44 3 13 16 5 40 6 58 5 44 5 56 4 41 4 10 17 6 41 7
58 6 43 6 54 5 38 5 7 18 7 42 8 58 7 42 7 52 6 36 6 4 19 8 43 9 58 8 41 8 49 7
33 7 1 20 9 44 10 58 9 39 9 47 8 30 7 58 21 10 45 11 58 10 38 10 45 9 27 8 55
22 11 46 12 58 11 37 11 43 10 24 9 52 23 12 47 13 57 12 36 12 40 11 21 10 49 24
13 48 14 57 13 34 13 38 12 18 11 46 25 14 48 15 57 14 33 14 36 13 15 12 43 26
15 49 16 56 15 32 15 33 14 12 13 40 27 16 50 17 56 16 30 16 31 15 10 14 37 28
17 51 18 56 17 29 17 28 16 7 15 34 29 18 51 19 56 18 28 18 26 17 4 16 31 30 19
52 19 27 19 23 18 1 17 29 31 20 52 20 25 18 58

The Table of the true place of the Sun.
Months. July. August. September. October. Noue^ber. Dece^ber. Signs. Ca^cer.
Leo. Virgo. Libra. Scorpio. Sagittari^ Days. G M G M G M G M G M G M 1 18 26
18 ^ 18 4 17 39 18 49 19 24 2 19 23 1^ ^ 19 2 18 39 19 50 20 26 3 20 20 19 58
20 1 19 38 20 51 21 27 4 21 17 20 55 21 0 20 38 21 52 22 29 5 22 14 2^ 53 21 58
21 38 22 53 23 30 6 23 11 22 51 2^ 57 22 38 23 54 24 31 7 24 8 23 48 23 56 23
38 24 55 25 33 8 25 5 24 46 24 55 24 38 25 56 26 34 9 26 2 25 44 25 54 25 39 26
57 27 36 10 27 0 26 42 26 53 26 39 27 58 28 37 11 27 57 27 40 27 52 27 39 28 59
29 39 12 28 54 28 38 28 51 28 39 0 40 13 29 51 29 36 29 50 29 39 1 1 1 42 14 48
^ 34 49 39 2 3 2 43 15 1 46 1 32 1 48 1 40 3 4 3 45 16 2 43 2 30 2 47 2 40 4 5
4 46 17 3 40 3 28 3 46 3 40 5 6 5 48 18 4 38 4 26 4 45 4 41 6 8 6 49 19 5 35 5
24 5 45 5 41 7 9 7 51 20 6 32 6 22 6 44 6 42 8 1^ 8 52 21 7 30 7 21 7 44 7 42 9
11 9 54 22 8 27 8 19 8 43 8 43 10 12 10 55 23 9 25 9 17 9 42 9 43 11 13 11 57
24 10 22 10 16 10 42 10 44 12 14 12 58 25 11 20 11 14 11 41 11 45 13 15 13 59
26 12 17 12 13 12 41 12 45 14 16 15 1 27 13 15 13 11 13 41 13 46 15 18 16 2 28
14 12 14 10 14 40 14 47 16 19 17 3 29 15 10 15 8 15 40 15 47 17 20 18 5 30 16 7
16 7 16 39 16 48 18 22 19 6 31 17 5 17 5 17 49 22 20 7

The Table of the Equation of the Sun.
The years of our lord The equation to be added. The years of our lord The
equation to be added. The years of our lord The equation to be added. The years
of our lord The equation to be added. G M G M G M G M 1545 R1 0 1581 1 16 1617
1 32 1653 1 48 1546 45 1582 1 1 ^618 1 17 1654 1 33 1547 30 1583 46 1619 1 2
1655 1 18 1548 15 1584 32 1620 47 1656 1 3 1549 1 2 1585 1 18 1621 1 33 1657 1
49 1550 47 1586 1 3 1622 1 18 1658 1 34 1551 32 1587 48 1623 1 3 1659 1 19 1552
18 1588 33 1624 49 1660 1 4 1553 1 4 1589 1 ^9 1625 1 35 1661 1 51 1554 49 1590
1 4 1626 1 20 1662 1 36 1555 34 1591 49 1627 1 25 1663 1 21 1556 19 1592 35
1628 51 1664 1 7 1557 1 05 1593 1 21 1629 1 37 1665 1 53 1558 50 1594 1 ^6 1630
1 22 1666 1 38 1559 35 1595 51 1631 1 7 1667 1 23 1560 21 1596 37 1632 53 1668
1 9 1561 1 7 1597 1 23 1633 1 38 1669 1 55 1562 52 1598 1 8 1634 1 23 1670 1 40
1563 37 1599 53 1635 1 8 1671 1 25 1564 23 1600 39 1636 54 1672 1 10 1565 1 9
1601 1 25 1637 1 40 1673 1 56 1566 54 1602 1 10 1638 1 5 1674 1 41 1567 39 1603
55 1639 1 10 1675 1 26 1568 25 1604 40 1640 56 1676 1 12 1569 1 11 1605 1 26
1641 1 42 1677 1 58 1570 56 1606 1 11 1642 1 27 1678 1 33 1571 41 1607 56 1643
1 12 1679 1 28 1572 26 1608 32 1644 8 1680 1 13 1573 1 12 1609 1 28 1645 1 44
1681 R2 1574 57 1610 1 13 1646 1 29 1682 1 45 1575 42 1611 58 1647 1 14 1683 1
30 1576 28 1612 44 1648 1 0 1684 1 15 1577 1 14 1613 1 30 1649 1 46 1685 2 2
1578 59 1614 1 15 1650 1 31 1686 1 4 1579 44 1615 1 10 1651 1 16 1687 2 32 1580
29 1616 46 1652 1 2 1688 1 8

This Table of the Equation of the Sun, serves from the year of 1545. where
it has his root or beginning, until 1680. and in the year of 1681. it shall
return to the root, adding thereunto one degree more. As for example. In the
year of 1681. add one degree upon the other degree that the root has, and
so shall the year of 1681. have two degrees of Equation, and the year of
1682. shall have one degree, and 45. minutes, which is to add one degree upon
45. minutes, that had the year of 1546. etc. And having passed other 136.
years, you shall return to the root, adding two degrees.

The iij. Chapter, of the declination of the Sun.
THE declination of the Sun, is the arcke of the greater Circle, What is the
declination of the Su^^e.
which passes by the Poles of the world, included between the Equ^noctiall
and the Zodiac. And here is to be noted, that whatsoever four points or
pricks which are equally distaunt from the points of equinoxes (which are the
beginnings of Aries and Libra) shall have equal declinations.

Whereof if follows, that the four quarters of the Zodiac have equal
declinations. And to avoid prolixitie, I will add hereunto a Table of the
declinations of only one quarter of the Zodiac, so that all having one self
same manner of declinations, it may serve for all, and the order of it is this.
The signs whose declination increases, are in the head or front of the Table,
and the degrees of these signs descend by the left side thereof. And the
signs whose declination decreaseth, are in the foot of the Table, and the
degrees of these signs, rise by the right side of the same. The disposition of
the Table being understood: then to know what declination the Sun has in
every degree of the Zodiac, you ought Signs Signs G G M G M G M G 0 0 11 30
20 12 30 1 0 24 11 51 20 25 29 2 0 48 12 12 20 37 28 3 1 12 12 33 20 49 27 4 1
36 12 53 21 0 26 5 2 0 13 13 21 11 25 6 2 23 13 33 21 22 24 7 2 47 13 53 21 32
23 8 3 11 14 13 21 42 22 9 3 35 14 32 21 51 21 0 3 58 14 51 22 0 20 11 4 22 15
10 22 9 19 12 4 45 15 28 22 17 18 13 5 9 15 47 22 25 17 14 5 32 16 5 22 32 16
15 5 55 16 23 22 39 15 16 6 19 16 40 22 46 14 17 6 42 16 57 22 52 13 18 7 5 17
14 23 57 12 19 7 28 17 31 23 3 11 20 7 50 17 47 23 8 10 21 8 13 18 3 23 12 9 ^2
8 35 18 19 23 15 8 ^3 8 58 18 34 23 19 7 24 9 20 18 49 23 22 6 ^5 9 42 ^9 4 23
24 5 26 10 4 19 18 23 ^6 4 27 10 26 ^9 32 23 28 3 8 10 47 19 46 23 29 29 11 9
19 59 23 30 1 30 11 30 20 12 23 30 0 Signs Signs to know the true place of
the Sun (as in the Chapter past is declared) for the day of the declination
which you desire to know, and the sign which the Sun shall be found in that
day, shall you seek in the front or foot of the Table. And if it be in the
front, you shall seek the number of the degrees on the left side. And if it
shall be at the foot of the Table, you shall seek it on the right side. Then
above or under the sign, in the front of that degree of the said sign, you
shall find two numbers, whereof the first is of degrees, and the second of
minutes: and those degrees and minutes of declination the Sun has that day.
And this is understood without having respect to the odd minutes above the
degree, which the true place of the Sun has.

And if you desire to veryfie this more precisely, note the declination of that
degree, and of the degree following: and take the less from the more, and that
which remay^eth, shall be the difference of the declination from the one degree
to the other, of which difference ye shall take a part propo^tio^ally, as are
the minutes of the place of the S^nne unto 60. And this part of minutes must be
added to the first declination of it, and be less then the second, or must be
taken from it if it shall be g^eater, and then that rises thereof, shall be the
precise declination for that sign, degree, and minute. As for example. In the
year 1546. the tenth day of September, the Sun shall be in 26. G. 38. M. of
Virgo, and to the 26. G. precise, shall correspond 1. G. 36. M. of declination.
And to verif^e the declination that comes to 38. minutes, which is more of
the 26. G. you must mark the difference that is from the declination of 26. G.
(which is one G. 36. M.) to the declination of the 27. G. which is 1. G. 12. M.
The difference is 24. M. Of these you must take such part proportionally, as
the 38. minutes bears unto 60. which are almost two terces of a degree. Then
the two terces of 24. are 16. which must be taken from one degree 36. M. which
correspond to the 26. G. of Virgo, because the declinatio^s go decreasyng, and
remains 1. G. 20. M. and if the declinations increase, you must add thereto,
as you take away when they decrease.

An other example for this year of 1561.
Example for the year 1561. the 20. of Apryll, I find the true place of the
Sun at noone, in 9. degrees 54. minutes of Taurus: then in the Table of the
signs present, I seek for 9. degrees of Taurus, to which does answer for
the declination 14. degrees. 32. minutes, and to the next degree following, does
answer 14. degrees 51. minutes: then take the lesser out of the more, so
rests 19. minutes. Then from a rul^ of 3. and say, if 60. minutes give 54.
mi^utes (which 54. minutes does rest before of the 9. degrees of Taurus) how
many does 19. minutes give? which 19. minutes are the diversity of the 9. and
10. degrees of Taurus. S^ I find, that 19. minutes gives 17. minutes, and 6.
seco^des, which 17. m^nutes, and 6. secondes, I add to the 14. degrees 23.
minutes, which answeareth to the 9. degrees of Taurus. And it comes to
fourteen degrees. 49. minutes, and six secondes, which is the true
declination for the twenty day of Apry^l. Anno. 1561.

It is also to be noted, that I add these seventeen minutes and six
secondes, because the declination does increase: for if it decreased, it were
to be taken out so much, and the rest is the declination. So is the declination
for the twenty of Apryll in the year 1561. fourteen degrees. 49. minutes,
and six secondes.

The iiij. Chapter, of the increase of the Sun into the twelve Signs. And of
the Equinoctials and Solstitials which divide the four times of the year.
OF that is said in the Chapter before, The entrance of the Sun into the
fou^^ principal signs.
it follows that the sun entering into the four principal signs, causes
the four times of the year. For entering into Aries, it changes the time to
us from winter to the spring time. And entryng into Cancer, it changes the
time from spryng to summer. And entering into Libra, from summer to Autumn.
Likewise entering into Capricorn, it changes from Autumn to Winter. So that
when to us that be on the part of the North, is summer, then is it winter to
them that are on the South part. Or contrarywyse, being summer to them on the
South, it is winter to them on the North. The en^rance of the sun into these
signs, and all other of the Zodiac, has not been ever at one self same
time of the year. The cause of this is, that the Latin y^ere is not equal
with the moving of the s^nne in the Zodiac, The Latin^ year.
as shall be said in the x. Chapter, The E^uinoctialles in the y^ere of Christ^s
birth.
where we will entreat of the year. In the time that Christ our redeemer was
borne, were the Equinoctialles. The one at the eight of the ^ale^des of Apryll,
and the other at five of the kalendes of October: So that they had the
Equinoctial of the Spryng, at the xxv. of March, and the Equinoctial of
Autumn, at the xxvii. of September, as writes John Baptist Capuano, upon the
second Chapter of the Sphere of Johan. De sacro bosco. They judged then the
Solsticialles, The Solsti^^^ls.
as that of the Somme^, at the eight day of the kalendes of July, which is the
xxiiii. of June: the other of the Winter, they judged at the eight day of the
kalends of I^nuarie, which is the xxv. of December. And here will I not omit
to say how in those times, at these four days (that is to mean, in the two
Solstitialles and two Equinoctialles) were celebrated, or did chance four
marvelous things in the world.

For in the spring Equinoctial, which was at the xxv. of March, the Son of
GOD was inca^nate, and afterward borne of the Uirgin Marie in the Solstitiall
of Winter, ^our notable things.
which was at the xxv. of December.

In the Equinoctial of Autumn, which was the xxvii. of September, was
conceived blessed John Baptist, the crier and precursour of Christ: and was
borne in the summer Solsticiall, that was the xxiiii. of June. And this is the
syxth Month whereof Saint Luke speaks in the Gospel. Which thing also John
Chrysostom does veryfie, saying that S. John was borne when the days began
to decrease, and our Lord when they began to increase. And it may certaynely
seem worthy to be had in memory, that in the said Equinoctial of the
spring, Christ suffered, Adam was created and lost the estate of innocencye,
Abel was slain, Melchisedech offered bread and wine, Isahac by Abraham was
brought to be sacrificed, John Baptist was beheaded at Macherunta, Peter
delivered out of prison, Saint James beheaded by Herod, the good Thief
enjoyed Paradise, and the bodies of many Saints rose with Christ. And who so
further desires more precisely to know the entrance of the Sun into Aries,
To know more precisely the entrance of the Sun into the four principal
^ign^^.
and into the other principal signs, shall in the third part of this
work, in the eight Chapter, find rules which shall bring him to the
knowledge thereof. B^t ^o return to our time, I say that this present year of
1545. the Sun enters into the first degree of Aries, at the tenth of
March, at four of the clock at after noone, and into the first degree of
Taurus the nynth of Apryll 2. hours, and 7. minutes, and into Gemini the 11.
of May 2. hours and six minutes, into Cancer the 11. of June. 14. hours. 44.
minutes, into Leo the 13. of July. 3. hours. 50. minutes, into Virgo the 13.
of August 9. hours 56. minutes, into Libra the 13. of September 4. hours 4.
miuutes, into Scorpio the 13. of October. 7. hours 13. minutes into Sagittarie
the 12. of November just at noone, into Capricorn the 11. of December 8.
hours 16. minutes, into Aquarius the 9. of January. 2. hours, one minute,
into Pisces the 8. of February 1. hour 30. minutes after midday (that is to
say) from noone 1. hour 30. minutes. To know when the Sun enters into
every of the xii. Sign^^
And that we may in the years to come, know the day, hour, and minute, in
the which the Sun enters into every sign, we will follow this order.

Upon the days, hours, and minutes, that the Sun enters into every sign
this said year. 1545. we must add for every year five hours and 49.
minutes, which with the 365. days, which every year conteyneth, shall be the
time in the which the Sun accomplysheth his Revolution. Leap ye^r^.
And because that in the year of the Bisextile or Leap year, is added to
February one day more to his 28. which he has once in four years, from 6.
to 6. hours, if we shall take from the computation that which we have given
him, turning one day backward (as shall be in the year 1548.) and upon that
that remains shall return in the year following of 1549. to add five ho^res
49. minutes, and as much more every other year following, shall be a certain
rule for ever.

And it is to note, that the degrees and minutes which we have touched before,
are properly for the City of Cadiz. And if we desire to apply them for other
Cities or places more Eastwarde: then for every xv. degrees that they are
distaunt from Cadiz in longitude, we must add one hour. And if for Cities, or
places more W^stward^ Variation of hours by the rapte moving of the Sun from
the East to the West.
in like manner for every xv. degrees we must take away one hour, by reason of
the course of the Sun by his rapte moving from the East to the West. For it is
certain, that when with us in Cadiz it is xii. hours of the clock, t^ them
that are xv. degrees Eastward from us, it is one of the clock, and to them that
are from us xv. degrees toward the West, it is xi. of the clock.

Now that we have Rules to know the entrance of the Sun into the xii.
signs, thereby may we also know his entrance into the four C^^dinall or
principal signs, which are they that determine and end the Equinoctialles
and Solstitialles, whereby are caused the four times of the year. And
forasmuch as the general change of times, is by reason of the Sun, The
entrance of the Sun into the iiii. principal signs, causes the change of
time.
who by his coming near, warmeth, by his remaining dries, with his
departure, cools, and by his long tarying away, causes maystnesse, we will
show the qualities of the principal winds, elements, regions, humors, and
ages, in one brief Table: and then consequently in an other will we describe
the beginning, midst, and end of the four times of the year, as well in the
months, as in the heavenly signs.

The Table of the qualities of the Elements.
Qualities. Hot and dry Hot and moist Cold and moist Cold and dry Parts of the
year Summer Spryng. Winter. Autumn. Principal winds East. South. West.
North. Elements. Fire. Air. Water. Earth. Regions. East. South. West. North.
4. Humors. Choler. Blood. Phlegm. Melancholy 4. Ages. Youth. Man's state. Aged.
Age.

The Table of the four times of the year.
Times. Beginning. Myddest. End. Spryng. March. Aries. Apryl. Taurus. May.
Gemini. Som^er. June. Cancer. July. Leo. August. Virgo. Autumn. Septem^.
Libra. October. Scorpio. Nouemb. Sagit. Winter. December. Capricor. Ianua. Aquar.
Februa. Pisces.

The v. Chapter, of the Moon, and of her motions and properties.
IN the Chapters past of this second part, The Sun and Moon are the
principal luminaries
we have entreated of the Sun, and of his motions and effects, as the most
noble and principal luminarie. In this present Chapter we will entreat of the
Moon, which is the second luminarie, although in the order of the heavens she
is the first, and nearest unto us of all other Planets or Stars.

The M^one therefore is a round body, of heavenly substance, solid and dark
in respect of the Sun, having no proper light of his own, but is apt to
receive light. She is moved from the West into the East, according to the
order of the signs, every day 13. degrees little more or less, and somewhat
more then 10. minutes, The Eclipse of the Moon
by the proper motion of the heaven or sphere upon the Ares and Poles of the
Zodia^ke. I said more or less, because that over and beside the moving of her
deferent or circle, which is moved every day the aforesaid 13. degrees and 10.
minutes, almost 11. she has an Eclipse where the Moon is fixed: at the motion
whereof, sometimes she is moved more sw^ftly, and sometimes more slowly:
Nevertheless, according to her self motion, she makes her course in 27.
days and almost 8. hours: The conjunction of the Moon with the Sun. The
Moon receives her light of the Sun.
and having no light of her own, she is lyghtened of the Sun, as manifestly
appears hereby, that being in conjunction with the Sun, or near unto him,
we see her not lyghtened: because the light which she then receives, is only
her uppermost or highest part, whereby she directly beholds the Sun,
forasmuch as he is in the fourth heaven, and she in the first. And departing
from the Sun by her prop^r moving, The aspect of the Moon to the Sun.
the Sun remains on the West part. Then toward that part we begin to see a
little of the part of the Moon lyghtened, and so more and more by little and
little, as she departs farther from the Sun. And at this time she has her
horns or corners toward the East, because the Sun is in the West. During
this time also, she is said to increase, or that she goes increasing unto the
opposition which we see, The increasing and opposition of the Moon.
by the part of her, which the Sun directly beholds. And so do we see her
altogether lyghtened, and call it the full Moon. Then passing from the
opposition, she comes nearer the Sun by little and little, being darkened and
hyd from us, and lyghtened only by her highest part: and this time is cal^ed
the decreasing or wane of the Moon. Then also has she her horns toward the
West, because the Sun is in the East: and this until she turn again in
conjunction with the Sun, and that we see her not lyghtened at all.

The Moon is less then the Stars or other Planets, except Mercury, The
bigness of the Moon.
and less then the earth. And if any shall affirm the contrary, saying, that
it is written in the first of Genesis, that God made two great lyghtes: the
greatest to give light to the day, and the less to lyghten the night, (as
David also affirms.) To this I answer, that the Moon being nearest unto
the earth, appears unto us greater then she should do, if she were further
distaunt from us. And although she be great of light (received as we have
said) and big of body, yet is she not great in respect of the other Stars.
And therefore the words of Genesis aforesaid, The Moon is ^earest unto the
e^^th.
may be understood to be spoken in such manner and phrase as holy Scripture
often uses, to humble and apply it self to the weakness of our
understanding, and grosenesse of our senses.

The vi. Chapter, of the conjunctions and oppositions of the Sun and the
Moon.
THE Sun and the Moon are moved under the Zodiac with diverse motions. The
Moon with a swifter motion then the Sun follows him, The motion of the
moon^.
ouertaketh him, and goes before him, until she place her self in Diameter
with him. And when she has thus overtaken him, so that they are both in one
selfsame degree of the Zodiac, then is the conjunction. The conjunction.
Then departing from him, and being in equal degrees of the signs opposite
according to the Diameter, is the opposition. To know the times of these
conjunctions and oppositions, The opposit^.
is very profitable and necessary for Mariners. These times may be known in
two manners. To know the times of oppositions and coniunctio^s.
One way, by the Ephimerides or Almanacke, or other tables, or Luna^ie
instruments. And by these means is known precisely the day, hour, and
minute of the conjunction and opposition. It may likewise be known by the
rules of computation, which are the rules that are known by memory, although
not precisely, as by the books aforesaid. And here is to be understood,
that from one conjunction to another, according to the half moouings of the
Sun and the Moon, there passes 29. days, twelve hours, and 44. minutes.
And consequent^y from conjunction to opposition, and from opposition to
conjunction, the half thereof, which is fourteen days 18. hours, and 22.
minutes. To know the^e conjunctions by rules of computat^on, is presupposed to
know the golden number, and by it, the concurrent or Epacte.

The golden number, To know the golden number.
is the number of nienteene years. In which time, the conjunctions of the
Sun and the Moon make all their varieties in the times of every year: so
that if the conjunction were the twelfth day of March in this year of 1545.
from this year in the nienteene years following, which shall be in the year of
1564. the conjunction shall return to be at the twelfth day of M^^che. It was
first called the golden number by the Egyptians, who first found the use
thereof, and sent it to Rome written in golden Letters. To find this number,
it is needful to know his roots, which is this. In the year that Christ our
Lord and redeemer was borne (whereby we make this account) the golden number
was the number of one, The roots of the golden number.
which was the year of the root or begi^^^ng: and the first year of the
birth of Christ, was two of the golden number. So that joining to the years of
our Lord one of the root or beg^^ning, and from all take away the nienteene,
then the rest shall be the golden number. And if you desire to make computation
by a nearer root, take for the root the year of 1500. when nienteene was the
golden number, and in the year of 1501. did begin one of the golden number,
and so consequently ever taking away the nienteene.

This present year of 1545. we have seven of the golden number. And in the
year of 1546. we shall have eight. etc.

The concurrent.
The golden number being known, it is necessary for this computation of the
Moon to know the concurrent. The concurrent of every year, is the number of
the days passed of the conjunction of the Moon at the beginning of March.
And the^e grow of the difference of the Solar year to the Lunar: The Solar and
Lunar years.
As the Lunar year has 354. days, and the Solar year 365. so having every
year eleven days of difference, which are added every year until they come
to the number of thyrtie, and passing thyrtie, those that do pass are of the
concurrent.

To find the number of the concurrent.
The number of the concurrent of every year, is found in this manner.

And the better to bear it in memory, you must imagine three places: and
these commonly are assigned on the thumb. As the first place at the root of
the thumb, the second in the middle joint thereof, and the third and last, in
the top of the thumb. Then ^n the first place put ten, in the second
twenty, and in the third thirty. Then by the order of these places shall be
compted the golden number: As one in the first place, two in the second, and
three in the third, returning four to the first place. etc. vnti^^ the golden
number of that year for the which the concurrent is sought. And the number of
that place where the golden number ends, must be joined with the number of
the golden number: and that does amount thereof, shall be the concurrent, so
that it pass not 30. But if it pass 30. then that that is more then 10. is
the concurrent of that year.

And here is to be noted, that the years of this computation of the Moon,
begin at the first day of March, and last until the last day of February, so
that this present year of 1545. by computation of the golden number, we have
seven: which accounted by the said places, ends in the first, which is 10.
which also joined with the golden number of seven, make 7. and so much is the
concurrent of this present year.

Likewise, this number of Epacte, Epact.
or concurrent, is found in multiplying the golden number by 11. and dividing
the sum by 30. then that remains, is the Epact or concurrent.

The concurrent being thus known, To know the days o^ ag^ of the Moon^.
then to know the days of the Moon, it is necessary to know three numbers.
The fyrst^ is the concurrent. The second, the number of the month in which you
are, beginning at March. The third, the days past of the same month. And
joining th^se three numbers, if they come not to 30. so many days old is the
Moon^. And if they be 30. it is the conjunction. And if they pass 30. they
also that pass, are the age of the Moon.

This is understood in the months that have 3^^ days, for in them that have
only 30. days, the conjunction is at the 29. day, and they that pass of 29.
are the age of the Moon. As for example.

The first day of August, of the concurrent 17. of months from March 6. and of
days of the month (...) make 24. and so much is the age of the Moon.

An other example. The tenth of September, of concurrent 17. of months seven,
of days ten, which are in all 34. And because that September has only 34.
days, we must take away 29. of the 34. and so rest five days, which are the
age of the Moon. And in like manner shall w^ give to February 29. days of
the Moon.

It followet^, To know t^^ day of the conjunction.
that the days of the Moon being known, then vnreckon^^g or disreck^ning
backewarde, we find for example. The 20. of July, the Moon has 12. days
taken from the 20. remains 8. Then the eight day was the conjunction.

The day of the conjunction is likewise known by joining the months
(beginning in March) with the concurrent, and if they come not to 30. then at
so many days of that month as lacks of 30. shall be the conjunction.

Example.
In August 6. of the months, and 17. of the concurrent, are 23. which of 30.
lacks 7. Then at the seventh day was the conjunction, and if they pass 30.
then taking them that pass from the number of the days which the month had
next before, and then that which remains, does show the day of the
conjunction. Like as the Moon of September of the year 1546. we shall count
the concurrent 28. of months 7. which are 35. Then taking away the 5. from
30. and one which August has, remains 26. and so the 26. of August, of the
year to come of 1546. the Moon shall make conjunction.

The vij. Chapter, of the declaration and use of an Instrument, by the which is
found the place and declination of the Sun, with the days and place of the
Moon.
To know the place of the Moon in the Zodiac, and what aspectes she has
with the Sun.
IN the second and third Chapter, I have given rules to know the true place
of the Sun, and his declination. In this Chapter I will describe an
instrument, whereby may be known the declination and place of the Sun, and
knowing by the Chapter past, the days of the Moon, shall also be known her
place in the Zodiac, and how much of her is lightened, and what aspect she
has with the Sun.

This Instrument is in square form, and has by the sides 23. degrees and a
half, of the which the 23. and a half that descend from the myddest
downward, The description of the Instrument.
is the declination of the South signs: and the other from the myddest
upward, are the declinat^ons of the North signs. Within this quadrature is
described a circle, by the circumference whereof, are the twelve signs and
their degrees, joined to the circumference: and further within, is the number
of them, and then their names. Yet further within this, is another circle,
where are the twelve months, with their numbers and days.

Then to the center of this circle, are annexed two rundelles, whereof the
greatest and lowest is called the rundel of the Sun.

This has an I^dex or shewer, in which is painted the Sun, and in the
circumference of it are the days of the age of the Moon. In the other circle,
in the circumference thereof, is a round hole, representing the Moon: directly
from the which, is another Index coming forth of the circumference of this
rundell, in which rundell are all the aspectes which the Moon makes with the
Sun.

Having described the Instrument, let us declare the use thereof, which is this.

First to find the true place of the Sun, The use of the Instrument to find
the tru^ place of the Sun.
we must put the Index of the rundell of the Sun, upon the day of the month
in which we are, or desire to know the place of the Sun. Then in the circle
of the signs, it shall show the sign and degree in the which it is: and in
like manner, resting still upon the degree, looking in the paralels that touch
in the circumference, and proceeding by that line that touches the Sun which
the Index does note, ye shall see in the side of the Instrument, the number of
the degrees of the declination which the Sun has at that day.

To find the place of the Moon, To find the place of the Moon.
we must hold the Index of the rundell of the Sun, fast upon the day of the
moves in the which we desire to know the place of the Moon. And accompting
in the rundell of the Sun, the days that have passed from the day of the
Conjunction (as I have said in the Chapter before) and where ends that
number of the days, if there we apply the index of the Moon, it shall show
in the circle of the signs, the place where she is. And so shall she appear
in the instrument lightened, or darkened, more or less as in heaven. In like
manner, consydering the place of the Sun and the Moon, shall be seen what
aspect they have, by the lines that trauerse the superficial of the Lunar
circle of the Moon.



The aspects which the Planets have one to another, or whereby they behold one
another, are five. Five aspecte^ of the Planets.


Conjunction is, when two Planets be under one self same degree and minute in
the Zodiac, Conjunction.
whos^ charact is this.

Opposition is, Opposition.
when between the place of the Planetes is half a circle, which are 180.
degrees, and is thus figured.

Trinall aspect is, Trinall.
when between the Planettes shall be four signs, which are 120. degrees, and
is figured thus.

Quadrine aspect is, quadrine.
when one Planet is distaunt from another by three signs, which are 90.
degrees, whose charact is this.

Sextile aspect is, Sexti^e.
when two signs are between them which are threescore degrees, and is marked
thus.

And if by memory you desire to know the true space of the sun, To know the
place of the Sun by the rule of memory.

To know in what degree the Sun is.


without respect of minutes (which may sufficiently be done with the
Astrolabie) bea^e in memory these numbers, 10.9.10.11.12.13.14.13.14.13.12. Of
the which the first serves for January, the second for February, with their
signs: and so of the rest. Then to know in what degree the sun is, you
shall take away the days that are applied to every Month, according to the
said numbers of the days for the which you desire to know the true place of
the sun, and in them that remain, in so many degrees is the sun of the
sign into the which it enters the Month. And if the days past of the
Month, shall be less then the days applied to the same Month: you shall join
thirty with those days past of the Month, and of the sum that amounts,
you shall take away the days applied to the said Month, and the rest shall be
the degrees in which the sun shall be of the sign of the Month past, as for
example.

Example.
January. 10 February. 9 March. 10 Apryll. 10 May. 11 June. 12 July. 13
August. 14 September. 13 October. 14 November. 14 December. 13

The 22. of October, taking away four^teene that were applied, remain eight
degrees of Scorpio, where the Sun is.

Another Example.
The six of December, which are lesser then twelve which is applied unto it,
if we join six to thyr^ie, which are the days of the month next before,
they make 36. and from them we take away the 12. rest 24. So in 24. degrees, is
the sun, of the sign of the month before, which is Sagittarie.

The viii. Chapter, of the Eclipse of the Moon and the Sun.
THe Eclipses of the sun and of the Moo^e, is a thing that causes great
fear and admiration among the common and ignorant people, and ^o them that
understand the cause thereof, nothing at all. And therefore have I thought g^od
to declare the effects thereof.

The Eclipse of the Moon.
The Eclipse of the Moon, is the interposition or being of the Earth between
her and the sun. And whereas the Moon has no proper light of her own, and
the earth, being dark and not transparent, makes his shadow on the part
opposite to the sun: the Moon by her proper motion does pass by this
shadow, and is Eclipsed or darkened either in the whole or in part, according
to the portion of her that passes by the shadow. More^uer (as we have said)
that only the sun is moved in the line Eclipticke, and the Earth being in
the center of the world, the point or prick of the shadow shall be under the
Eclipticke. The Moon decli^eth from the Eclipticke sometimes to the one part,
The moving of the Sun in the Eclipse.
and sometimes to the other, because her Eccentricke wherein she is moved, does
cut the Eclipticke equally into two halfes, so that the one half of the
Eccentricke, does decline from the Eclipticke toward the North part, and the
other half toward the South, and the greatest declination of it from the
Ecliptike, is 5. degrees. In that manner, the Moon shall be at no time in the
Eclipticke, but only when she shall be in either of the intersections where the
Eccentricke does cut the said Eclipticke. That intersetion where she passes
and goes ^oward the North part, is called the head of the Dragon, The head of
the Dragon.
and is marked thus. The other where she passes and declineth toward the
South part, is called the tail of the Dragon, The tail of the Dragon.
and is marked thus. And the Sun moving by his proper motion, and coming to
the head, then shall the shadow of the earth be in the tail, because it is
the point opposite. And if then the Moon come thither, The Sun is bigger
then the earth.
of her proper motion she passes by the shadow, The shadow of the earth.
and lacking light of the Sun, she is eclipsed. And if the Sun come to the
tail, the shadow is in the head, and then likewise shall the Moon be
eclipsed, if she pass by the head.

It is to understand, that the sun is much bigger then the earth, and by
perspectiue, the shadow of the earth in how much the farther it parts from
it, becomes sharper and sharper, until it come to a point: so that the
shado^^ of the whole earth, is piramidally sharp. And as the Moon is less
then the earth, yet (although his shadow goes sharpning) it suffiseth to
eclipse the Moon, if she pass by the midst thereof.

The Eclipse of ^h^ Sun.
The Eclipse of the Sun, is the interpos^tion of the Moon between us and the
Sun, as if the Sun be in the fourth heaven, and the Moon in the first, she
being a dark body, and by her proper motion overtake the Sun, then putting
her self between him and us, she covers him in part, or in the whole, and
this is the Eclipse of the Sun. As the Sun also goes ever under the
Ecliptykes, at that time that he comes to the head or tail of the Dragon, if
then the Moon make conjunction with him, shall be the Eclipse of the Sun, for
as much as they are both under the Ecliptyke.

The Eclipse of the Sun is not universal.
The Eclipse of the Sun can not be universal in the whole earth, I say, unto
all them that may see the Sun at the time of the Eclipse, as is the Eclipse
of the Moon universal. For if the Moon have one part Eclipsed, all that may
see her, shall see her Eclipsed: But the Sun some may see al wholly Eclipsed,
and other in part, or other also not at all Eclipsed: and this all at one self
same time. The cause whereof, is the diversity of the ^specte, which is, to
see the Moon in the Zodiac out of her place: as if the Sun and Moon
should make conjunction in the beginning of Aries, and in the head of the
Dragon, they that then should be in the Equinoctial, under the Sun and the
Moon, or that the Sun and the Moon should be in their Zenith, they should
see the Moon hyde all the Sun.

And they that should be in the North Climates, should see, that the Moon
hydeth or darkeneth only the South part of the Sun, ^ow ^h^ Sun is
eclipsed in the whole, or i^ part.
and not al. Again, they on the South part, should see the Moon hyde the
North part of the Sun, and not all. And if at the time of the conjunction,
she have a little passed the head of the Dragon, or lack a little to come to the
tail, so that she be in the North latitude: they that then should be in the
North Climates, should see the Moon Eclipse all the Sun: and they of the
Equinoctial should see only the North part of the Sun Eclipsed, and they
of the South should see him nothing at all Eclipsed. So that although the
Eclipse of the Sun shall be total or particular, it can not be universal in
the whole earth.

And note, that for the quantity of these Eclipses, Of the quantity of the
Eclipses.
the Astronomers divide into twelve equal parts, as well the Diameter of the
Sun, as of the Moon, and these parts they call figures, punctes, or
pricks, and according to ^he p^nc^es of the Diameter of the Moon, which is
covered by the shadow of the earth, or the parts of the Diameter of the
Sun, which the Moon does cover, so many fingers or punctes shall be said to
be Eclipsed. As if 6. the half, if 3. a quarter, if 4. a terce, or third
part, if 6. three quarters, if 8. two terces.

It is also to be noted, why the Moon seems sometime bigger, and sometime
less then the Sun.
that although the Sun be bigger then the Moon, yet at sometime the Moon
seems greater then the Sun. And this shall be, when the Sun is in the
Auge of the Eccentrike, and the Moon in the opposite of the Auge of the
Epicicle.

And when it so appears, he may be all Eclipsed. Sometimes also the Moon
seems less. This is when the Sun is in the opposite of the Auge of the
Eccentricke, and the Moon in the Auge of the Epicicle. Then although we
should see the center of the Moon in the center of the Sun, she can not
hyde him all whollye, because the Sun shall appear greater.

Of this that we have said, The Sun is Eclipsed in conjunction, and the Moon
in opposition.
it follows that all the Eclipses of the Sun^e, must of necessity be in the
coniuncttion, and the Eclipses of the Moon, in the opposition: whereby is
inferred, that the Eclipse of the Sun in

By the description of other, the great year is when the eight sphere ioy^tly
with all the A^ges, The reuo^ution on o^ the ^ight Sphere.
make one perfect revolution at the moving of the nyenth Sphere. And this
shall be in the space of xlix. thousand years.

The solar year, The Sol^r year.
is a revolution of the Sun, carried by the proper moving of his heaven
upon the Axis and Poles of the Zodiac, ending where it began, and returnyng
an other year by the self same course, as the Poet Vi^gil affyrmeth, saying.

Atque in se sua per vestigia voluitur annus.
That is to say, The year turns again to him self by his own proper
steps.

how the Egyptians painted the year.
The Egyptians lackyng the use of Letters, and having the same consideration,
painted the year like unto an Adder, bytyng her own tail: and hereof was a
ryng called Annulus, as it were Annus (that is, a year) because a ryng turns
round in it self, The quantity of the year.
as does the year. Of the quantity of this year were diverse opinions and
computations among them of ancient time. The Arabians and Persians accounted
it regulerly by xii. Moo^es, which are 354. days. Romulus gave to his year x.
months, because that time suffiseth to a woman to bring forth her birth, and
also for that during so much time, it was not lawful for a W^ddow to marry
after the death of her husband. Numa Pompilius added two months, to make it
up twelve months in 350. days, The year of the hebrews.
which was the m^st ancient year of the Hebrews, according to the which,
they account at this day. The Greeks and Egyptians, The Greeks.
consydering the course of the Sun, made the year of 365. days. Then by the
commandment of Julius Caesar Julius Caesar.
(whose order we now observe) were added six hours, to the end to make
equal this number of days with the course of the Sun: and hereof the
Bisextile or Leap year had his beginning, L^^pe year.
from four to four years. But to say the truth, they erred: The one, by
somewhat too much, and the other by somewhat too little.

Days of the ye^r^.
This y^ere conteyneth 365. days. 5. h^ures, and 49. minutes.

Likewise at the first, the year had diverse begynninges. Numa Pompilius began
it from the Winter solsticiall, Beginning of the year.
because that then the Sun begins to rise toward us, Ovid.
as Ovid aff^rmeth in these verses: Brum^ noui prima est, bruma is the stay of
the sun in winter, the winter solstitiall, and shortest day of the year.
veterisque nouissima Solis.
Principum capiunt Phoebus and Annus idem.


Which may thus be englyshed.

Brume is the first of the new year,
And last day of the old:
The Sun and year begin at once,
As Ovid has us told.
Romulus began it at March, at the Equinox of the spring, because that then
all things revive and floryshe: and by the opinion of the D^ui^es, The Creation
of the world.
it seems good reason to begin the year at March, because the world was
created the 25. of the Kalendes of Apryl, which is the 18. of the month
aforesaid. Likewise, God speaking of this month to the people of Israel,
Exodus xii.
said unto them, This shall be the first of the months of the year. The
Arabians begin from the Summer solsti^iall, whose opinion is, that the Sun^e
was made in the sign of Leo. Other begin the year in September, about the
Equinoctial of Autumn, as do the Jews, resting in the authority of Genesis,
where it is written thus: Let the earth bring forth green herbs, to have
fruit agreeable to their kind. etc. And because Autumn is a fruitful time,
they began from thence to account their year. The Greeks, Persians, and
Egyptians, account it from October. The Christians, Where the Christians begin
the year.
some from the Incarnation of Christ, other from his birth, and other from the
first day of January.

In like man^er, Diversity in the number of the years or the date.
is great diversity in beginning the number of years, which we call Era,
that is, the date. The Greeks began their date, from the death of great
Alexander. The Egyptians, from the death of Nabuchodonosor. The Persians, from
Gesdargit. The Arabians or Moors, from the preaching of M^chomet, Machomet.
who was after the birth of Christ 626. years. Other also from the Roman
Emperors. The Christians began the account of our Savior Jesus Christ 500.
years after his birth, The date of the Christians
as writes Cardinal Cusanus. And here it shall not be from my purpose, to
show how justly and ryghtfully was commanded by Don John King of Spain, the
first of that name, that i^ the Courts and Parliamentes which he held in
Sego^ia, in the year of 1383. leaving the dates that they had begun from the
Emperor Octauian, for tributes and other payments specifyed in Wrytynges and
Privileges, they should no more put the date of the Emperor, for as much as
the day in the which the Son of God became man, and was borne by the blessed
Uirgin, was so excellent a thing, and most worthy to be had in memory. So
that in Spain, since that time, in all common Writings, the date is made from
the Nativity of our Lord, beginning there the first day of the year, and
commonly the first day of January. Some Astronomers begin it the first of
March.

We have in this Chapter entreated of the great year, and of the Solar year,
with his quantity, beginning, and date. In the Chapter following, we will
entreat of the Lunar year, which we call a month.

The xi. Chapter, of the month, and of his differences.
The Lunar year, or mo^eth.

Revolution of the moon.


COnsydering the month ^bsolutelye^ without having respect to the Solar year,
it may be called a year, according to the division we have made in the Chapter
of the year. For it is a revolution of the heaven of the Moon which moves
slowly in compar^son of the first heaven. And if we consider the month as part
of the year, then is the name of a month more proper unto it. For this word
Men's mensis, in Latin, is derived of Mensur^, which signifies measure. And so
the month and year referred to time, all may be called month: forasmuch as
all is the measure of time, as we have touched in the said Chapter of the year.

The month is to be considered in two manners: either (as it is) part of the
Solar year, or is caused by the course of the Moon. The month that is part
of the Solar year, is that which at this day we use. And into xii. o^ these
months, The deuisio^ of the yeer^ into twelve months.
is the year di^ided: as Ianuar^e, February, March, Apryll, May, June, July,
August, September, October, November, December.

They are not all of equal days, Apryl, June, September, and November, have
30. days: all the other have 31. except February, which has 28. and when the
Bisextile or Leap is, it has 29. The names and numbers of these months were
assigned at the will and pleasure of men, and the cause why they have remained
so long time, is the authority of the Emperors, that ordained them for the
common people, who accepted them by the Roman Church, which admitted the use
of them.

The Lunar month has two consyderations. The Luna^ month.
The one is the time which the Moon tarieth from that she comes forth
from one point of the Zodiac, until she return thither by her proper
moving, and this is called the month of the peragration, The mone^^ of
peragratio^
in which revolution she spends 27. days, and almost 8. hours. The other
consyderation is, having respect to the time which the Moon taryeth, from
that she is in conjunction with the Sun, until another coniuncti^n. And this
is called the month of Consecution, The month of consecutio^
and is more then the month of Peragration, by two days 4. hours. 44.
minutes. For the Sun and the Moon being in conjunction under one punct of
the Zodiac, The moving of the Su^ne and moon in conjunction.
and moving both by their proper moouinges, toward the East, as the moouyng
of the Moon is swifter then the moving of the Sun, she leaves him behind.

And when she had ended her month of peregrination, she returns to the point
from whence she departed, and not findyng the Sun there (because in the mean
time the Sun of his proper motion has gone almost 27. degrees) the Moon
passes from this point, and in the said 2. days. 4. hours 44. minutes,
ouertaketh the Sun: and so commonly has this month of consecution 26.
days. 12. hours, and 44. minutes. So that whatsoever is said of the Lunar
month, is to be understood of this month of consecution, which all they use
that account by Moons: as do the Hebrews, Arabians, and Persians.

The Mariners ought not to neclect this computation, because it is convenient
for them to know the tides, To know the tides by the aspectes of the Moon.
and other effects caused by the aspectes of the Sun and the Moon, for
their aspectes do correspond to the parts of this month, as the conjunction
to the beginning, the opposition to the midst, and the quartile aspect to the
quarter, and so of the other. Likewise in this month, is considered the
illumination of the Moon, The illumination or change of the Moon.
and the days that the light fails her: so that neither by day nor by night
we may see her, for being burnt under the beams of the Sun. The time that
she is so, is called Interlunium (that is) the change or hydyng, Interlunium,
is the space of time in the which neither the old Moon does appear, nor the
new Moon is seen.
which is sometime more, and sometime less. When the conjunction shall be from
the beginning of Capricorn until the end of Gemini, and the Moon has North
latitude, and her moving swyfte: then shall the new Moon soon be seen, and
so shall the Interlunium be but little. And when the conjunction shall be from the
beginning of Cancer, until the end of Sagittarius, and the Moon has South
latitude, and her moving slow, the longer will it be or the new Moon show
her self to us: and certain of the causes concurring, and not all, so shall
the Interlunium be in a mean between both.

The xii. Chapter. Of the week.
THe week is a time of seven days, The week of the Iew^s.
the beginning whereof is Sunday, and so did the Jews count their first day,
saying, Prima Sabati, secunda Sabati, (that is) the first of the Sabbath, the
second of the Sabbath. etc. to the sixth of the Sabbath, and then the Sabbath.
The Romans that called the Planets Gods, The Roman^^.
forasmuch as the sun was principal among them, called their first day, the
day of the sun, the second, of the Moon, the third, of Mars, the four^h,
of Mercury, the fyfth, of Jupiter, the syxth, of Uenus, the seventh, of
Saturn. The Christians.
The Christians solemnising the sunday, began their account from it: as, on
such a day our Lord was borne: Ferine, signifies vacant days, or som^time
holy or f^stiuall (...).
on such a day he rose: and on such a day he sent the holy Ghost upon his
Apostles. etc. They also account the days of the week for Ferias.

The xiii. Chapter, of the day, and of the night.
THE day is of two sorts, as, the natural day, and the artificial day. The
natural day, The na^^^all day.
is the space of time, wherein, the sun is carried by the first moveable about
the earth, from the Meridian, to the Weast, and from the Weast under the earth,
coming to the East, and from thence returning again to the said Meridian:
and this time has the Equinoctial given one whole turn, and more, such
part of it as correspondeth to the proper moving of the sun: or otherwise,
the natural day is a circle described with the center of the sun, at the
moving of the first mouable. The Romans began this natural day, from
midnight, and ended it in the mydnight following, The beginning of the natural
day.
and so do we account it for fasting days: and from evening to evening, in
celebrating of festival days. The Athenienses began it at the Sun set, or
going down of the Sun. The Babylonians, at the risyng of the Sun. The
Umbria^s, and Ethuscos, from the mydday, or noone, and ended it the noone day
following. In ^his manner do the Astronomers begin it, and find that the day
shall ever begin at one self same hour for the quality of the Meridians. And
if they had begun it from the rising or fall of the Sun, it should not be
ever at one self same hour, because the Sun rises and falls at sometimes
sooner, and at other times later: The end of the na^u^all day.
and so should the beginning of the day be variable. And it is to understand,
that when we commonly say^ at the tenth day of such a month: the same ^enth
day does end the same day at noone, and the hours that run from that
noonetyde forward, are of the eleventh day: and so do the Astronom^rs account
them.

The artificial day.
The day artificial, is part of the day natural, and is the time that the Sun
tarieth from that it rises in the East, until it fall in the Weast, And the
night is that part that lacks or fails for the natural day, The nygh^.
which is the time that the Sun taryeth from that he hydeth him self in the
Weast, until he return to appear in the East: and so the day artificial and
the night, make one natural day. And according heereunto, it is written in
Genesis, that of evening and morning was made one day. Isodorus defining this
artificial day, says, that the day is the presence of the Sun, or the being
of the Sun above the earth: as it is night unto us when he is under it. Or
otherwise, the night is the shadow of the earth, extended diametrally opposite
to the Sun. The quantity and differences of these days artificial, and
their nyghtes, and how they increase and diminishe, we have largely declared in
the first Chapter.

The xiiii. Chapter of hours.
AS there is two differences of the day, as the natural day, and artificial:
so is there two differences of hours, as hours natural, which correspond to
the natural day, hours natural and artificial.
and hours artificial which correspond to the artificial day. Hora or Ora is
a Greek name, and signifies end. And so say we Ora maris, for the end or
brymme of the sea, or the list or edge of appar^ll, as says Isodore in his
Etimolagies. The hour natural or equal, The hour natural or equal.
is a 24. part of the day natural, and is the time of pass^ng fyfteene degrees
of the Equinoctial. These 24. hours that make one natural day, the
Astronomers does begin the day at the Meridian, compting the hours after the
order of the first mooueable, which is from the said Meridian, in the angle of
mydnyght, where they account twelve hours, and from thence toward the East,
and come to end the 24. hours in the same Meridian where they began: and this
they use for the computation of the tables of the mouings of the heavens. The
Astronomers use the same in their instruments, as in the Astrolabie, and Dials
Horizontall, and vertical, and in all other instruments for hours. In Spain
also we use to account these 24. in two times twelve, beginning at noone, and
ending twelve at mydnight: and again, beginning at mydnight, and ending other
twelve at noone. And to distinct the one from the other, they call the one
afternoon hours, and the other forenoone hours: and commonly we say six
hours of the morning, and six of the evening. In Italy they account them
from the falling of the Sun, until the next fall the day following.

The artificial or temperal hour, The hour artificial or temperal.
is a twelfe part of the day arcke, or the night arcke.

They are called temperall hours, because they ^a^^e in the times that the day
varieth: For in the time that the days shall be great, so shall be the hours:
and when the days shall be short, so likewise shall the hours be, and in like
manner of the nights. So that, as the artificial day, great or little, is
divided into twelve hours: even so the night great or little, is divided into
other twelve. The ancients divide the day into four parts, The day and night
divided into four parts.
and the night into other four, giving unto every quarter part three hours.
At the rysyng of the Sun, which was the first hour of the first quarter,
they called the first hour: and three hours passed, they called the third
hour, and six hours passed of the day, they called the syxth hour, which
was the midday or noone tide. Also the nienth hour, they named at niene hours
past of the day. And the Sun set, or going down of the Sun, they called
the Evening: as says the Poet Uirgil in this verse.

Ante diem clausam componet vesper olimpo.
Interpretation of certain places of the Gospel.
And according to this computation, is to be understood that writes Saint
Matthewe: That the laborers came to the Uineyarde at the eleventh hour,
whereby is meant the fyfth hour, one hour before the Sun was set. And when
we read in S. John: The ague left him the seventh hour. etc. By this account
it was one hour after noone, when Christ healed the son of the Ruler that
was diseased in Capernaum. In like manner by these hours, the ancients divided
the night into four quarters, The night divided into ii^^. quarters. Four
watches of the night.
giving three hours to every quarter. And in these four parts of the night
were Soldiers appointed to watch. In the first quarter, which they call
Canticinium, (and we the first sleep) they watched all. In the second, which
they called Intempestiuum, being the turn of midnyght, the young men watched.
In the third, which they called Gallicinium, of the crowing of Cocks, watched
the Soldiers of middle age. In the fourth and last quarter, called Matutinum,
or Antilucanum (that is, the spring of the day) the old Soldiers watched. And
thus is understood the first, the second, and third watch of the night, in
like manner ought the Mariners to keep watch and ward, how Mariners ought to
watch.
to avoid as well the peril of the sea, as also the dangers of Rouers: and to
divide the night by quarters, after the manner of Soldiers, as did also the
Mariners in old time.

The xv. Chapter, of the making and use of an universal Dyal for the day.
WHereas in the Chapter before, we have entreated of hours, and their
differences, we entend here to describe the making of an Instrument general,
To know the hours of the day by the Sun.
to know the hours of the day by the beams of the Sun, which is done in
this manner. Take a round plate of Laton, and let it be called the Equinoctial
circle, the circumference whereof, you shall divide into 24. equal parts by
both the sides, and from the center to every of these parts, you shall draw a
right line: one of the which shall be a Meridian. And in the one part of that,
write twelve, which shall be the hour of the mydday or Noone. And in the
other part write other twelve, which shall be for Mydnyght. In the highest
part, turnyng upon the center, toward the right hand, write one, two, three,
foure^ etc. In the lower, or nether part, you shall count toward the left
hand, turnyng it upon the center: so that the one hour of the one part,
come upon the line of the one hour of the other part, in like manner two
upon two, three upon three, and so forth of the other. And note that in the
line of six at after Noone, and at the line of six in the Morning, there
remain certain round pieces, corners, or ends, after the manner of Axis, of
the thickness of the self same plate. Then make a half circle of the same
metal, as bygge as the half circumference of the plate, and of the
thickness of a piece of four ryalles of Plate, or somewhat more, even as the
plate it self, and of the breadth of half a finger, if the instrument shall be
great: or less, if the instrument shall be less. This half circle, shall you
graduate or divide into 180. degrees, beginning at the one end, one, two,
three, and so forth, unto 90. in the myddest, and the like shall you do from
the other end unto the same 90. Also, you must number them in the breadth of
the same half circle: and this half circle, shall you make fast on the
nether part of the instrument, so that the ends thereof may be fixed in the
ends of the Meridian line. Then through the center of the plate or
Equinoctial circle, shall pass a round steel or wyre of the same metal,
made fast or sodered in it, so that it rise and come forth equally from every
side of the pla^e the fourth part of the Diameter of the same, and this shall be
called the Axis or exiltree of the world. The instrument being thus made, you
shall place it, or set it in a frame, having two arms, standards, or arches,
so that it change between the said arches, borne up by the ronnde pieces or
ends of the plate, left thereof at the ends of the line of the six hours
aforesaid, in such sort, that being thus stayed, it may be directly turned. And
in the midst between these two arms, beneath in the foot of them, or where
they are placed, you shall raise a prick, or point: so that the plate which
signifies the Equinoctial, being perpendiculer, the brimme or edge thereof may
fall upon the point or prick, and consequently the plate standing plain or
flat, the nientie degrees of the half circle, must show or touch the said
prick, as shall also the end or extremity of the Axis of the world, and the
other end shall show the Zenith or vertical point.

This instrument must be so placed, that the Meridian line be North and South:
The placing of the instrument.
which you shall find in this manner. In an open and plain place, where the
Sun shyneth for the most part of the day, you shall make a circle with a
pair of compasses, in the mids whereof, you shall set a steel or wyre, so
upright, that it declyne not, or bend not, either one way or other, and the
same no longer then the fourth part of the Diameter of the circle. The fynding
of the Meridian line.
Then in the morning when the Sun ryseth, the shadow shall be very long, and
as it ryseth higher and higher, so the shadow waxes shorter and shorter. Then
must you observe the time, when the extremity or end of the shadow touches
in the circumference of the Circle, and where it touches you shall make a
prick. Then goes the shadow shortnyng unto the mydday or noone tide, and as
from thence the Sun declineth, so does the shadow increase, and when it
shall come a^aine to the circumference of the Circle, you shall make another
prycke. Then shall you part in the myddest, the arc that is between the one
prick and the other, and from the middle pricke^ draw a right line to the
center of the Circle: And that shall be the Meridian line, whereupon you shall
set the instrument. Furthermore, in the foot of the frame of the instrument,
you shall set a compass or Dyal, which shall show the Meridian line, This
done, upon the arches of the frame, and corners of the six hours, you shall
turn the Equinoctial so far, that it pass so much of the half circle by the
middle prick, how many degrees the Pole is raised above the Horizon of that
region or place where you are, The elevation of the Pole.
and then the shadow of the wyre or steel, shall justly show in the Plate, the
hour, and what a clock it is.

Here follows the Figure of the Instrument.



The xv. Chapter, of certain particular Dyals, Mural, and Horizontall.
AMong sundry manner and fashions of particular Dyals, there are two
principal. Whereof the one is Horizontall, Dyals horizontall and vertical.
which is placed in the superficial of the Horizon: the other is verticiall,
and must be made or set on a wall perpendiculer, and directly against the South
or mydday, from the true leuant or East, to the true ponent or West, East and
^est.
the which the Mariners call East and West. To make any of these two Dials,
you must draw a right line, and call it the Axis of the poles of the world,
upon the which you shall draw an half circle, and divide it in 90. equal
parts. And where the half circle is cut with the line of the Axis, must be
accounted by the circumference, the altitude of the pole for the city or place
for the which you intend to make the Dyall. And in the point of the
circumference where ends the altitude of the pole, you shall make a mark,
and write there, The altitude of the pole. And from that point draw a right
line unto the point where you began to account the altitude of the pole, which
line shall be called the Semidiameter, or half Diameter of the vertical circle.
And from the same point of the altitude of the pole, draw another right line
to the other extremity or end of the Axis, and this shall be called the
Semidiameter of the Horizon: and likewise from the same point of the altitude
of the pole, draw a right line perpendiculer until it touch in the Axis, and
this shall be called the Semidiameter of the Equinoctial. Hereby is considered a
Triangle, The Triangle.
which has by the sides thereof the Semidiameter of the vertical, the
Semidiameter of the Horizon, and the Axis of the world, which Triangle shall
serve afterward. These three Semidiameters, of the vertical, the Equinoctial,
and the Horizon, being found, you shall make the Dyall in this manner.

Draw a right line somewhat long, and call it the line of contingence. The
making of the Dyall.
This shall you cut with an other ly^e i^ right angles^ after the manner of a
cross, which sh^lbe the Meridian line. Then with your compass, ^ake from the
Triangle the Semidiameter of the Equinoctial, and of this bygnesse draw a
circle upon the Meridian line: so that the edge or brymme of the circle, touch
in the line of continge^ce. Then with a compass, take the Diameter of the
vertical circle, if you will make a mu^all Dyall, or the Semidiameter of the
Horizon, if you will make a Horizontall Dyall, on a play^e or flat form.
Therefore with such Semidiameter as you desire, you shall draw a circle upon
the other part of the Meridian line, so that the circumference thereof touch
in the line of contingence. Then shall you divide the Equinoctial circle into
four equal parts, and the quarter that is toward the line of contingence,
shall you divide into six equal parts. And setting the end of the ruler in
the center of the Equinoctial, and upon every point of them that divide ^he
six equal parts, from thence shall you draw certain right lines, until
they touch in the line of contingence. And from these points of the line of
contingence, you shall draw other right lines, to the center of the Horizontal
circle, which lines shall be the determiners of the hours. And near unto the
Meridian line, where it touches in the line of contingence, you shall write
twelve, and consequently toward the East, you shall write one, two, three,
four, five, six: and from the syxth hour, you shall draw a right line, which
shall pass by the center of the H^rizontal circle equally distant from the
line of contyngence. The one quarter of the Horizontal being drawn by the
self same, and of the same measure and bygnesse shall you draw the other, in
such sort, that the same bygnesse that is from twelve to one, the self same
shall you give from the twelfth, to the eleventh: and the same bigness and
measure that is from one to two, shall you give from eleven to twelve, and so
forth of the other.

And note that the Horizontal Dyall, after the syxth hour of the euenyng,
shall have the hours of seven and eight, and in climates far North xi. also,
and more if need shall require, and consequently must have the hours of five
and four of the morning, hours of the horizontall Dyall.
and in climates far North, three also: and these also must be so marked,
that from six to seven, may be the same that is from five to six, and from
seven to eight, the same that is from four to five: also, four and five of
the morning, as seven and eight. The Dyal being thus drawn in paper, or on a
table, Placing of t^^ Dyall.
or any other thing, must be painted (on a table, or in stone, or in what so
ever you desire to make the Dyall) a circle, of the same bigness as is the
circle horizontall, and in that must be translated the lines and numbers of the
said circle horizontall: Then must you make a triangle of metal, of the self
same bigness and form that is made in the myddle circle: and the side of
this triangle (which is called the half diameter of ^he horizon) must be fixed
upon the Meridian line of the horizon Dyall, so that the side of the tryangle
(which is the Axis of the world) and extremity or end thereof, may fall in
the center of the horizontall Dyall, and must stand so perpendiculer, that it
declyne neither to the one part, nor to the other. The Dyall being thus made,
you shall set it upon a Meridian line, The Meridian line of the Dyall.
so that the Meridian line of the Dyall may stand or rest upon it, and so shall
the shadow of the triangle show the hour: and if for this place we desire to
know it, we must fix it there. And if for any other place, so setting it, we
shall have a certain hour. So may we in any instant remove it to another
place, and likewise set it there, to make certain and true demonstration of
the hour.

Here follows the Figure of this Demonstration.



The making of the vertical Dyall.
In like manner as is made the Horizontal Dyal, must be made the vertical,
taking from the Triangle the Semidiameter of the Circle vertical.

And note, that for the Circle vertical, it shall not be needful of more
then six hours before noone, and other six after noone. And the triangle
must be fixed in the meridian line upon the side that is called the
Semidiameter of the Circle vertical. And if you will not make a triangle of
metal, but that a wyre of Iron may give the shadow, then must you make the
said triangle of paste or paper. And according to the form or pattern thereof
make the wyre of Iron, and cause the same to be set in all sorts of Dials, as
is before.

The xvii. Chapter, of the composition and use of an instrument general for
the hours of the night.
WHere as in the Chapters past, I have described the manner and form to make
two Dials for the hours of the day, me seems that for the more perfection of
this work, it would be convenient here to teach the making of a Dyal to know
the hours of the night, The Guard^ stars.
by the Circle which the two Stars, called the Guardians, or the mouth of the
horn, do describe by the moving of the first mooueable. But for as much as
it is a common opinion, that in the myddest of Apryll it is mydnyght when the
Guardes be in the head, whereof they take the beginning of the year, I will
declare how it ought to be understood. what is mydnyght.
Certain it is, that to be mydnyght, is none other thing but the Sun to be
by the moving of the first moveable, to every one in that part of his Meridyan
that is to him under the earth, even as is to him mydday, Noone, or mydday.
or noone, when to him it is in that part of the Meridyan that is above the
earth. And in this present year of 1545. (to be out of doubt hereof) I made
experience with a precise Astrolabie, so that the first or foremost Guard
Star, being perpendiculerly over or above the North Star, I found in the
Meridyan, where the Sun makes mydnyght, the ix. degree of Taurus, whereby it
follows, that the Sun being in this degree, which is at the xix. of Apryl,
the same Guard Star shall be perpendiculerly over the North star, which is
the line of the head, and consequently the Sun being in the nienth degree of
Scorpio, which is at the xxii. of October, the guard star shall be in the line
of the feet: and by this calculation may be known when it shall be in the right
or in the lea^t, An error.
and in all the other lines: so that they manyfestly err, that account the
mydnyght at the xv. of Apryll, when the first guard star is in the line of
the head, accompting a terce or third part of an hour sooner and more then
they should do.

The making of the ^nstrument.
H^uing thus given principles for the instrument, you shall proc^ede in the
making thereof, as follows. In paste, or on a plate of ^aton, make a circle of
the quantity of a spanne, or of the bigness that you desire the instrument or
Dyal to be: then make an other circle somewhat less, so far distaunt from
the greater, that between the one and the other may be a space, in the which
may be signed or marked the days and months. Likewise shall you make another
less circle, leaving space to set the numbers of the days of every month.
And under this circle, shall you make an other, leaving space to write the names
of the months: then shall you divide the first and greatest circle into eight
equal parts, so that the xix. of Apryl may be in the highest or uppermost part
of the instrument, which is where they say the line of the head to be, and the
xxii. of October must be in the nether part. Also, the xiii. of January, in
the right arm: and in the leaft arm, the xvii. of July: and so the other
days that do fall to the other lines, according as they answer to the right
assension of the Sun, as you may see in this figure.

This being thus divided, you must also divide the spaces that are between the
one line and the other, into the days which be numbered in every space: so
that between the xix. of Apryll, and the third of June, are 45. days, and
that space shall you divide into 45. parts. And whereas the instrument being
small, it can not in so little space receive so many parts, you shall divide it
from five, to five parts, and so shall you divide the other spaces by the
numbers that are signed in them. Then one day more before the x. toward the
left hand you shall make a strike, and there shall be the xx. of Apryl. And five
days more before, make another stryke, and there shall be the xxv. And yet other
five days more before, which shall be the xxx. of Apryl, make another strike
overthwart unto the neathermost circle, and there shall May begin: And from
these days shall you begin to account the days of May from five to five. And
in the last space you shall put six, which shall make the xxxi. days that May
has. And there shall you make another strike, which shall trauerse or
^uerthwart unto the less ci^cle. And in this manner you shall divide the other
months, giving to every of them the number of his days.

This being done, upon the outward part of the great circle, you shall cut down
the paper, paste, or plate of laton, leaving of the same for a sign or mark a
flower Deluce upon the 19. of Apryl, for that it must be the head: and likewise
at the 22. of October, may be left a handel to hold it by. Then must you make
a rundel to the same paste or laton, of the bigness of the less circle,
without the circumference whereof, shall be left a tooth or index, in the which
you shall write, Time. And from the one side of this index toward the left
hand, you shall draw a right line, that may pass through the center to the
circumference, and this shall be the Meridian line. Also to this rundel you shall
give a circle, so much lower from the circumference, that there may be left a
space where the number of the days may be written. And this rundel you shall
divide into 24. equal parts, beginning at the Meridian line of the index at
the twelfth hour of the night. Then in the next space toward the left hand,
you shall make the number of one. Likewise in the second space the number of
two, in the third, the number of three, and so forth of the residue, unto the
other twelve of the day, in the opposite or contrary part of the index. So
consequently proceeding i. ii. iii. etc. unto the twelve of the index, which
shall be the xxiiii. hours of the natural day.

Furthermore also you must make another piece, of the same substance of past
or metal, in manner of a horn, The horn of the seven stars, which make the
less bear.
in form and order as are in heaven the seven stars, which make the less
bear: And this of such quantity, that the first or foremost guarde star, may
reach without the great rundell close to the circumference thereof, having the
North star his center, with the center of the instrument. And from this
star or center unto the first and foremost guard star, must be a right line,
by the which the horn must be cut near from the center, unto the discovering
or showing of the hours. Also, from the first guarde to the second, must be
two parts of niene, of that that is from the Star, which signifies the
North, to the first guarde. Again, the second and last guarde, must be toward
the left hand, over or above the first, three quarter parts of one half
Circle, which has for the Semidiameter the two parts of niene, (whereof we
have spoken before) given upon the right line that goes from the North to the
first guard. These two guarde Stars, must be boared through with holes, of
the bygnesse of an Aglet of a point, and likewise the North Star, with also
the two rundelles through the center, and by that, al three pieces annexed, so
that there remain a hole in the myddest, like the holes of the guardes^ so
that by it, and by the other of the guardes, may be seen the Stars in
heaven, in such sort, that the less rundell and the horn may be turned
round about the Axis, as does appear in the demonstration following.



To find the hour with the instrument.
The instrument thus ended, and brought to perfection, when you desire to know
the hour, you shall turn the index of the less rundell in the which is
written, Time, to that part of the great rundell where is marked the day in the
which you desire to know the hour: and directing your face toward the
North, you shall make the head toward the height of heaven, at the 19. of
April. And seeing in heaven by the hole in the myddest the star of the
North, holdyng the instrument in such compass of the face, that by the
circumference of the greater rundell, may be seen the guarde star in heaven,
you shall turn the horn round about, until in fall upon the Guardes: so
that by the two holes of the mouth of the horn, the two Guard stars may be
seen, and by the hole in the myddest, the North star, and all three with one
eye: then the right ly^e that goes from the North to the first Guarde, shall
show in the less rundell, the hour that shall be.

The xviii. Chapter, of the time of Tides, or rysyng and falling of the Sea.
GReat account ought Pilottes and Mari^^rs to have of the Tides, to take Port,
enter upon Bars, pass by Flattes, and finally, for all manner of Nauigations.
For being ignorant hereof, great hurt and inconvenience might chance unto
them, as did of late to the valiant Captain, Don John Gusman the Earl of
Niebla, in the year of 1436. who was drowned before the City of Gibraltar,
for that the Mariners kept no^e account, neither had consyderation of the
Tides. By reason whereof, not only he was drowned, but also with him dyed many
woorth^e Gentlemen, and valiant Captains of Spain.

The Mariners hold for a certain rule, The Mariners opinion of ^bbyng and
flowing of the sea, or tyd^s.

Observation of the Moon^ to know the tides.


that the Moon being in the Northeast, or in the Southwest, is full Sea: and
being in the Southwest, or Northwest, to be low Water. They affirm also, that
at the first day of the new Moon, the Sun being at Northeast, and a quarter
to the East (that is Northeast, and by East) the Moon shall be Northeast, and
then shall be full Sea, and three hours, and three quarters.

And at the second day of the Moon, when the Sun shall be at East Northeast,
the Moon shall be at Northeast, and then shall be full sea, and four hours,
and two quarters. etc. Their account is, that the Sun being in the North, is
mydnyght: and being in the Northeast, they account, three: Eight principal
wyndes.
and in the East, six. So that they account, three hours from wind to
wind, by the eight pryncipall wyndes, or lines, which the Spanyardes call
Rumbos. These wyndes must be imagined upon the North, placed in the Angle,
under, or beneath the Earth: and the Sun and the Moon at the moving of the
first mooueable, and they ought not to be imagined in the Horizon, as the
compass shows. For speaking by the terms of Astronomy, you must
understand, that the Moon touching in the circle of hours at the number of
three, is ever full Sea: and touching in the same circle at the number of
niene, is ever low water. No less ought they to observe just account of the
hours, by quarters of hours. For to give 30. days to the Moon, it shall be
necessary to account by the fyftes of hours, as shall be said hereafter.

Here is to be noted, that the Spanyardes think (be like) that a Northeast
and Southwest Moon, makes a full Sea in all other places, as it does in
Spain. But in that they be greatly deceived, and therefore the rule that they
have set forth for the Tides, serves only for such places where it flows
Northeast and Southwest Moon a full Sea.

And the better to understand the increasyng and decreasyng of the Ocean Sea,
The Moon causes the ebbing and flowing of the Ocean Sea
it shall be convenient to know the cause thereof, wher^vnto we say, that the
Moon is the cause of ebbyng and flowyng, or rising and falling, increase or
decrease of the Sea: not only by her light, but also by her secret or hyd
property. The Moon compasses about the earth, The moving of the Moon.
from the East into the West, until she return to the place or point from
whence she departed: and in this course wastes or spends so much more then
one natural day, in how much her proper moving is more then the Sun
against the first mooueable, so that she makes her turn or course about the
four quarters of heaven in xxiiii. hours, and four fyfthes of one hour,
which are the twelve degrees that she goes more then the Sun. And in this
time the Ocean increases and decreaseth twyse, so that this increasing and
decreasing, answers directly to the course of the Moon: whereby it follows,
that the sea increases six hours and one fyfth part, and decreaseth other
six hours, and one fyfth. And if this day at the twelfth hour, was full sea,
the low water shall be at the syxth hour and one fyfth part: and at the twelfth
hour and two fyfth parts it shall return to be full sea: and at the syxth
hour and three fyfthes, shall be low water again: and at the twelfth and four
fyfthes of the other day, shall be full sea. So that from one day to another, the
tide does shorten four fyfthes of an hour, The shortning of the tides.
which is the time that the Moon slacketh or carries more then one natural
day, to return to the point from whence she departed by the twelve degrees,
whereof we have spoken. Whereby it manifestly appears, how they beguyle them
selves that say, An error.
that the sea increases six hours, and decreaseth other six. For if it were
so, the tides should ever be at one self same time and hour. But for as much
as there is more then xxiiii. hours, The variation of the tides.
by the said four fyfth parts, thereby is caused the variation of the tides:
so that if this day, the tide be at one of the clock, to morrow it shall be at
one and four fyfth parts, and the day following, at two of the clock and
three fyftes. etc.

For this account, I will describe a Table in circular figure, A Table to know
the variation of the tides.
although not precise, for the causes which we have touched before in the fyfth
Chapter, speaking of the Moon: who sometimes in her moving is swyft, and
sometime s^acketh as much, because the conjunction is not ever in one self
same point of the Zodiac, as ye Mariners presuppose for their rule. This
figure shall have two circles, in the less (which shall be the first, and next
unto the center) shall be the days of the Moon, from one to thirty, which we
count the conjunction. And in the second and greatest circle, shall be found
the hours of the tides. So that, who so desires to know when the tide
shall be, where it flows Southwest and Northeast, let him at that hour take
heed to the days of the Moon, how many they are: as if ^hee be in the
conjunction, or if it be the first or second of the Moon. etc. And the day
being known, then in the second circle which answeareth directly to the day,
shall he find when shall be high water, or full sea: and consequently, the
ebb, or low water, which shall be six hours and one fyfth, after the full sea,
and so likewise may he judge when shall be the half tide: an^ this as well at the
time when it increases (which shall be three hours and half a fyfth part of an
hour, before the full sea) as also when it decreaseth, which shall be the half
ebb, three hours, and half the fyfth of one hour, after the full sea.

The Table follows.



This increasing and decreasing of the Tides, is not ever in equal quantity.
In the conjunctions and oppositions, they increase and decrease much, which the
Mariners call high spring tides, and the greatest increase of al, they call the
high springes. In the quarters of the Moon (which are at the 7. and 22. of the
Moon, or near there about) they increase and decrease but little: which the
Mariners call nepe tides, low water, dead waters, or low flooddes.

The xix. Chapter, of certain signs, which prognosticate tempests, or fair
weather.
A Good Pilot or Mariner, ought not to be ignorant of certain signs or tokens
which the natural Philosophers describe of tempests. For as they signify unto
him, so shall he leave his port, or enter into it: which if he can not, then
ought he with patience and hope, to tarry the time that God has appointed for
him, who moves and troubles the Seas, when it pleases him, and appeaseth
them again at his pleasure. Less hurts and damageth the stroke which we
see coming, or foresee, then that which has stricked us, and taken us
careless. When the Sun ryseth fair and clear, it signifies a fair day:
but if it show yealowe, or deadly, tempest is like to follow. Again, if at
the rising of the Sun his beams show them selves contract, Signs of fa^^^
and soul weather.
or geathered together, and short, you shall have rain: if the mistes or
clouds make a circle about the Sun or Moon, how much the greater that
circle shall be, so much greater shall be the tempest to come: and if ^here shall be
two circles, the tempest shall increase the more. And if it chance, that at
the rysyng of the Sun the clouds be turned ^edde, it is a sign of no small
tempest. When the Sun or the Moon shall have a circle, look toward the
part where it breaks, and from thence shall wind come: if it depart, or
dispearse equally, fair weather shall follow. When the Moon ryseth bright and
(...) by the which they pass. We see that in some o^e region it rayneth with
one wind, and the self same wind in other places disperseth the clouds. The
N^rthwest wind is dry in Spain, yet in Lybia it is very moist and rayny. The
South wind in Europe, causes rain in most places, and therefore the Poets
named it the wind of waters, and this wind in Palestina or Jury is dry. The
cause of this diversity, is, that when the wind blows in Palestina, it
passes by hot and dry regions, as by the deserts of Affrike, and passes not
by any sea at al. But when it blows in these parts of Europe, it must of
necess^tie pass by, and over the waters of the sea Mediterraneum, or the
Leuant sea, where it gathers moisture and causes rain. The Leuant or East
wind, in Malaga, and Gibralter, is moist, and in Sheres De la Frontera, is
hot as Hell.

The xx. Chapter, of the bright and shynyng exhalations that appear in the
tempests, which the Mariners call Santelmo, or Corpus sancti.
IGnorance is the mother of errors, and therefore will I not omit to show
the natural cause hereof, although among certain simple and ignorant
people, it is accounted for a miracle, that in certain tempests on the Sea,
the Maryners see certain shynyng and bright fyres, which with great
superstition they kneel down unto, and pray unto, affyrming that it is
Santelmo that appears unto them, Some call these the fires of S. Elin and S.
Nicolas.
and not contented heerewith, some swear that they have seen^ drops of green
w^xe fall down. Other affirm that this wax is of such heat, that if it fall
from the top of the Ship, it does melt the rosen and pitch of the hatches of
the Ship, with such other foolish imaginations, and therefore it shall be good
briefly to speak hereof, to stop the mouths of such fond and ignorant
persons. The exhalations or vapoures of the gross ^umes or smokes that rise
from the earth, wandering fyers engendered of exhalations and vapors.
are constrained or geathered together by the coldness of the night, and the
air, and are thickened in the first region of the air, next unto the earth.
This may, and is wont to be inflamed or kindled, and if it find a body
whereunto it may cleave, it abides in that until it be consumed. This fire is
clear, and shyneth, and yet burns not. The Greeks call it Polyduces, Castor
and Pollux.
and the Latins call it Castor and Pollux. It is accustomed to appear upon
the shrowdes, and oftentimes is seen upon the pykes of souldyers, in the
armies of men of war, as Pliny writes, and this, as well by reason of
continual smoke, as also by the heat of much people. Certain it is, what is
smoke and flame.
that smoke is none other thing then fire dispearsed: as flame is an exhalation
or euaporation that ryseth in manner of smoke, from a gross or fat body, and at
the time that it ryseth, being geathered together, is constrained into flame,
inuestured with fire. This resplendence or shy^yng, is also often times seen,
Exhalations of the land and water.
not only in iourneying by land, but also in sailing by ryuers: and when it
appears on the land, it ryseth of the smoke that is geathered together with
the cold air of the night, and on the banks of ryuers: this smoke is
geathered of the exhalations of the water, and consequently being kyndeled,
appears bright and shynyng. But now let us come to the Shyps that sail by
the Sea, and to the Mariners that are accustomed to tempests. To them
therefor I say, that that light, Exhalations and vapors engendered in Shyps.
or such other lyghtes as they see, is engendered of the fumes and smokes of
their Ship, with the heat of men couched close and near together in a
narrow place, and when a tempest ryseth, the said smoke is thickened, pressed
together, and beaten down by the wyndes, in such sort, that being tossed
from one side to another, it is set on fire by moving, and takes hold
sometime on the shroudes, and sometimes on the top, and sometime also in the
poupe, or in the foreshyppe: So that to see this light, or the same to appear,
is a natural thing, and not supernatural.

When Captain B^zerra was at Corron, in the Emperors Navy, with his company
of Souldyers, he chanced to be in a tempest, and saw the said fire of
Santelmo, which shortly after descended so low, that the Captain might easily
come to it: and taking it in his cloak, he found it to be a little drop of
water. Some have thought it to be a certain shyning Fly, A shining fly
called Taros, which the sea men some time see in a calm in the Summer
season: and thus Santelmo appeared no more. The Captain remained astonished at
the mockery, and the other perceived it to be no miracle. The opinion of the
Maryners that affirmed it to be Santelmo, A superstitious opinion of the
Mariners.
may rise of Saint Erasmo, Bishop of Naples, who (as they say) not only in his
life time, but also after his death, was a patron and helper of Mariners that
called upon him in tempests. This name of Erasmo, they of Naples call Ereemo:
and process of time taking away one e. by the figure of Sincope, remained the
name of Santermo. And the Spaniardes, who never can long keep any strange
vocable, call it Santelmo, turning r. into l. Yet of this Santelmo, whereof the
Maryners speak, there is neither scripture that makes mention, nor authority
that confirms it. I hear say that the Friar preachers had a religious man,
A lie of the friar preachers.
of commendable life, and good conversation, named Friar Pero Gonzales, borne
in Galizia, and that in his life time our Lord did certain miracles by him,
and that this is he that shyneth and gives light in tempests. No doubt, but
GOD works miracles in his Saints, and by his Saints, as says David. But if
this servant of GOD was Pero Gonzales, Psalm. 67. Testimony of ancient
aucthours.
how then shall he be Santelmo? Another difficulty there is, as touching this
light: for there are wrytyngs of more antiquity then the law of grace and
coming of Christ in flesh, which give testimony hereof. For the Poet
Uirgyll, in the second of his Aeneidos, writes, that this fire appeared upon
the head of Julius Ascanius. And Titus Liuius in his first book, affirms,
that it appeared upon the head of Seruius Tullius, the sixth King of the
Romans.

Pomponius Articus says, that Rome began to be builded in the third year of
the third Olimpiades, The buildyng of Rome.
that is, in the tenth year of Jonathan king of the Jews, and from the
creation of the world 3201. years, and 729. years before Christ our Savior
was borne. The Kings of Rome were seven, and reigned 244. years. The Roman^
kings.
Eusebius says, they reigned 246. Seruius Tullius reigned 44. years.
Tarquinus Superbus 25. years after him. So that discountyng these years, it
shall appear clearly as I say. Although the years were not discounted, let
them read Diadorus Siculus, an ancient writer, let them read Plutarchus,
Aristotle, and other old Auctours that have written hereof, and they shall
find, that if tempests be near unto the Sea, these fyres and lights appear
in them: and appeared not only to the Gentiles, but at this day also appear
to the Turks and Moors in tempests. When only one light appears, it is
taken for an evil sign: And hereof said Propertius thus.

Candida foelici soluite vela toro.
And why it is an evil sign, One light or fire is an evil sign.

Two lyghtes.


this is the cause: that if the tempest that ryseth be great, it choketh the
exhalation, although yet by the part least troubled, it appears. When there
are two lyghtes, it signifies that it is sufficient to consume the matter of
the tempest, or that the tempest begins to cease, and the gross humor
has the maisterie. But sometime it chances, that two lyghtes appearing,
there may be a tempest, and one appearyng shall not be so great, and often
times there is a tempest without any light at all seen. The blind Gentilitie
called these Castor and Pollux, Castor and Pollux.
and placed them in heaven in the sign of Gemini.

Now remains to aunsweare to one objection of the Marrines, an error of the
Mariners.
who say, that never man that has seen these Fyres, has peryshed. To this I
say, that many may see, and have seen these lyghtes, of whom, some have been
in peril, and some drowned: Notwithstanding, no man can affirm, that if the
drowned might speak, they would say that they have seen them. Therefore the
wise Christian Maryner ought to have a clear conscience, and to call for the
help of almighty God, lifting up his eyes and hands unto heaven, Psalm. 68.
and say with the Prophet, Saluum me fac Deus, quoniam intrauerunt aquae vsque
ad animam meam. Save me, oh my God, for waters have entered even unto my soul.

Here ends the second part.
The third part, entreats of the composition and use of Instruments, and
Rules for the Art of Navigations.
The first Chapter, of the number, order, and names of the wyndes.
SO greatly esteemed was Eolus, why Eolus was feigned god of winds.
King of the Eolas Islands, or Islands of Vulcane, for having reason and
knowledge of the wyndes, that they of ancient time called him the god and lord
of them. With no less consyderation, the prudent Maryner ought not to be
ignorant of them, for as much as the universal benefit, and commodity of
Navigations consists therein. And to have the better knowledge thereof, you
shall understand, that wind is fruit of the air, what is wind.
and vapor of the earth: the which by reason of his subtlety, pearceth the
air, strikes it, and enforces it. Other say, that wind, is air, moved or
tossed by the vehement influence of vapors of contrary quality. It is in
Latin called Ventus, because it is vehement, and v^olent, whose force is so
great, that it overthrows not only heaps of stones, or rocks, and casts
down trees: but also disturbeth the air and the earth, and moves the seas.
There are four principal wyndes, The four principal or Cardinal wynd^s.
which come from the four cardinal or principal points of the Horizon. We
have said that the Meridian circle, cutteth the Horizon in two points (that is)
in the North and in the South, and the Equinoctial cutteth i^ in other two,
that is, in the East and West, and from these four points come these four
winds, Luke. xvii.
whereof all the wh^le Scripture makes men^ion. These four wyndes they in
ancient time, named in this manner. That that comes from the East^ they
called Sub^olanus, East.
which we call the Leuant, or East wind. That comes from the South, Sou^h.
they named Auster, which we call the Meridian, or South wind. That comes
from the West, west.
they call Faucinus, which we call the Ponent or West. That from the North
they named Septentrio, or Aquile, or Boreas, North.
which we call North. To every of these four wyndes, they adjoined two
collateral wyndes, in manner as follows. That that is from the East toward
the part of the North, where the Tropike of Cancer aryseth, or comes forth,
they called Vulturnus: and that that is from thence toward the part of ye
South, Colla^erall wyndes.
where ryseth the Tropike of Capricorn, they called Eurus: also that is from
the West toward the part of the South, where the Tropike of Capricorn goes
down, they call Aphricus: and that that declineth to the North, where the
Tropike of Cancer goes down, they call Caurus. The Collaterals of the North
and he South, answeareth to the circumferences of the Polar circles: that that
is from the North toward the Leuant, or East, they call Aquilo: and that
declineth toward the West part, they call Circius: that is from the South
toward the East, Euro Auster, and toward the West, Euro Aphricus: thus many
has Aristotle in his Metheora. Twelve wy^des.
With these xii. winds, they sailed in old time, and made their compass by
them.

The Hydrographers of late days, and such as are trauayled and exercised in
saylyng, agree with the au^cients in the four principal wyndes, Eight whole
wyndes.

Division of the horizon by the four principal wyndes.


although they have chaung^d the names, calling the Leuant, or Orient, East: y^
Ponent or Occident, West: the Septentrional, North: and the Meridional, South.
Between these four winds, they divide every quarter of the Horizon into two
halfes, made of the two nearest, in this manner. Between the North and the
East, taking name of them both, they name the Northeast. Between the East and
the South, they name the Southeast: and between the South and the West,
Southwest: between West and North, Northwest. These eight wyndes in
navigations, they call whole wyndes.

Between these eight wyndes, they place other eight, that are called half
wyndes, which also are named of the two that are nearest unto them. Eight
half wyndes.
That that is between the North and Northeast, they call Northnortheast,
Between North East, and is East Northeast: and so forth of the other. Beside
these half winds, they have other which they call quarter winds. quarter
winds.
These take the name of the winds to the which they declyne: as if to the
quarter from ^he North, toward the Northeast, they call it North, and a
quarter toward the Northeast, that is, North and by East. And that that is
toward the Northwest, they call North, and a quarter toward Northwest. And so
of the other, as shall be verified in the figure following: The deuisio^ of the
wind^.
whereof is gathered, that deuidyng the eight principal wyndes into half
wyndes, they are 16. And every half wind divided into two quarters, xxxii.
winde^ in al^^
are in all 32. wyndes. Some have been so curious, or rather so vaynely careful
and too precise, that they have divided them into 64. And in the Cards that
they have, the confusion of lines is greater, then the profit that may be
taken thereby.

The demonstration of the wyndes.



These names do they use that sail by the Ocean Sea. And it seems they had
their beginning of the Almaine or Flemish tongue: For these nations chiefly
sail in the Ocean. They that sail in the S^a Mediteraneum, The names of the
winds in the Italian or Tuscane tongu^.
or Leuant Sea, call them by other nam^s, taking original of the Tuscan or
Italian tongue. Or else that they have denomination of the parts from whence
they come, in respect of the Sea Mediteraneum, as the wind called Graeco,
because it comes from Grecia, and Libe^co, because it comm^th from Lybia, and
Syroccho, because it comes from Syria, and beginning at the North, these are
their names, Tramontana, Graeco, Leuante, Ponente, Maestro, and that that is
between Tramontana and Graeco, they call Graeco Tramontana, and that is
between Graeco and Leuante, they call Graeco Leuante, and that is between
Leuante and Syroccho, they call Leuante Syroccho, and that is between Syroccho
and Mezzo Iorno, they call Mezzo Iorno Syroccho, and so of the other: and the
like of the quarters. And because they that sail in the Ocean, are governed by
altitudes, we will use the names that they use, where we intend to entreat of
altitud^s, and every man shall use them as he lyst^th, for as much as the
difference is not in the winds, but only in their names.

The second Chapter, of the composition of Cards for the Sea.
ARriuyng to the end desired (which is Navigations, What is Navigations.
the principal intent why I began this work) I say, that Navigations or
Sailing, is none other thing then to journey, or vyage by water, from one place
to another, and is one of the four difficult^st things, Proverb. xxx.
wher^of the most wise King has written. These viag^s do differ from viages by
land, in three things: for the land is ^yrme and steadfast, but this is
fluxible, The danger and difficulti of nauigatio^
wavering, and ^ooueable. That of the land, is known and termined by marks,
signs, and limittes: but this of the Sea, is uncertain and unknown. And if
in viages by land, there are hills, mountains, rocks, and craggie places,
the Sea pays the same seven fold with torments and tempests: therefore
these viages being so difficult, it shall be hard to make the same understood by
words or writing. The best explication, or invention, that the wits of men
have found for the manifesting of this, is to give the same painted in a Card.

Making of Cards for the Sea.
For the draught, or making whereof, it shall be requisite to know two things:
whereof the one is, the right position of places, or placing of countries and
coasts. The other is the distances that is from one place to another, and so
the Card shall have two descriptions. The wyndes or lines are called Rumbos, in
the Spa^ish tongue
The one that answeareth to the position, shall be the wyndes, which the
Mariners call lines or points of the compass: and the other that aunsweareth
to the distances, shall be the drawing and poynting of the coasts of the land,
and of the Islands compassed with the sea. To point the wyndes, or lines, you
must take saynnes of Parchment, or large Paper, of such bygnesse as you will
the Card to be, and in it draw two right lines with black ink, which in
the midst shall cut or divide them selves in right angles, the one according
to the length of the Card, which shall be East and West, and the other North and
South. Upon the point where they cut, make a center, and upon it, give a
privy or hid circle, which may occupy in manner the whole Card. This circle,
some make with lead, that it may be easily put out: these two lines divide the
circle into four equal parts, and every part of these shall you divide in
the myddest with a prick or puncte. Then from one puncte to another, draw a
right Diametrall line with black incke: and so shall the circle remain
divided with four lines, into eight equal parts, which corresponde to the
eight winds. In like manner shall you divide every of the eight into two equal
parts, and every part of these is called a half wind. Then draw from every
puncte, to his opposite Diametrall a right line, of green, or azure: likewise
shall you divide every half wind in the circle, into two equal parts. And
from these punctes, which divide the quarters, you shall draw a certain right
line with read ink, which also shall pass by the center, which they call
the mother Compass, The mother compass of the Card 32. lines which signify
so ma^y winds.
or chief compass of the Card, being in the myddest thereof: and so shall
come forth from the center, to the circumference 32. lines, which signify
the 32. winds. Beside these said lines, you shall make other equal distant to
them, and of the self same colors, in this manner. From the points of the
wyndes and half wyndes that pass by the center, draw certain right lines,
that pass not by the center, but be equally distant to those that pass by the
center, and of the same colors and equidistance, as are they that pass by the
center. And as these lines concur together as well in the center as in the
points of the wyndes, and half wyndes, that are in the circumference of the
circle, they shall leave, or make there other syxteene compasses, The placing
of many compas^es in the Card.
every one with his thyrtie and two wyndes. And if the Card be very great,
because the lines may not go far in sunder, if you will make there other
syxteene compasses, you must make them between the one and the other of the
first syxteene points, where the quarters are made with their wyndes, as we
have said. It is the custom for the most part, to paynt upon the center of
these compasses, a flower, or a rose, The flower, or rose of the center.
with diverse colors, and gold, differencing the lines, and marking them with
letters and other marks: especially signing the North with a flower Deluce,
and ^he East with a Cross. This beside the destinction of the wyndes, The
North.
serves also for the garnishing of the Card. And this for ye most part is
done after that the coast is drawn. And thus much suffiseth for the draught
of the wyndes.

The situation of the places, The situation of ^he place. etc.
Ports, and Islands in the Card, according to their proper ^ifferences,
consysteth in the particular, and ^rue relation of such as have trauayled
them, and therefore for this purpose it shall be needful to have paternes of
Coasts, Ports and Islands, which must be painted in the Card, and ^hese of
the best and most approved to be true: and not only to have paternes well
painted, but also it shall be necessary to know the true altitudes of the
Pole, of certain principal Capes, Ports, and famous Cities. This done, they
must be translated into certain thin papers, Translation of the Card, from
one to another.
and transparent, that may be seen through, and those of the best and finest
that may be had, annoynting them with oil of Line seed, and then drying the^
at the Sun. Then take the pattern or Card that is to be translated, and
reach or stre^che it forth upon a table. Then put the transparent paper, upon
the one side of the pattern where you will begin. And the paper ^eing made fast
upon the pattern with plomettes of lead, or a little wax, that may easily be
taken off, you shall in the transparent paper mark with a fine pen, one East
and West, and one North and South, or two, upon those that are seen by the
self same paper in the pattern. And this is called tracyng, or translatyng. In
like manner shall you trace all ye Costs, Havens, Ports, Islands, Cities, Capes,
and rivers, as appears in the pattern, unto the rocks that come forth of
the water, and the known banks. And because this paper does not suffice, you
shall put thereto another, and more, is need shall require. And begin the
translation in one, where the other ends, until you have translated all that
you desire, not forgetting to make in every one, lines of North and South, East
and West, to serve for marks afterward. So that the line of North and South,
of the one paper, may join close and even, with the line of the North and
South of the other paper that is joined to it by longitude.

And the pattern thus translated into these papers, you must put the ruled or
lyned paper or papers upon a plain, smooth, and steadfast table, where you
shall stretche them forth, and make them fast with plomets or weyghts, or
nail them to the table by the sides or corners, with small nails. Then upon
the said ruled paper, you shall put the paper that is translated from the
pattern, in that side or part that is correspondent from the pattern, to the
ruled Card, so that the lines of East and West, North and South of the
translation, may be upon the lines that answer to them in the ruled Card.

This paper thus made fast by the one side or part, you shall by the other
side (that it may remain in his place) put under it an other fine paper,
smoked or smyred on the neathermost part (which is that, that falls upon the
ruled Card) either with a lynke, Some do this only with oil.
or with matches of pitche. These thus ordered, and made fast one upon
another, you shall take a steel bodkyn, or wyre, with a smoothe and blunt
point, that it race not, Tracing of ^h^ Card.
or bore not the paper, and with it shall you draw, pressyng upon all the
translation, and tracing it with diligence and discretion, marking ever how
much in it is translated from the pattern: saving the wyndes or lines which the
Maryners call Rumbos, and so shall remain all the impression of the smoke in
the ruled Card, upon the which, with a fine pen you shall trace with ynke:
which being dry, you shall with ^rummes of bread make it clean from all the
smoke, and so shall the coaste appear in the Card drawn with ynke.

This done, The paynting of the Card.
then with a small pen shall you describe in the Card, all the places and
names of the coast in that part where they are, and as they are seen in the
pattern. And first you must describe in read, the Ports, principal Capes,
famous Cities, with other notable things: and all the residue in black. Then
shall you draw or paynt Cities, Shyps, Banners, and beasts, and also mark the
Regions, and other notable things. Then with colors and gold shall you
garnyshe and beautify the Cities, Compasses, Shyps, and other parts of the
Card. Then shall you set forth the coasts with green, by the shore or
banks of the lands, and make them fair to sight with a li^le saffron, or
otherwise, as shall seem best. Likewise shall you describe certain letters,
with their significations, in this manner.

B. for a Bay. C. for a Cape. A. for an Angle. I. or Y. for an Island. M. for a
Mountain. P. for a Port. R. for a River.

Then in place where is more room, The making of the trunk or scale of the
leagues.
or that is least occupied, you shall draw two right lines, equally distaunt:
and the one no further from the other then half a singer, or little more, and so
long, that between the^ may be marked at ye least three hundred leagues. And
this the Maryners call the truncke or scale of leagues, and place it or use it
in this manner. They take with y^ compass, a hundred leagues of y^ trunk of
the Card or pattern yt is translated, and they set them just between the two
lines, and this space they part by the half, and rest the foot of the
compass in 50. and these divided again equally in two parts, they rest the
compass in 25. and the 25. being likewise divided, they rest in xii. leagues
and a half, and ma^ke them as appears in the demonstration following.



The graduation of the Card.
The Card being thus made, then to graduate it, or divide it into degrees, you
must draw three lines, which make right angles with the line of Ea^^ and
West, equidistant to the line of North and South: and (...) also shall be North
and South. These shall be drawn by the Islands ^f Asores, or Soria, or nearer
to Spain, or where the Card shall be less^ occupied. And for this purpose,
the one line (...) so far distant from the other, that in the two spaces
wh^^^ (...) make, may be marked, in the one, the degrees, and in the other, the
number of them, conformable to the graduacion of the pattern: as the uumbers of
degrees show East and West, with the Ports, Capes, and coasts in their proper
altitudes.

And if the Card have no graduation, you shall take with the compass in the
trunk of the leagues, seven spaces of 12. leagues and a half, which are 87.
leagues and a half. And these must be divided into five parts, which come
forth at 17. leagues and a half for a part: and the four parts taken with
the compass, make four degrees, and divided into four parts, every part is
a degree, and is marked thus..

And if you will make the degrees at 16. leagues, and two terces or more: The
mark of a degree.
you shall give to every degree so much space as the leagues comprehend. This
graduation must be begun from some one cape, whose altitude of the Pole is well
known. And the whole Card being thus graduate, you must begin the number of
the degrees from the Equinoctial line, one, two, thr^e. etc. toward the one
Pole, and the like toward the other: so that to the known Cape, may answer
the number of his altitude. And so shall you do to the whole Card. Also, the
Equinoctial line shall be marked in his proper place.

And in like manner shall you mark the Tropikes according as they are in ye
sphere. But forasmuch as in Spain, Cape S. Vincent.
Cape saint Uincent is the principal, they begin there to make graduation, and
number it in 37. degrees. And from thence toward the Pole Artike, the degrees
do increase. And from thence toward the Equinoctial line, Increasing and
diminishing of the degrees.
they deminish: and from that line, to the pole Antartike, they increase again
(as we have said) as is contained in the Card, and as appears in this
demonstration following.



And if the pattern have neither leagues nor degrees, you must take or know the
altitudes of two Capes, If the pattern have neither league nor degree.
that are North, and South, of the degrees, and the difference of the degrees
of the elevation, that is from the one Cape to the other, ye shall divide all
that space in so many parts, and so each one part shall be seventeen leagues
and a half, as answers to one degree. Or according to the opinion of the
leagues of the roundnesse of the earth, as we have said, as touching this in
the eyghteenth Chapter of the first part. In Spain they use with the compass
to take the space that is from Cape saint Uincent, to the myddest of the
greatest Island of Berlinga, which they account three degrees: so that after
seventeen leagues and a half for a degree, they are 52. leagues and a half:
and so much do they put in this space. Other put fifty leagues, accompting
after syxteene leagues, and two terces for a degree, and in this manner they
make of leagues, degrees, and of degrees, leagues. The sailing Cards, have no
certain bigness limited them, because they only represent the description
of the water and earth, and not the quantity, and for this cause some are
painted in great space, and other in little. They that are in great space, are
more manifest, and more precise: and these the Maryners call Cards of the
l^rgest prick or draught. The quantity of Cards.
Some desire rather to have them in less space, because they are brieffer, and
conteyne much in little room: and these they call Cards of the less^ prycke.
And if for any consyderation aforesaid, you desire to reduce any C^rde from
the greatest prick to the least, or contrarywyse: The reducing of Card^ from a
big form^ to a less, or the contrary.
y^u must paynt only the coast and Islands on a paper, in manner as you did in
the ruled Card, of the lines or wyndes, I say, let it be drawn upon paper,
for destroying or rasing the pattern. And when it is traced only with ynke,
then upon that draught shall you draw certain right li^es equidistaunt made
all by one compass, according to the length of the Card, and other lines that
may cut them in right angles. and likewise equidistaunt, and of the same
compass that the first are. These two orders of lines, shall divide all the
superficial part of the Card, into perfect squares or quadratures. And it is
to be noted, that the nearer the lines are joined together, and the squares
the le^se, so much the more perfectly may it be reduced, and more easily. Then
shall you take another paper, greater or less then the Card, according to the
point that you desire to reduce it unto, and in the length and breadth thereof,
you shall divide so many spaces as are between the lines of the other paper,
and if it be greater, the squares shall be greater: and if less, less. To
ke^pe order in the correspondence of the squares (which shall be a great light to
translate the one from the other) you shall number the orders of the squares,
as those of the longitude, by the ^ronte or uppermost part: and those of the
latitude, by the side, as well in the one paper, as in the other, conformable:
also, those of the front, from the left hand to the right, and those of the
side, from above, downward. Then behold the coast how it goes by the squares
of the first paper, and likewise the tracting or drawing in the squares of the
second, in the self same order and proportion, as it is there, and so shall
it remain reduced to the point which you desire. And this shall serve for a
pattern, to set in the ruled Card.

Here follows the manner of the translating of the Card from one form into
another, greater or less.



Here follows a similitude of the Mariners Card.

The pilots and Mariners neither use nor have the knowledge to use other
Cards, The pl^yne Cards are imperfecte. Example of e^rour in the plain Cards.
then only these that are plain, as I have said. The which, because they are
no^ Globus, Sphericall, or round, are imperfect, and fail to show the true
distances. For in how much they depart from the Equinoctial, toward which so
ever of the P^les, the Meridian lines are contracte narrower and narrower: In
such manner, that ^f two Cities or points in the Equinoctial, should be
distaunt of longitude 60. leagues, and in the self same Meridian at 60.
degrees from the Equinoctial, toward either of the Poles^ should be other ^wo
Cities or points, they should be dist^un^ in longitude but only 30. leagues.
And for the better declaration and understanding hereof, I say, that if two
Ships should depart from the Equinoctial, the one distaunt from the other a
hundred leagues by East and Weast, and that either of them should sail
directly by his Meridian toward the North: then when either of them has the
Pole over his Horizon 60. degrees, the one shall be distaunt from the other
only 50. leagues by the Paralelle of East and Weast, as appears by the
plain Cards, that they have the self same hundred leagues. And beside these
considerations, one error br^ngeth in an other, and so another an other.
Whereof to speak any more here, it shall be to certain Pilots (as the proverb
says) not only to give musyke to the deaf, The ign^raunce of ^ertayne
Pilots. Good Cards. The variation of the Compass.
or to pay^t a house for blind men, but shall also be an endless confusion.
Furthermore it is necessary to consider, that good Cards ought to have the
Coasts, Ports, Cities, and other places, situate according to the wyndes or
lines thereof, proportionally as they are in the world: and not by the wyndes
that the compass shows. This I say for the Northeasting or Northwesting of
the compass (called the variation) as he^reafter I will touch in the fyfth
Chapter. And likewise shall you diligently observe, that the graduation of the
Card show the same in their proper altitudes. Altitude^.
The Cards that lack this, ought to be corrected and amended by wise and
expert men: Saui^g that in the Leuant sea (called Marae Mediterraneum) and in
this Channel of Flaunders (called the narrow seas) it is not conueni^nt for the
navigations, In the na^row seas they s^yle not by elevation of the Pole.
that the Ports be marked in the Cards by the wyndes, which the compass
shows, for as much as they sail not by the altitudes of the Pole. Likewise,
it shall not be inconvenient, but rather very necessary (to avoid so many
errors, of the which do ^low great dangers, and such a confusion) that your
Majesty should command certain learned Cosmographers and expert in the
art of sailing, Correction of the sea Card.
to verify ye altitudes of ye Pole, that are of Ports, Capes, Islands, and
people by the coasts of the Sea, and in like manner truly to describe the
coasts of the land, especially of the Navigations of the West Indies, The west
Indies.
or Mundo Nueuo, where it has pleased God that so many nations and people have
received the water of holy baptism, coming to the knowledge of the true God,
whereby the Christian Empire is greatly amplyfyde, beside the great richesse
had by the said Indies. An^ this has God miraculously wrought by the
conquestes of your Majesty, in subduing Infidels, and Gentiles, to the
obedience of the true Catholic faith. Charles the fyfth.
Whereby, not only God has be^n well pleased, but also your Majesty has
received perpetual fame, with eternal renown, and immortal glory to your
posterity in worlds to come.

The iii. Chapter, of the virtue and property of the Lodestone, called in
Latin Magnes, and in Spanish, P^edraymon.
THe Lode stone (as writes Cardinal Cusanus) has substance, The virtue,
sub^^ance, and operation of the Lodestone
virtue, and operation. His ver^ue is engendered of his substance, essence, or
being, and of his essence and virtue proceeds this operation and effect, in
such sort, that this stone communicating his virtue to iron, by reason thereof,
causes the iron to move, although between the one and the other be a cup,
or plate of silver, or a table, or any other like thing. Virtue attractiue.


The attractiue, or drawing force of the Lode stone, causes the nature of iron
to be and rest in it, and that so fyrmely and quietly, Cusan applies this to
the glori^ied body of Christ, according to these words, If I shall be exalted, I
will draw all unto me.
that being naturally heavy and ponderous, it descends not, because his
nature rests not in him self, but is unite with the nature of the stone,
which seems to extend it self, and as it were to cast ^oorth a lively
spirit of enchaunting virtue. Insomuch that (as we see by experience) by the
said union, it not only distributeth his virtue to one iron, but that iron
likewise to another, and that other again to another, and so forth: until of
many ryngs or lynkes of iron, be made a chain.

Saint Augustine (as he writes in his books, De ciuitate Dei) did maruayle
that he saw an iron move it self upon a v^ssell, by moo^ing the Lode stone
under the vessel.

It is called Magnes, Why the Lode stone was called Magn^s, and the findyng
thereof.
because the inuentour, or fynder thereof, was so named: who (as Plin^e writes)
keeping cattle in East I^dia, had his shoes soled with plates of iron, and
iron nails, such as they use in G^sconie, and had in his hand a staff with a
pyke, or hook of iron: and resting him self upon a quantity of this stone,
could ^ot remove his feet, neither lift up his staff. Then staying a while
asto^yshed, as ignorant of the cause, at the length began to perceive the
property of the stone, and to understand the attractiue virtue thereof (the
color of it differs not from iron) and was therefore called quick iron, or
living iron.

The best kind of these stones, is of Auzurine or blew color, as the sea
sometimes appears. Sundry kinds of the lode stone.


Of these, are found five kinds or differences. The first is, of Ethiope. The
second, of Ma^edonie. The third, of Lechio in Boetia. The fourth, of Tro^da,
near to Alexandria, And the fyfth of Asia: but at this day, it is found in
diverse other places. It is found also in many places in Spain: The l^destone
of ^payne.
as in the hill Mor^na, near unto the village of Calera, being of the order
of saint James, in the province of Leon. Likewise in a hill of Moron, in the
territory of the Earl of Vrenia, is great quantity th^reof, and in diverse
other places. The stone that we most commonly use, is of the Island of Elua,
The Island of Elua.

The lodestone of Denmark.


of the Lord of Pomblina, which I judge to be better then that of Denmark.
This and the other, have virtue to draw iron unto ^^e^. And true it is that
Teanxedes writes, The lodestone of Ethiope.

Diverse opinions of the lode stone.


that in Ethiope is found an other kind of this stone, that puts iron from
it. Auerroes the commentator of Aristotle, denies that Magnes draws iron
unto it, but says, The qualities and properties of the lode stone.
that iron by his natural inclination does move to the stone, as to his
natural place, by a c^rtayne quality, which the stone impresseth in iron. And
beside this ver^ue and property that it has to draw iron unto it, The parts
of the lodestone.
it has also another: and that is, that it gives unto iron ver^ue and power,
to show the two points of the Horizon, where it cutteth the Meridian, that is
in the two wyndes, of Nor^h, and South. These virtues are found more intent,
in only two parts of the stone: and these are ever opposite, or contrary the
one to the other, and so are they contrary in operation. For iron touched with
the one part, and placed where it may move freely, will show the North: and
an other iron touched with the other part, will show the South. Fyndyng this
experience, may be known, What part of the stone au^sweareth to the North and
South.
what part of the stone answeareth to the North, which the Mariners call the
face of the stone, and likewise of the South. This stone is so necessary, that
without it, Navigations should be imperfecte and uncertain, because it gives
life to the Needle and Compass, which leads and guydeth the Pilote, that he
may go certaynely in the day, and not err or wander in the night. Also it
shows and directs to compass the world, The use and making of the
Maryners compass.
and to know the wyndes. And therefore, for as much as the compass is so
necessary, we intend to show the order and manner how it ought to be made,
for it may chance to fail, or be lost in the viage.

The iiii. Chapter, of the making of the Mariners compass for Navigations.
TAke such paste or paper, whereof Cards are made, and make in it a Circle, of
the quantity of a spanne, or little more or less. In the which you shall
paynte the 31. wyndes, with their colors, in such order as we gave in the
first and second Chapter of the wyndes, and of the Card, The Flower deluse,
and the cross.
not forgetting to mark the North with a Flower deluce, and the East with a
cross. And more then this, may every man garnishe and beautify the same, as
seems best to his fantasy. Then on the lower or nether part of this
paste, you must draw a line, which shall be directly under that of the North
and South, which shall be the mark for the setting of the Irons and Steeles.
The fly, flower, or rose of the compass.
Then shall you take wyre of iron or steel, of the bygnesse of a great pynne,
or according to the bygnesse or the roundn^^se of ^he paste, flower, rose or
fly, as it may be called. This wyre must be bowed double, so that every of the
parts may be equally as long as the Diameter of the fly, and a quarter part
more. The ends or points of these iro^s or steeles, must be pynched
together, and made close, and open in the myddest, the one from the other,
until the ends come to be equal with the extremities of the Diameter of the
fly, and so shall the ^^eeles remain in manner in form of an edge. These
wyres or irons must be made fast in the nether part of the fly: so that
their extr^mities, ^nds, or points, come precisely by the line of North and
South. The line of the North and South.


And to fix or fasten them so, they must be covered with a thin paper glued,
leauyng the points and ends uncovered: And these ends must be ^ouched with
the Lode stone, in this manner. The part that is under the flower deluce, must
be rubbed on that part of the stone that answers to the North, as is said in
the Chapter before. The touching of the n^edle with the lode stone.
And this shall suffice for the perfection of the compass. Yet some there be,
that for superaboundaunce, do^ touch the other part of the Iron, with that
part of the stone that answers to the South, although it may suffice to
touch it only with the other part. This touching of the Iron with the stone,
that the demonstratiue or woorking virtue may show it self forth, The
breaking of the ^tone, to draw out his virtue.
must be done with geuyng certain strokes with a hammer, on that part of the
stone wherewith the Iron must be touched, that is to say, in the North part, or
the South: And from these will come forth of the stone certain beardes, like
small ysicles, whereon you shall rub the point of the Iron, as you would when
a knyfe: and so shall certain of those beardes of the stone, cleave and stick
fas^ to the Iron. And the Irons thus touched, with the beardes cleaving to
them, you must take a prick or point of laton, of Peramidal, sharp, or steple
form, which is broad below, and sharde above toward the point, this is made
round, or eight square, as seems best: and in the nether part or breadth, it
must be bored (but not through) with a borer, which must also be of Piramidall
form, and center into the myddest of the said P^ramidall prick, or point of
laton, unto the midst, or somewhat more. This Piramidall point (which the
mariners call the Capitell) must be of height half a finger breadth, or
according as the compass shall be, and must be put through the center of the
fly, so that the point come forth on the higher part thereof, and must there
be made fast, and well ^ixte. Then shall you take a round box of wood, within
the which the needle may be, The box of the compass.
not touching the sides of the same: And this must be of the heyght of the
half Diameter of the compass. And the ground or bottom thereof must be set
to it, as to the covering of a box, that it may be easily taken off, and put
on, to have often recourse, to touch the irons with the s^one (which they call
feeding) when need shall be, Feedyng the needle with the stone.
that the virtue of the compass fail not. Also in the midst of the ground,
or floor of the box, you must set a sharp point or prick, made of a wyre of
laton, this must stand right up, and upon the prick or point thereof, you
shall se^ the bored hole of the Capitel, and that the wind enter not above,
you shall cover the box with a glass. And thus being touched with the stone
and set upon the point, it shall show the true part of the North, and
consequently all the other wyndes.

And here is to be noted, that after the irons or needle of the compass has
been touched in any of these manners, A notable experience of the Lodeston^
if you bring the North part of the stone, to the North of the needle or
compass: then will the North of the needle come to it. And if you bring the
North part of the stone, to the South part of the needle, it will flee from it.

And contrariwise, if you bring the South part of the stone, to the South of
the needle, it will come to it, and if to the North, it will flee from it. This
is understood, the needle or compass standing as it should be. And this also
is a good sign, to know which is the North part and South part of the stone.

Moreover, this box must be put within another box, in the which it must hang
upon two circles of laton, annexed the one within the other: which serve that
the compass sway not, or hang not toward the one side or the other, although
the Ship sway, and this box also must have his cover of wood, to keep the
other. You shall likewise observe that the point of the Capitell, and the hole
thereof, and also the point or prick upon the which it rests, by vprig^t, and
likewise the Rose, that it declyne not to one part or other. And if it be
quicker then it ought to be, then make the point that it goes upon somewhat
blunter.



The v. Chapter, of the effect or property, that the compass has to the
Northeasting or Northwesting, whereby is known the variation of the Compass.
The variation of the comp^^.
MAny and diverse are the opinions that I have heard, and also read in certain
writers of latter days, as touching the Northeasting and Northwesting of the
Compass, and yet me seems, that none does touch the prycke, and few the
white.

They call it Northeasting, when the needle shows or poynteth from the North
(which is his true mark) toward the Northeast: and Northwesting, when from the
North, it declyneth toward Northwest. For the better understanding of these
differences, whereby the needles differ or vary from the pole, you must (being
in the Meridian where the compasses show the pole) imagine a poy^t under the
pole of the world, The poy^t attractiue imagined under the pole of the world.
and this point to be without all the heavens, contained under the first
moveable. The which point or part of heaven, has a virtue attractiue, yt
draws unto it Iron touched with the part of the lode stone, correspondent to
that certain part of heaven imagined without or under all the heavens, moved by
ye first moveable. For if it were imagined to be moved within any of the moved
heavens, then the attractiue point, by the moving of the first moveable, and
consequently ^he compass, should make the self same moving in 24. hours,
which is never seen. And therefore this point is not in the moveable heavens,
neither in ye pole. For if it were in it, the compass should not vary,
Northeasting, and Northwesting. The cause of the va^iation of the compass
Therefore the cause of Northeasting or Northwesting, or departing from the pole
of the world, is, that being in the said Meridian, the attractiue point and the
pole, are in the self same, or in one Meridian: and the compass showing the
attractiue point, Departing of the pole from the point attractiue.
shows directly the pole. And departing from the same Meridian toward the
East (the world being round) the pole of the world remains to us on the left
hand: and the point of the attractiue virtue, shall be on the right hand, which
is toward the Northeast wind. And in how much more we shall sail toward the
East, the distaunce shall appear greater unto us, until we come unto the 90.
degrees: and there shall be the most and greatest Northeasting. And passing from
thence further forward, The greatest Northeasting.
it shall appear unto us, yt the attractiue point, comes nearer and nearer
unto the Meridian line: and so much shall the compass go bettering or amending
the Northeasting, until it return to the self same meridian in the opposite or
contrary part from whence they came, or where they began, and then shall the
attractiue point be to them directly upon, or against the pole of the world,
and the compass shall show or point directly toward it. And again, passing
further forward, the pole of the wo^l^ sh^l rem^ine to the right hand, and the
point attractiue to the left hand, and so shall the compass begin
Northwesting, The greatest ^o^thwesting.
increasing it until it come from thence to the 90 degrees, and there shall be
the most of his Northwesting. For turning toward the Meridian from the
attractiue point, it shall go amending or bettering, until it return to the
selfsame Meridian from whence it departed, and there shall the compass show
the pole of the world directly, by, or over against the attractiue point, which
is perpendiculerly under the pole. The attractiue point is under the Pole.
And if from thence they should turn, to pass toward the West, the pole
should rest to the right hand, and the attractiue point to the left, and so
shall the variation be to the Northwest: and this is the cause of the
Northeasting, and Northwesting, or variation of the compass. The Northeasting
and Northwesting is not vnifourme.
Also it is not to be vnderstoo^e that this Northeasting, and Northwesting, is
uniform, as is the departing (or according to the departure) from the
Meridian, where the compass shows perfectly: but rather before at the
beginning of the departing from the said Meridian, it makes difference, or
variation in a certain quantity, and the increase that is afterward, is
little, and so much the less, in how much y^ more the departing is from the
said Meridian. For it is a passion of ye circles, The declinati^n of the Sun.
dividing or cutting them selves in ye sphere: so that these differences are,
as are they of the declinatio^s of the Sun: which near unto the Equinoctials,
are great, and near to the solstitials, are little. All the which shall
evidently appear in ye figure following, which is a circle divided by two
Diameters, into 4. equal parts, cutting the^ selves in ye center in right
angles. And from the center point (called the pole) comes forth a moveable
Meridian: and in it goes a compass likewise moveable about the circle. The
attractiue point is somewhat distant from the pole of the world, and from it,
comes forth a threede, which must ever pass by the North and South of the
compass. And the compass being in the Meridian of ye point attractiue, that
passes by the pole, shall show the pole. And without that shall go
northeasting, or northwesting, so varying and departing from the true Meridian
that comes forth of the pole of the world. The Meridian that shows (...)
Pole.
It is the opinion of some Mariners, that the Meridian where the compass
shows directly the pole, passes by the Island of Sancta Maria, and other say,
by the Island of Cueruo in the Asores.

Demonstration of Northeasting.


And where as the inconvenience is manifest and notorious, the same must be
remedied with prudence and time, Experience, the ground of reason.
and not to be negligent in the viage: but ever to use and observe experience,
more profitable then the subtyle and curious questions of the secret searchers
of natural things without experience, whereof reason takes his principal
ground. And therefore the wise Pilot ought to know by experience (as many of
them do not) how much a good compass does vary, Advertisement to Pilots.
Northeasting, or Northwesting from one Port to another. So that to know how
much the compass does vary, Northeasting, or Northwesting, from one place to
another, (as to say, half a quarter, or more or less in quantity as they are
distant from the said Meridian, where the compasses show the Pole) shall in the
Navigations take heed, and well consider, in any such v^age, Northeasting or
Northwesting, in the points of the compass. And this shall be to sail truly by
the poynt^s or lines that the Card does certaynely show. As for example.
Example of ^aylyng.
In sailing from any Island that is in the said Meridian, or from any other
part, in seeking of any port that is to them true Northeast, if by this way the
compass should N^rtheast half a quarter, then saylyng by the poyn^es or lines
of the compass Northeast half a quarter to the North, their Navigations shall be
(excepti^g other impediments) to the Northeast which the Card shows: And by
this point or line, must be made the account of such a vyage. And so by the
points of the Card, they shall directly find the Port that they sought. And by
this order shall they go^^rne themselves in all N^uigations. For the which, it
is convenient that wise and expert Pilots, should make notes of observations of
Nor^heasting and Northwesting, that is, from Port, to Port, and to make
compilations and geatherings of such notes, to carry with them in their Ships
for regim^^^s: and not to be busy or c^rious to amend their compass^s, or
with the stone to rub the Irons or S^eeles, neither on the one side or the
other, from whence the Flower deluce does show: For this should cause many
inconveniences. Neither ought they to admit in their Cards, two graduations:
The variation of the comp^^.
especially for that to know how much in every place the compass does go
aside, or vary from the true Meridian, may easily be made an instrument to show
the same by the Su^ne in the day, and by the Stars in the night.

The vi. Chapter, of the introduction and principl^s of the Art of Navigations.
FOr as much as now we have the guide, which is the compass, it is convenient
to enter into the way, which is Navigations. The which (as we have said) is to
go or pass by water from one place to another. And this presupposed, I say
that he that desires to attempt Nauigations, must know two things, which the
Card shall show him. The one is, by what point or line he ought to sail: In
Navigations what is chiefly to be considered.
and this shall the lines of the saylyng Card show him. The other is, ^he
leagues of the distaunce: and this shall the scale or trunk of the leagues
show, taking with a compass the distaunce of two places, and applying it to
the s^al^. The knowledge of these two things, ought the Pilot to bear in
memory: and to put them in effect, ought to direct his foreship to the
selfsame wind, which the compass does show. For the distaunce, The distance.
he ought to know how much the Ship goes daily, well considering and
observing the winds, tides, currents, and all such things as may be with
him, or against him. And according heereunto, he shall know how much he has
gone, and what remains for him to go, and whether he be far off, or near
unto the place whither he in^endeth to sail: the which in Navigations, is the
end desired. And because this estimation or computation can not be just and
exact, especially in a long vyage, or in long time, it shall be convenient that
we rectify or amend it, knowing the place where the Ship is, on the
superficial part of the water, by the place that answers to it in heaven.
The altitude of the Pole and Equinoctial.
This place of heaven, is known by the altitude of the pole: and by the
altitude of the pole, is known the altitude of the Equinoctial: and by the
altitude of the Equinoctial and declination of the Sun, is known y^
Meridian altitude: and contrarywyse, The Meridian altitude.
knowing the Meridian altitude and declination of the Sun, is known the
altitude of the Equinoctial, and by the Equinoctial, the pole, and by the
altitude of the pole, is known the latitude: and this is the place that is
desired to be known. But for as much as the heaven is moveable from the East
to the West, this place is not known as a certain point, but is known as a
line or parallel at a certain distaunce from the Equinoctial, and it is known
in what point of this parallel the Ship is, To know the place of heaven.
by the altitudes that are taken from heaven: but it is known by the line that
the Ship has gone, as we will further declare in ye xiii. Chapter, of making a
point or prick in the Card. And in this manner you shall have rectified the
way that the Ship has gone, To know the way of the vyage.
and consequently the way that it has yet to go.

And forasmuch as these altitudes are so profitable and necessary, it shall be
needful to give rules how we may use them to our most commodity. Rules to
know the ^l^itudes.
And for this, is presupposed to know, that all places situate on the
superficial part of the earth, and water, either they are under one M^ridian,
so that they have, or where they have one self same longitude, Longitude and
latitude.
and differ in latitude, or are in one parallel, where they have one self same
latitude, and differ in longitude, or are in diverse Meridians and paraleles,
where they differ in longitude, and latitude. And I say, that if they have one
self same longitude, they sail from the one to the other, by the line of
North, and South, and how many degrees does vary the altitude of the pole and
of the Equinoctial in heaven, so many degrees have they gone by sea, or by
land, If two places have one self same latitude, they pass from the one to
the other by the line of East and West. And in such manner of viage, the
altitudes do not profit us, because there is no variation. If they differ or
vary in longitude, and latitude, they sail from the one to the other by some
of the other lines. Variation of degrees.
But there are more degrees that correspond the way that the Ship makes, then
the degrees that vary the altitudes of the Equinoctial, and the pole. And this
difference shall be greater, in how much the line shall draw near to the East and
West: And how much it shall draw near to North and South, it shall be less. Of
the degrees or leagues that answer to every degree of the variation of the
altitude, we will entreat heerea^ter in the xii. Chapter.

how the altitudes are known,
These altitudes are known many ways, but especially by two: as by the
Meridian altitude and declination of the Sun (as we have said) is known the
altitude of the Equinoctial, and by it, the altitude of the Pole. The second
way, they are known by the altitude of some fixed Star, The fixte Stars.
of those that are not hid. And among many other, the North Star, The North
Star.
is taken, because it is nearest to the Pole. To know the altitudes by the Sun,
To know the altitudes by the Sun.

The Meridian.


three things are necessary, that is to say, an instrument, the declination of
the Sun, and rules. The instrument to know the Meridian altitude shall be the
Astrolabie, because it is most commodious for this purpose, whereof we will
entreat in the Chapter following. The declination of the Sun (which is to
take it away, or to join it with the Meridian altitude) we have already
described in the third Chapter of the second part. The rule to know when the
declinations must be joined with the Meridian altitude, The declination of the
Sun.

The altitudes of the Pole.


or taken from it, we will give in the viii. Chapter. To know the altitudes of
the Pole, by the altitudes of the North Star, two things are necessary: that
is, an instrument, and rules. The instrument wherewith the Mariners are
accustomed to take the altitudes of the North, they call Balestilia, which is a
cross staff, whereof we will write hereafter in the nien^h Chapter. La^obes
staff.
And the rules of the Turn or compass, which the North Star makes about
the Pole, we will declare in the tenth Chapter.

The vii. Chapter, of the making and use of the Astrolabie^ with the which the
maryners take the altitude of the Sun.
TAke a plate of copper, or latton (which for this purpose is better then any
other metal) of the biggenesse that you desire to make the Astrolabi^, and is
commonly of the biggenesse of a spanne of the Diameter, and let it be of the
thickness of half a finger at the least: for the waightier that it shall be, so
much shall it be more steadie to make the altitude. This place must be made
round by a circle, leaving coming forth of the circle or corner, in the which
you shall put a ring or handel with a hole, whereby you may hang the
Astrolabie, by a thread or li^e to take the altitude.

After it is thus made, with y^ ring or handle annexed thereto, make it bright,
and smoothe, publlyshed on both the sides, and all of one equal thickness,
that one side be not heavier then another, which y^u shall try in this manner:
The rectifying of the A^^rolabie
hang the plate by the ryng or hole that you have made, and from the same hole
hang a plomet of lead, fasted to a here, or fine threede of silk. The
Astrolabie thus hanging, free, and at liberty with the plomet, if then the
thread fall upon the center of the Astrolabie, The threed^ and plomet.
it is well: but if the threede do lean or swar^e to the one side, or to the
other, from the center, then is that side thicker and heavier then the other,
and must therefore be made thynner, until the thread fall justly upon the
center. This done, make a circle upon the said center^ a little within the
circumference of the Astrolabie. Then draw a Diameter from the center of the
hole, in the which the ring or handle is, unto ye center of the Astrolabie,
traversing or ouerthwarting the whole Circle. And this shall be called the line
of the Zenith, The lines vertical and horizontall.
or Uertial point: which also shall be cut with an other Diameter upon the
center, making right angles with it. And this Diameter shall be called the
Horizontall line. These two Diameters shall divide the circle, into four equal
parts. After this, you shall make another circle, so much more within the
second, that between the circumferences of both the circles, may be contained
the numbers of the degrees. Then (the Astrolabie hanging before you) you shall
divide the one part (being the superior and leaft part) first into three
equal parts, and every part shall conteyne 30. degrees. Then shall you divide
every part of these into three other equal parts, and they shall conteyne 10.
degrees: and every of these divide into two parts, and they shall conteyne 5.
degr^es. This done, put a ruler upon the center of the Astrolabie, applying it
to every of the points that divide the said parts, and draw certain lines
that pass from the circumference of the first circle, unto the less
circumference: and in the spaces of the less circle write the numbers of the
degrees, beginning in the Horizontall line: and in that space put five, and in
the second, t^n, and so forth of the other, until the 90. degrees end in the
line of the Zenith. then shall you divide the spaces that are between the first
circle and the second, every space into fine, which shall make the 90. degrees.
The Astrolabie thus made, you shall make the Alhidada or Label. The Alhidada of
the Ast^olabie.
For the which, you shall take a pla^e of laton, of the breadth of scarcely
two fingers, and as thick as the Astrolabie: also as long as the Diameter of
the Astrolabie, and make a line in the myddest thereof by the longitude: in the
midst of this line, make a circle, so great, that it may touch in the sides
of the plate: then cut off this plate on the on^ side, that which it has from
the line to the right hand, and on the other side, that it has from the line
to the leaft hand, leauyng the circle whole. This line that shall pass by the
center of the circle, is called Linea fiduciae, (that is) the line of
confidence, which is that, that shows in the degrees, the altitude that is
taken. Then shall you take away the ends or corners of the Alhidada that are
without the line, so that you touch not the line. This done, you shall make
two little rising or raised tables or plates, of the same metal whereof the
Astrolabie is made, and of the self same thickness that is the Alhidada, or
little less, and of the breadth of the Diameter of the circle of the Alhidada,
and let them be a thumb in heyght or breadth. In the myddest of these two
places by the height, you shall make a line. When these are made equal, and al
th^yr angles right, in every line of these that you have made, you shall also
make two holes, ^qually distaunt from the sides or edges of the said plates or
tablettes. And of the two holes of every of these little plates, The holes of
the alhidada.
the one hole must be as big as may conteyne a great pynne: and these shall
serve to take the altitude of the Stars. The other must be so subtle and
small as a fine sowyng needle: and these serve to take the altitude of the
Sun. They must be made in such manner, that the outward part of them be
bygger, and less within, of the quantity that I have said. These tablets or
erected plates being thus made, they must be sothered in the Alhidada, between
the center and extremities or ends of the same, making in it certain notches
where they may be made fast, and sothered: or leauyng first in the plates
certain sharp points or corners, that may enter into certain holes made in
the Alhidada, whereby they may be made fast underneath with pinnes: And they
must be so set, that the line where the holes of ye plates are, may fall upon
the line of confidence of the Alhidada, so that the one half of the plate be
set upon the Alhidada, and the other half without it, or at large. In like
manner you shall take good advertisement, that the great hole of the one plate,
stand directly against the great hole of the other plate, and be nothing at all
awry. This done, you shall bore the Astrolabie through by the center, making a
very round hole, that may have in the midst of it the center of the
Astrolabie. This hole shall be of the biggenesse of a goose quil. And the like
shall you make in the center of the circle of the Alhidada. Then shall you make a
pynne or nail of the same la^on, the which on the upper part of the Alhidada
may have a plain and round head. This pynne also shall be very round and
smoothe, that it may enter just and close into the hole of the Alhidada and
Astrolabie. And at the end or point thereof, coming forth on the other side
of the Astrolabie, must be a hole made sydeway through the pin, close to the
plate of the Astrolabie, of the bigness of a little nail or pin, that may be
put therein, to make fast together the Alhidada with the Astrolabie, so that
the Alhidada may thereby be turned round about the Astrolabie, as appears in
this figure following.



To take the altitude of the Sun, To take the altitude of the Sun.
hang up the Astrolabie by the ryng, and set the Alhidada against the Sun,
and raise it, or put it down in the quarter that is graduate, until ye beams
of the Sun enter in by the little hole of the other table^ or raised plate,
and precisely by the other little hole of the other tablet. Then look upon the
line of confidence: and how many degrees it shows in the quarter that is
graduate (beginning from the Horizontall line) so many degrees of height has
the Sun. In like manner shall you do to take the altitude of any other Star,
looking through the great holes, because this may hardly be seen by the little
holes.

The viii. Chapter, of the d^finition of the altitude. And how the altitude of
the Pole may well be known by the Meridian altitude and elevation of the Sun.
IT is convenient to d^fine the altitude, before we give rules of the use
thereof. The Altitude of the Sun, or the Moon, or of any other Stars,
What is the altitude of the Planets or Stars.
is the distaunce that is between it and the Horizon. And this ought to be
accounted by the degrees of the great Circle, which passes by the Zenith, and
by the center of the Sun, or of the Moon, or of the Star, unto the Horizon.
And the degrees that are from the H^rizon to the Star, or to the Sun, that is
the altitude: The complement of the altitude.
And the degrees that are from the Center of the S^arre, or of the Sun, unto
the Zenith, is called the complement, or supplement of the altitude. The
altitude of the Equinoctial, is ever co^nted by the Meridian. And the degrees
of the Meridian, that are between the Equinoctial and the Horizon, is the
altitude of the Equinoctial: and other so many are they, that are from the
Zenith to the Pole. from the Zenith to the Pole.
For the altitude of the Equinoctial, is equal to the complement of the
altitude of the Pole. The degrees of the Meridian that are be^w^^ne the
Equinoctial, and the Zenith, is called the complement of the altitude of the
Equinoctial, and is equal to the altitude of the Pole. And al^hough we have
defined the altitude in general, ye^ shall we only profit our selves by the
Meridional altitude of the Sun. The Meridian altitude, is the greatest
altitude that the Sun has every day: The Meridian altitude of the Sun.
and this shall be, when the Center of the Sun is in the Meridian. And the
Arc of the Meridian, that is between the Horizon and the Sun, The shadows
that the Sun makes at mydday.
is the Meridian altitude. So that when we say the altitude of the Sun is
taken, it is understood at mydday. The shadows that the Sun then makes,
are in three sorts. for either to us it casts the shadow toward the North
part, or toward the South, or pendiculer by a right up line, so that at midday,
or noone, nothing that stands vpryght, gives any shadow at all. But
forasmuch as there is such variation in declinations, altitudes, shadows, an^
paralelles, i^ shall be necessary to give rules for all varia^ions. And these
shall be reduced into four brief and compe^dious rules the which I have here
described, Rules for all variations.
that the wyttie may have profit by them, and the rude learn them: not caryng
for the rules of the Mariners, because they are so long and tedious. For (as
the Philosopher says) it is vainly done by many, that may well be done by few.

When the shadow shall be perpendiculer, The pe^pendiculer shadow.
it is because the Sun is in the Zenith, and 90 degrees above the Horizon.
And then how many degrees of declination the Sun hath^ so much shall we be
distant from the Equi^octiall, toward the part where the Sun declineth. And
if it have no declination, it and we shall be under the Equinoctial.

But when the Sun and the shadows shall be to us from the Equinoctial, The
declinin^ shadows.
toward one of the Poles, we shall take away the declination from the Meridian
altitude, and then shall remain the complement of the elevation, which
complement being taken from 90. degrees, then shall remain that which we be
distaunt from the Equinoctial, toward the same Pole.

When the Sun declineth from the Equinoctial, toward the one Pole, and the
shadows shall be toward the other, we shall join the declination with the
meridian altitude: and if all come not to 90. then substract them from 90.
degrees, and we shall have the complement, and so much shall we be distan^ from
the Equinoctial, toward that Pole to the which the shadow falls. And if
they be more in number then 90. then the overplus of 90. shall we be distaunt
from the Equinoctial, toward the Pole where the Sun declineth^ And if they
be just 90^ we shall be under the Equinoc^iall.

When the Sun has no declination^ When the Su^ne has no declination.
we shall be distaunt from the Equinoctial the complement of the Meridian
altitude, toward the Pole where the shadows are. By these rules (beside the
use whereof we have spoken) may be known how much is the greatest declination
of the Sun, the altitude of the Equinoctial, the day, hour, and minute, when
the Equinox was: the which is known as follows.

Having taken the greater Meridian altitude of the Sommet (which is in the
beginning of Cancer) and the less of Winter, To know the greatest declination
of the ^^nne.
(which is in the beginning of Capricorn) taking away the less from the more,
the ^est is that, that is from Tropike to Tropike, and consequently par^ed by
the midst, is the greatest declination. As for example. Exampl^.
I suppose, that being in the City of Cadi^, to find the great Meridian
altitude of the Sun (being in the beginning of Cancer) to be 77. degrees, and
the lesser Meridian altitude (which is, when the Sun is in the beginning of
Capricorn) to be 30. degrees: then taking 30. from 77. remain 28. degrees:
and so much is from Tropike to Tropike. And the half (which is 23. and a
half) is the greatest declination.

Consequently the greatest declination added to the less Meridian altitude,
taking it away from the greater Meridian altitude, that rises thereof, is the
altitude of the Equinoctial. Example 23. and a half of the greatest
declination, Example.
joined with 30. of the least Meridian altitude, or taken away from the 77. of
the greatest Meridian altitude, remain 53. degrees and a half, which is the
altitude of the Equinoctial, in the City of Cadiz. Hereof it follows, The
true Equinoctial.
that w^e^ we shall ^ake the meridian altitude in 53. degrees and a half, that
day is the true Equinoctial. But if it had one day less, and the other day
following it had more, we must take the less from the more, and form the rule
of three upon the rest, saying, If 24. minutes (which is that that the Sun
declineth in one day) does yield 24. hours, how much shall those minutes that
lacks of 53. degrees and a half of the altitude of the Equinoctial, yield
me? Multiplying and dividing according to the foresaid rule, then that which
comes thereof, shall be the hours after the midday, when it is Equinox.

Example.
Example of the experience that I made in the City of Cadiz the tenth day of
March at midday or high noone, I took the altitude of the Sun, in 53^
degrees, and 26. minutes, they lack to be the Equinoctial 4. minutes. An other
day, the xi. of March, at noone, I took the Sun, in 53. degrees, and fifty
minutes: which are more then the Equinoctial by twenty minutes. Then to know
at what hour the Sun was in the 53. degrees, and thirty minutes of the
Equinoctial, I took away the Meridian altitude that I took at the tenth of
March, from that that I took at the eleventh, which is the difference 24.
minutes, and I formed the rule, saying: if 24. minutes the Sun did rise to
me, in 24. hours, then in how much time shall rise unto me the four minutes
that failed me at the tenth of March? I multiplied, divided, and found, that in
four hours: and so shall you say, that the Equinoctial was in the city of
Cadiz the tenth day of March, at four of the clock at after noone, which is
understood (according to the Astronomers) at four hours run at the eleventh
day of March, at this present year 1545.

The ix. Chapter, of the making of the cross staff, wherewith the Mariner^
take the altitude of the North Star.
MAke a square s^affe or yard, of the thickness of a ^^nger, more or less,
according to the goodness of the wood, and of length six spannes, or more.
For the longer that it is, the more precise shall it be, and the degrees shall
be the greater, whereby follows the certainetie of the altitude. Then take a
very plain table, of the length of the sta^^e, and two spannes of breadth, or
at the least a spanne and a half: and in the myddest of this Table, make a
right line by longitude, and in the one end of this line, make another line
that may cut it in right angles. And upon the cutting of these two lines, put
the foot of the compass, and make half a circle, which may remain on the
part of the long line, so that the half circle may have so much Diameter, as
you desire the height of the hammer, head, or crossepeece of the staff to be.
This half circle being made, you shall draw two lines, equidistaunt to the
line which you have made by the midst of the Table. These lines must touch in
the extremities or ends of the half circle. Then divide every half of ye half
circle, or quarter of the circle, into two equal parts, and the two halfes that
shall end in the first line, divide each of them into 90. equal parts. Then
take a ruler, and put the edge thereof upon the center of the half circle, and
upon every of the marks which divide the 90. parts, and so proceed, making
punctes in the lines, which you have made equidistant to the first line. Then
draw certain right lines, from the punctes of the one line, to the opposite
punctes of the other: and so shall the draught be ended. Then take ye staff or
yard, and put the one end thereof in the center of the half circle, and apply
the edge of the yard to the line that goes by the midst of the Table: and
mark in the yard the marks that are in the said line, by means of the
traversing lines, and see also that the marks which you make in the yard, be
traversing lines, and make them their numbers, beginning at the end or point of
the yard that shall be to the contrary part, from that which you did in the
punct of the half circle. And to know with what degrees you shall begin the
yard or staff, and what number you shall mark in the first line of the punct,
look how many degrees are from the circle which you divided between the line
that goes to the last mark, and with so many degrees enter, and so
consequently shall you place the numbers from five to five, or from ten to
ten. When you have thus numbered the yard, then to make the cross piece
thereof, take a table or planke of good wood, which shall be so much in length^
as shall be the Diameter of the half circle, and so much in breadth as three
times the thycknesse of the yard, and of thickness two fyngers, or little
less. On the one side also it must be very plain, and on the other side in
the myddest it must have a square or quadrature of all the thicknes of the
plancke, and from the square to the ends, it must be made thinner and thinner,
so that it has in manner the form of such pickars wherewith milstones are
pycked. And in the myddest (by longitude and latitude) it must have a square
hole, by the which the yard may enter just, and make right angles with the
cross piece. And the point of the yard must enter by the plain side of the
cross piece, and come forth of the square side thereof. To take the altitude
of the North Star, To take the altitude of the Starr^^.
or any other Star on the Sea (for it serves not on the Land, nor for the
Sun, except the Sun shall be under any thin cloud, and the Horizon clear)
you shall put the head of the staff to the corner of your eye, ^aysing it up,
or putting it down, until the nether part of the cross piece come with the
Horizon: and being so, if the higher part of the cross piece shall come with
the star, you must look the plain side of the cross piece in what number
of degrees of the staff it falls, and those degrees shall be the altitude of
the Star: as if the cross piece reach not to the Star, you must bring the
cross piece nearer to your eye, until the one part thereof come with the
H^rizon, and the other with ^he Star, and the degrees, which it shows,
shall be the altitude.

The x. Chapter, of the altitude of the Pole, known by the altitude of the
North Star.
TO know the parallel in the which the Ship is, over and beside the rules
there before of the altitudes of the Sun, it is likewise known by the
altitudes of the North Star. These two manners are used, for that more credit
is given to two witnesses, then to one: So that if by one arise any doubt, the
same may be certified by the other, and also because time may sometime serve
for the one, and not for the other: as, to have a cloudy midday or noone, and a
clear night.

The North Star.
The altitude is taken of the North Star, which is a Star in the extremity or
end of the tail of the less Bear, being a constellation, The les bear.
commonly called the Horn. For this North Star (of the most notable Stars
about the Pole) is nearest unto it, and shall therefore show a less circle then
any of the other, and so shall his altitude differ little from the altitude of
the Pole. This Star has declination 85. degrees, The horn.
and 51. minutes, and the complement to nientie (which are four degrees, The
distaunce of the north Star from the Pole.
and nientie minutes) is his distance from the Pole. And although the Mariners
hold opinion, that it is not distaunt more then three degrees and a half, yet
to my judgment, more credit ought to be given to the Astronomers, then to the
Mariners, for as much as the Astronomers do know the places of the Stars,
with their longitudes, latitudes, declinations, and right assentions, more
perfectly and precisely then do the Mariners: For they account not only by
degrees, but also by minutes and seconds. But let none deceive them selves
through my opinion. Therefore, whosoever will precisely know it, let him take
the highest altitude of the North Star, which is his being over the pole, and
the less altitude, which is his being under it: then take away the less from
the more, and the half of that that remains, shall be the distaunce of that
Star from the pole of the world.

And likewise by this experience, may be known the altitude of the pole, and
what all the other stars, that go not down under the Horizon, be distant
from it. Joining the greater altitude with the less, and that shall amount
thereof, divided by the half, shall be the altitude of the Pole: and taking away
this altitude of the Pole, from the greater altitude of the Star, or the
less from the altitude of the Pole, the rest that remains shall be the
distance of the Star from the Pole. The Pole is invisible.
And as ye Pole is invisible, it can not be seen or known, when the North
Star is higher or lower, except it be by the mean of some other mark: and for
this is considered the position of the former Guards, or watch, being one of ye
two stars called the Guard, which are in the mouth of the Horn. The two
stars called the Guards of the North Star.
The Mariners have noted eight positions from the former Guard star, to the
North star, which answer to the eight principal winds. And as the Guard
is to the North star according to the placing of these positions, so shall it
be higher or lower from the Pole. Let us here put the common rules which the
Mariners use, Common rules of the Mariners differing from the Astronomers.
to comply with those that are of opinion of the three degrees and a half. And
for the opinion of ye Astronomers (which is the distance of 4. degrees, and 9.
minutes) I will hereafter give a circuler figure with a moveable horn: then the
eight wyndes of the eight positions being marked, and putting the Guarde and
the North star in every of the wyndes, it shall be the distaunce that the North
star is higher or lower from the Pole.

Common Rules.
The form Guarde being in the East, These rules after the Mariners account do
hold, but not after the As^ronomers account, as may appear in the rules next
before.
the North Star is in one degree and a half under the Pole. The Guarde being
in the Northeast, the North Star is three degrees and a half under the Pole.
The Guarde being in the North, the Star is three degrees under the Pole. The
Guarde in the Northwest, the Star is half a degree under the Pole. The
Guarde in the West, the Star is one degree and a half above the Pole. The
Guarde in the Southwest, the Star is three degree^ and a half above the
Pole. The Guarde in the South, the Star is three degrees above the Pole. The
Guarde in the Southeast, the said North Star is half a degree above the
Pole.
The eight principal winds according to four^ ly^es.
Note that these eight wyndes, are made according to four lines. Whereof two
are right, which are North and South, and East and West: and the other two are
crooked, which are Northeast Southwest, and Southeast Northwest. When the
Guarde and the North Star shall be in the right line, it shall appear clear
how they are: and when they shall be in the crooked lines, it may be seen,
because the Guards are the one by the other in a right line.

To see by Theorike or Speculation, how the North star rises up, and goes
down from the Pole of the world, I will here describe the said circuler
figure or instrument, which is a circle, An instrument ^o know the rising o^
falling of the North star from the pole of the world.
in whose circumference are written the eight wyndes. The North in the highest
place of the instrument, which they call the head, and the South in the nether
part thereof, which they call the foot: the East in the right arm, the West
in the lef^ arm, the four rest between these in their places. And here is to
be noted, that the lines which pass not through y^ center, are of y^ wynds of
their equidistances that pass through the center. Within this circle, is an
other little circle, which describes the star of the North, by the moving of
the first moveable, and has for his center the Pole of the world, as has the
first. This little circle has for his Diameter eight degrees and eyghteene
minutes: as four degrees and nine minutes above the pole, and the other four
degrees and nine minutes under it. And they are divided by certain lines
equidistant to the East and West. In ye center of this circle, The horn of the
seven stars
is annexed a horn, with his seven stars, moveable round about by all the
winds. And seeing them in heaven, Advertisement to Mariners in using the
figure following.
how, and in what wind they are, even so in this figure shall we see the North
star, in what part it is of the degrees high or low from the pole: and that
the Pilot or Mariners shall not err. I say that he ought not to put the
foreguard in the winds that pass through the center of the figure, for it
shall be North and South with the pole, and not with the star of the North, as
it ought to be, and so of the other winds. And in this manner the star of the
North, shall show in the lines equidistant from the less circle, the degrees
and parts of degrees that it is higher or lower then the pole of the world:
for the same course, differences, and variations, it makes in heaven.

This figure is after the Astronomers, Which affirm that the North star is
four degrees, and nine minutes from the P^l^.



Thus being known how much the North star is under or a^oue the pole, The
altitude of the Pole above the horizon.
let us take the altitude thereof: and that of if that is under the Pole, let
us join to his height, and as much of it as is above, let us take away, and
that shall rise thereof, shall be the altitude of the Pole above our Horizon.

The xi. Chapter, of the composition and use of an instrument, by the which
without observing the South Sun, or midday, is known the altitude of the
Pole, and the hour that is.
WE have given rules, whereby the Pilotte may know in what parallel he finds
himself with his Ship. But he may not know this at all hours, for as
much as for the altitudes of the Sun, it is necessary to observe the midday
justly, and for the altitudes of the North, it is necess^ry to observe, that
the foremost guarde be placed justly with the North, in some of the four lines
of the eight wyndes. And over and beside the rules aforesaid, I have thought
good to describe an instrument, An instrument to know the parallel and hour by
the s^nne.
by the which may be known the parallel where the Ship is, and what the hour
is at any time of the day by the beams of the sun.

Make a round pla^e of La^on, or other convenient metal, of the Diameter of
a sp^^ne, or more: For the greater that it is, the more precis^ shall it be:
and make in it two Diameters, that may cut themselves in right angles upon the
center. In the four extremes or ends of these Diameters, leave four round
punc^es or points, that may serve for axis. The one of these Diameters, shall be
called the axis of the world, and the other, the line of East and West. This
done, make of the same la^on a semicircular piece, of the thicknes of the
plate, or little less, and of the breadth of half a ^inger: this must stand
upon an edge, so that the co^^ex part may come justly with the half of the
circumference of the plate, to the which it must be nailed or sothered in the
nether part of the plate, the semicircle being raised, and that the ends
thereof may come with the ends of the axis of the world. And this semicircle
shall you divide into ^wo equal parts, and every half into 90. degrees,
beginning from the half point toward the end of the Axis of the world, which
are the Poles.

In like manner shall you make^ two circuler pieces, of the bigness of a pe^ce
of four ryals of plate, which they call rundels, for the hours: these must be
made fast in the plate by the Poles of the world, which may hold or bear
them by their cen^ers. And every of these rundelles must be divided into 24.
equal parts, and although not all, yet the uppermost part of the plate. And
above in ye highest point of these divisions, you must write 12. because that
there it shall show the midday or noone. And from thence, the afternoon hours
must begin their numbers toward the West part, and shall end. 6. hours in the
half or midst of the joint of the circle with the plate. In the other joint
of the other part, shall begin 6. of the hours before noone, and shall end 12.
in the ^ighest point. You must also make another Semicircular piece, of the
breadth of a finger, this must be plain or flat, and the concauitie or
holownesse thereof, equal to the Semicircle of the edge or side of the plate,
and in the ends must have two holes, wherein may justly enter the points that
come forth of the circle, for the hours, which are the Poles of the world.
Also, this Semicircle must have two lines, one on the uppermost part, and the
other on the neathermost, which may divide the breadth into two equal parts.
This half circle likewise must be divided into two equal parts by longitude,
with a ^^auersed line, which shall be called the Equinoctial, and from this
line, to the inward part thereof, must be counted 13. degrees and a half
toward the one part, and as much toward the other part of the 90. that
every half of the circle conteyneth. And at every part where end the 13.
degrees and a half, make a trauersed line, so that from the one to the other,
may be 47. degrees. And in this space shall you draw certain lines
equidistaunte with them of the midst, that they and the middle line, may
divide into 4. equal parts the breadth of the half circle. Then look in the
table of the declinations of the sun, what declination have the 5. degrees of
Aries, and that shall you account from the Equinoctial toward the one part,
and as much more toward the other, making a line that may trauerse that of the
myddest, where that declination does end and touch in the other two lines. And
the same shall you do at 10.15.20.25. and 30. which is the end of Aries, and
beginning of Taurus: and then the line shall trauerse all the breadth. The like
also shall yo^ do to Taurus and Gemini, then in the spaces, write the caractes
of the xii. signs, beginning Aries from the Equinoctial, The caracts of the
xii. signs.
toward the North Pole. And then do Taurus and Gemini end in the greatest
declination, beginning Cancer in the other part of it. Then Leo and Uirgo do
end in the Equinoctial, where shall begin Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius: and in
the other part, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces, shall end in the
Equinoctial where Aries began. This half circle must have an opening, or open
place, even and just in the midst from the Equinoctial, unto somewhat more
then the greatest declinations, and must be a little brother on the inner part,
then without: and not so broad as may come to the two lines, because it would
then take away the graduation of the signs. And in this open place must be put
a square grain or stubbe, which on the inner part may come plain with the
half circle, and on the utter part may come forth a little, where shall be n^yld
a square piece of Laton, of the breadth of the half circle. This grain or
stubbe being so nailed with the piece, must have in the midst a hole, The
hole that represents the Sun.
so small, as may receive a little pin, and by the center of this hole, must
pass a line, which shall trauerse all the grain. And this line shall serve to
put the sun (which the hole represents) in the degree of the sign where it
is. This half circle where it goes in the circumferences of the rundels for
the hours, must ^e fyled on the one side unto the line that is in the myddest,
to mark it, and show the number of it. For the placyng or setty^g of this
instrument, The placing or setting of the instrument.
you must cut a gyrdle or ryng of laton, as thick as the plate, and of the
breadth of a fy^ger, or little less: and so large, that of it may be made a
circle somewhat bigger then the plate, so that the plate and the Meridian may
easily be contey^ed within it. This circle shall be called the Horizon, which
must be divided into four quarters.

In like m^ner must be m^de two semicirculer pieces, and the ends of them must
be nailed or sothered in the points that divide the quarters of the circle: and
divide the one from th^ther in two equal parts, making right spherical angles.
And in this joint of these two pieces, must be nailed or sothered a Mast^^, the
which at the one end is divided into two branches or forks. The Foo^e or Base
of the instrument.
Then shall you make a base or foot for the same, which in the uppermost part
thereof shall have a concauitie or holownesse, where may be set a sailing
compass or a needle, touched with the Lode stone, and covered over with a
glass. And on the highest edges of this base, the two branches of the Mastel
shall be made fast, and this base, with the Mastel, the half circle, and the
circle, shall be all one piece, which ^halbe called the seat or frame of the
instrument. The Horizontal circle in the ends of one half circle, must have
two holes, in the which may enter the Axis that are made in the ends of the
line of East and West.

Also you must take good heed when you sother or make fast the Mustel in the
base, that the North and South of the plate or Horizon, come with the North and
South of the needle that is beneath, having ever respect how much the needle
does vary from the Meridian, by Northeasting or Northwesting. In the joint of
the two half circles upon the Mastel, must be a point (called the index or
shewer) which shall show in the half circle, The Index or shewer.
sothered in the place on ye neither part the degrees that the Pole is raised
above the Horizon.

For the perfection of this instrument, it shall be convenient to set the Horizon
very play^e and equal at the time of the operation or practicing with the
instrument, The placing of the horizon.
and this may be done in two manners. Whereof the one is, hanging by a fine
threede, at the center of the plate, a plomet made somewhat poynted at the
nether end: so that the Horizon standing plain and leuel, the point of the
plome^ may ^al upon the point of the index, For the Land.
and this manner is good for the land. But for the Sea, For the Sea.
you shall sother the Hor^zon two Ax^s, little stubbes or ends coming forth.
These shall be put in the two opposite holes of a circle of metal made somewhat
strong, and this circle must have other two stubbes likewise coming forth,
and equally distant from the two holes. These must be sothered or nailed in two
holes of another circle in like manner, and the other circle with other two
stubbes, enclosed in a box. If then the box stand even and leuel, the poyse
or weight shall cause the Horizon to stand level, although the Ship sway or
roll from side to side. The use of this instrument is in this manner.

The use of the instrument.
When you desire to know the parallel in which you are, and the hour that is,
put the line that trauerseth the grain, in the degree of the sign in the
which the Sun is (which you shall know by the ^able of the place of the Sun,
in the second Chapter of the second part) and set the North and the South of
the plate, with the North and South of the needle. Then turn the moveable
Meridian against the Sun, the foot of the instrument standing fast, and
raise it, or put it down in the plate, until the beam of the Sun enter in
at the hole of the grain, and fall in the center of the plate, and standing
so, behold the index, The altitude of the Pole.
and how many degrees it shows from the Meridian, so much is the altitude of
the Pole. Then look where the moveable Meridian shows in the rundel of the
hours, and there shall you see the hour that is.

Here folo^eth the demonstration.



The xii. Chapter, of the leagues that are run for a degree, according unto
di^ers courses.
IN the sixth Chapter, I promised to give a rule to know the distaunce from
one parallel to another, To know the distance from one parallel to another.
sailing by whatsoever line or wind, except the East and West: for the which
is to be understood, that the Navigations or course from one place to another
(according to the Cosmographers) ought to be by the arc of the greater circle,
The arc of the greater circle.
for that by this manner shall be the shortest course, and this greater circle
they divide into 360. degrees: and all the distances that are from one place to
another, they account by the degrees and minutes of this circle: and so sailing
from North to South, to one degree of the variation of the height of the Pole,
shall answer another degree of the greater circle in the superficial part of
the water and land. And therefore sailing by whatsoever other line, until the
Pole does vary one degree of altitudes, The altitude of the Pole varying one
degree.
we shall have gone more then one degree of the greater circle: and the degrees
that aunsweare to every line or wind, you shall see in the demonstration
following, which has two parallel lines, which are East and West, and the line
that cutteth them in right angles, which comes forth of the center from the
quarter of the circle that is made, is North and South, and then shall you see
by this order, all the other wyndes, half wyndes, and quarters of wyndes,
reduced to one quarter: The quarter serving for the 32. winds of the compass.
For the self same account serves for Northeast and Southwest, and Northwest
and Southeast, and so of the half winds and quarters of winds that are
equally distant from the line of the North and South: and so this quarter shall
serve for all the 32. wynds of the compass. Without this quarter, hard by the
line, you shall find two numbers, whereof the first shall be of the degrees, and
minutes of degrees of the great circle, which is from one parallel to another.
The other number, shall be the leagues, and par^es of l^agues that such degrees
and minutes do amount unto, after the rate of 17. leagues and a half for a
degree. In like manner in the parallel, where the lines of the wyndes do
concur, shall be set jointly to every line the degrees and minutes of the
distaunce from the line of North and South, and leagues and parts of leagues
that such degrees and minutes amount unto. And so it is, that sailing by the
line, wynd, or point of North and South, until the altitude of the pole vary
one degree, is run another degree, which contains leagues 17. and a half.
And by the next line, One degree of variation of the Pole.
for one d^gree of the variation of the altitude of the pole, is run one
degree, one minute 17. leagues, and 5. six parts. And they that run upon that
line or point, depart from the line of North, and South, or Meridian line 12.
minutes, leagues 3. and a half. By the second line, Departing from the
Meridian line.
is run one degree 5. minutes, and leagues 19. scant, and in this course,
they part from the Meridian 25. minutes, leagues 17. and a quarter. By the
third line is run one degree 12. minutes, leagues 21. and a 20. part of a
league, and depart from the Meridian line 40. minutes, leagues 11. and two
terces. By the fourth line, is run one degre^, minutes 25. leagues 24. and
three quarters, and depart from the Meridian, one degree justly, leagues 17.
and a half. By the fyfth line, is run one degree, minutes 48. leagues 31.
and a half, and depart from the line one degree 30. minutes, leagues 26. and
one quarter. By the syxth line, is run two degrees, minutes 37. leagues 45.
and of the 45. parts of one league, the 11. part, and depart from the line two
degrees, minutes 25. leagues 42. and a quarter. By the seventh line, is run
^yue degrees, Degrees of the greater circle.
minutes 8. leagues 29. and two ter^es, and depart from the line five degrees,
minu^s 2. which are leagues 88. accompting 17. l^agues and a half for a degree
of the greater circle. And if for every line you desire to know this
c^mputation of leagues, after 16. leagues and two terces for a degree, or for
more or less leagues or miles, multiply those such degr^es by the number of
the leagues or miles which ^nter into every degree, and likewise shall you
number the minutes that are more then the degrees, by the same number of the
leagues that ^nter in every degree, dividing them by sixty, and that that
shall come of the division, you shall join with the multiplication of the
degrees, and that shall amount thereof, shall be the leagues, and parts of
leagues, that was in those such degrees.

The xiii. Chapter, how to set or make a prycke in the Card of Navigations.
THe Mariners call the pricking of a point in the Card, To know in what part
or point the Ship is.
to see and appoint in it, in what point or part of the Sea the Ship is in
Navigations. For the perfourming whereof, it shall be requisite that the Pilot
know from what degree, or how many degrees of the altitude of the Pole he
departed, and with what wind he sayleth. And when he desires to know where
he is, let him know the altitude of the Pole, The altitude of the Pole.
by some of the aforesaid rules. And if (taking the altitude) he find him
self in the same degrees where he was when he departed, his Navigations has
been from the East to the West, and what he has gone can not be known but by
the judgment of a wise and expert man, according to the s^y^^nesse or
goodness of his Ship, with consideration of the more or less time he has
had, as we have said before in the sixth Chapter. To find the distaunce by the
Card.
But if ^e find him self in more or less degrees, let him take two pair of
compasses, and put the foot of one, in the point or plate where his Ship was
when he departed, and the other in the line or wind by the which he sayleth,
and likewise let him set the one point of the other compass in the graduation
of the Card, in that number of degrees that he finds the altitude of ^h^
Pole, and the other point of the same compass in the next line o^ East and
West: and so with both the compasses, one in the one hand, and the other in the
other hand, let him go joining them together, taking good heed, that the
point of the compass do ^ot swerve from the wind whereby he has sailed,
neyth^r the p^ynt of the other compass from the line of East and West, where
he set it.

And following those two compasses by these two lines, until the points of the
two compasses join (that is to mean, the point that was set in the place from
whence he departed, and the other that was set in the degrees that were found)
then where these two points do join, is the point where the Ship is. But (as
we have said in the syxth Chapter) they must have great respect to the wyndes
and seas, Aduertisements t^ the Pilotes.
and other things which experience shows them, to know if they have gone
directly by that line, or if they have fallen from it, and to what part: the
which I remit to the judgment of men of good experience. From thence forward,
they shall return to keep the same account, as when they departed from the
haven, especially when they change their course.

The xiiii. Chapter, of the making and use of the Instrument generll, to know
the hours and quantities of the day, and at what wind the Sun ryseth and
falls.
MAke a round plate with a ryng or a handle above, as in the Astrolabie,
drawing a line from the ring downward passing through the center, and another
line that may cut it in right angles throngh the center: And this last line
shall be called the Horizon. Then shall you give a circle upon the center,
leaving so much space between it and the edge of the plate, that therein may
be written the numbers of the degrees: then also make another circle somewhat
more within, leaving likewise a space where the graduations may be divided.
This done, de^ide one of the highest quadrants toward the left hand into 90.
parts, which shall be called the degrees of latitude, beginning the number of
them from the ring, and ending the same in the Horizon. Then make another
rundell somewhat less then this, in such manner that the degrees and numbers of
the greater, remain uncovered. And deuid this less, by two Diameters into
four equal parts. And at the one end of the one Diameter, leave a point coming
forth of the less rundell, cut directly with the same Diameter by the one
part, and this shall be called the index or shewer. In this rundell you shall
make a circle half, a finger less then the rundel. Then with a compass take.
23. Degrees and a half from the Diameter, which signifies the Equinoctial:
and where as end the. 23. degrees and a half, for every part make a right line
from one point to another, so that this be a line of 47. Degrees, and as mu^^
(...) at ^^e other end of the said Equinoctial. Upon every one of these right
lines, you shall make a ha^^e ^ircle, and ^euide ^u^ry of them into six equal
parts, which may aunswe^re to six^ signs, and every sign into thre^ parts,
which may (...) to the tenthes or tenth part^ ^f d^g^^es: and if the (...) be
great, you shall divide eu^ry sign into fi^^ or (...) par^es, so that you may
make it perfect and precise. This (...), from the points or pricks of the one
half circle, to the points of the other, draw certain lines which shall be
equidi^^n^ to the Equinoctial. In the ends of these lines, betwee^e the less
circle, and the edge of the rundell, draw also certain lines, which may
reach unto the beginninges and ends of the signs: and in the ^oppe of the
ends, or over the ends of these lines, make an Arc, so far distaunt from
the less circle, as is the thickness of the edge of a piece of four ryals of
plate: And in the space that is left, graduate the signs from ten to ten,
or as the division shall be. The space that remains from thence to the edge of
the rundel, you shall divide by the half, The placing of the twelve signs in
the instrument.
and in it shall be made twelve spaces, where you shall set the signs with their
names or caractes orderly, so that Aries be next unto the Equinoctial then
Taurus toward the part of the Index, then Gemini: and turning toward the
Equinoctial, Cancer, Leo, Uirgo. Likewise on the other part of the
Equinoctial, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius. And turnyng to the Equinoctial,
Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces. The zodiac.
And thus having signed the Zodiac, you shall also sign or mark the hours
in manner as follows.

Divide the less circle of this rundel into four equal parts, so that every
quarter may have six parts. Reduce this division to the Diameter, putting the
ruler upon the points, equally distant from the Horizon. And where it touches
the Equinoctial, make pricks or points, Division of the Equinoctial and
Tropikes.
so that the Equinoctial remain divided into twelve parts. Then upon one of
the Tropykes give a circle, which may have the same Tropike for his Diameter.
Divide this circle into 24. equal parts^ and reduce these divisions to the
Tropike, as is done in the Equinoctial, and from one Tropike to another: then
the Equinoctial and the Tropikes being thus divided with this pricks or points,
you shall pass with a pair of compasses by every point equally ordered from
the Horizon, to the one and the other part: and these shall be called hours,
writing in the ends of them their numbers, beginning the one part in one, The
hours with their numbers.
and ending it in twelve. On the other part, begin the one in thopposite part,
and end in twelve. This done, these rundels shall be brought to their perfection.
Moreover, you shall make a triangle, with a right angle, having two equal sides
that may make the right angle. Every of these sides must be as long as is the
Semidiameter of the greatest rundel: The triangle.
also, upon and about the right angle, you shall make a little circle, which
shall have the same angle for his center, and on the one side of this tryangle,
set two raised plates, as in the Astrolabie: on the contrary side of these
raised plates, must be a hole, so far distant from the ce^ter or angle, as is
the Semidiameter of the circle of the less rundel. In this hole you must put a
thread, hanging thereat a little wayght or plommet, only sufficient to hold the
thread straight, so that it cause nothing of the rundels to turn, or the
instrument to decline. Furthermore, in a circle as big as the less of the
less rundel, you shall divide into 32. parts the eight wyndes, Division of the
winds.
and half wyndes, and quarters of winds. And being thus redused to their
Diameters (as is done in the Equinoctial) you shall translate them in the sides
of the triangle, in the which by the center of his little circle, and by the
center of the rundels, all the three pieces must be made fast with an axes or a
nail, so that they may be turned about close and very just. Then put a ring
in the handle of the instrument, whereby it may hang, as in the Astrolabie: and
so shall the Instrument be ^ynished and brought to perfection.

This is the trace or draught of the Instrument.



To know at what hour^ the Sun ryseth and falls (by the Instrument
following) you shall put the Pole of the less rundel (which is the index) to
the left hand in the greatest rundell, To know at what hour the Sun rises or
falls.
in so many degrees above the Horizon, in how many degrees the Pole is raised
in that land or place. Then put the tryangle, (which is the Horizon) in his
place: that is to say, if the Sun shall be in the North signs, put it to the
left hand: and if it shall be in the South signs, to the right hand, and then
the triangle shall cut the parallel where the Sun goes, in.10. or.20. or.30.
degrees, or proportionally where it is, and there shall you see in the sides of
the Zodiac, the hours when the Sun ryseth and falls. And likewise at
what wind the Sun ryseeth and falls to us, you shall see in the wynds of
the tryangle.

At what wind the Sun rises or falls.
To know by the elevation of the Sun, the hour that is, put the Pole or Index
so far distant from the Zenith or handle of the Instrument, as it is in that
place or parallel above the Horizon, then turn the triangle toward the Sun,
until the beams thereof enter in at the raised plates, and then the thread
with the plomet, shall cut the parallel of the Sun, by the hour that shall be:
and consequently the triangle shall be distant from the Zenith the degrees that
the Sun shall be raised that hour about the Horizon.

This is the Demonstration.



FINIS.
Here begins the Table of this Book.
The contents of the Chapters of the first part.
THe general distinction of Creatures. Folio. iiii. The definition of the
World. Fol. v. The definition of the Sphere. Fol. eodem. The division of the
World. Fol. eodem. The number, order, and property of the Elements and
Heavens. Fol. vi. The immutabilitie or immobilitie of the Earth. Fol. viii. The
roundnes of the Earth and Water. Fol. viii. The motion of the Heavens and
Elements. Fol. x. The division of the Sphere into formal parts. Fol. eod. The
Equinoctial circle. Fol. xii. The Zodiac. Fol. eodem. The circle called
Coluri. Fol. xiii. The Meridian circle. Fol. xiiii. The Horizontall circle.
Fol. eod. The four less circles. Fol. xv. The five Zones. Fol. xvi. The
Longitude and La^itude. And of the proportion which the less circles have to
the great circle. Fol. xviii. The circuit or compass of the earth and water,
according to the opinions of the ancient and later auctours. Fol. xix. The
vii. Climates. Fol. eod. Certain principles of this science. Fol. xxi.
The Contents of the second part.
THe course of the Sun in the Zodiac. Fol. xxii. The true place of the
Sun in the Zodiac. Fol. xxiii. The declination of the Sun. Fol. xxv. The
entrance of the Sun in the xii. signs, and of the Equinoctials and
Solstitials which divide the four times of the year. Fol. xxvii. Of the
Moon, and her motions and properties. Fol. xxix. The conjunctions and
oppositions of the Sun and the Moon. Fol. xxx. The declaration and use of an
instrument, by the which is found the place and declination of the Sun, with
the days and place of the Moon. Fol. xxxi. The Eclipses of the Moon and the
Sun. Fol. xxxiii. Of time, and the definition thereof. Fol. xxxv. Of the
year, and the diverse beginnings and reckonings or computations had thereof in
old time. Fol. xxxvi. Of the month, and of his differences. Fol. xxxvii. Of
the week. Fol. xxxix. Of the day and night. Fol. eod. Of hours. Fol. xl. The
making and use of an universal Dyal for the day. Fol. xli. Of certain
particular Dials, Mural and Horizontal. Fol. xliii. The composition and use of
an instrument for the hours of the night. Fol. xlv. The time of the tides, or
rising and falling of the sea. Fol. xlviii Of certain signs which
prognosticate tempests, or fair weather. Fol. l. Of the bright and shining
exhalations that appear in te^pests which the Mariners call Santelmo, or Corpus
sancti. Fol. li.
The Contents of the third part.
THe number, order, and names of the winds. Fol. liiii. The composition of
Cards for the Sea. Fol. lvi. The virtue and property of the Lodestone, called
in Latin, Magnes, and in Spanish, Piedrayman. Fol. lxii. The making of the
Mariners compass for Nauiga. Fol. lxiii. The effect and property that the
compass has to Northeasting or Northwesting, whereby is known the variation
of the compass. Fol. lxiiii. The introductio^ and principles of the art of
Nauiga. Fol. lxvii The making and use of the Astrolabie, with the which the
Ma^iners take the altitudes of the Sun. Fol. lxviii. The definition of the
altitudes, an^ how the altitudes of the Pole may well be known by the Meridian
altitude and de^lination of the Sun. Fol. lxxi. The making of the cross
staff, wherewith the Mariners take the altitude of the North star. Fol.
lxxii. How the altitude of the Pole is known by the altitude of the North
star. Fol. lxxiii. The composition and use of an Instrument, by the which
without observing the South Sun or midday, is known the altitude of the
Pole, and the hour that is. Fol. lxxv. Of the leagues that are run for a
degree, according unto diverse courses. Fol. lxxviii. How to set or make a
prick in the card of Navigations. Fol. lxxx. Of the making and use of an
Instrument general, to know the hours and quantities of the day, and what
wind the Sun ryseth and falls. Fol. eod.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Abell Ieffes for Richard Watkins, and are to be sold
at his shop.

Cum Priuilegio.


