WITS Fittes and Fancies. Fronted and entermedled with Presidentes of Honor
and Wisdom.

Also: LOVES OVVLE. An idle conceited dialogue between Love, and an old man.

Recta securus. A. C.

Imprinted at London by Richard Iohnes, at the sign of the Rose and Crown next
above S. Andrews Church in Holborne. 1595.

To the Right Honorable, GEORGE, Earl of CVMBERLAND, Baron CLIFFORD: Lord of
Westmerland, Bromfleet, Vipount and Vessa, and of the most honorable order of
the Garter Knight: All fortune ever equal to his valourous worth.
THe multiplicity of my duteous affections toward your Lordship confounds my
conceit how to honor you in good sort, still dispurposing my will of all
especial intended services, to make me serve you as it were at random.
Wherefore, I have now at last condiscended to the generalty, and do here
present your Lordship these Wits, Fittes, and Fancies, a large and universal
matter, which were they not fronted and suffused with an honest blush of Honor
and Wisdom (your own proper Colors) I would not have adventured in so high
a place: And if besides therein be any absurdity escaped, unanswerable to so
great worth and Nobleness as is in your L. I hope the generaltie of the
matter, joint that the Author is a stranger, will, if not privilege such
amiss, yet at least wise hold it excused in your favor. It seems the
Spaniard for his part (for so he was) did not baselie conceit this matter,
that did dare direct it to so high a State as Don John of Austria, his Lieges
brother. But how ere it were blameworthy or innocence in him I recke not,
neither yet force I how Don John conceipted it, so your Lordship daigne it in
gree. I did intend it to your late sea-voyage, to the end it might have
pleased you to pass away therewith some unpleasant hours. But as it was not
ripe enough for that season, so now I pray God it come in due season to your
good liking. Diverse of them are of mine own inserting, and that without any
injury I hope to my Author: the which are easily to be discerned from his, for
that they taste more Englishlie: Neither have I used his Method therein, but
have set down one of mine own, which I take to be better: Which both method
and matter, if I shall once perceive your L. to daigne it in your favor, I
will not fear that any Gentleman will easily disgrace it, to whom next under
your Lordship, I wish it current and well accepted: For such (I know) is
generally their devotions to your worth, that whatsoever matter, (all were it
guilt it self) that is once refuged to your Virtues shrine and Sanctuary,
they will not rashly ravish it to arraignment, and public shame.

As for my Loves Owl in the latter end, the truth is, I can pretend it no
outlandish privilege to your Honors favor, and therefore do rather leave it
to your pardon then good liking, as a folly of an idle vain: Upon which your
said pardon of the one, and good liking of the other presuming; I will endeavor
according to my ever vowed and bounden duty to your L. to serve you (God
willing) in some better worth hereafter. Hoping that what I have here done, may
at least wise serve to put better wits in mind to honor your Nobleness
as well with their peaceful pens as others do with their sea-paines.

Your Lordships in all humble service reverently devoted, Anthony Copley.

To the Gentlemen READERS.
GEntlemen: these Wits, Fittes and Fancies are of the nature to admit no
eloquence wherewith to delight ye, as also many of them to seem barren at the
first sight, which nevertheless to the second eye may minister content and
merriment: Understand ye therefore, that I direct them not to the sullen and
moodie person, who happily in his austeritie will befoole a great many of them
before ever he read them, as matter either differing from his sour
disposition, or perhaps above his wit. Neither do I profess them as regular
Methodes or deep grounded Axioms of Logic certainty, but as certain free
Offals and presidents of Wits wandering variety. Momus (Gentlemen) I confess,
were able to make a foul wrack among them, were he as precise as he is
malicious; Wherefore, my desire is they come not under his Rauin, nor yet under
Minos heavy censure: But whosoever is Gentle merrie-wittie, he take all.
Neither must any person of what vocation soever, take offense at any thing
herein contained: Considering that mirth, not malice, means it all. As for my
Loves Owl, I am content that Momus turn it to a tennis-ball if he can, and
bandy it quite away: namely, I desire M. Daniel, M. Spencer, and other the
Prime Poets of our time, to pardon it with as easy a frown as they please,
for that I give them to understand, that an Vniuersiti^ Muse never pend it,
though humbly devoted thereunto.

Yours in desire to please you. A. C.

Wits, Fits, and Fancies.
OF KINGS AND PRINCES
ALONSO de Valentia, having yielded to Ferdinando king of Spain, the Forte of
Samora, it pleased the king at his entry therinto, to view the King of
Portugal his rich wardrop there: where having suruaid a good space, al his
royal robes and jewels, he refused in the end to ransacke it, neither would
he bestow any one garment or jewel upon any of his train: Whereupon a Gallant
then standing by, thus said unto him. Pleases your Majesty, the King of
Portugal has not forborne any rapine that ever he could attain unto, either
upon your Graces proper goods, or any of your subjects, and will your Majesty
then daigne to deal thus ciuilly with him? Whereunto the King answered: All
that I desire of my Nephew of Portugal, is but to take away the bad conceits
and opinions of his will, and not the attires of his person.

A Portugal delivered a Forte to the foresaid Ferdinando, King of Spain, and
being shortly after with the King in other service against his Countrymen (who
very bravely defended their hold) he said unto him, And it like your
Majesty, I ^endred you my Forte with half this ado. Yea mary (answered the
King) and therefore had I rather trust this defendantes sons with my Fortes,
then yours.

A Portugal Gentleman besought his King of a protection against certain his
enemies, who had vowed his death: The King thereunto condiscended, and gave it
him. Shortly after he came again unto the King, and complained to him of the
great fear he went in, notwithstanding his protection: whereunto the King
answered: From fear I cannot protect you.

The Duke of Nazareth, coming to the Court to do his duty to the Emperor in
most rich and sumptuous robes, and his liueries most gallant: The Emperess^
seeing him out at a window, said: It seems that Nazareth comes rather to be
seen of us, then to see us.

A Moore-King of Granada, called Chiquito, yielded the said town to
Ferdinando, King of Spain upon composition, and being marched away with his
troops a mile or two from thence made a stand, and from a high hill turned
back to view the town, as his last farewell thereunto: and beholding it, he
fell a weeping, and said: Better had I lost my life then so fair a town. His
Mother hereunto answered: You do well (son) to weep like a woman, seeing you
did not defend it like a man.

A Moore King showing his Nobles much treasure, and a great heap of iewelles,
they all commended his Majesty for so rich spoils over his enemies. And one
amongst the rest said. And it like your Majesty, how great a felicity were all
this, if a man were to live ever. The King answered, You have spoken very
fondly, for were not men mortal, I had never been a King.

Ferdinando King of Spain asked Auennamer, a Moore king, his prisoner, how he
lived so long, being a man of great years. He answered, I never stood when I
might sit, I married late, I was a widower betimes, and I mean never to ma^ie
more.

Salladine the Moore, that last of all won Jerusalem from the Christians dying,
commanded a winding sheet to be borne in pomp at his funeral upon the point
of a Lance, and a Herald to pronounce aloud these words Salladine great Lord
of Asia, of all his wealth and glory, only this winding sheet he carries away
with him.

Ferdinando King of Spain made choice of a certain Gentleman, who was not the
best of fight, to employ him in an especial affair, and the Queen bespake the
King to choose some fitter person, namely one of a better sight: The King would
not, but employed him, who very happily effected the affair. Shortly after,
the King using him in another piece of service, it was the Gentleman's chance
to succeed il therein: Whereupon at his succeslesse return, the Queen
commanded her Treasurer to give him two hundred pounds for his pains. The
Treasurer maruelling why her Majesty was so bountiful to one, whom she so ill
conceited, and had so ill deserved. The Queen said: As for his former service,
in that he did it well, he did it out of kind, but now that he has failed
herein, I tell you, he has duly done his kind, and fitted my expectation.

Isabell Queen of Spain, willed a Gentleman to buy her a Nagge of such a
proportion, and of such a color: The Gentleman not finding any such,
presented her with a most goodly horse and a mare, but she still demanding the
aforesaid Nag, at last he answered. And it like your Majesty, such a Nag I can
not find, and therefore do here present you this horse and mare: May it but
please your Grace to bid them engender you such a nagge as you would have, and
I dare say they will do it in the best manner.

The aforesaid Queen of Spain woonted to say, that every ones good gesture is
a letter in his commendation.

Philip the first, King of Spain, seeing a Faulcon kill an Eagle, commanded
the head to be wrong off, saying, Let none presume against his Sovereign.

The Earl of Warwick asked King Henry the sixth, why it pleased his Majesty
to go so meanly attyred: The King answered, It beseemes a king to excel his
Subjects in virtue, not in vesture.

Alonso king of Arragon washing his hands before dinner, delivered to a
Gentleman that stood by a couple of ringes of great value to hold whilst he
had done: and after washing not demanding them again, it pleased the
Gentleman to keep them as his own: A ten years after the King washing his
hands as before, this Gentleman chanced then to stand by, and proffering to
receive his rings again: The King knew him, and calling to mind his former
villainy, delivered them to an other, and said to him: Nay, soft friend, no more
rings for you till you restore me my first couple.

Alonso King of Arragon used to say, that five old things pleased him passing
well, viz. Old wood for fuel; an old horse for easy riding; wine of a year
old; old friends, and old books.

An Archdeacon of Civil in Spain, slew a shoemaker, and the shoomakers son
besought justice, and he had it thus. viz. That the Archdeacon for penance of
the fact, should not say Mass the space of a whole year after: This justice
sufficed not the young Shoemaker: but chauncing in the mean time that Pedro
King of Spain came thither in progress: The Shoemaker then renewed his suit to
his Majesty. Whereupon the Judge stepped forth and informed the King how that
Justice was already passed upon the said Archdeaco^n, and told him al how it
was. Nevertheless the young shoemaker mainly importuning his Majesty for better
justice: at last the King asked him, whether he thought himself man enough to
kill the Archdeacon: He answered: Yes: Do it then said the King. Hereupon the
next day, (being Corpus Christi day) and the Archdeacon passing along in
procession amongst the rest of the Clergy: The Shoemaker makes me no more
ado, but rushing upon his person, stabbes him with his dagger. The King being
complained unto of this fact, and the fellow brought before him: It pleased the
King in full notice of all the matter thus to pronounce sentence against him,
namely: That in as much as the Archdeacon was pennanced for his foresaid
murder, but only not to say Mass of a whole year; that in like manner this
shoemaker should now not cobble any shoes the space of a whole year.

Alfred King of England used to say, that it is much safer to take advise of
the dead, then of the living, meaning Books, which neither for fear, nor yet
for flattery abstain to tell a truth.

A Moore-king of Granada understood the Spanish tongue reasonable well* and
seldom or never spoke it. Being asked why he refused so to do when occasion
was offered: He answered: Because a King ought neither do nor say any thing,
be it never so trifling, which may not beseem him passing well.

A Queen asking a country Gentleman when his wife was to be brought a bed, he
answered: When so ever it shall please your Highness to command.

Upon the first discovery of the Indies, it was discoursed before Isabell
Queen of Spain, that hardly any of her subjects would be found, that would
adventure so far and dangerous a voyage by sea: The Queen answered: Yes,
Fools and Misers will.

Isabell Queen of Spain woonted to say, that she loved a life these four
sightes: An armed man in the field, a Bishop in Pontificalibus: a Lady in
estate, and a Thief upon the gallows.

Henry the third, King of France the very same morning that he had murdered
the Duke of Guize in Bloyes, coming to the old Queen his mother with the
news, and asking her how she liked thereof: She answered: It is well done,
(son) if it be well done.

Queen Isabell of Spain abhorred Garlike, and it chanced on a time through
the Cooks negligence that a dish of Fish was served to her boorde, all covered
over with Percely, which had lain among Garlic: As Soon as the Queen smelt
it: she said: A way with that Villain, see where he is come disguised in
green.

The Emperor Nero hearing that his predecessor Claudius was related among the
Gods, and knowing that he died of a poisoned Sallade, said: I had not thought
that sallades had been the food of the Gods.

OF NOBLEMEN AND Ambassadors.
DON John first Duke of Medina Sydonia, being aduertisd by his Treasurer that
his expenses were most excessive, and his gifts all to liberal; he answered: I
will have the glory of my house known to the world, not by possessing much
treasure, but by expending much treasure.

Don Frederick of Tolledo, Duke of Alua, being besought unto by a poor widow
Gentlewoman to prefer with his liberality her daughter in marriage; he was
easily inclined so to do: Whereupon he willed his treasurer to give her an
hundred Marks: The Treasurer mistook the Duke, and gave her an hundred pounds:
who shortly after coming to give up his accounts to his L. this hundred pounds
came then in sight: whereunto the Duke excepted, and said: Why, I awarded but
one one hundred Marks. The Treasurer had then no other shift, but to say, that
his ears mistook his Honors pleasure. Nay, replide the Duke, rather do I
thank God that he has affoorded thee better ears, then me a good tongue, and
so he past the account for current.

A plain Countryman came to demand justice of the Lord high Constable of
Castile, and thus he said. I am come to crave Justice of your Worship, I
beseech your Excellence to dispatch me, for I am a poor man my Lord, and
unless your Reverence favor my case, I am utterly undone: I pray your good
Mastership to be good to me, and I will truly pray God to bless your Alteze
whiles I live. The Constable hereat broke forth a laughing and said: This
poor Swain will be sure to hit me either high or low.

The said Lord Constable of Castile, lying on his deathbed, his Treasurer came
unto him, and besought him to forgive him the value of xi. hundred pounds,
whereof he had defeated him in his former accounts. I do (said the Constable)
and I wish it were twenty millions more, that I might as freely forgive thee ^t
all, as I pray God to forgive me all.

The Fortress of Buitrago by negligence was set on fire, and burnt down to
the ground, the Duke of Infantasgo being thereof Lord: The Captain of the place
was the first man that brought the Duke news of the mischance, beseeching his
Altez, that seeing it happened through his mere default, he would sever his
detested head from his shoulders, for an example to all careless Captains ever
after. Then the Duke asked him whether his nets and toils which he had there
for Dear, were also perished with the fire; he answered, No my Lord, they are
safe: That Is well, said the Duke: As for the Fortress, I tell theeCaptaine,
take no care, for I did mean to have rased it long ago.

A poor Gentleman of the country had bred up a horse to the perfection of a
dainty good one, in so much that he made account to be a great gainer thereby,
and upon diligent inquiry after a good Copesmate, he understood that the Duke
of Infantasgo would out of doubt give him more for him than any in all the
country besides, so greatly that Duke delighted in choice of good horses. To
him then this Gentleman needs would with his horse, and traveling on the way,
the weather being extreme hot, and the horse no less fat and foggie with over
much former ease, fell down and died. The Gentleman nevertheless got the horse
flayed, and carried the skin to show the Duke, and said unto him, Your Honor
may judge by this skin what a goodly horse it was, and God is my Judge, my L. I
was bringing him to offer unto your Lordship before all others. Gramercy, said
the Duke: But tell me, what did you value the horse at. Believe me my Lord (he
answered) not under an hundred pounds could have bought him of me. With that
the Duke commanded his Treasurer to give the poor Gentleman two hundred
pounds, and said unto him: I give you these two hundred pounds as a charge,
that through your default you never suffer any so gallant horse miscarrie any
more so mischanceablie under your hands.

Sir Thomas Moore woonted to say, that a Liar as a Liar resembled counterfeit
Coin, and in his other vices is like to light Coin.

A Pick-thanke told Don Lopez de Haro, that such a one had greatly misused him
in terms behind his back, aduising him to revenge the injury highly:
Whereunto Don Lopez answered: Now I give God thanks, that though he be able to
speak ^ll of me, yet has he not the power to hurt me.

The Earl of Vrenia meeting an Archbishop in the street, saluted him with
all due reverence: And the Prelate but slightlie resaluted him, touching only
his hat brim: Which the Earl noting, stepped to one of his Gentlemen and told
him: It seems your Lord is either balde, mangie, or earelesse, that he dares
not venture off his hatte, for fear belike to have it seen.

The Earl of Vrenia being to send a letter to a fair Lady, was desirous to
make proof of the bearers su^ficiency, as concerning his due performance of
the ceremony thereunto belonging: And he called unto him a new page of his and
said: Sir I am to send you forth with with a letter to a very fair Lady,
let me see how well you can do your message: imagine that I am she, and here
hold the Letter, and get you gone out at yonder door, and then come in again,
and let me hear what you will say: The Page took the letter, went forth, and
came in again, and being come somewhat near the Earl. he doft his hat, and
downd his knee, and kissed the Letter, and gave it him, saying: Madam* my Lord
of Vrenia greets your Ladyship, and has sent you this Letter. The Earl at
this instant his hand was in his codpiece, and stood stooping, and thus he
answered: Welcome my Lad, how fares my Lady the Countess? The Page answered:
Well and like your Honor* And the Earl how fares his L. what is he now a
doing? He answered My Lord is likewise well (Madam) his hand in his codpeece,
all to bescratching somewhat.

A poor Gentleman seldom dined from the Earl of Vrenia his board. It
chanced in a forenoone that a tumult arose in the Earls Palace, the
Gentleman not being yet come: but anon after he came (for it was dinner time)
Whom the Earl seeing, said unto him: Sir, you are welcome, though resembling
the Smithes dog, evermore awake at meal, and asleep at the Anuill.

The Earl of Vrenia asked one that came from the Court, what was reported of
him there: Who answered: Neither good nor bad (my Lord) that I could hear:
With that the Earl commanded him to be thoroughly blowe-basted and beaten* and
then afterward gave him fifty Ducats, saying: Now may thou report of Vrenia
both good and bad.

An ancient Captain, whose beard was hoare-white with age, brought word to the
Earl of Vrenia how the enemy had surprisd his Forte: Trust me (Captain) good
news, (answered the Earl,) Thou have lost the ^ort, and preserved the
Barba^ane. Barbacane, signifying in Spanish, a white beard, and also a
Blockhouse.

Francisco Symenes Archbishop of Tolledo being deputed high Governor over
Spain, during the Emperors absence in the low Countries; upon occasion of
some service, sent for the Earl of Vrenia to come to him to Madryll. The Earl
arrived as far as Guadalaiara (which was a two days journey off the Court)
and walking there in the Goldsmyths street, chanced to cast his eye upon a
curious piece of plate in one of the shoppes, and with that he stepped to it,
and viewing it, and liking it well, he willed the Goldsmith to bring it to his
lodging. The Goldsmith knew him not, and therefore craved his name. Then the
Earl remembering his old grudge toward the Archbishop, and taking it in
foul scorn to be at his call, answered. Na, na (my friend) it skils not who I
am, seeing I am come thus far.

A Gentleman, neighbor to the Earl of Vrenia in a dear year of Corn,
besought the Earl to supply his present necessity. The Earl was well pleased
so to do, and willed his Secretorie to draw a warrant to his Steward to
measure him out twenty quarters: mean while the Earl stood talking with the
Gentleman at a window. At last the Secretorie having drawn the warrant,
brought it to the Earl to sign: Which he perusing, and finding that the words
went thus, I will you to deliver twenty quarters of wheat to Don Pedro de
Gusman, wherewith I am willing to pleasure him at this time. He straight tore
the warrant, and all to beknau'd the Secretorie, and said: Write that he
deliver him twenty quarters, for that it pleases Don Pedro de Gusman to do me
the honor to accept it.

A Seruitor of the Earl of Vrenia, who was but a poor man's son, besought
his Lords leave to go into the Country for a time, for as much as his Father
had provided him a wife there. The Earl was content and willed his
Chamberlain to give him withal a suit of Apparel out of his Wardrop. The
serving man assaying many, and finding none to fit him, in the end the
Chamberlain came and told the Earl of it, whereunto the Earl answered. Then
bid my Treasurer give him an hundred pounds to buy him one withal. The
Treasurer paid it, and he had it.

Isabell Queen of Spain willed Don Alonzo de Aguilar to entitle himself
Marquis of Pliego* (which was the name of his Manor house:) He answered: That
were all one as if your Majesty would advise me to marry my maid.

The Marquis of Cenete was wont to say, That to be rich was not to increase
treasure, but to diminish appetites.

Gonzalo Fernandes, a brave Spanish General, walking in a Church, heard a
Priest loudly praying: To whom he said: Father, what prayer is that you say?
He answered, the Prime: Strain it not then so high (replied the General) least
you break it: For Prime in Spanish signifies also a treble Lute string.

Gonzalo Fernandes used to pass much by a poor man's door, who had two very
fair daughters: which the poor man perceiving, and conceiving withal that
Gonzalos abusiue love of his daughters might greatly redound to his relief: He
came to him, and besought him to help him to some doings in the Country,
thinking by such his absence the better to leave his daughters to Gonzalos
lust, and without that the world might justly suspect any his priuity
thereunto. Gonzalo perceiving such the poor man's drift and desperation, took
compassion of his case, and drawing him into an inner room, gave him two
hundred Crowns in two several bags, saying: I marie will I (my friend) do for
thee: Hold here these two bags and be gone; see thou bestow thy daughters
presently therewith, and as for thy self, I will provide for thee besides.

Gonzalo Fernandes still used to say, that he remained debtor to none so much
as to them, to whom he gave most: So much he esteemed the honor of his bounty.

The Earl of Cifuentes woonted to say, that Noblemen in times past used to
cast account with their Lances, and now adays with compters.

Don Diego de Mendoza Earl of Melito, was wont to say, That in the house
where is a fountain, there needs no Cesterne, and the Lord that has fee
enough, need hoord up no treasure.

The Earl of Cenete being a very young Gentleman at the siege of Perpenian,
ventured close under the wall, and darted a Lance into the Castle, and came
safe away: Anon after a couple of hors-men salied forth of the place, and he
seeing them would have ventured to encounter one of them, But his Tutor would
not suffer him, but said: Soft Sir, first I will go before and kill one of
them, and then come you after and cut off his head: Nay (replied the Earl)
rather let me go before and kill one of them, and then come you after and
kiss his tail.

The Earl of Lenios awarded Justice to a Vass^ll of his: wherewith the party
found himself greatly agrieued, and highly exclaimed of the Earls injustice
therein, and belike the Earl indeed mistook the matter: Whereupon he sent for
the party the next day* and said unto him: My friend, thy ^peeches deserve
laughter, and my error reformation.

A Duke of Feria was so honorable in his bounties, that he never bid his
Treasurer any set value to disburse, but thus: Give such a one forty or fifty
Crowns, 100. or 1^0. pounds: so as the Treasurer rested evermore perplexed how
to perform the Dukes pleasure. Wherefore being on a time commanded to give a
certain Gentleman 200. or 250. Crowns, he came to the Duke, to demand his
exact ple^sure therein: Why pesant (answered the Duke) seekst thou to alter my
manner of phrase, I tell thee now for good and all, understand always the most
of my pleasure, and there an end.

Don Bernardin de Velasco delighted so exceedingly in cros-bowes, that he
deputed an especial room in his house for their safe custody. It cha^ced on a
time, that being to purchase a goodly manor, and much country about it in
Andaluzia, he had stored up treasure, to the value of 60000 pounds, which, his
Treasurer for more safety had coffered up, and disposed in the said cros-bow
room, as being the strongest place in all the house. Don Bernardin one day
coming thither, to see his cros-bowes, and seeing those coffers there, asked
what trumpery it was. The Treasurer answered: Treasure. Treasure (said Velasco)
it is trash; away with it, what makes it here to endanger my cros-bowes?

A Constable coming to arrest a shomaker within his house; the shoomakers wife
so well bestirred her, that she bravely belamb'd the constable, whiles in the
mean time her husband got away: The Constable then came unto the Duke of
Infantasgo and complained unto him of the battery, and of the shoomakers vviues
misusage; alleging that if so scandalous a fact were not very severely, and
that eftsoons corrected, it would greatly redound to his L. disgrace: whereunto
the Duke answered: Seeing as thou say, the disgrace will be mine, I forgive
the shoomakers wife.

Don Bernardin de B^badilia entering into the Earl of Beniuenta his privy
chamber, the Earl did not arise to salute him: Whereupon al in a chafe he flung
out, and said; your L. is good for a vassal

A worshipful Gentleman saying in complement to The Earl of Vrenia: (I rest
ever your Honors poor friend) and with that sucesing, and adjoining afterward
( and your humble seruiture.) The Earl answered: I had taken you at your first
word: viz. for a friend, had you not afterward adjoined seruiture.

A King of Spain commanded a gallerie to be built upon Arches all along a
street from his palace to Don Inigo Lopez his palace, and understanding that
it was all finished, he sent a Gentleman of his privy chamber to go view the
work, and bring him true report thereof, and withal to salute in his name Don
Inigo Lopez. The Gentleman being arrived there, viewed the work, and did the
Kingssalute unto the Nobleman: who answered: Most humble thanks unto the Kings
salute, and I pray tell his highness I am well, and do rest ready at all his
Majesty's employance, only I marvel why it has pleased his Highness to daigne
so unnecessary a prop to my strong house.

At the funeral of the King of Hungary, the Emperor Charles passed along in a
mourning robe, and the Earl of Nassao bore up his train. An officious
Gentleman, retainer to the said Earl supposing it no less courtesy to do the
like to his Lord, took up his train, and bore it up after him a good way: At
last the Earl looking back, espied him, and said: Let down sir fool and be
gone in a knaves name.

A Duchess was iealious of a fair Gentlewoman, conceipting that she used
some unlawful means to distray her Duke to her amity: and in this mind sent
for her to murder her. The innocent Gentlewoman suspecting no such danger,
came; and being in the place of death, the Duchess regarding her exceeding
rare beauty, dismissed her again, saying: It is thy beauty has slain me, and
saved thee.

Certain Ladies coming to visit an honorable person, who was become a Friar,
and had left the world, they said: That they greatly meruelled that so high a
state as he would leave the world, who had always lived most honorably therein
and at his hearts ease: He answered: Even as you say (Ladies) I have always
hitherto bestowed my fine flower on the world, and now therefore is it meet,
that at leastwise I give my bran unto my God, if so it please him to accept it.

A widow Gentlewoman in a dearth of corn, came to the Earl of Vrenia, and
besought him of his charity to relieve her With that the Earl called his
Secretary unto him, and bid him draw a warrant to his Bailiffe, to deliver her
so much. The Secretary, whether he mistook his L pleasure, or whether he was
willing to use his own discretion therein, set down less then the Earls
award, namely but xx. bushels; and so brought it to the Earl to sign: Who
seeing so small a quantity, as but twenty bushels, was highly displeasd, and
blotted it out, and wrote over it five hundred. Whereat his Secretary seeming
greatly to muse, the Earl said: Thus has thy folly made me a more Fool: but
go to, so it shall pass for this once. And he passed it so.

The Earl of Cabra, being a very valiant Gentleman, arming himself on a time
to go skirmishe the enemy, his Gentlemen greatly meruelled to see him so
tremble and quiver all the time he was of arming: which the Earl perceiving,
said: See see (Sirs) how basely my flesh quakes to think in what a pecke of
troubles my aduenturous heart will put it in anon.

A Nobleman had his young son up to the Court, who being a delicate youth,
the Ladies eyes were never off him, neglecting all other gallants, he being in
place: Which the Nobleman perceiving, said unto them. Are you so ouer-ioyed
with the sight of gre^ne barley, that you forget your prouander before you?

Don Bernardino Piementel had his house plentifully furnished with all manner
rich and necessary things: In so much as it pleased the King his Liege to
grace it in his progress time with his survey: Who when he had viewed it all
from one office to another, in the end he greatly commended him, saying: That
he was a good common-wealthes-man: Whereupon a Noble man, this Piementels
ill-willer, then by, said unto the King. And like your Majesty, there is not
the least city or town in all your land, but is better furnished. True answered
Piementell, and yet I assure you (my Lord) not any whit of all this provision
came from your town of Burgos.

Alauarda in Spanish signifies a Halberd, and Aluarda a pack saddle. A Nobleman
willed his Secretary to write a Letter to a Gentleman a friend of his in
Tolledo, for a dozen of Alauardas, viz. Halberds. Now the Secretary through
negligence wrote Aluardas, viz. Pack-saddles: Which the Noble man set his hand
to without ere reading it, and so sent it away. The Gentleman meaning simply
bought a dosen of Pack-saddles, and sent them to the Nobleman, according to the
contents of his letter: Which being presented to his view, and withal
perceiving by the Gentleman's letter, such the contents of his own, he straight
found out his Secretaries error, whom he presently called unto him, and gave
him in regard of such his gross oversight, one half of the pack-saddles, and
the other six he reserved to himself, as in respect he was so careless, as to
set his hand to a letter before ere he red it.

The Marquis of Santiliana customed to say, that ceremonies are enough for
strangers, but deeds befit friends.

The Marquis of Santiliana was a great student, and being on a time merrily
reprehended therefore by his illiterate friends, he said: I converse better with
my books then with you.

The Marquis of Comares talking with the President of Cordua said unto him,
that the Romans maintained a rich Common wealth, and but mean houses, and
the Spaniards rich houses, and but a hungry commonwealth.

A Commendador-Maior of Spain, whose steward was all to miserlie for his
thrift, said unto him: I pray thee N. less profit and more honor.

A Noble man having many Guestes upon a time at dinner with him and his board
not very well furnished, called his steward unto him and said: Why N. this dinner
is like a leaden blade, the point and the pummel soon bent together.

The Earl of Cifuentes being Ambassador for his Spanish King at the Court of
Rome, and being present at a Council holden in the Popes Consistory, at which
were present Ambassadors from most Christian nations; and a many Cardinals,
and the Pope himself, and seeing there the French king his chair placed above
his Lieges, he pushed it down with great impacience. A Bishop that sat by,
rebuking him therefore, and affirming that that was no meet time nor place to
commit scandals. Tut reverend father he answered) say you as beseemes a divine
and do I as fitteth a Gentleman.

A Duke of Florence invited to his palace at Rome the Earl of Tendilia,
Spaines Ambassador to Supper, and the Duke would have placed him at the upper
end of the board under his cloth of estate; but the Earl greatly gainsaide
it, and refused it. Then the Duke waxing hereat ciuilly angry, commanded one
of his Gentlemen to bring him forthwith the keys of his palace, to the end
to yield them up to the Earl,

Frances King of France in a Letter that he wrote to the Emperors Ambassador,
endorsed it thus. To the Ambassador of Kings, and King of Ambassadors, etc.

Cardinal Saluiates, the Popes Legate in Spain, at the Emperor Charles his
espousall, being in merry conversation, said: That France tasted of pride,
Spain of malice, Italy of wisdom, England of vanity, Portugal of fools.

OF GENTLEMEN.
A Gentleman asking a Dier, whether he could die his silk stockings of the
color of a woman's honesty: Fie, said a Gentlewoma^ that stood by, what a
question is that? Say you fie (replied the Gentleman) Believe me I had not
thought a woman's honesty had been of the color of (Fie.)

A Sodomitical Gentleman walking in a Chu^chyard with an other poor Gentleman,
whom he greatly disdained, and asking him where he would be buried when he were
dead: The other answered: With you in Sodom.

Isabell Queen of Spain, saying to a young gentleman, whose father had before
time sustained some just disgrace at her highness hands. I trow N. you will
trimly raise up your house again, and make us good amends for your fathers
fault. He (being a silly sot) answered Yea, and like your Majesty, one end of
my barn indeed is sore decayed with the last winds, by reason that it stands
somewhat high, but my mother has promised me to be at the charge of that
reparation.

A Gentleman sitting at a play, a Merchant by chance sat before him, whose hat
was so high and broad, that it hindered his view of the play; whereupon he
said unto him: My good ^riend, I beseech you do off your hatte a while, for I
assure you it will greatly benefit my eie-sight.

A Spanish Gentleman had a many Moors to his slaves, and in the winter time he
kept them cold and bare: A Churchman rebuking such his vncharitie and hard
heart, and saying that it was a shame unto him: He answered*: Pass they over
the cold and I Will pass over the shame well enough.

A Gentleman in regard of a Gentlewomans rude behavior toward him, estranged
himself for a season from conuersing with her. Whereupon a friend of hers
asking him on a time, why he became so great a stranger to that house, he
answered: Because better is civil strangeness, than rude familiarity.

A Gentleman riding along where sat a many Gentlewomen at the street door, an
ugly Mastiffe curre flewe at him: Whereupon the Gentleman desirous to view the
Gentlewomen, took this as an occasion to turn back, and said unto the^:
Gentlewoman, this Curre is hell, and all you are heaven.

A Gentleman bespake a pair of shoes of a shoemaker, who at the months end
brought them him: Whereat the Gentleman somewhat angry with his so long delay,
said unto him: Eue^ as you came (my friend) so be gone; for I wear not my
shoes by your foot, but by mine own.

On S. Steuens day it is the custom, all horses to be let blood and drenched.
A Gentleman being that morning demanded whether it pleased him to have his
horse let blood and drencht according to the fashion. He answered: No sir, my
horse is not diseasd of the fashions.

A young Gentleman said unto an old Gentleman (who was but his equal both in
lineage, and living, and all other respects only age excepted) Sir I beseech
you let me kiss your reverend hand. The Other was content, and offered it him
to kiss: But the young Gentleman, seeing such his vanity, only shook him by
the hand, and said: Good faith Sir, you and I against any other two.

A poor Gentleman that for wealths sake had married a rich pesants daughter,
compared such his marriage to a pudding, whereinto he had put the blood, and
his Father in law the Chibbols.

A Ge^tleman came hungry home, and called for dinner, and his man answered:
That it was but new stricken ten. Tut (said the Gentleman) tellest thou me of
ten by the clock, being twelve by my stomach?

A poor Gentleman dying, had three fair hawks, which he thus disposed of:
viz. The One to be sold for the benefit of his soul; the other for the discharge
of certain dribling debts; and the third to remain to his son, whom he made
his Executor. This good Executor within a while after missing one of the
hawks, said: So well fare thy heart (hawke) be thou gone for my fathers soul.

A Gentleman being releast out of prison, the porter at parting demanded his
fee, and the Gentleman gave him but a common prisoners fee, viz. three pence:
Whereunto the Porter excepting, and challenging six pence. The Gentleman
shaming belike to have been prisoner for so foul a matter: answered: I am
content thou take me for a pesant for this once.

A very civil Gentleman walking in conversation with other his companions,
stayed talking by the way with a plain Cuntryman, who met him, and delivered
him a letter: And because his parley was somewhat long, the others were
discontented and walked on before, leaving him behind, who at last ouertaking
them, said: Gentlemen, it is no less honorable to answer an inferior, then
to comply with an equal.

A young Gentleman that had followed the wars, complained when he came home
of the Sciatica: And being asked how he came by that ache, he answered: By
lying in frank tenements, viz. Upon the bare earth.

One asking a Gentleman his acquaintance what good horses he had, he answered:
As stately a one as ever you saw. The Other then desirous to see it, to the
stable they went; where when they came, a piteous poor jade it was (God wot)
of pure skin and bone But looking still about for the foresaid stately horse,
and not seeing any such there, he marvelled, and often asked where he was
become. Then the other answered: Why lo here where he stands (pointing to the
poor lade) I warrant ye (quoth he) that he goes not above half a mile an
hour to die for it, and can you have a statelier horse then so?

A Gentleman seeing his man gallop a horse ilfauoredly, said unto him: I assure
thee (N.) thou do not a whit discr^dit thy mother: The serving man asking
him how so Mary (quoth he) because when one does a thing passing well and with a
good grace (as now thou do) I have hard it often said: The whoreson has done
it passing well.

A Nobleman came to the Court with a gallant train of golde-chaines after
him: And one of his Gentlemen being asked how it chanced that he had never a
chain as well as the rest: He answered: I do not gnawe.

A virtuous Gentleman seeing a malicious person look down on the ground, and
continue gazing thereon a good space, said: Questionless either some mischief
is befallen yonder man, or some good to some other body.

A Gentleman that had been to see the Peake, traveling the same day homeward
again, alighted that night in an In: where, when he was to go to bed, a
bonny-Lasse stepped into his chamber and offered him her service all night: He
seeing her impudence, answered: I lift not (wench) to enter into the Peake
twice in twelve hours: and so dismissed her.

A Gentleman put out his mule to a Horse-courser to break and bid him make it a
widdow-mule: The horse-courser maruelling at such a term, demanded his
meaning therein. Mary (said the Gentleman) a widow has these three good
properties: she is fat, she feeds well, and she goes well, such a one would I
have you make my mule.

M. William Goring of Sussex had left him by Sir Henry his father a chest of
treasure so close pyl'd up together, that hard it was to finger out any one
piece, much les^e to gripe out any. This Gentleman having lost the key of that
chest, offered a lock-smith in bargain for a new, either to take his full
gripe of money out of it, at the opening thereof; or else to stand to the bare
price of his key. The Smith chose rather the adventure of his gripe: Whichwhen
it came to pass, and that withal the injury he did unto his fingers, he could
neither gripe, nor pick out any one piece: At last he was feign to stand to
the Gentleman's courtesy, who like a Gentleman requited his avarice with far
more bounty then the key was worth.

An Officer whose daughter was detected of dishonestie, and generally so
reported, vpbraided a gentleman that his brother was a Papist, and therefore he
himself happily not much better. The Gent. hereunto answered: As Well may an
honest man have a knave to his brother, as an erra^t whore to his daughter

A Gentleman accompanying on the way a great Commendador of Spain, who wore a
huge chain about his neck, with a great S. James hanging down his breast
before; at parting this Gent. horse was so unwieldy, that he could not easily
rule him, but still he ^risked and carabetted and crossed the Commendador on the
way: Whereupon the Commendador asking him, what his horse ayled, he answered:
And like your Honor, he is like a Hackney jade, which wheresoever it sees a
sign hang out, thinks strait it is an In, and will not pass it to die. So is
it with my horse, and your Honors habit about your neck.

Two Gentlemen were at factions with one an other, and the one of the^ sent his
trusty servant to an old Gent. his neighbor, to solicit his partiality on his
behalf: Whereunto the old Gent. made this answer, that he for his part, was
rather sorry of their mutual enmities (being both his very good neighbors)
the^ that he would any ways be a party therein, other then in way to atone
them to his power, and make them good friends again. The seruing-man
delivering this answer to his master: The Gentleman all in a snuff said:
What an old fool is he, that will be angry with no body.

A Gent conuersing merrily among a many Gentlewomen, they said unto him: Ware
you speak no more such follies, for fear we bind you, he answered: Being your
selves all loose will you bind me?

A Spanish Gentleman was buying of Porke, and another that was not a Gentleman,
but so seemed, came and cheapened it of the butcher, as though he meant to buy
it out of the others hand: Whereat the Gentleman half angry, said unto him. Well
seeing you come to cheapen my porke, I Will (sure) one of these days come cheapen
your pease.

A poor Gentleman and a rich Cormougeon being at chollericke terms with one
another, the Churl ^ware that he was as good a Gentleman as he. Even so
(replied the gent^eman) then I assure thee, I am the veriest pesant in the
world:

A pick-thanke was telling a virtuous Gentleman, how such a one spoke ill of
him behind his back in the presence of a great many Of a great many? (answered
the ge^tleman) Believe me, so I had rather one should say ill of me before
many, then many before one.

One told a Gentleman that his men tatled much disgrace of him behind his
back He answered: Let them tattle what they list, and do I what I list.

A Gentleman hearing thieves in the night time scaling his neighbors house,
said: Hark how yonder poultry mount up to their pearches.

A Gentleman of Tolledo having a piece of rich Taffeta brought him from a
friend of his out of India, sent for a Merchant to buy it of him: Who seeing
it, and liking it well* told the gentleman, that if it pleased him to take
saffron in exchange for it, he would gladly rid him of it: Whereunto the
gentleman answered: Gramercy (my good friend) But know you not that my L.
Cardinals grace is at this day Inquisitor general over all Spain? Go but to
him, and obtain of his Grace, that whereas Saffron is now most used in fried
meats, he to en^oine all men to use it hereafter in boiled meats; and this
being once granted and proclaimed, then come to me again, and I will show you
more of my mind.

One saying to a Gentleman: Sir, me thinks you have built your house well for
Summer, but not for winter: He answered: Belike you think I have less wit
then wild geese, that cannot shift my abode with every season.

There was a certain poor Gentleman, who, in regard of his poverty, every one
thowed, and not any vouchsafed him the title of Mastership: Whereupon one that
noted it said: This argues that neither God nor the K. ever created mastership.

One asking a Gentleman what he thought of one that was newly taken in
adultery: He answered: Taken tarde.

OF GALLANTS AND VPSTARTS.
A Presumptuous gallant besought the King of Spain in a merim^nt to make him
his Secretary; The King answered* that he was already provided of a su^ficient
one. Yea, well I wot (replied the gallant) your Mai^sty has a Secretary
indeed, but he can speak no Latin, which is a foul default. The Secretary
standing by, then answered. But it is a greater shame not to speak good
Spanish.

Emanuell King of Portugal being to ride a hunting, willed his Steward to
provide him dinn^r in a banqueting house, which he had in the forest, and
that it should consist only of such meats as had no blood in them. viz.
Sallades and fruits altogether. A Gallant ouerhearing such the Kings
encharge, stepped straight to a Gentleman his companion by, and drawing out his
sword, presented it to the King, and said: It may then please your Majesty to
taste hereof, for by Jesus it never yet drew blood of any and in it self the
deu'll a whit it has.

A merry Gentleman seeing a Gallant that was bound for the Indies walk the
streets, his hat al-a fl^unt, and befeathered with all kind of colloured
plumes, said: When a Gods name will this Woodcocke fly, ^or well I see he
has all his ^ethers about him.

One that had layn first with the mother, and then afterward with the daughter,
asked a Ruffian mate, what that fact might resemble; who answered: All one, as
if you should eat the hen first, and the chickin after.

A Spanish Hidalgo used to say, that in a case of brabble between king Phillip
and him, he might with more right give the King the lie, the the King give it
him, because he himself is a pure Spaniard, and the King but an Ostrich.

A gallant used to say: Traveling on the way, let me always lie in a house
where I may call my Host Knave, and my Hostess whore, viz. in an Inn.

A Gallant was brought before a merry Recorder of London for getting a maid
with child, and the Recorder said: It is a marvel (master N.) that you being a
Gentleman of good quality, would venture to get maids with child: The
Gentleman answered: Nay rather were it a marvel, if a maid had gotten me with
child.

A Gallant entered into a young Noblemans chamber whiles he was a trimming, and
said: What means your L. to have to do with this pack saddle groom? The
barber answered: True (my Lord) for such a saddle indeed did I once make for
his father.

A Gallant bosted himself of much Worship and Gentry in a place where he was
not known: and it chanced that he and his Tailor squared about a bill of
account, and he highly vaunting his worship to the Tailor, said: Why Pesant,
it seems, thou know not what Gentry means: Tell me, what is it? The Tailer
answered, Yes, to be borne a hundred miles hence.

A poor creature begged alms of a Gallant, who gave him a Tester. With that
the beggar said, that he would pray to god most truly for him. No (answered the
Gallant) I pray thee pray for thy self, for I take no Almes-vsurie.

A young Master that had wasted a goodly inheritance in a very short space,
one said in mockage of him: Whereas earth uses to consume al other men, this
Gallant has consumed earth.

A Portugal and a Spaniard fought, and by means of friends they were parted,
and almost made friends. Then the Portugal said: I am content (sirs) at your
earnest entreaties to let the villain live, but as (I am a Gentleman,) I Will have
one limme or other of him, as a badge of my victory.

A vain Gallant ran his head by chance against another belly, and the
company asking this other how he felt his belly, he answered: Well, for a
wind-bladder never gives great blow.

An unthrifty youth being brought to the last cast, challenged in the Arches a
certain rich Citizens daughter to wife, affirming, that they were at such a
time, and in such a place contracted together. Then the Judge asked him,
whether the marriage were never since consummated, yea or no? With that steps
me forth the Maids Procter, and said: Yes (sir) his living is long ago.

Two companions went to a wenching house, and the Less was not yet come
according to appointment: whereupon one of them began in the mean time to
conceit the old Viccareste of that h^l, there present. Which the other seeing,
said unto him: Are you so hungry that you will eat up the halter before the
hay come.

A Gallant seeing himself worshipped at every word in all places where he
came, said unto his hostess that so beworshipt him: I pray thee hostess,
worship me no worships, would my worship were hanged.

One asking a gallant where he lay anights, he answered: My lodging is like the
point of a sagbot, that still goes with the eye.

A young Master was new come to his living, and his mother blaming his
unthriftiness, all in a pelting chafe he said unto her: Faith (mother) taunt me
so but once more, and for spite I Will sell ye all the land and living I have. So
may you do well, Son (answered his mother,) yea and if you should sell it all
but for six pence, yet should you be no looser thereby, for it never cost you
groate.

A presumptuous Gallant pricked up upon the Spanish Court gate a Tilt-challenge
against all comers: A Lady asking her Paramour whether he would subscribe
thereunto, He answered: No (Madam) no firm of mine, for, so fantastical a body
admits no impression, viz. Encounter.

An vpstart Gallant being determined to seem the Gentleman, bought him half a
dosen fair suits of apparel, and putting on the first day of his bravery a
fair large velvet cloak, he looked about him, and said: Me thinks this cloak
stands nothing hansome upon me: True (said a Gentleman that stood by) you may
therefore do well to begin with Taffeta first, and then fall to your velvet
afterward.

A gallant was a boasting that he feared neither pox nor plague: And an other
adioyn'd, Nor God.

One commending an others huge strength, said: That if the world had an iron
ring at it, he would lift it up all.

A Gallant threatened one, saying: If thou offend me, I Will throw thee so high
into the Element, that rather may thou fear famishing, then falling.

A Parish in the west Country called Lent was by fortune set on fire: and by
chance a good fellow passing by at the same time, and seeing it, asked the
Parishes name: They answered, Lent: Lent (quoth he) I pray ye then in with
Fridayes and Saterdayes to, that the fire may consume them altogether.

CORONELS AND CAPTAINS.
MOnsieur de Aubenie last General of the French forces in the Kingdom of
Naples, being, what by conquest, and what by composition, to yield up to
Spain, the last towns and holds that he there held for his Liege* It pleased
Gonzalo Fernandes the Spanish General to be so honorable, as after much
Festiuitie extended unto him at his surrender, to furn^sh also his decayed
army with principal good horses to pack away: But Monsieur d' Aubenie rather
regarding the pride of his mind, then the courtesy of the Spanish General,
told him at parting, that he had done very unadvisedly, to mount his men so
bravely away, in as much as upon the same horses he might chance to see him
and them shortly again in those parts, in as hostill manner as ever before.
You shall be welcome (answered Gonzales) whenever you come, neither shall you
ever find Spain less honorable then now.

One Pedrarias a Portugal in a battle that he fought against Spain, took
prisoners a many Gentlemen and Artizans of Tolledo, and having occasion the
morrow after to make a Trench and a vault under ground at a place called
Pannionrostro, he asked them all severally, whether they were Gentlemen or
Artizans: And such as said they were Artizans, he employed them in the work,
saying: Why would you leave your trades? And the Gentlemen he dismissed, saying:
You did but your duties to come to the wars.

Gonzalo Fernandes used to say: That soldiers in peace, are like chimneyes in
Summer.

The said General woonted to say: If thy enemy fly, make him a golden bridge.

The said Gonzalo Fernandes marching on a time to bid the Frenchmen battle,
chanced to stumble and fall: Whereat his Army seeming dismayed, at rising up he
said unto them: Why (sirs) this is no worse then that the ground embraces me
for joy.

Diego Garcia Paredez saying to Gonzalo Fernandes: May it please your Honor to
avoid that dangerous place, seeing how sore the enemy plays upon it: He
answered. Since God has put no fear into your heart, put you none into mine.

Don Pedro Gonzales seeing his Liege at the battle of Aliuberoto in danger to
be slain, alighted from off his horse, and mounted the King thereon, and
foretir'd him safe away. Which after he had done, and placed him in assured
safty, he would have returned back again to the battle, but the King would
not suffer him. Pardon me my Liege then he said: I will go. Never shall the
women of Guadalasara say, that I trained out their sons and husbands to the
wars, and have left them dead in the field, and am my self safe returned
home.

A Spanish Captain was sent to skirmish a multitude of enemies with a few men:
And of those ^ew he took but the one half, saying: Better yet a few die then
all.

Chatillion, L. Admiral of France having given the Guizians a great overthrow
in a vale, was himself suddenly set upon by a troop of enemies from a hill:
Yet notwithstanding retreating his scattered Army to saftie with the loss of
only some few, he said by the way: I thought yonder mountain cloud would at
last redownd to a shoure of rain.

The King of Spain commanded the brave Castle of Montilia for the lords
treason to be rased to the ground: And it chanced, that as the ruin was a
doing, the unexpected fall of a turret slew fifty persons. Gonzalo Fernandes
hearing of it, said: Oh what a destruction (trow ye) would Montilia have made
amongst her enemies, had it been suffered to live, that dying has slain so
many of her foes.

Fernando Gonzales seeing one of his soldiers a selling his horse, asked him
why he sold him: The Soldier answered: Because (my Lord) his fashion is to
give back at the sight of armor. I marvel much (replied Gonzales) that you
will sell him for the same quality you bought him for.

Gonzalo Fernandes being to bid the enemy battle, it fortuned that certain
barrels of powder were set on fire, wherewith the Army was superstitiously
dismayed: which he perceiving, said: (Sirs,) this is the bonfire of our victory.

A Soldier came and told his Captain, that he thought such a Fortress of
the enemy might be won only with the loss of some few men: Whereunto the
Captain answered: But will you be one of those few?

A covetous Captain, whose name was Leonard Robiny, his Soldiers in
derision, called him Captain Rob-pennie.

A gallant Captain leading his men forth to service, and seeing them half
amazed at the over multitudes of the enemy, said: Why, (Sirs) did heaven fall,
we would (I trow) support it with our manly Arms.

An Italian Captain seeing fire given to a Canon in the enemies Fort toward his
quarter, prostrated himself upon the ground, and said: He that fears not
thee, fears not God.

The Castle of Endouen in Brabant being surpised by night* by the States
soldiers, the Captain thereof being an Italian, was then a bed with his
wench: To whom his Lieutenant came, and said: Up and fight (Captain) or save
your self, for the enemy is within the walls He answered. You and the rest
fight there, for I have as much as I can turn me to here: Anon after came one
of his Sergeants, and said: Captain, up and away, the enemy preuailes: He
answered: I, now I come, my lance is in the rest: At last came rushing in his
Ancient, and said: Captain, your colors are lost, and the Castle taken: He
answered: Yet have I broken my Lance, what will you more? Then last of all
rusht in the enemy into his chamber, and would have ^laine him: With that he
kissed his whore, and said unto them: Oh Sirs, Bon guerre, bon guerre, see here
Bon guerre.

An Italian Captain in the Low-Cuntries leading his men to skirmish the enemy:
thus heathenlie encouraged them saying: (Sirs) remembering the Anticke honor of
our Roman nation, fight so: and as for your sins, if you die, know ye there
is no God. So said, he fought, and was the first man was slain. Good Reader,
detest this and honor Gods judgment therein.

OF SOVLDIOVRS.
A Captain and a soldier fought a combat, and the Captain hurt the
soldier in the Arm. So as down fell his sword from out his hand, he resting
at the Captains mercy. Then the Captain saying: Now yield (villain) or die. Is
it as I list (answered the Soldier) know ye then, that though my Arm now
fails me to fight, yet my courage serves me well to die.

Amongst a many Portugalles that went to give the Moors a Camesado by night a
Spaniard marched amongst them, and he speaking somewhat loud, contrary to their
proclaimed silence: a Portugal shent him therefore, saying: By your Spanish
speech the Moors will think we be all Spaniards, and then (before God) will
they kill every mothers child of us.

A Portugal soldier marching in a troop of Spaniardes against the Moors
unarmed and weaponlesse, one asked him why he was no better furnished: He
answered: Mary because there are as valiant men at foot, as at Arms.

A Spaniard at the entry of the breach of Mastricht (a Flaunders town) seeing
at a corner house, as he ran along to the spoil, an Image of the Virgin Marie
broken and all defaced, bowed down his knee to the ground, and vowed that
before he passed that street he would kill seven Dutch men in despite of the
seven deadly sins, and an eight in revenge of that sacrilege done to the
said Image of our Lady, and he did so.

A Spanish soldiers match in Flanders, not taking fire so presently as he
would, said: Gogs Nouns, this Lutherane fire refuses to light my Catholic
match, for fear (belike) least it should kill some thousand Dutch Lutheranes.

A crew of Soldiers begged of a Gentleman as he rode on the way, and he
answered: Faith (Sirs) I do not use to give takers any thing. They
nevertheless still importuning him and one of them, saying: Happily your
Worship has sometimes been a Marshal man your self (for so you seem,) and
therefore we hope you will not be unkind to poor Soldiers in distress. No
trust me (answered the Gentleman) I never was Soldier in all my life and yet
(I hope in God) I am an honest man nevertheless.

A cowardly Gallant went forth with his company to combat the Moors, and the
Moors won the field: Home then returned the runaway suruiuors, and brought
their General word of al a la mort. Amongst whom this Gallant was missing; and
not being heard of, was thought to have been slain. Nay I warrant you (said an
old woman there present) he is living, for well ye wot, Moors eat no Hares
flesh.

A Gallego of Spain went to the wars, and was shot with an arrowe into the
head. The Surgeon searching the wound, said, that he could not possibly live,
for that the arrow had pierst his brain. The Gallego answered: That can not
be, for I have no brain at all; had I had brains, I trow I had never come to
the wars.

At the siege of Barcelona, a Portugal horsman entered pelle melle, in
the enemies throng into the town gate, and wrote with a chalk within the gate:
Hitherto adventured Vasco Fernandes. The next day a Spaniard hearing him boast
thereof, was no less aduenturous, and bravely hazarded himself the next
skirmish, in at the same gate, and wrote with a cole beyond his: Hitherto Vasco
Fernandes did not adventure.

A valiant Soldier being demanded how many men he durst encounter withal at
once, answered: If he be an honest man, one is enough, if villains, a whole
street-full.

A nouice soldier putting on his first harness, trembled, and said: Now that
I see my self in Arms, I am afraid of my self.

A young soldier brought from the wars a great skarre in his face, and
chancing on a time to meet an old Soldier, that had as great a skar in the
face as he, he stood gazing thereupon a good while: Then the other asking him
why he did so: He answered: I am sure I am up, but you have won it by the
elder hand.

A soldier that had a piteous mangled face brought his garment to a Tailor to
mend: The Tailor gazing earnestly on his face, at last said: You had more need
be new made, then mended.

An Italian soldier at the siege of Bergaine op Zome in Brabant, prostrated
himself on the ground, at the sight of a Canon shot, and said. Not bow to
thee, not bow to God.

A soldier that in his mirth was most gracious, and in his rage intolerable:
One said, that he was like a Quince that helps disgestion well, and yet is it
self hard to digest.

A Spanish Officer brauing an English Gentleman that served his king in the
Low countries, and saying: My Liege gives thee bread to eat: else might
thou starve well enough: He answered: Your King indeed adventures his purse for
me, but I my Princess displeasure, and my life for him.

One preferred wars before peace, and his reason was, Because that in wars
the fathers bury their sons, but in peace the sons their fathers.

A soldier was a telling how that in a battle in which he was, the enemies
Arrows were so infinite in the air, that they darkened the sun over them:
Whereunto an other answered: Then had you the ods, to fight with them in the
shade.

In a plain all covered over with snow, a Captain seeing a soldier march in
his doublet and hose with a pike on his shoulder all in a sweat, asked him how
in so cold a day as that, and but in a thin doublet and hose he could possibly
sweat so: The soldier answered: Marie (Captain) if you carried all your
goods upon your back at once, as I do, I warrant you, you would sweat as well
as I.

OF CHALLENGES AND Combats.
A Gentleman reading a letter of defiance, wherein he was challenged the field,
his page holding the candle unto him whilst he read it, and snuffing it,
chanced to put it out. Sir (then said the Gentleman) light the candle again
quickly, for I tell thee (boy) this letter comes not to put out candles, but
to kill God a mercy on his soul.

Fernando Gonzales appointed twelve Spanish soldiers to combat so many other
French men hand to hand; and it fell out that the combat ended with equal
honor to both nations: Whereupon Gonzales said; I sent my Spaniardes forth
for better men.

In Spain single combat is not allowed, but between persons of like blood
and lineage: A Spanish Gentleman having a quarrel with another not his equal,
sent him a challenge thus: I, N. do acknowledge my self as base a villain as
thou thy self; and therefore, see thou meet me to morrow at such a place.

A Spanish soldier challenged an Italian Gentleman to the field: Whereunto the
Italian excepted, as in respect he was his better; nevertheless (he said) I have
a boy that shall fight with thee in the right of my quarrel, where er'e thou
dare to appoint: The Spaniard herunto thus answered: Let that boy come, for
boy, or base how er'e he be, I will account him thy better.

It was vpbraided to one that he turned his back to his enemy, and ran away:
He answered: No, I did but trauerse my ground in the fury of my spirits.

A Gentleman, who was none of the wisest, was deputed judge in jest, of a Just
between two other Gentlemen: And one saying unto him; (Sir) how think you of
this last course, has not Master N. lost his Lance? meaning that he had not
countercrusht it upon his adversary: Whereunto he answered: If master N. have
lost his Lance, let him seek it out again.

A gowtie Gentleman challenged to run with one for a wager: What wager (said
the other?) He answered: For humors.

An old Gentleman being a hunting, lost one of his Beagles, and understanding
that such a young Gallant had taken it up, sent to him to demand it: which the
youth refusing to deliver, the next day, he sent him a challenge to the field.
But the young gentleman returned him this answer: That in regard of his weak old
age, he would not so much distaine his vigorous youth, as to encounter him in
Arms. Whereunto the old Gentleman replied: That notwithstanding that he was a
young boy indeed, yet was it ungratefully done of him, in that he did not at
leastwise daigne to thank him for such proffered spurs, how ever he durst or
listed not to accept them, being offered to such his infant years of vndesert.

TRAVAYLERS BY LAND and Sea.
A Traveling Gentleman being returned home out of Italy discoursed to a friend
of his a very unlikely accident that had befallen him by the way. Whereat his
page standing by, said: I beseech your worship give me leave to believe it.

In a common between two Alehouses stood a fair stone cross, and two
Gentlemen riding by it, the one of them said: See where stands a cross
between two Thieves. One of the Alehouse, hosts ouer-hearing him say so, was
all in a pelting chafe, and foully taunted the Gentleman therefore: Who
answered: Why (my friend) thou art the good thief.

Two Trauaylers met together at an Inn, and a fat Capon was served up to their
board: At dinner time one asked the other, whether he had a father living or no:
He answered, no: And withal told him a long discourse how, and where, and
how long since his father died: Mean time the other eat up the best of all
the Capon: Which the tale-teller at last perceiving, half angry, said unto
him: Now that you have heard the discourse of my fathers death: I pray you tell
me, have you also er'e a father living: He answered: No* Now I pray you then
tell me (quoth the other) how he died: He very earnest at his vittailes,
briefly answered: Suddenly, very suddenly.

A Mastiffe dog flue upon a passenger, and he with the pike of his staff ran
him into the guts, and killed him: The owner of the dog hereupon commnc'd his
action against the par^ie: And the matter being brought to the vpshot, the
Judge asked him, why he did not rather strike the dog with the wood end of the
staff, then with the pike: he answered: And like your Honor, he flue at me
with his teeth, not with his tail.

Don John de Figueroa used to say: That he that evermore alleges in his
conversation other men's sayings, is like a gowty nail, that cannot enter the
wood, except an augar make the way before.

A trauayler meeting a country man, asked him the way to such a place: The
country man told him, and withal brought him partly on his way, and as they
rode together, he took exceptions to the Trauailers bag, which he wore sagging
down his belly before, and said: It is the manner of this country to wear bags
at our sides, not upon our bellies, as you do. Whereunto the trauailer
answered: I wear it thus, because I suppose there are a many thieves in this
country.

An old man traveling to a far country, and being some eight or nine days
journey on his way, all hot and pursie as he was, wrote a letter to his wife, in
which he said. As for my health (wife) I am well (I thank God) hitherto, only
I find my breath somewhat short, in so much as I dare assure me, if ever I die,
it will be for want of breath, and nothing else.

A water-man feried a Gentleman over a river, who was booted and spurt'd, and
went to take horse on the other side the water; to who^ the Gentleman said: How
chances it (my friend) that thou work'st this day, being Ascension day? he
answered: It seems (sir) your Worship means to ride to day.

An Hostler taking a Gentleman's boots down to make clean: The Gentleman said
unto him. I pray thee (fellow) let my boots alone, for the old dirt will serve
to keep out the n^w.

Two Trauailers scoorst horses with one another, and when they had done, the one
of them said: Now at a word, you have as errant a jade as ever went on four
legs: for he is foundred he has the scratches, he is broken winded, etc.
The Other answered: Then have I but mine own again.

One trauayling on a frosty morning through a country village, was set upon by
a great Mastiffe: He stooping for a stone to throw at him, and feeling it
hard frozen to the earth, said: A pox on the country where stones are tied,
and dogs let loose.

A plain Gentleman riding upon a lean large horse, a Gallant that met him,
asked him what a yard of his horse was worth: With that he bid his man
alight, and lift up his horse tail unto him, and then he answered. Enter into
the shop, and they within will show you.

A Trauailer affirming that he saw a cole-wort so monstrous huge that 500. men
on hors-backe might stand in her shade. An other answered: And I for my part
did once see a Chaldron so wide, that 300. men wrought therein, every one
distant twenty yardes from other. Then the Colewoort-lyar asked him, to what
use that Chaldron was made: he answered. To sees your Colewoort in.

A Trauailer vsd to tell monstrous lies of his iourneyes, and of the places and
things he had seen. And being one day in conversation with many Gent. and
bosting that he had seen these and these places: One of them said unto him:
Belike you are seen in Cosmography: No (he answered) I never was in that City
yet, but indeed I remember I once travailed in sight of it, leaving it somewhat
on the left hand, but such was my have, that I ouerpast it, as I have done many
a fair city more in my days.

One accompaned another many days together about his affairs, and finding
himself not duly complied withal for such his courtesy, vpbraided him with his
foresaid travail: Whereunto the other answered. As much went I with you, as you
with me.

One that had been whipped at a carts tail for a misdemeanure fled his country
for very shame, and embarked away to an obscure Island in the sea, where he
spent the remainder of his life: And walking one day in the high street of the
town, where he remained, he chanced to see a poor fellow whipped at a Carts
tail along the street, and in compassion of his case, he said: Lord, how can
this poor soul endure all this whipping cheer* By chance one that stood by,
and knew his foresaid correction at home in his own country, answered. Even (as
a man would say) as well as he that had abidden the like whipping cheer before.

Don Iuan de Vrbina used to say: That such as report news of strange
countries, are like vagabonds, whose garments consist rather of patches, then
of any principal piece.

A poor young Gentleman carrying his dumb old mother before him upon a Mu^e;
the Duke of Nazareth ouertook him on the way, and he thinking it good manners to
bear the Duke company, the rather because he had a Gentlewoman before him,
offered to press near him, to the end to ride cheek by iowle by him: His old
mother being more considerate, and seeing his folly, spurned the Mule as hard
as she could out of the way: But the wisacre her son seeing her do so,
thought that she did it to hasten the rather near unto the Duke: whereupon he in
that conceit set spurs to the Mule ^o fiercely, that the Mule waxed stark
mad withal, and in his fury ran into a ditch, where (in the Dukes sight) he
threw them both down, viz. the mother undermost with all her clothes about
her ears, and her son upon her, and the Mule upon them both.

Gonzalo Fernandes arriving safe a shore in Spain after a great tempest, and
looking back to the sea, he espied an other ship tending to the same shore,
and upon the poop of it a gallant clad all in crimson Velvet: Whereupon Don
Diego de Mendoza, asking him who he thought that might be: He answered: It is
Santelmus, who never appears but after a tempest.

In a perilous storm at sea, a passenger of the company, whiles all the rest
were a weeping and praying, and making humble vows to God for their safeties,
fell hard to his vittailes: And being for such his impiety reprehended, he
answered: Being to drink by and by so great a draught of water, is it not meet
(trow ye) that I vittaile my paunch well aforehand?

A Passenger at sea feeling his stomach rise, said to the master of the ship:
I pray hold still the ship a while, til I vomit.

A ship sailing toward Peru, a mighty storm arose and endangered it: Whereupon
the Captain charged every man to throw into the sea, the heauiest thing he
could best spare, to the end to lighten somewhat the ship. A passenger that
had his wife there, offered then to throw her over board, but the company
rescued her: And being asked what he ayled so to do, he answered: She is the
heauiest thing I have, and I can best spare her.

One counseled his friend to pass along by sea from Newcastle to London,
affirming that with a good wind he might arrive there both sooner then by land,
and with half the charge. The Other answered: No, I list not ride upon a horse
that goes an end, and that I cannot alight off him at all seasons when I list
my self.

A waterman affirmed, that all boats were females: And his reason was, because
folk use to enter into them.

A ship being by mischaunce set on fire upon the coast of Peru, and past all
recovery, a soldier threw himself into the sea, and said: Some roast, some
sod.

A Fishmonger in a tempest at sea, seeming to fear drowning, The Mariners
asked him, whether he feared to be eaten of Fishes; He answered: No, rather may
Fishes fear me.

One praying his friend to lend him his cloak: The other answered: Seeing it
raines not, what need ye er'e a cloak? and if it should rain, why then
should I need it my self.

OF POLITICIANS.
A Politician wonted to say: Who so deceiues me once, God forgive him; If
twice, God forgive him, and God forgive me; But if thrice, still God forgive
him, but never forgive me.

One used to say, that men now a days make more of all things, then our
forefathers did, all but our graves.

One would needs prove that men now a days are wiser then men of old time,
and his reason was: Because they could remedy evil but only with good, but men
now adays can remedy one mischief with another.

One used to say: That it is always good to miss a friend before he be
missing.

One used to say: Better be poor at the beginning, then at the latter ending.

Philip Duke of Burgundy was woonted to say: Of great personages speak neither
good nor bad: For if thou speak good of them, happily thou belie^t them; if
evil, thou may repent it.

A Politician always wished his enemy these three advantages, viz. A just plea
in law, to love such as wish him ill, and to win at the beginning of play.

A politician aduising a young Gentleman to deal doubly, and dissemble
twenty manner of faces in the affair he had in hand: He answered: I list not
slave my self to so many faces, for that one good face is both better worth,
and a great deal easier to represent

A Politician aduising a well disposed person to counterfeit a patient behavior
toward such a ones extreme rudeness, seeing he was likely in time to receive
some benefit at his hands, if he please him well: The Other answered: I list
not slave my self to advantages.

The Italians use to say, De che me ^lo, me guarde Iddio: De ch^ no me fio, me
guardare Io: That is,

A fained friend God shield me from his danger,
For well I Will save my self from foe and stranger.
OF SVTE AND SVTERS.
ONe Henry Goldingham that had long sued to her Majesty for her Sign to his
granted suite and her Majesty still saying that she had no pen and ink at
hand to do it, at last he humbled his Bill to her highness foot, and said:
May it then please your Majesty but to step your royal foot heerupon, and I my
self will then warrant it for good. Her Majesty so well liked of such his
merry conceit, that presently calling for pen and ink did daigne to sign
it.

The Cardinal Don Pedro Gonzales being 80. years old, a serui^or of his as
old, or rather older then himself, besought him of the Alcaldeship of Canales,
an office which was lately fallen into his grant: Whereunto the Cardinal
answered, that he was sorry he had spoken so late, forasmuch as he had
already granted it to another, promising that the next that fell, he should
have it without all fail: Oh my good Lord (replied the seruitor) but what
thing in this world can sooner fall void then your Grace or I?

An Italian Captain in the Low-cuntries besought the Duke of Parma of an
unreasonable suit, which the Duke refused him: and he humbly thanked his Altez
therefore: Whereat his friends and fellows by marueyling, he said: Even humble
thanks for that his Excellence has so speedily dispatched me.

A young Nobleman in Spain, suing a Duke for his Duchy, in the midst of all
his law, fell in love with a very mean Gentlewoman, whose name was Blanke, and
married her forthwith: Whereat his father was in a great chafe, and said: The
fool suing for a Dukedom, would he be pleased with a Blanke?

A poor man was an humble suter to a Gentleman, who said unto him: I pray thee
(fellow) be gone, for thy breath stinks miserably of garlike: He answered: Not
I Sir, happily it is my suit that stinks unto you.

A Gentleman passing along under his Mistress window, she chanced (spitting
out thereat) to spit upon him, and forthwith perceiving her amiss, craved
pardon of him therefore; who answered: Forsooth (Lady) a Fisherman wets and
dables himself all day long, and perchance catches but shrimps in the end:
and I to catch so fair a Trout as you, do you think I can loath so slight a
deaw? Faith no.

A reverend person besought a largess of a Prince for a friend of his, and the
Prince refused it him: he nevertheless still entreated and it would not be, til
at last, humbling himself upon his knee at the princes foot, with much
entreatie he obtained it: A many gentlemen standing by, condemned such his too
much baseness, considering his gravity and wisdom, and told him, that he had
therein greatly discredited his reverence and magnanimity: He answered: That
is not my fault (Gentlemen) but the princes, whose ears (as you see) are in
his heels.

One besought a Judge for justice, and thus he said: My good Lord, whereas the
injury that such a one has done me, is very hell. Now, howsoever it shall
please your L. to end the matter, I will account it heaven.

OF GAME AND GAMESTERS.
A Lady had an unthrifty son, and she being to take water on a time, and
seeing the billows rough, and the wind high, said unto him: Son, if I drown
to day, I pray thee play not away my clothes till I be buried.

One used to say, that dice and purging pills were of like nature: ^or that a
little of the one purges a man's panch thoroughly, and as little of the other a
man's purse.

One dispraisd Dice, and said, that Dicers are worse then Usurers for that
they with a hundred get but ten: but Dicers with ten* happily get a hundred.

A Captain and a Merchant played at dice, and the Captain lost, and swore
lustily ever and anon: At last having lost all, he snatched it all away from
the merchant again: Whereat the merchant amazed, stood trembling and said:
Captain, if you meant I should not carry away any winnings, what a^l'd you to
swear, and rage so at every word.

Hernando Gonzales woonted to say: That a great gamester could hardly be an
honest man, because he both hears that in play, which he may not well abide,
and utters that which others may no less abide.

One asked a great Dicer of a pale complexion, what was the reason he still
looked so pale and wan: He answered: So looks the money I lost at play.

One asked another what Gallant that was, that passed by so bravely toward
the Court, so stately mounted, and attyr'd all in gold: Mary (quoth he) it is
one master N. a Gentleman that maintains himself so gallant as you see, only
by play. By play? (replied the other) In truth I have not seen any, that has
so well redressed his own defaults by others defaults.

A friend aduisd a great gamester his kinsman to give over play, affirming that
it was a great sin, and a folly both: Whereunto the other answered: Rather is
it an especial virtue, and a singular remedy against all the seven deadly
sins. For first, how can that man be proud (trow ye) who after having lost an
hundred or a thousand pounds at dice with a Nobleman, will afterward be so
humble, as to venture his Tester with a Lackey? Or how can that man be
covetous, that cannot safeguard his utmost penny from play? Or how can he
possi^lie be lusty to women, that continually tyres himself out at play? Or
how can he be a glutton, that dare not bestow a Tester on his belly, for fear
he should want it at play? Or how can he be envious of other men's goods, that
is so careless of his own? Or how can he be easly angry, that puts up a
thousand curses every night, for sitti^g up so late at play? Or how can he be
accounted slothful, that sits up whole days and nights at play, and never lins
playing?

One discommending bull-bayting in Spain with darts, where the bull is suffered
to run loose: and his reason was: Because it teaches men to run away.

Pedro Mexia a Spanish Croniographer, wonted to say, that belike it is a
shameful thing to run at the ring, seeing none do it barefaced, but with
their beuers down.

A Gentleman who did greatly stut and stammer in his speech, playing at Mawe,
laid down a winning card, and then said unto his partener: How sa-ay ye now,
wa-was not this ca-ca-ard pa-as-assing we-we-well la-a-ayd: Yes (answered
the other) It is well laid, but yet it needs not half this cackling.

A Moore viewing the bull bayted with darts in an enclosed compass of ground,
where both the Bull and the men fought loosely and in danger: A Spaniard asked
him how he liked that sport: He answered: Too little for earnest, and too much
for Jest.

A greasy companion lost his money at cards, and in his rages still said: The
Deu'st take me: At last a stander by hearing him say so* answered: So would he
(I warrant you) were it not for fear of your bird-lime.

A cogging companion asking a civil Gentleman, whether he would play with him
at dice: He answered: No, with no such lucratiue fellows as you.

A Gamester ought a Gentleman (a friend of his) five pounds, and having lost
all his money at dice, sent to borrow 5 pounds more, by the token that he ought
him already five pounds: Whereunto the Gentleman thus answered the messenger:
Bid your Master send me the token, and then I Will send him the five pounds.

The end of the first part of this book.
Wits, Fittes, and Fancies. The second Part.
OF POPES AND PRELATES.
YT was discoursed at the table of Pope Alexander the sixth, whether Physicians
were necessary in a common wealth, yea or no: some affirming that Rome being
six hundred years and odd without them, the Citizens lived in good health,
and lusty all that while: And therefore a kind of cattle, that might very well
be spared in a common-welth. Not so (said the Pope) rather are they right
necessary (in my opinion) for without them the world would increase so fast,
that one could not live by an other.

An old seruitor of a Pope besought him of the Archbishopricke of Silence in
the Isle of Serdinia, the said suppliant being a very talkatiue and prating
man: Whereunto the Pope answered: Trust me, you have no reason to crave that Sea
of all others, being it will evermore approve you a liar.

A Cardinal complained unto Pope Clement the seventh, how one Michael Angelo
his painter in a picture which he had drawn of Doomsday in S. Peter's chapel
at Rome, had therein figured him in hell amongst the damned, beseeching him to
bid it be altered to some other favor: Whereunto the Pope answered: Well you
wot, I can release a soul out of Purgatory but not out of hell.

Pope Adrian the sixth was minded to have thrown Pasquins image into Tyber,
thereby to take away al occasion of libelling, which was the^ used in Rome in
the person of that Image: Whereunto the Duke of Sesa answered: If your Holiness
throw Pasquin into Tyber, out of doubt he will turn to a Frogge, and then will
he croke both day and night, whereas now his clamor is but only in the day time.

Friar Frances Symenes being created Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo, wrote
to an especial friend of his of such the high honor he was called unto, and of
his good success: Whereunto the Gentleman answered, that as concerning his
Graces particular, he was glad he had attained so sovereign a dignity; for
that his virtues did deserve no less: But as for himself, he was sorry that by
such his graces promotion he had lost so great a friend: As much to say, as
true friendship can be but amongst equals.

A certain man of Osma in Spain having his case to be discust and adjudg'd by
the Cardinal Symenes his deputy in the town of Alcala, took exceptions to
the said Judge, as one who^ he thought favored not his case, and therefore
besought his grace to assign him some other Judge either of Madryl or
Guadalajara: Whereunto the Cardinal gainsaying, and asking him what
sufficienter man he thought was in Madryl or Guadalajara to determine his matter
the^ his foresaid deputy in Alcala. To this the man of Osma replied: And like
your grace there was one found in Tordelaguna, who was worthy to be a Cardinal
and Archbishop of Toledo (meaning the Cardinal himself who was born in that
pore parish) And the^ does your Grace think that neither Madryl nor Guadalajara
can afford a sufficient judge of my plea?

A Cardinal passing along the street, and being saluted by a band of
soldiers with much shot, so as the smoke was very thick and unsavory: one of
his Gent. besought him to hasten somewhat faster from out that fume: Oh no
(answered the Cardinal) this is the sent that pleases me above all the incense
in the world.

The Cardinal Symenes being deputed high governor over all Spain in the
Emperor Charles his absence, and understanding at last, that the Emperor was
now landed again on the coast: At this present news he disposed all the
treasure he then had in his hands to the College of Alcala, and to other
Church uses, as though that Spain now needed no treasure for her defense, so
long as the Emperor was there arrived in person. And as concerning the said
treasure he said, that if an Angel from heaven should have told him before the
Emperors landing, that his Majesty would not rid him thereof at his arriual,
he would have thought him some devil in an Angels shape: And that now no less
would he think him a Devil that should come and tell him that the Emperor
would not acquit him thereof, having disposed it to so good uses.

The foresaid Cardinal never bestowed benefice upon any that came to beg it at
his hands: It chanced on a time that a priest hearing of a rich benefice that
was newly fallen in his country, and being very liquorish thereof came unto
him, and thus bespake him: Most reverend Sir, forasmuch as well I wot your
Grace never bestows benefice upon any that craves it at your hands, I give
you to understand that in my country there is a benefice fallen into your
grant, which would very well besteed me, by reason it is near the place where
I was borne. Now I humbly beseech your Graces good advise how I may come by
it. Well (answered the Cardinal) you shall have it, and forthwith he commanded
his Secretary to draw him out a fair collation, which was done, and he had it.

The Cardinal Don Pedro Gonzales de Mendoza upon a Christmas morning offered at
a Mass an entier Altar-suit, so rich, as it was valued at eighteen thousand
Crowns, and after his said Offertorie ended, kneeling down before the Altar,
he there remained a good space in humble prayer and tears: Which the Marquis
of Cenete seeing, came to him, and said: Reverend Father, I beseech you weep
no more, for I Will undertake to get you the whole suite restored you again.

The said Cardinal seeing a Priest carrying a cudgel under his gown, said
unto him: It ill beseemes your habit to bear a weapon about you: Whereunto the
Priest answered and protested, that he bare it not in quarrel against any
Christian creature in the world, but only to defend himself against the dogs
of that town, which he found to be fierce and angry curres* Oh (replied the
Cardinal) and wherefore (I pray you) then serves S. John's Gospel? He answered:
True (my Lord) but these cur^es understand no Latin; and therefore against
them am I feign to bear this defense, as you see.

The Cardinal Don Alonso Manrique spent much, and owed much: There was in his
Church a Channon, who was so good a fellow that he seldom eat at home, and yet
nevertheless retained a Steward in continual standing wages: Whereupon the
Cardinal upon a time merrily asking him what he meant to keep a Steward,
having so little use to put him to: The Channon no less merrily answered:
Your Grace has great reason, for in sooth (my Lord) my Steward and your
Treasurer may very well be whipped at a Carts tail for vagabondes.

A Gentleman of Cardinal Wolsey making way before his Lord as he passed
through the church, and seeing a poor priest kneeling at his prayers in the
way, raised him up, saying: Room for my Lord Cardinals Grace: Whereupon the
priest rose up and said: Will his Grace (trow ye) supply my place?

A Bishopric ^as bestowed upon one that seemed to be a man of good life, but
was not generally so reputed: And the Cardinal Loyasa greeted him thus: My
Lord, God send you joy; and I am glad you are provided of a Sea, before your
hypocrisy be fully ended.

Don Alonso Cartillio, a Spanish Archbishop, his household expense was so
excessive, that on a time his Steward telling him, that except he took some
more moderat course of living his rents could not possibly maintain it: Well,
(answered the Archbishop) set me down then what mean you would have me
observe in this matter: Whereunto the steward replying, that it might please
his Grace to put away all idle persons, and retain only necessary ones: Well
(replied the Prelate) but give me then a note of such as you judge necessary,
and another of the unnecessary. The steward did so: Then the morrow after the
Bishop commanding all his household before him into his great hall, willed his
steward to set his necessary servants in a row by themselves on the one side,
and the unnecessary ones likewise several by themselves on the other side;
which being done, he the^ said unto his steward: These necessary ones which
you have here placed, I have need of them all, and these others (I tell thee)
they have all need of me: Wherefore necessary and unnecessary, I will still
retain them all.

A poor widow that had her only daughter to bestow, humbly besought the
aforesaid Archbishop of his bounty toward her preferment. The Bishop was
content, and calling for pen and ink, wrote a warrant down into the country
to his steward to deliver her fifty pounds, thinking indeed he had written but
five pounds: When the steward saw the bill, he straight took horse and rode up
to the Bishop, and told him: Your Grace has awarded yonder poor widow fifty
pounds for her daughter, and so it is that I have not so much in hand. No
(said the Bishop) what not poor five pounds? Yes five, and like your Grace
(answered the steward) but your assignation is fifty pounds: Be it fifty
pounds then (replied the Bishop) for sure not I, but God or some of his good
Angels set it down so: Wherefore no more ado, let her have it. With that the
steward was feign to borrow it, and she had it.

The Archbishop of Cullen riding along the plain all rounded about with men of
war, and himself most brightly glittering in Arms: A Swain ploughing
therabouts laughed to see him so: Which the Prelate perceiving, commanded him
straight before him, and asked him why he laughed so: Mary I laugh (answered
the Pesant) to see an Archbishop so souldiourly gallant. Why sirrah (said the
Bishop) I am thus as a Duke, not as an Archbishop or a priest: Even so Sir
(replied the swain) now I pray then, crack me this nut, Were my L. Duke at the
devil, where (trow ye) were my L. Archbishop then?

The Archbishop of Granada, saying to the Archbishop of Toledo that he much
marvelled he being so great a State would visit Hospitals, and perform to the
sick and needy such a deal of drudgerie as daily he did. Marvel not hereat
(answered the good Bishop) but rather well weighing with your self, what is
the true dignity and duty of a pastor, wonder at the many good duties I do
omit.

A Spanish Bishop riding on the way saw a shepherd sunning himself under a
bank, and thus he bespake him: I marvel much (shepherd) that shepheardes now
a days are not like as they were in times past, when there were of them great
Prophets and great kings in the world, and to them it was that the Angel first
denounced the nativity of our savior Jesus Christ before all others. Oh Sir
(answered the shepherd) neither are Bishops now a days like to those good
ones of old time at diverse of whose deaths the belles did ring of themselves,
and now can scarce be made to toll but with many men's strength.

A Bishop sent half a dozen of Capons to an Abbot, and the bearer eat one of
them to his dinner by the way: Now when the Abbot had red the Bishops letter,
which certified that he had sent him six Capons, he then said unto the
messenger. My lad, I pray thee tell my Lord Bishop, I humbly thank his
Lordship for five Capons, and as for the sixth, give thou him thanks for it thy
self.

A Bishops Chaplain helping his Lord on with his Rochet, and being somewhat
long a drawing on the sleeves: Why when? (said the Bishop) me thinks you are
very tedious about this geere. And like your Grace (he answered) your sleeves
are very straight. Very straight indeed (replied the Bishop) for well I wot,
full twenty years have I traueiled to get them on, and till this present time
could I never attain to do it.

In a solemn festiuitie which was holden at Guadalajara in Spain, two
Gentlemen appeared to the multitude in Clergy attire, to discharge unto them
some Church-merriment, and being demanded in a Bishops name, who was there
present, who they were: We are (quoth they) two Archdeacons of the Church of
Vtica, and so tell your Lord: The said Bishop being prelate of that place.

Bishop Gardener being deprived of his Bishopric, one thus saluted him in
derision: Farewell Bishop olim^ He answered: Gramercie Knave semper.

Lord Cromwell reproching Bishop Gardener being deprived of his Bishopric by
the King, said: Where is now (Sir Bishop) al your Gloria patri become? He
answered: Even as it has pleased the King my Liege: Nevertheless, sicut erat
in principio, so am I still (my Lord) as good a gentleman as your self.

A Chanonrie of the Church of Cuencae was fallen into the Bishops grant, and a
certain scholar, who had before time translated out of Latin into Spanish
the vain works of Tostado became an humble suter to the Bishop for it; which
the Bishop denied him, saying: It is no cream to be eaten with Tostados, viz.
Tostes.

One besought a worshipful Gentleman to be a means for him to a Bishop to
forgive him a certain dribbling debt: The Gentleman answered: His power is to
bind, not to loose.

One Friar Rapiero, a famous preacher, had a petty Bishopric bestowed upon
him in th'Ile of Corsica: And one pitying his no higher preferment, said:
Alas, it is too small a pommell for such a Rapier.

The Cardinal Don Alonso Cartillio enioyn'd his Iester to bring him at every
months end a cronicle of al merry matters that had happened in the mean
time: The Cardinal within a while after entertained an Alcumist, to whom
being but newly come, he delivered a thousand Crowns to go to Toledo to
buy him all manner of implements belonging to that Art. In which mean time he
called for his foresaid Cronicler to know what occurrents were befallen that
month. Then the Iester among other fooleries, read unto him what a monstrous
folly he himself had committed, to trust a stranger with a hundred crowns,
whom happily he should never see more: Whereunto the Cardinal answered: But
what if he do come again, how then? Mary then (replied the Cronicler) will I
put you out, and put him in your place.

A Physician had a big fat Bishop in cure, who was somewhat distempered with a
lightness in his head: And the Physician coming forth of his bedchamber in a
morning, a Gentleman met him at the door, and asked him how my Lord did: Who
answered: Would my Mule were half so well.

A Pick-thanke telling a Prelate that such a Gentleman had highly slandered
him in public; and therwithall aduising him to revenge it in a very high
degree: He answered: And wherefore (I pray ye then) serve these words of
Christ, Mihi vindictam and ego retribuam?

Cardinal Medices now Duke of Florence, seeing certain Jews walk Sabothly
upon a Satterday in his fair garden on Mount Trinity in Rome; commanded them
(in despite of such their Satterday-sabboth) to be employed all that day in
servile work in his said garden, and at night made them a liberal supper of
good cheer: Amongst which he caused minced Porke to be set before them so
cunningly disguised, and besauc'd, that unwittingly they fell to it, and eat
thereof, contrary to their superstitious pork-opinion in that point: And after
they had supt paid them a large day-wages, and so dismissed them: They at parting
being told of the disguised pork they had eaten, were stark mad; and whereas
before they held themselves guilty only of their servile labor that day (it
being their Sabbath day) now were they outrageous testie at both together: And
in a full stomach of detest, flung down their wages, and would none of it:
But to their Synagogue they hy'd them, and there told their Rabbin of all the
premises: Whereupon he forthwith excommunicated the Cardinal, and deeply
accursed him to the pit of hell in full congregation: Which he understanding,
went the next day to Pope Pius quintus, and in jest told him all the story, as
aforesaid, concluding with the Rabbis excommunication and accurse against him:
And withal merrily besought the Pope to release him thereof. The Pope took it
in a far other sense, and greatly rebuked the Cardinal therefore, affirming
that he had done a very scandalous act, so to force the conscience of a Jew,
they not being sheep of Christ's fold, and therefore without the liberty of his
Crozier to pastorize, much less to enforce in matter of religion: So saying,
he enioyn'd him a very severe penance, both personal and pecuniarie.

OF PRIESTS AND FRIARS.
A Silly Friar came to a Doctor of Toledo, and told him, that he thought he
had incurred irregularitie, for saying to his Ass by the way as he accompaned
certain prisoners to execution: Haight beast, and on a Gods name: supposing
that by reason thereof he had so much the sooner brought the poor prisoners to
their ends: To whom the Doctor answered: In reparation of that irregularity,
you must seek out the said Ass again, and as often as you said then unto
him, haight beast, or on a Gods name, so often say unto him now, Hoe beast,
fair and softly a Gods name.

A Parson demanded of his Vicar the rent of three years which was behind
unpaid. Whereupon the Vicar led him forth into the Churchyard, (it being
wholly ouer-growne with grass) and then he said: How think you sir, I can
possibly pay you rent for such land, as (I assure you) has laid waste this
whole three years day?

A Confessor coming to visit a sick poor woman in bed, and after having
heard her confession, and given her good ghostly advise to Godward: At his
departure the poor widow willed her maid to give him the fattest Capon she
had: The maid did so, and the Priest accepted it, and went his way. Shortly
after the woman recovered her health, and walking abroad she missed among other
her poultrey this Capon, and forgetting how she had bestowed it; she called her
maid to her, and asked her what was become of it: Whereunto the maid answering
that she had given it in her sickness time to the priest; she said: What a foul
ill, did I so? So often had I given it heertofore to the Devil when I missed
it, and still it came again, and giving it but once to the Priest has he
carried it quite away?

A great preacher ambitious of a Bishopric: On a time after his sermon ended
coming down the pulpit, a Gentleman of great worship standing by, proffered
him his hand to help him down: Pardon me sir (said the preacher;) may it
please you rather to help me up with your friendly hand, for down (alas) I
can come alone all-too easily.

A Churchman passing along by a countrey-Gentlemans door, a Mastiffe-dogge
flue at him, and all betore his cloak. The morrow after returning that way
again, he chanced to see the Gentleman then standing at his gate, and this dog
by him, to whom he said: Sir, either tie up your dog, or kiss his tail:
Even so plain? (answered the Gentleman) Believe me, since you so friendly put
it to my choice, I will rather of the two tie him up.

A Friar following a Bishop all fair and softly after, as being much diseased
with the gowte: One of the Bishops Gentlemen said unto him: On, on, Father, you
need not fear falling on this fair earth. The Friar answered: Men do not
fall because they fear falling, but they fear least they should fall.

A Spanish Friar having granted unto him a Bishopric in India: He thus
bespake the Emperors Secretary, that drew the assignation. Sir, because I
know how dangerous a thing a Bishopric is to one that knows not how to
discharge his pastoral duty therein as he ought, and knowing withal my own
insufficiency in that behalf, I am verily of opinion, that for me to be a
Bishop were my high way to hell. And in sooth to go to hell by India is a great
way about: Wherefore I pray you assign me some nearer Sea, or none at all.

A famous Preacher, who had long sued for a Bishopric, and could not attain
to any, used to say, that out of doubt if it rained myters, not any one would
light upon his head.

One Friar invited another to his Cell to dinner, and upon some occasion the
inuitant Friar sent forth his boy, and then said unto the other: The world
reports you the son of a Gentleman, and for my part I verily think no less,
so trim and gracious is your conversation: Whereunto the other answered:
certainly if you speak this to frump me, you are much to blame, and if to
commend me, why then did you send away the boy?

The Pope and the King of Spain between them created Friar Frances Symones
Archbishop of Toledo: Friar Paschall, Bishop of Burgos, and Friar Diego Desa
Archbishop of Valentia, all on one day: Whereupon one merrily said, that the
Pope and the King played all that day at Friers-Trump, or at Friers-Ruffe.

A Friar that was vesting himself to Mass, a Gentleman prayed him to say a
Hunters Mass (meaning a brief Mass) With that the Friar took his Missal,
and turned it al over leaf by leaf, continuing so doing a good while: Which
the Gentleman thinking long, at last said unto him: I pray you Father dispatch.
Me thinks you are very long a registring your Missall: Why sir, (answered the
Friar) you bespake a Hunters Mass, and in sooth I can find no such Mass in
all my Book.

A Dominican and a Franciscan Friar traueiling together on the way, arrived at
a brook, where the Dominican requested the Franciscan, in as much as he was
barefoot, to carry him over the water on his back: The Franciscan was content,
and up he took him, and into the river he went; and being stepped into the
channel, there he paws'd, and said to the Dominican: Tell me (brother) have
you any money about you? The Dominican thinking that he aimed thereby at a
consideration for his pains, answered: (...) Yea marie have I a little, but
not much: Much or little then (replied the Franciscan) well you wot my order
allows me not to carry any money about me, though well you may. And therefore:
And with that down he let slip the Dominican into the channel, where his
money could not save him from being very well wet.

The Portugalles keep holy the battaile-day of Aljuberoto, in which they
overthrew and slew a many thousand Spaniards in the field: Upon which festiual
Aniuersarie day one Friar John Hurtado the Kings Confessor, coming to salute
his Majesty: the King said unto him: Tell me Father Hurtado, how like you this
triumphant day of ours against the Spaniards? Have they any such holy days of
victories against us? Oh no my Liege, (answered the Friar) they are not half
so happy a people: But as for Portugal, if it should keep holy all her
victories and conquests against Spain, every day in the year would be a
hohy-day amongst us, whereby we should stand in danger of famine for want of
working-daies.

An vnlatin'd Channon hearing that the Archdeacon went about in visitation, and
that he would be with him and his brethren within a day or two, sent away his
whore Iennet to a friend of his, and wrote him this letter withal, Ego
Johannes Shaa de villa Caveatis (viz. of the town of Ware) mitto ad vos hoc
verbum, vt Archideabolus (viz, the Archdeacon) errat circum circa per cuntriam
(viz. the country) and venit aduersus nos. Quare mitto ad vos vnicum meum
Ienettum, tam album vt lac, tam dulce vt mel, tam benign quod non potest
dicere non, sed queso ne iaceas cum, Dato sibi id quod querit, and quicquid
venit ad, ego soluam pro, valeto.

An unlearned country Vicar preaching to his Parishioners against their
continual Alehousrie, used this argument: Sirs (quoth he) you that love ale so
well, if you wist of what bad stuff it were made, you would loathe it: For it
is made of a thing called Malt. Now (I pray you) what is Malt but M A L T? as
much to say as M much, A ale, L little, T thrift.

A plain country Vicar persuaded his parishioners in all their troubles and
adversities, to call upon God, and thus he said: There is (dearly beloved) a
certain familiar beast amongst you called a hog, see you not how toward a
storm or a tempest it cries evermore, ourgh, ourgh? So must you likewise in
all your iminent troubles and dangers, say to your selves, Lourghd, Lourghd,
help me.

One Peter Martyr, Cronicler to the king of Spain, had been a long time suter
for a Bishopric, and hearing at last that four several Confessors were
provided of so many several Seas at once, he said: Faith, among so many
Confessors one Martyr would very well have beseem'd the company.

A Friar whose name was Bonaduenture coming to be acquainted with an other
Friar, whose name was Malaver, as much to say in English as speed ill:
Bonaduenture said unto him: Lord (brother Malauer) how many seek for me and
chance on you!

Two Monks were accounted passing virtuous men, and the one of them was very
fat and gross, and well complexioned, and the other pale and megre. The Prior
being asked on a time by a Nobleman what might be the reason of so different
effects of virtuous living, he answered: And like your Honor, yonder fat
brother thinks only of God and of the Joys of heaven, and this other of
death, doomsday and hell.

One used to say, that no linnage could be accounted through ripe till it had a
shorn crown on the head, viz. A priest or Friar of the name.

A Gentleman coming early on a Christmasse morning to visit a reverend
Channon in the Queere after Mattins, and seeing his seat vnhang'd with
Tapistrie, as all the others were, considering both what a solemn day it was,
and withal how very cold, he much marvelled thereat: and asked him why he
let his seat be so inglorious: With that the Cannon pointing to a poor body
there by before the high Altar all bare and miserable: He answered: See ye
yonder poor soul there? it is he will not ^uffer me to sit in seat of glory.

One used to say that folly fattes the Gentleman, and lewd conditions beleans
the Clergy man.

Don in Spanish, signifies Sir. A Friar hearing a Dukes Usher calling a many of
his Lords Gentlemen together, and saying Don John, Don Alonso, Don Rodriguez,
etc. He adjon'd And I warrant you, there is ner' a Donum Spiritus-sancti among
all these Dons.

A very learned preacher was condemned of too much tediousness in his sermons,
in that he used oftentimes to repeat one thing twi^e: Whereupon preaching on a
time he said to the people, Brethren I understand you condemn me for over
tedious in my sermons, Now the truth is, I am sure very few of you
understand me well the first time, and therefore am I feign to repeat it once
again, and then in doing so, you say I am to tedious: And (good faith) to
repeat a thing once and a half, that is woorst of all, and I am sure you will
like that neither.

A Friar following a many Gentlewomen in the street who with their long trains
raised up a great dust after them: At last they seeing the Friar near behind
the^, for reverence stood still and made him way: Who as he passed along by
them said: Know ye (Gentlewome^) that the dust of the sheep is a lodestarre to
the Wolf.

A Gentleman came to visit a widow Gentlewoman, and as he entered into the
house, he met two Friars coming forth, and ouerhard the Ge^tlewoman saying to
her maid: Yonder Friars smell like rats: The Gent. adjoin'd: and happily have
don like rats.

A grave Doctor that had been a long time suter at Rome to the Cardinal of
Toledo for a Chanonrie in that Church, obtayn'd it in the end, and then
presently wrote a letter to a friend of his in Toledo, giving him to
understand, that whereas he had all that while gone up and down like an Ape in
the streets of Rome, without er'e a tail, he should now see him shortly there
at Toledo like a Squerrell with tail enough. Written in refference to the long
trains that those Channons wear.

A reverend Churchman being done a secret disgrace unjustifiable by the party
that did it, and he yet not knowing him, said: Ah poor despite, that makes
the Author peep in his head for shame.

OF DOCTORS, AND SCHOLARS.
IT was a great controversy in the University of Leyden between the Physic
and Law Doctors, whether of them should take place foremost at the
Commencements: And a merry Chanceller being deputed judge of the difference,
asked them whether at an execution, the fellon or the hangman ought to go
foremost to the gallows: They al answered: The fellon: Even so? (replied the
Chancellor) Then ye Lawyers, go ye foremost as thieves, and ye Physicians
follow ye after as hangmen.

One asked a great Clearke how he might do to become wise: Who answered: In
sooth (friend) I can hardly resolve you: For you still go one way, and
wisdom another, that I do not see how you can possibly meet.

A profound Doctor of Law had never in all his life been above three miles out
of Salamanca, where he was both borne and bred up: And being sent for on a time
by a Nobleman dwelling some two days journey thence, as concerning his advise
in a weighty matter in law, and having ridden his first days journey almost
to an end, he then waxed weary, and would no further: But turned back again
to Salamanca, saying: I never thought the world had been so great.

There dwelt a grave Law-Doctor in Salamanca, and a neighbors child of his
came somewhat early in a morning to crave a little fire of him: Take some my
boy (he said) but wherein will thou carry it? Marie Sir (he answered) thus: and
with that he laid a quantity of ashes upon the palm of his hand, and the
the coals thereupon, and so went his way. The Doctor wondered hereat, and
swear, that with all the learning he had, he could not have devised so trim a
slight.

Punta in Spanish signifies a Size, and also a stitch. An ignorant Spanish
Doctor came to a shoemaker, and bespake a pair of shoes for his son: and the
shoemaker asked him of what Punta, viz. what size: Marie (quoth he) that can I
not yet show you, but I will go home and see, and bring you word in the
afternoon: Home he went, and calling for a pair of his sons old shoes, he
vnript all the stitches thereof, and told how many there were of them: and
then after dinner he went again to the shoemaker, and said: My sons shoes are
of the 64. Puntas, viz. stitches.

One was telling a Dunsicall Doctor how such a man was a great scholar, but a
very fool; he marueil'd greatly thereat, and said: Well I wot, a man may be
unlearned, but how learning may be without a man I cannot imagine.

A Doctor coming to reform the University of Salamanca, one scholar asked
another, whether he would also reform the University clock: No (answered
the other) for Par in parem non habet imperium.

A big Doctor passed along with seven petty scholars at his heels: One that
saw it, said: Lo yonder the Moon and the seven stars.

A Graduate of Salamanca was to ride before a Gentlewoman, and for manners sake
would needs have her get up first, which she refusing to do, the more he
urged her, and would needs have it so, so absurd was his schollerly ciuility.

A Countreyman suspecting Legier de main between his daughter and a young
shephard, came to a Doctor who was famed for a great Sooth-sayer in that
country, and presented him a couple of Capons, and told him all his foresaid
iealosie, craving withal to be forthwith resolved thereupon Then the Doctor
took a great book, and turned over a many leaves, and made a great mumble to
himself as seeming to conjure: At last taking his spectacles off his nose: he
asked the countryman both their ages: who answering that his daughter was
fifteen years old, and the shepherd three and twenty: Then the Doctor said:
If it be so (friend) byrladie I do not deny, but it may be so in deed; and
so dismissed him.

A grave Doctor discoursing unto two vain Gallants upon a point of natural
Philosophy, and one of them saying, that he understood never a word he said: He
answered: No marueil, for empty barrels never sink down to the bottom.

One Doctor Villiabos saying grace before the Emperor Charles, did it
silentlie: Whereunto a vain Gallant afterward excepting, and saying that it
were much better if he spoke it out: He answered: Make me but a fool, and
I Will speak as loud as you: but it will mar the grace quite.

One Doctor Matthew, a famous Preacher in Salamanca, was a very little man: And
one seeing him pass along in the street, called him in jest, Minimus
Apostolorum: Which he ouer-hearing, merrily answered; Yet is Matthew maximus
Euangelistarum.

One that had a great good memory and was very eloquent and had withal but
little learning: an other thus bejested him saying: That he had rock and
spindle enough, but the Deu'll a whit of yarne.

A Master of Art (amongst others) bayted the Bull with darts, and traversing
along by the Duke of Infantasgo his scaffold, who knew both him and his little
learning, said: And like your Grace the Cuspe of a dart dulles not litterature:
True (answered the Duke) especially his, who has but a little.

In the edge of an evening one Scholar said unto another: Det tibi Deus bonum
sero. The other answered: Et tibi malum cito.

A punie Scholar in a College, a great dish of broth was set before him at
dinner with a pease in it: And he seeing it, began straight to untruss his
points: And being asked why he did so: He answered: I will go swim at
yonder pease.

A thin slice of cheese was set before a scholar, who as soon as he saw it,
laid his finger upon his mouth, and being demanded why he did so, he answered:
Least my breath should blow it away.

A many Scholars went to steal Conies, and by the way they warned a nouice
among them to make no noise for fear of skarring the Conies away: At last he
espying some, said aloud in Latin: Ecce Cuniculi multi: And with that the
Conies ran into their berries: Wherewith his fellows offended, and chyding
him therefore, he said: Who (the Deu'll) would have thought that Conies
understood Latin.

A Repetitor in a College of Coimbria asked a Logick-Scholler, Quid est prima?
He answered: Four Cards of four several suits.

A Scholar of Salamanca wrote to his father to buy him a book entitled,
Digestum vetus: And the silly man returned him this answer: (Son) Vetus me
no Vetusses, but let it be span new, and therefore do I here send you twice
the price of it: do buy it your self.

A Scholar was commending a Doctors wife (who had sometimes been a Familiar of
their College) affirming that she was passing discreet, and of good
deportment: Another answered: No marueill if she be so, having a Familiar.

A petty Channonrie was fallen void in the Church of Alcala, and according to
the manner there, a bill was set up upon the Church door to advertise any man
of it that would be willing, and withal should be thought sufficient to be
admitted thereunto: By chance a scholar passing by, and reading it, said:
Alas poor Chanonrie, art thou so weak as to lean against a wall?

One that had a fair Library, and seldom or never betook himself to study,
another said unto him: It seems that you and your books are at a truce.

One being asked whether he thought such a man literat, or no: He answered. I,
his letters are like plain song, few and gross

The Marquis of Santelliana woonted to say, that we rest much bound to good
Authors, because they both diswarne us from vice, and advise us to virtue.

Platon in Spanish signifies a platter, also it is the Spanish name for the
great Philosopher Plato: A profound scholar, and an other being in rages,
the other threw a great Platon, viz. a platter at the scholar, and sore broke
his head: One coming by in the mean time, and seeing the scholar so highly
disgraced said to the other: You have done you know not what, in misusing so
great a scholar: The Other answered: Well may he now prove a great scholar
indeed: for well I wot, he has had a great Plato, viz. a Plato on his head.

OF POETS AND MVSITIONS.
THe Earl of Orgas used to say that he is a fool that cannot make a Ballad,
and a more fool that does make a ballad.

One Garci Sanchez a Spanish Poet, became bestraught of his wits with overmuch
leuitie, and at the rhyme of his distraction was playing upon a Bandore. Now,
certain months after being partly come to himself again, he was invited to
play before a great magistrate of the town, and he played upon the self same
instrument: which after that he had done, he delivered it up to the said
Magistrate, saying: So, now am I glad to see thee in the hands of Justice, that
wrought'st me so much woe.

A scholar presented a gratulatorie new-yeer unto sir Thomas Moore in prose:
And he reading it, and seeing how barrain and senseless it was, asked him
whether he could turn it into verse: He answered yes: With that Sir Thomas
Moore delivered it him again so to alter: Who within a two days after, came
and brought it him all in verse: Which Sir Thomas Moore reading, and noting the
time, said: I marie, now is here rhyme I see, whereas before was neither rhyme
nor reason.

One seeing an excellent Poet crooked and deformed of person, said: Lord, what
a poor cottage does yonder good wit inhabit!

A Seruing-man served in a Kids head to his masters board, and by the way eat
up all the brain of it: Whereupon his master asking what was become of the
brain: He answered: Sir, it is a Musition-kid.

A scholar playing on the Bandore, one requested him to sing thereunto some
curious fine song: He then began, Nominatino, hic, hec, hoc: Genetiuo huius,
etc.

One said of Musitions that they were the happiest craftsmen of all others,
because they earne money with making themselves merry.

A Musition was offered good exhibition in a Cathedral Church, and he refused
it and went to another place: Within a year after he came thither again,
having his voice much impaired, and there offered his service upon the
conditions which he formerly refused: Answer was made: Where you wasted your
steel, there go waste your iron.

A poor Knight of small revenue retained a consort of Viols in his house, and
asking at dinner time a Gentleman a guest of his how he liked of his music: He
answered: They play well, only they want dauncers.

A Portugez had hired a Musition to play and sing for him at his Maistresse
window: The Musition did so, and sung her a sonnet, whereof part went thus:
Fair maistresse, hither am I come for you: Wherefore vouchsafe to pity me now.
etc. The Portugez waxed jealious heerat, and all to bombasted the poor fellow,
saying: What (villain) thou come for her? and she to pity thee? I marie shall
she, go hang thee thou errand knave.

A Portugez played music at his maistresse window, and she unkindly threw
stones at him and drove him away: A friend of his being then with him, and
seeing his extreme melancholy thereat; bemond him, saying: What greater honor
could betide you, then stones to fly about your music, and give it audience
as they did to Orpheus?

A Gent. made music at his Masters window, and sung her a song which began
thus, My secret passions, etc. An other Gentlewoman being then in place, and
hearing him begin so, said: Belike your servant is sick of the pyles.

A Princes Musition begged of his Altez the Captainship of the castle of Tail,
and it was denied him: Whereupon being called within a while after to sing
before the Princess, he refused to come: Then the Princess asking a
Gentleman that stood by, what the fool ayl'd: He answered: And like your
Highness, he has vowed never to sing more without a Tail.

One used to say, that a fool and a dauncer differ but in this, That a fool
is a fool all his life, and a Dauncer but whiles he daunceth.

One hearing th'Organs in a Church upon a Wednesday in Lent, contrary to the
due of that season, said, that it was like a Mellowne in winter.

A miser-Nobleman turned away his Musitions, and willed them the next morning
that they were to depart, to come and play him their last farewell under his
window: They did so, and when they had all done, he paid them but their bare
wages, and so dismissed them: Whereupon one of them at parting said unto him: And
like you Honor, so great misery deserves bag-pipes.

A Channon asking a singing man who had but a shallowe beard, how far his
hawke could fly without belles: (meaning that he thought he might starve but
for his singing.) The singing-man answered: Even as far as yours without his
hood: So answered in reference to the hood he wore.

A Gentleman that played very well upon the Bandore, and had but a bad voice,
played and song in an Evening under his Maistresse window, and when he had done,
asked her how she liked his music: She answered: You have played very well,
and you have sung to.

An old Piper used to say: If my auditors wist how much I delight my self in
the music I make them, they would rather look that I should give them
somewhat, then they give me.

A poor Musitions hose hung loosely about him for want of points, and playing
on a time upon a Bandore before a many Gentlemen, he did it very well, and to
al their good likings: whereupon one of them said merrily unto him. Faith
(fellow) playing so many good points upon the instrument as thou do,
bestow one upon thy hose: He answered: Your Worship having found that point,
I beseech you bestow it upon me.

OF PHYSIC AND PHYSICIANS.
A Grave physic Doctor reading by candlelight the secrets of Nature, and
finding among other things that a large and a broad beard betokens a fool: He
straight took the candle in one hand, and a looking glass in the other, and
began to view what manner of beard his own was. Now, holding the candle over
near: the flame set it on fire, and burnt it half off. Then all in a chafe
throwing down the glass, he took pen and ink, and wrote in the margin of this
secret, Probatum est.

A Vint^ner had taken in three or sour hogsheades of good wine, and seeing a
physician pass along, he filled an Vrinal half full of it, and showed it him
for a sick man's water. The physician viewing it, and tossing it up and down a
good space, at last he said: that the patient whose water that was, was full of
bad humors, and had need to be purged and let blood: You Duns (answered the
Vintener) it is good piss, and with that drunk it clean off, and when he had
done, threw the Vrinall at the Doctors head.

A bad Painter that never drew good picture in all his life, found small thrift
in his trade for want of utterance of his rude shapes: and went to dwell in
another place, where he was not known, and there took upon him the practice
of physic, and was the death of many a one: At last an acquaintance of his
coming to that town, chaunc'd to see him, and asking him what he made in a
Physicians robe, and why he had given over his old trade: He answered: Faith,
I am now become as you see, to the end the earth may bury al my ignorance and
errors hereafter.

An old Gentlewoman was ouer-carefull of her sons health, who was not
greatly diseased, and said to the Physician: I marvel (M. Doctor) that you
cheer up my son no more, I pray you physic him daintely that he may be well
again and walk abroad: Whereunto the Doctor answered: Give him then two
fetherbeds more.

A delicate Gent. being somewhat sickish, sent often for the Physician to come
to him, and one morning he sent for him purposely to come feel his pulse: The
Doctor came and felt it, and the Gentleman then said unto him: How say ye (M.
Doctor) does not my pulse beat very softly? Yes Sir, (answered the Doctor) He
that rides on an Ass must needs go fair and softly.

A Physician sent for a Farriar to cure his horse of the Bots, and after he
had done, the Doctor offered him two shillinges, which the Smith tefused,
saying: We fellow-craftsmen use not to take money of one another.

One asked a Physician what was the reason, that when one passes Doctor of
physic, they put him on gilt spurs, and create him a Gentleman: He answered
merrily: To war-fare health.

The Spaniards call the 7. stars the 7. Goats: There was a Physick-Doctor in
Salamanca, whose father was a rich country swain, and loved Kids flesh above
any other meat: This swain died, and this Doctor his son coming to his
funeral, his brothers requested him to tell the^ by his skill in Astrology
what was become of their fathers soul: Forth then he went in the evening, and
cast his eye toward the seven Goats, and finding the full number of those
stars, he sighed, and said: Dear brethren so it is, that I fear me our
father is damned, for were he ascended into heaven, out of doubt he had by the
way devoured some four or five of yonder Goats (poynting to the stars) so
well he loved Goats flesh in his life time (as ye all know) But behold,
yonder may you see the full number of seven still; wherefore I greatly fear he
is either descended into hell, or else is gone to heaven some far way about.

A Doctor of physic examining a student, who was to take degree in that
faculty, among other questions asked him, what was the reason that the
plague sore commonly takes men in the groyne, or in the Arme-pit: He answered:
Because it is the fashion.

A Physicians son sickned, and besought his father to physic him: who
answered: Son, Physic and medicines are ours to sell, not to use.

A Gentlewoman chyding her chambermaid, said: Thou art even as filthy as a
Physicians eye.

Doctor Parra a Spanish Physician came to vsite his Patient Don Garcia
Manrique, the Duke of Nazareth his son, the Dukes Muliter being also sick at
the same time: They asking him what diet they should give them: He answered:
Give Don Garcia half a chicken, and the Muliter a pound and a half of Beef.

A Gentleman saying to an unlearned Physician: Whether a ways master
Hors-leach, whether trudge you so fast? He answered: To cure your Worship.

One compared Physicians to hawks, which if they kill but Partridges, are
valued not above thirty Crowns: If Duckes and Mallards at fifty: if Herons
at two hundred: So Physicians, if they kill but Clownes and pesants, are not
greatly esteemed: if Gentl. or Knights, they are reasonable: but if they kill
Lords or great states, the^ are they great Clearks, and highly accounted of.

A Physician being asked what might be the reason of the stone and
Stranguillion in men: he answered: Fie upon false Millers that grind with
such grauellie Quearnes.

A Physician coming to feel a Ladies pulse, and thinking to do it very
manerly, as though (forsooth) he were unworthy to touch her, drew her smock
sleeue over her wrest, and so felt it

A Physician riding over Shooters hill in Kent was afraid of Thieves, and by
chance he saw a far off a troop of people before him. Whereupon he bid his man
ride toward them, to discover what they were: Mean time he hid himself close
behind a bush: The fellow coming unto them, understood that they conducted a
murderer to execution: Whereupon (being a mad knave) he straight set spurs to
his horse, and galloped back again amain toward his master, still beckning unto
him all the way as he posted, to be gone, and shift for himself: Which the
Doctor perceiving, away he flinges back again toward London, as though he
had had a devil at his tail, and being alighted at his Inn, he there
attended his man's coming: Who eftsoons arrived, all panting, and blowing, said
unto him: Happy you (master) that are so well escaped. Gogs nownes, he to be
hanged for killing only one man, what would they have done with you (I trow)
who have slain so many in your days?

OF IVSTICES, LAWYERS, and Scriueners.
A Fellon being condemned to die, said to the Judge: I summon you to appear
within 30. days at the Tribunal of God, to answer the injustice you have
done me, and see you fail not heerof: The Judge heerat smiled, and faid to one
that stood by: I pray you appear for me at that day, for (I assure you) I have
so much business now in hand, that I shall not be able to dispatch so soon.

A presumptuous Fellon being brought to the bar, told the Judge that he
looked like Pilate: Whereunto the Judge answered: At leastwise I will not wash
my hands with Pilate to condemn so very a Varlet as thou.

An Abbot disclaiming before a Justice to the temporal law, and saying that he
was to be tried by the Clergy, and not by the Layety: The Justice straight
willed his Mule to be seas'd upon for the Plaintiffes debt and then answered:
At leastwise (father) your Mule is of the Layety.

Ronquillio a Spanish Justice used to say: That it is good to hang a thief of
what age soever he be: a young thief to the end he may steal no more, and an
old thief for his former thefts.

The Marquis of Santilliana commended Justice, because it winnes good men to
applaud it, and Clemency bad men.

In a town in the Low Countries a Spanish prisoner escaped out of prison down
by a ladder, which was privily conuay'd unto him by a wench which bore him good
will in that town, and yet nevertheless it was his hap to be taken again: And
being arraigned for the fact, it was evident that such his breach of prison was
chiefly for the wenches sake: Whereupon Grave Maurice (sitting the^ upon the
bench) merrily said unto him: Is it possible thou could not get up upon her
without a ladder? and so pardoned him.

A Lawyer had wasted much money about a stone-building, which was so ill
contrived, as every man accounted his expense vain. A Client of his came to
him for his advise in a matter of Law, and he being at that present in a chafe
with his workmen, said unto him: You do this and that, and I know not what, and
all off your own head, and then you blame the Lawyer for all: The Client
heerunto answered: Sir, my oversight in this case is but slight, but yours is
of lime and stone.

One coming to a Lawyer for his advise in law without ere a fee; the Lawyer
said unto him: How will you have your lamp burn without oil?

Certain countrymen came to a Lawyer to know his opinion in this case,
namely, whether if they and the whole parish, being able to prove that their
Curate kept a wench, he might be deposed from his cure, and another put in his
place. The Doctor then asked them, whether the wench were of that parish, or a
stranger: they answered, a stranger of such a place: and named where. Even so
(replied the Doctor) Faith, tell me the^ (sirs) you knowing your Curate to be a
man of such a disposition, do you not think it more tolerable that he keep
a Less of a strange place, rather then of your own parish?

An old woman had a shee-Asse which she loved passing well, because both at
mill and at market it had done her much good service along time: This old
woman dying, willed her Executors to let this Ass live the remainder of her
days in rest and peace from all manner labor and pains, and all the day long
to run at pasture, and every night to be allowed a peck of oats: this to
continue during the natural life of the said Ass. And to this effect, she
bequeathed a portion of money to be disposed of from time to time in oats for
the Ass, and so died. Shortly after the Ass died also: Then the old woman's
son (who had a colt of the aforesaid ass) finding that the Ass at her death
time had left behind her a good quantity of her allowance in oats unspent,
which he lawfully demanding of the Executors, they denied to deliver him: He
thereupon came to a grave Doctor in law to have his advise in the case:
Whereunto the Doctor in full notice of all the matter, thus resolved him. viz.
That he might lawfully enter his action against the aforesaid executors for the
oats: because both he himself was heir unto his mother, as also his colt (to
whose use he was chiefly to pretend it) was the other Asses natural issue and
heir apparent. This was the Law-doctors sage opinion upon this text, which he
concluded he would warrant for good law.

One telling an honest Gentleman that he doubted not, but his friend should
speed well in his Law-matter, having so good a purse, and so great friends: The
Gent answered: If that be all your hope, the more is the pity.

A widow Gentlewoman in King Henry the 7. days, gave the Feasant for her
cognizance, and one Cook her adversary Attorney in Law, said at the bar in
disgrace of her cause, that he doubted not ere he had done, but he would
thoroughly plume her Feasant, and make it a poor bird: The Gentlewoman
answered: Then is it great pity so fair a bird should fall into so foul a
Cooks handling.

Two Lawyers met the next day after the term, and the one said to the other: I
am sure you carry full bags down with you into the country, having made so
good a harvest of this Term: Not so (answered the other) rather do I think
you have: For your bags (I dare say) are so top-full of fees, that when you
throw them down upon the board, they make no sound at all as mine do:
The Other replied: Then belike I have the odds of you in money, and you of me
in music.

A simple Justice was complained unto of a wrong sentence he had given against
one: And he answered: Quod esquilse, esquilse viz, Quod scripst, scripst.

A soldier coming to a Lawyer to have a bill drawn, The Lawyer did it: And
then he offered him his sword in payment: Whereunto the Lawyer excepted, and
said: Blade me no bladings, but give me good gheult.

A great Lawyer loosing his money at Cards, was in a pelting chafe, and by
chance a friend of his coming in, and marueilling to see him so teasty: The
Lawyer said: I do but canuasse the error of this action.

A miserable petti-fogger and his boy traueilling up to the term, and wading
through a brook, the stream was so strong that it bore him quite away: And
even as his legs began to fail him, he turned back to his boy, and said:
Now is it time if thou have any thing of mine, come give it me quickly.

The Emperor Charles at his first entry into Toledo, took an oath (according
to the prerogative of that place) to preserve and secure unto the Citizens all
their ancient rites and privileges inviolable, which after he had sworn, and
that the towns public Notarie had engrossed it of record. The said Notarie
then said unto him: If your Majesty please to perform what you have here
sworn, God bless you: if not: God incline your heart that you may, and bless
you nevertheless.

A young Scriuener read a bill of sale to his master, and the words went thus:
Be it known unto all men to whom this present bill shall come or appertain,
that I, A.B of such a place, do by these presents pass, grant, give, and
make over unto C.D. of such a place, all my lands and possessions lying and
being in such a place, for the sum of so much money alredie in hand
received: And heerat he paused a while to spette: Whereat his surly master
(half angry and testie) said: On, on, with a mischief: Then the fellow
proceeded, and read: Namely, to you and your heirs, and to all that shall or
may hereafter issue from them and theirs to the worlds end.

A Scriuener was writing a Marchantes last will and testament, in which the
merchant expressed many debts that were owing him, which he willed his
executors to take up, and dispose to such and such uses. A kinsman of this
Marchantes then standing by, and hoping for some good thing to be bequeathed
him, longed to hear some good news to that effect, and ^aide unto the
Scriuener: hagh, hagh, what says my uncle now? Does he now make his Maundies?
No (answered the Scriuener) he is yet in his demands.

A Scriuener taking an inventory of all the goods and chattels of a
dissembling Jew, one willed him to set down certain flitches of Bacon that
hung in his kitchen chimney: Whereunto the Scriuener answered: No, they are no
mooueables, for I dare say, they are by this time of day deep rooted in his
belief.

The end of the second part of this book.
Wits, Fittes, and Fancies. The third Part.
OF LOVE AND LOVERS.
ANamorous Ass perfumed his loue-letter to his maistresse, and fearing least
she should neglect how sweet it was, wrote in a postscript underneath: I pray
you (maistresse) after you have read this letter, smell to it.

A widow Gentlewoman hearing a young Noblemans discourse unto her of the
mariageable love he bare her daughter, and she objecting that she was too
meanly descended to be wife to so great a Lord as he: He answered: A more
matter is love then Lordship.

A Gentleman seeing a fair Gentlewoman at a window, he volted and carabetted
upon his horse a good space before her, and at last away he pranced: Anon after
he came that way again, and did as before, and so continued a good while: At
last he departed for good and all, and being come home, he sent her two bottles
of Orange flower water by his page: Which the Gentlewoman accepting, said unto
the page: Now, I pray thee (my Lad) thank thy master, and tell him, that I
thought his evening wind would turn to water.

A Spaniard going to a femal house in Antwarp, was demanded by a friend of his,
whether he went: Who answered: To practice upon a sinner in the act of charity.

Celestina is a dainty pastoral loue-booke in Spanish, and it signifies
Celestial: A Scholar coming to visit his maistresse, she desired him to
help her to the said Celestina: Who answered: Your self being the Original,
what would you do with the translation?

Fuente in Spanish signifies a fountain: Two Gent. came to visit a
Gentlewoma^, whose Paramour was one Senior Fuente They walking in the hall
together, one of them said: Lord what a fresh house is this, I have not come in
a fresher? The Other answered: No marueill, for it has a Fuente in it: viz. a
fountain.

A Gent. had stolen a fair maid away down at a window and a kinswoman of his
asked him how they had the hearts to venture so dangerously: He answered: Our
loves were so ardent that had we not conuaid our selves out at the window for
air, we had quite consumed one another.

A Gentlewoman went to Church so concealed, that she thought no body could
know her: It chanced that her Lover met her, and knew her, and spoke unto her:
Sir (she answered) you mistake me, how know ye me? All too well (replied the
Gent.) for so soon as I met you, behold my wounds fell fresh a bleeding: Oh
heerof you only are guilty.

One asked a Scholar how a man ought to demean himself in his first loves to
his Maistresse: He answered; Tell her once that you love her, and then let the
Devil work the rest.

A Gent. said unto a Gentlewoman: Fair Maistresse, long have I loved you, and
till now have always been abasht to declare you my Love: Alas good sir (she
answered) in sooth had you told me of your love even at the first, you had
hazarded to loose no more then you do at this present.

A Gentleman bore certain Gentlewomen in hand, how that by his skill in
palmestry he could tell them all their fortunes: A Gentlewoman of the company,
to whom he was particularly devoted, then reached him forth her hand, to see
what judgment he would give upon it: who after he had viewed it a good while,
in the end he said unto her: In sooth all my fortune lies in your hand.

A Gent. had been a long time suter to a Gentlewoman, who still rewarded his
love but with skorne and disdain: Nevertheless he bore himself still a suter
unto her: and playing music on a time under her window, she gave him the
hearing a while, and at last threw a wispe of straw at him in derision: He not
greatly offended thereat, said: Of a bad pay-maister better yet take straw then
nothing.

A young Gent. being proffered a great man's daughter in marriage, deliberated
many months upon the matter: And being asked why he so long delayed his
consent, answered: The affair which is to be done but once for ever, ought to
be largely thought upon.

A Gent. was a suter to a fair Gentlewoman, and coming in an afternoon to
court her, he found her then at cards with an other Gent. whom he had in
jealosie of a corriuall: And within a while she said, See, see (I pray) what
bad cards he deals me: He answered: Lady, receive them not.

A Portugal woonted to say, that fine love consists only in talking, dancing
and feasting with fair Ladies, the rest Asses can do as well as men.

A maid was cheapning somewhat at a Haberdashers shop, and as they were jesting
together, she asked him who was his maistresse: With that the Haberdasher took
down a looking glass, and held it before her, and said: Lo there may you see
her, if you please.

Half a fool went a wooing; and by the way he seemed very pensive, and full
of muses: Certain his companions that met him and knew his errand, one of them
said unto the rest: Me thinks (sirs) master N. goes very sollomly a wooing:
He thinks belike (answered another) what foolerie to speak first unto his
maistresse: He need not do so (adioyn'd the third) for in a kitchen well
burnished supper is soon furnished.

A maid of fifty years of standing was proffered to a young Gentleman in
marriage, with a great portion, and besides that that she was so old, she was
withal yll-fauoured: Moreover it was his good hap upon a time to have a sight
of her bare leg, as she alighted from off her horse, and he saw that it was
nothing but skin and bone, and as yellow as a Kytes foot. At the very same
time was also proffered him a very fair young maid in marriage of an eighteen
years old, but her portion simple and small: nevertheless this young Gallant
chose her, and refused the other: And being demanded why he did so, he
answered: I viewed the figure below, and saw that there remained good 18.

A fair Gentl^woman caught a flea upon the belly-part of her kertle, and said:
Why how now Flea? what, Fleas so bold in winter? Her suter then standing by
answered: It is all summer thereawaies.

An ill fauor'd Gentlewoman asked a young Gent. whether he were in love or no:
Who answered, that he was: Then she to try how well he could fancy her, said
unto him: If you were not, I would entertain you for my servant: He answered:
Tush you do but say so: I dare say you would not.

One asked an ill-fauor'd widow why she did not marie: she answered: Because
if any marry me, it will be rather for my goods, then for my own sake, and
then will he be to me not as a kind husband, but only as a friend, or a
wel-willer.

A widow Gentlew. who had buried her very kind husband being persuaded to
marry again, she answered: The death of a dear husband ought not disannull
the love of a chaste wife.

A sharp dame in disdain of her suter, sent him this message: Who er'e shall
be my husband, must have these four Sses. viz. He must be sage, sole, secret,
solatious: Whereunto her suter returned her this answer again: And whoeuer
shall be my wife, must be none of these four Cees. viz. Common, crooked,
cursed, careless.

One asking his inamor'd friend, how he could find in his heart to love such a
fops, being she was neither fair nor well fauor'd, but a very slut, and that
had a stinking breath withal. He answered: Oh she makes ye most fine sops.

A reverend Licentiate at law was a suter to a fair Gentlewoman, and she
skorning him, still returned him tart and squeamish quippes: Whereupon on a time
he said unto her: Gentlewoma^, you greatly forget your self to injure me so
highly, considering both my honest love toward you, as also my gravity, who
am (as you know) a Licentiat in Law. Whereunto she answered: Having lost the
game, plead you now for leauings?

One being asked why he loved so extremely such a foul, crooked, and squint
eyed creature: he answered: She makes ye a most dainty Sallade of Lettuce.

A Gentl. coming to visit his friend sore loue-sick a bed, and desiring to
know his so cruel mistress: he answered: Oh (sir) Bereft of bliss a beldame
caused this.

A young Gent. viewing ouer-curiously a merchants fair wife, by chance a
virtuous kinsman of his came by; and noting it, said unto him: That which
cannot be lawfully coueted, ought not to be curiously regarded.

OF HVSBANDS, AND WIVING.
A Spright appeared to one by night, and miserably amazed him yet in the end
being somewhat revived from fear, he thus bespake it: If thou be God or any of
his good Angels, I know thou will not hurt me: And if thou be the devil or
his Dame, I likewise hope no less, because I have married thy sister: meaning
his shrewd wife.

A seruing-man was a suter to a maids dishonestie, who asked him, whether he
meant to marie her yea, or no: He answered No: For that better could he afford
her sheets, then ruffes.

A fair young wife asking her unkind kind-husband the cause of his jealosie:
he answered: Faith (wife) not in respect that I any whit distrust thy true and
loyal love toward me, but because I see all the world ouer-loueth thee: So
that though I dare trust thee with all the world, as being my most true turtle
dove; yet dare I not trust all the world with thee, because thou art all too
fair, and men ouer-loue thee.

The Earl of Orgas was wont to say, that who so submits himself to his
wives supremacy, does all one as if he fed with his feet, and marched on his
hands.

A Duke being highly offended with his slave, would have hanged him, but at
last aduising upon a worser torment (as he thought) said: No, hanging is all
too easy a death, I Will marie him to a shrowe.

One asked an acquaintance of his, whether he were yet a married man or no: he
answered: What, an Ape clogged up in a chimney corner? Faith no.

In a plague time a Constable passing by his neighbors house, and hearing his
wife sore lamming him, that night he set up a red cross upon his door,
whereat the neighbor the next morning highly offended, tore it down, and
complained to the the Alderman of the ward of the high injury the Constable had
therein done him: who being presently sent for, thus he answered the matter:
And like your Worship, his wife sore beat him yesterday, and I think there
cannot be a greater plague in a house then that, and therefore I did it.

A Musition singing under a Gentleman's window, The fair wife proou'd a
shrewe, etc. The Gentleman straight arose from out his bed, and looking out at
the window, said unto him: The fair wife you speak of, well may you go seek
her else where, for here she is not: but as for the shrew, she is here a bed
with me

An old Gentleman had provided a wife for the wisakre his son, to whom he
gave in great charge, during the bridal time not to speak any one word for
fear the Brides friends should happily discover his foolerie: So all dinner
time there sat the wise Gentleman silly silent (God knows) not forgetting to
use his chappes more then his tongue: At last the Brides friends perceiving
such his foolish silence, whispered his disgrace in one another ear, and sore
beflouted him. Among the rest, one of them said to his next commensall:
Questionless the Bridegroom is a iollie wise young Gentleman, see how
sollomly he sits, and I warrant you he thinks upon some weighty matter: He
ouer-hearing this, loudlie said unto his father there present: Sir, well may I
now be bold to speak, for that (I see) they have now discovered me*

One advised his friend to choose his wife rather with his ears, then with his
eyes.

A Maid was proffered to one in marriage, and her friends were offended that
the party so long paused upon the choice: Whereunto he answered: Is she foul?
then is she odious: If fair? then is she hard to keep: These be the extremes I
muse upon.

One woonted to say, that to a peaceable life in marriage it were meet the
husband were deaf, and the wife blind.

A fair woman took an yll-fac'd man to husband, and her beauty still more and
more increased: A pleasant Gent. noting it, said: That he never in all his life
saw an apple in a cowshare continue so long vnrotten.

One used to say, that the best choice of a wife is by Arethmeticke.

A man of worship married a poor man's daughter, and certain his friends
questioning with his brother, what portion her friends gave with her, he
answered: To fast with bread and water.

A Bridegroom said unto his spouse: When as at such a time I solicited thy
chastity, had thou then condiscended, I should never have loved thee after,
neither had we been now man and wife, for I did it purposely to try thee: She
answered: Faith I thought as much, but such a one taught me more wit then so
seven years ago.

A shrewd wise chid her husband out of doors, and he stepping forth into
the street, stumbled with his nose into the kennell, and at rising up again,
he said: Better here yet then within door^s.

A man had a shrewd wife, and he one day broke her head, the cure whereof cost
him dear expense afterward: Insomuch as his wife in regard thereof, said on a
time unto her gossips: Faith my husband will not dare give me no more broken
heads in have, considering how dear he finds them in the cure: Her husband
hearing of such her braues, sent the next day for the Surgeons and
Apothecaries, and in her presence paid them all their bills, and gave each of
them twenty shillings over and above saying: Hold this (sirs) against the next
time.

One used to say, that the father gives the portion, but God the good wife.

Two young men were suitors to a rich man's daughter, the one was rich, the other
poor, and he bestowed her upon the poor suter? Being demanded why he did
so, he answered: Because the poor batcheller is wise, and may repair his
living in time, but the other a fool, and like to bring all to naught.

One woonted to say, that the greatest pleasure a married man can have, is the
hope he has to bury his wife shortly whereby to become a new suter to an other.

A great personage but old withal, married a fair young maid in a manner
perforce, and against her friends good wills: Whereupon one merrily descanted
and said: That he married her perforce, and she him sans force.

In Spain it is lawful to marry by Attorney. One besought his dear friend
to marry a fair maid in his absence to his use, affirming that they were
already privily contracted before witness: His friend (with license of the
Church first obtained) did so: And after the marriage ended, he and the Bride
sat down together in a pew: And he spoke never a word unto her: which the
neighbors marueilling at, asked him why he was so strange to the Bride: he
answered: Well have I leave to wed her for my friend, but not to speak the
first folly unto her: that is his right, and he must have it.

A loving wife said unto her husband as she lay a dying: Dear husband, you
that are void of all sin, I beseech you pray for me.

One asked a young Gentleman, what he meant to marie so deaf a Gentlewoman: he
answered: Because I hoped she was also dumb.

One enueighing against such as choose their wives chiefly for beauty, said:
That such manner of wives after the first six months, are foul to their
husbands, and fair to all other men.

Of one that had married a foul woman with a rich portion, another s^id that he
took her merely by weight, without fashion

One Ducket a far merchant was held among his neighbors unable in generation,
and his fine wife being on a time in conversation among her gossips, and
talking of big husbands, she said: And I for my part (thanks be to God) have
Ducket enough (as you all know) and yet I assure ye, he is too light by two
grains.

One asking his neighbor how old his wife was: he answere^: Her mark is not
yet out.

One woonted to say: If your wife bid you throw your self out at a window, pray
God that it be not far to the ground.

A Gardener being to be hanged, his wife came to give him her last kiss at the
ga^lows: to whom he said: Fie on thee (baggage) thus are we like to thrive
well at the years end: there cannot be a meeting in all the country, but
still thou will be sure to make one: Home and weed, home and weed with a very
vengeance.

The Admiral of Castile said: that who so takes a wife, is like a soldier
that goes to the wars, to oppose himself against all encounter.

One hearing a cursed husband threatening his shrewd wife that unless she held
her tongue he would beat her with his dagger, said unto him: If you beat her
with the dagger, she will beat you with the scabberd.

OF WOMEN.
ONe demanded of a Physician, why men still sue to women, and women never to
men: He answered: Because women are always ready for men, and men not always
for women.

One asked a Gentlewoman, why other femals for the most part resist the male in
generation, and only women most gently yield unto it: She answered: because
women are no beasts.

A Gentlewoman greatly importuning a plain countreyman to deliver his opinion
what seasons he thought a woman fittest for a man: In the end (after many
courtesies and much a do) he answered: In sooth (Maistresse) whenever a man is
ready for a woman.

An uncivil Captain woonted to say that he loved a woman and his chamberpot
alike, neither of both but for his ease.

A maiden came to an old Grocer to buy some virgin-wax, the Grocer at that
instant was pounding spice in a mortar: then thus he answered: Hold here (fair
maid) this pestle if you please but as for Virgin wax, the Deu'l a whit have I
this many a day.

A Gentleman coming to a merchants house, the Dog flue at him at the door,
and he with his dagger smit off his tail: The good wife heerat was testie, and
misused the Gent. in terms: Whereupon he said: Why woman it is not a dogs
tail can serve your turn.

A Gentlewoman being demanded whether she loved her sons or her daughters
best, she answered, her daughters: A Gent. that stood by then, said: Me
thinks, God having made you a Carrier, you should love a packneedle well.

A woman in anger said, what (I pray ye) do you doubt of my honesty: No
(answered the other,) for it never stood in my way.

A maid had swallowed a dram too much, not knowing that she was with
child, but felt a pain in her belly, and carried her water to a Physician,
complaining to him of the grief: Who answered: Be a good cheer (wench) for
I Will warrant thee within these few months you shall have the cause of your
pain in your arms.

An unchaste woman of life was commending a man's honesty to his face in honest
company: he disdaining such her praise as proceeding from a woman of her
infamy, said. I hope I was never dishonest with you, that you should thus
commend me before all this good company.

King Edward the fourth was wont to say, that a woman's greatest difficulty is,
to hold her peace.

A Gent. requested a thing of an unchaste Gentlewoman: and she answered, Faith
sir no: had I a hundred things, you should not have any one of the^: Say you
so (replied the Gent.) I knew the time when having but one only thing, you let
a hundred use it.

An incontinent Bride thinking her marriage day ouer-long, and longing for
night, said unto her gossips. Now, would God it were even now night, or else
that I were unmarried again.

A chollericke person and a woman were a chyding together, and by chance an
acquaintance of his came by: who said unto him: Lord, what ayle ye to chyde
so with that woman, I know her of old, she is too hard a match for you: He
answered: Then a Gods name, let her chyde with S. Peter, S. Martin, Bristoll,
York, London and not with me.

One used to say: Who so has a daughter but twenty years old, well may he
bestow her upon her better, if 25. upon her equal, if above 25. then upon
whosoever lift to have her.

A rich man had a daughter above 30. years old, who found her self greatly
aggreeued that he had not all that while provided her a husband. Upon a time
he invited to dinner to him his five sons, who were all married in the same
town: Now this stale maid, their sister, then hoped that such their meting was
purposely to determine upon a good husband for her, but it fell out otherwise,
For after that dinner was done, the father said thus unto them: (Sons) I have
bid you all to dinner to day, to the end that every of you resolve me, where you
mean to be buried when you die, or whether you think it not best, that I build
a tomb for us altogether: Now let me hear your good aduises in this behalf:
Then the eldest son said: For my part (father) I desire to be buried in the
Parish Church where I chance to die, and so the rest in a row all as they
thought good. At last when they had all said, the father turned him about to
his daughter, and asked her where she would be buried: She answered; Faith no
where (father) for I am like to die desperate and for such as die so, well you
wot, the Church allows them no burial at all.

A young Gentlewoman that went for a virgin, and was none, being child-sicke,
the Physician asked her where her greatest grief lay: she answered: Me
thinks I feel my heart bounce against my belly.

A merry water-man said to a Gentlewoman as he ferried her over the water: My
boat (maistresse) has a leak just whereas you sit, yet fear not a Gods name,
for there is no amiss, but may be amended.

One in wrangle with a woman gave her the lie: an other that stood by then
answered: why, women are best when they lie.

One enticing another man's wife to unlawful lust: she said: All the while I
was a maid I obeyed my parents, and now that I am a wife I obey my husband:
wherefore, if your request be honest and reasonable, go move it to my husband.

A fair Gentlewoman was married away by her friends to an ill-fac'd, and a
crooked person: And a kinswoman of hers coming to comfort her on a time, she
said: As for friends (cosen) it is meet they be gallant Gent. but as for
husbands, we must take them as we find them.

A notable lewd Gentleman saying to a Gentlewoman that he loved her as his
soul: She answered: I had rather you said, you loved me as your body.

A Gentleman being booted and spurred ready to take horse, came to take his
leave of his Maistresse, who answered: Well may you ask me leave for the next
time, for at this time you have taken it of your self.

A Gentlewoman in extremity of labor, swear that if it pleased God she might
escape death for that once, she would never in all her life after hazard her
self to the like danger again: but being at last safely delivered, she then
said to one of the midwiues: So, now put out the holy candle, and keep it
till the next time.

A Gentleman taking his leave of his mistress, said: I kiss your hands and
your feet: She answered. Forget not (I pray) the station between.

One saying to a woman* Upon my soul do this: She answered: Stake down some
other pawn, for that is forfeited already.

An old Gentlewoman sent her daughter in law a box of preserues, who tasting
thereof said: Lord, how sour is this Sugre: So said in reference belike that it
came from a mother in law.

Two corriuals to a Maids dishonestie, drew and fought under her window: and
she looking out said: Sirres, you mistake, your quarrel is not to be ended with
steel, but with gold and silver.

A lascivious Dame conuersing among her Gossips, alluded thus cunningly to her
husbands ingeneratiuenesse, saying: In sooth my husband (thanks be to God)
has many good parts in him, he is a good Musition, he writes well, and he can
cast an account no man better, save only that he cannot multiply.

An old woman seeing the Bride her daughter vnarray her self fearfullie to
bedward, as who would say: Lord, is this the last hour of my maidenhead? She
said unto her: Faith (Daughter) and if it pleased God, would I were to abide
all thy pains too night.

A Gentleman saying to a young Gentlewoman, who had been five wears a wife,
and never had any child: I greatly marvel that your belly reares not: She
answered: How would you have air puff up my belly, having none in my head:
She taxed therein her husbands insufficiency.

A Genesis meeting his mistress late in an evening at a convenient back side,
for hasty business that he had, only saluted her, and passed on: An other
Gentlewoman, this Gentlewomans familiar, seeing and noting this out at a
window, and knowing with all their mutual loves, said the next day unto her:
How chanced it that yesternight such a one meeting you in such a convenient
place, he so slightly forsook you, bearing you so great good will, as I know
he does: She answered: The truth is, he refused to take the blot, and so lost
the game.

One asking another what was the reason that such a Gentlewoman being but a
poor widow had so many fair maids in her service: The Other answered:
Because she affoordes them free scope, as Hanniball did to his soldiers at
Capua.

A Gentlewoman disdaining her suter, said unto him: A woman of my calling to
love so base a groom as your mastership, faith sir no: He answered: Yes, the
rather for my baseness, for that women are shee-Wolues, that commonly pray
upon the basest carrion.

One being asked why he enueighed so sore against women kind, considering that
so many good Authors have from time to time whole-vollumed their praises: He
answered: They wrote what women ought to be, but I say what they are.

Pedro Mexia woonted to say, that a woman is the heaven of a man's eye, the hell
of his soul, and the purgatory of his purse.

The Earl of Vrenia woonted to say, that the virtuous life of a widow bridles
the wicked tongue to silence, and spurs the virtuous to commend her.

A widow ouer-liued her two husbands, whereof the first died rich, and left
her full bags, and yet withal used her but hardly in his life time: the other
spent all and lest her poor, yet whiles he lived used her very well and
kindly, These two being both buried in one Church, and near one another, she
one day standing between both their graves, said unto certain her gossips
there: See ye here these two graves? Here in this grave lies full bags, and
there lies spend all: now the deu'll take them both.

A kind wife followed her husband to the gallows, and he requesting her not to
trouble her self any farther, she answered: Ah yes (deer Husband) now that I
have brought you thus far on your way, faith I Will see you hanged too, God
willing.

A Gent. coming to visit a young Maid, found her a working of her wedding
wast-coat, and he asked her when she would have done it: She answered,
quickly: and then sighingly adjoin'd: Ah heerin I am to loose my maidenhead.

A young wife expostulating with her midwife her near pains in labor with the
child she went withal, and affirming that questionless she should never
be able to abide them: Yes (answered the (midwife) I warrant you (mistress)
you will refuse white bread and milk that hour. And so she did indeed, for the
Midwife presenting her white bread and milk in that agony, she refused it for
very pain.

Two gossips chatting late in an evening by the fires side, at last one of them
said unto her maid: Nann, light a candle, and with that fetched a great sigh,
and added: For well I wot, thy old master loved light above any earthly joy:
and now I pray God the light of heaven fair befall him: Whereunto the other
gossip answered: And I for my part (Gossip had a husband that above all things
loved a good fire well, now hell fire light on him.

The Earl of Vrenia used to say, that a woman's greatest jayle is modesty, and
silence.

Two shrewes being at civil brabble about one another honesty, the one of
them said: I faith thou sauor'st of honesty, even as a Cow does of Aqua vitae:
The Other answered: And the honesty of thee, and the woolle of an old dog
would make a good Cuckold-medlie.

One commending a proper woman who was an errand shrew, and withal very
talkatiue said: She is even as gallant a woman as ever I set eye on, all but
her tongue.

A Preacher in his good friday sermon said unto his parishioners: Sirs, who of
you all will not in honor of this day forgive his enemy with all his heart:
With that a woman stepped forth and said: Sir, I do: Whom (said the preacher:)
Marie whosoever (quoth she) will do so much as kill the knave my husband.

OF CVCKOLDS.
A Cuckold innocent being informed that such a one was a bed with his wife: he
answered: Knowing him as I do to be a right honest man, I dare adventure my
wife a bed with him.

An honest man that had but one eye and a queen to his wife, entering upon the
sudden into his bed chamber by night, a knave chanced to be then a bed with
her, who hearing her husbands voice, shifted him suddenly behind the door,
and thus she said unto her Goodman: What husband, is it you even welcome my good
husband: I hope in God my dream is come to pass: I was eue^ now adream'd that
you could see with either of your eyes, in so much as I waked for joy, and I
hope to find it true: And with that she arose from out her bed, and coming
toward him: Good husband (she said) let me lay my finger on your seeing eye,
and then tell me whether you discern any thing with the other: He answered:
No, not any thing. In this mean time she beckened to the Adulterer to be gone:
who straight slipped from behind the door down the stairs, and so escaped
quite away.

One went a wooing, and by the way he heard the Cuckoe sing: Whereupon he
turned back again, and swear that by the Mass he would prove him a liar.

One saluted his neigbour, and he refusing to resalute him, the other said: So
God me help, I see there is a kind of people in the world, that dare not d'offe
their hattes for discovering their horns.

A countreyman came to ask for a Gent. in a place where were a many other
Gent. besides, and it was his chance to ask the Gent. himself: Who answered:
My good friend, he that you ask for, was hanged many a day ago: And
wherefore I pray you sir? (replied the stranger:) Marie (he answered) for a
robbery: A robbery (quoth the stranger) Oh th'vngratious man, was he not
content to be a Cuckold all his life, but he would also prove himself a
thief in the end?

A poor countryman came from market, and brought home a sheep head with
him, horns and all: His wife seeing it said: Why how now (husband) what a head
like your own?

A Spannish Cuckold was condemned to be whipped by his wife at a carts tail,
condition, that if she forbore to do it in good earnest, she then to be whipped
her self. So marching along in the street he after the cart, and she with rods
after him, he oftentimes turned back to her, and said: Kate, good Kate, lay
thou on load on me, and let not them lay it on thee.

One saying merrily to his neighbor: Is your wife an honest woman (trow ye?)
He answered: I cannot easily resolve you that question, for well may a woman's
dishonestie be known by experience, but not her honesty.

A man being to be marked in the forehead for having three wives at once: A
Gent. that stood by, and knew the leuitie of his first, and lawful wife, said:
As Well deserves he a forehead-mark for his first wife, as for the other two.

A fair Gentlewoman danced her galliard passing well, and a Gent. highly
commended her good grace therein: The fool her husband then standing by, was
proud to hear his wife so praised, and adjoined. Oh but (Gent) if you knew
her a bed, as I do, you would say she were even the sweetest woman in the
world.

An English man asked a French man what was French for a Cuckold: Who answered
( Cocque) Why then I pray (quoth the Englishman) is this true French to say,
Monsieur ^ous estes Cocque. The Frenchman finding himself touched, answered*
Yea (sir) it is true French in the plural number, but not in the singular.

A Cuckold telling a Gentleman that he knew an Italian who made 160. pounds a
year of a Ciuit Cat which his father left him, and affirming that it were
good, if every yoonger brother in England were so well provided for: The Gent.
answered: I doubt not but your wife yields you twice as much every year.

A Cuckold seeing out at a window his wife and another in lascivious embraces:
and hearing her protest how deerly she loved him above all the men in the world:
He said aloud unto him: Believe her not (friend) believe her not: for (I assure
you) she has told me as much a thousand, and a thousand times, and yet have I
still found her false.

OF BASTARDS.
THe Archbishop of Saragosa and an other Gent. who were both base borne walked
together in a field, and meeting with a countryman, the Gent. pointed horns
at him with his two fingers, saying: How say thou (friend) are they even or
odd? He answered: No ods (sir) and but even a pair of Bastardes.

A Bastard was telling his friend that he was as much beholding to such a one
as to his own father: Why (said the other) can you possibly be beholding to any
so much as to your own father? he answered: You have reason: Yes (replied
the other) you are more beholding to your mother, that chose you such a father,
then to your father that chose you such a mother.

An old and a young Gent. being at terms of enmity, the young Gallant said:
Bethink thy self well, and thou shall find that thou art a base groom to me,
and that we are not fellows by odds: True (answered the old Gent.) for indeed
I very well remember, your father and I were fellows and bedfellowes too, not
passing nine months before you were borne. He spoke it in reference that the
world thought he had sometimes known the others mother carnally.

A young bastard throwing stones among a multitude of people: one said unto
him: Ware (boy) thou hit not thy father.

OF TABLE MATTER.
AN honest man invited a Physician to dinner, and at dinner time drunk to him
in a cup of wine: Whereunto the Physician excepted, and said: That he durst not
pledge him in wine for fear of pimples and inflammations in his face: The
other then answered: A foul ill on that face that makes the whole body fare
the worse.

An Italian used to say, that wine has these two discommodities with it: If
you put water into it, you mar it, and if you put none in, you mar your
self.

The Dutch man uses to say, that eating is not any whit necessary, other then
in as much as it procures a man to drink and talk.

A sudden silence being at a table, where sat a many at dinner, one of the
company said: Why how now (my masters?) it seems that some of us at this
board, sit with their legs a cross: A Gentlewoman thereunto excepted, and
said. Not I in sooth, for I have here somewhat between my legs: She meant the
tressell of the table, but it was not so taken.

To one that sipp'd his wine, an other said: me thinks you eat your wine* and
all to bemangle it: True (answered the other) I do it to gain the quintescence
out of it.

A friend of Don Alonso de Aguilar being at dinner with him called for a little
wine: Whereupon Don Alonso told him: In this house (sir) is neither a little to
be demanded, nor a little to be given.

A Turkie-pie had been often served in to a poor Genesis board, and at last a
seruing-man being to serve it in again, made some stay of it by the way,
resting it upon the buttry-hatch. By chance his master came by, and seeing it
there, asked him, why he did not carry it in: Marie sir, (answered the
seruingman) I thought it could by this time a day have found the way in alone.

On a Christmasse time the countrymen came in thick and threefold to a
worshipful man's house, and fell hungerlie to their victuals: And one of them
rising up with a full belly, said: Sirs, God bless you all, and the Founder:
The Gent. Steward then standing by answered: And the Confounders too.

A seruing-man by mischance shed broth on his masters board, and his master
said. Sir, I could have done so my self: he answered: No marvel (sir) for
your worship has seen me do it first.

An old Doctor complaining how that having but one only tooth left him in his
head, it was lately fallen away with eating a very ripe fig: an other
answered: But your tooth was a great deal riper.

A Physician willed an Italian soldier to forbear wine after figs: Who
answered: Tut (M. Doctor) you mistake: It is wine after figs, and a fig for
water.

A Doctor of physic wore his sleeves short, and very wide; and dining on a
time at a Noble man's board, he waxed liquorish of a Cranes leg: which for that
it was far from his reach, he thought it better manners, to take the whole Crane
out of the dish, and carue himself at leisure upon his trencher, then to
stretch out his arm so far, whereby to discover unto that honorable company
all his naked wrest: And he did so: A seruing-man then seeing th'empty dish,
took it from the board: At last the Doctor having shared out his morsel,
looked about for it, and missing it, threw the Crane under the board, saying:
Go seek it out.

Auenamar a Moore king commended water for two good properties that it has,
viz. It neither indebteth nor indrunkenneth a man.

One drunk a cup of very sma^l wine, and said: Why how now water? shall I call
thee wine?

A Gent. using to dine often with the Mayor of London, on a time brought his
friend with him, saying: My L. here I am come a bold guest of yours again, and
have brought my shadow with me. The Mayor welcomed him and his shadow: Within a
while after he came again to dinner to him, and brought two companions with
him: To whom the Mayor said: Sir, you be heartily welcome: But I pray you tell
me: Do you not think it a monstrous thing, one body to have two shadows?

Old M. Palmer of Agmerine was a pleasant Gent. and being one day at dinner
with the Duke of Sommerset, no sooner was a dainty morsel of meat carved him,
but straight the seruing-men were ready with clean trenchers to receive it
from him: At last a Lady carved him a Partridge-wing, and a seruing-man
forthwith cleane-trencher'd him, and went clean away with it: Which the
merry Gent. perceiving, said aloud unto all the honorable company: A fair
flight (sirs) mark, mark it well: on the fair flight.

At a summers banquet of fruits and sweet meats, a young Gent. placed himself
next to an old man, who had scarce ere a tooth in his head: But yet the old
man out-eat him: Whereupon the merry youth at rising, thus be jested him,
saying: Mass (father) of one that is no better shod, than I see you are, you
have run very well to day.

One came to visit a Gent. and he found him eating of cherries with a pair of
spectacles on his nose, whereat he greatly marvelled, and said: Sir, I
wonder, considering you are so good of sight, that you eat your cherries with
spectacles: He answered: The truth is, I bid my man buy me great Kentish
Cherries, and he has brought me these little ones, as you see, wherefore I eat
them thus with spectacles to make them seem great ones, and that is as good.

Grapes were set before one at the beginning of dinner and he said: It is not
good building upon a round foundation.

A Doctor of physic was telling one how wholesome it is to break ones fast all
the dog-day mornings, and one asked him when the dog-dayes begin, and how long
they continue: He answered: Marie, they begin (according to Pliny always
fifteen days before the Callend^ of August, that is, the 17. of Iulie, and
continue till the 17. of September: One that stood by, then said: In sooth
(master Doctor) I have often heard it even as you say that Dog-day breakfasts
are indeed very wholesome, but truly I always thought that those days began
eu^rmore the first of January, and ended not till the last of December.

In Spain Butter is dainty: and being served in on a time to a time to a
Noblemans board, a Gent. at the lower and took exceptions for that they had
none there: Whereunto his next commensall answered: Belike my Lords steward
thinks we have no bowls to greaze.

An Earl came late within night to a Gentleman's house, and a fat Capon was
served up to his supper, which The Earl seeing, straight tick'd the dish with
his knife to have it set near him: Whereupon the Gent. then standing by, said:
Your honor does well to take it, for it is a Trump at this time.

A poor Gent. invited a cupple of Friars to dinner to him and their cheer was
only eggs. The Gentl. would feign have excused the matter unto them: but one
of them perceiving his drift, said: Why (sir) eggs is very good fare, and many
good dishes may be made of eggs. Say you so father? (replied the Gent.) Hold ye
here then each of ye a cupple of eggs, dress them after your own manner.

Two Gent. went to break their fast in a Tavern, and a bagpiper stood piping
at the door: At last in came one, and set them down a cupple of eggs:
Whereat one of the Gent. excepted, and said: Has all this cackling been but
for these two poor eggs?

A man of worship had on the sudden great resort of guests, and their fare was
but ssender: Whereupon he called his steward unto him, and said: Why how
chances it N. that we have no better fare too day: This dinner is like an
apple, soon snatched up upon the point of a rapier.

A Gent and a Gentlewoman supping in one room at two several boords whereat
were a many strangers besides, the Gentlewoman waxing testie and foolish at
some sp^ech of his, began to misuse him vnciuillie in terms before all the
company: Whereupon the Gent. said: Some good body take away that Sallade from
the Gentlewoman: What Sallad goodman As^e? (said she) He replied: Your sallade
of nettles.

One used to say, that it is good to talk of wars, but not be in wars; to
talk of the sea, but not be at sea; to talk of hunting but rather to taste
thereof.

One woonted to say, that po^re men want meat to their stomachs, and rich men
stomachs to their meats

A rude Gentlewoman had stuffed her pottage to ^hicke with bread that somewhat
fell besides the dish: One seeing it, said: Gentlewoman you spill: No,
(answered another) well may it fall beside, but it cannot spill.

One being carved the rump of Mutton, he refused it, saying: I brook no couers
of close-stooles.

One was a telling a Gentlewoman how such a gallant of the Court eat every day
eight Capons in Blank-manger: She answered: Oh the Fox.

At a Noblemans banquet, a ship of Marchpain-stuffe was set upon the board,
wherein was all manner of fishes in the like stuff: Every one snatching thereat,
a sea-Captaine sitting far off could not reach thereunto, but one of the
company gave him a Sprat, which he receiving, held it a good space to his
ear: The Nobleman seeing it, asked him his conceit therein: He then in
reference to the little portion that came to him out of that Ma^ch-pane, thus
merrily answered: And like your Grace, my father before me (as your Honor
knows) was sometimes a sea-Captaine, and it was his mischance, and my hard hap,
that since his last undertaken voyage a sea, which was some twelve years ago, I
never since could hear what was become of him: Wherefore of every fish that
falls into my hands I still ask whether it can tell me any news of him:
And this petty Sprat (my Lord) says he was then a little one, and remembers no
such matter.

One drinking to a Gent. and saying: Sir, I drink to your sister Alice, and to
your cosen Besse, and so upward to your father, and to your mother, and then
down again to your little brother Robert, and little maistresse Frances, and
the rest: He answered: I pledge your pair of stairs.

OF VISITATION.
ONe came in a morning to speak with a Gent. who was known to have before
time forsworn himself in false witness against a neighbor of his: and the
Gent. page answered him that his master was yet a bed: within an hour after
he asked the Page again whether his master were yet stirring? Whereunto the
boy answering no, the party hereat all in a chafe departed, and said: Yea,
never may he rise up more in false witness against his neighbor.

Siento signifies in Spanish, I sit, and also I feel: A poor Genesis came to
visit a man of worship, and they presented him a ruinous stool to sit upon: He
seeing it, stood still, refusing to sit down: The man of worship asking him
why he stood, and requesting him withal to sit down: He answered: Pardon me
(sir) for No me siento, that is, I do not sit, because me siento, viz. because
I feel, He meant that he felt himself aggreeued with so homely a seat.

A Scholar that vaunted what especial interest he had in a certain fair
Gentlewoman, went he and his friend on a time to visit her: And she in
disdain of him still Thow'd him at every word, and he as often ouer-titled her
with Honor, Ladyship, and Majesty; Whereat the Gentlewoman waxing testie
cursed, asked him why he so exalted her in title above her calling* He
answered: May it please you to mount but one point higher, and then will I
fall one lower, so shall our music well accord.

One came to speak with his friend, who being at that time very busy, willed
his man to answer him that he was not within. But he by chance ouer-heard his
voice, and knew thereby that he was within: Whereupon he departed mal-content:
The next day this other came to speak with him* and he hearing that he was
come, looked out at a window* and told him that he was not at home: Not at
home? (answered the other) Why (I pray sir) who are you? Who am I? (replied he)
I hope I am one, whom you may as well credit, saying that I am not at home, as
well as I to believe your man, making me the like answer yesterday from you.

One that for his safety had taken Sanctuary, a friend of his came to visit
him, and said: Now thanks be to God, your case is just as well out of Sanctuary
as in Sanctuary: The Other answered: Else durst you not come visit me.

A Gentleman that had been long in the Indies, being returned home with a great
skar in his face, went to visit a friend of his, who knew him not of a good
while, till at last the Gentleman discoursing unto him his name, and kindred,
in the end he called him to mind, and said: Sir, you must pardon me, for (I
assure you,) your superscription being blurred, I could not well a read you.

A Gentleman being in conversation among a many foul Gentlewomen, at last in
came a very fair one: Whereat they all arose, to salute her and he said: If
this Gentlewoman had not come, we had lost the game, for want of a Courrecard.

A Gent. coming to visit a fair Gentlewoman, and finding her playing with a
tame Conie, said: God save both your Conies.

A Gentlewoman whose name was Thorney, sitting in her chamber between two
Gentlemen, whereof the one was a great drunkarde, the other as great a Letcher:
her maid came to her, and delivered her a message in her ear, and at rising
up again, said unto her: Forsooth (mistress) will it please you to be gone so
soon? No, not very soon (answered the Gentlewoman) for see you not how I am
here settled between the skin and the flesh?

Paja in Spanish signifies a mess of meat, likewise straw: A mean Gent. came
on a time to visit a man of great worship, who was but newly set down to
dinner, and therefore sequestered himself into a garden in the mean time:
Where after he had walked a good space, at last in he came again into the hall,
and asked a seruing-man whether his master had yet dined: Who answering, No,
and that the second Paja, viz. the second mess was but newly served in: all in
a chafe be flung away, saying: Nay, if he be all this while in his Paja, viz.
in his straw, (as he meant it) surely I will not stay till he have eaten his
Oats too.

The end of the third part of this book.
Wits, Fittes, and Fancies. The fourth part.
OF NATIONS AND CITIES.
AN Italian Traueiller used to say, that the Portugal seems a fool, and is a
fool; the Spaniard seems wise and is a fool; the Frenchman seems a fool,
and is wise; the Englishman wise, but cannot show it; the Italian both wise and
so seems, and that the Dutch man would be wise, but for the pot.

A Scot used to say, that Englishmen are like dogs, forasmuch as disgrace you
but any one of them, and the rest will all disgrace him more and more. So do
dogs, for if one of them be bitten and ouermatch'd with an other dog, all the
dogs in the street will straight take part with the victor dog, and all to
beteare the other: But Welshmen (he said) are like good cuntrie hogs, for let a
dog but bite or abuse any one of them, or any of them misuse one an other,
straight all the hogs in the ground will rescue and favor the distressed
hog, and all to begrunt the other hog away. No less is Welshmens true love
and kindness toward one another.

In the North of Ireland, where they eat but Oaten cake-bread, a Kearnes
mother hearing that her son was slain in fight against Englishmen, came the
morrow after into the field and finding her dead son there, after much moan
and lamentation over him, she chanced to cast her eye aside, and there by
espied a dead Englishman: Then up she arose, and much accursing our nation for
the death of her son, in the end she stripped him of his apparel, and
chanced to find a stale lofe of bread in his breeches, which was of the
provision he brought with him from the English pale: which after she had a
good while well viewed and wondered at: in the end burst forth into fresh
tears, and said: No marvel if my dear son be slain by one that voydes so
hard and huge a sturd.

A Scot was a preaching how that all men are one an others neighbor and
brother in Christ, even the Turk, the Jew, the Moore, the Caniball, the far
Indian: and then concluded: Yea and the very Englishman is our neighbor too.

A Portugal Friar was discoursing in his sermon of a great victory his
Nation had against the Spaniards that day twelve months, and said: Then both
the Armies camped near unto the river, we Christians on the one side, and the
Spaniards on the other.

A drunken Christian, and a Jewish Christian being at terms of brabble, the
Drunkard called the counterfeit, a drunken companion, and the counterfeit
called him a Jew: The next day they met again, and the Drunkard then said unto
the Jew: Sirrah, take thy Jew to thy self, and restore me my Drunkard again.

Sanabria a Spanish Captain used to say, that it was extreme cruelty in the
Muffes to make their wives their drudges in the wars, and no less vanity in
the Spaniard to make his maid his maistresse.

A Spaniard brauing an English fugitive soldier in the Low Countries, said,
that in his days he had slain as many Englishmen, as he had buttons in his
doublet: The Englishman answered: So often kiss you my tail.

One requested his supposed friend to stead him in a certain occasion, which
the other refused him, saying: To do you good in good sort, you might draw me
after you to Jerusalem with a woollen twine, but to do ill to pleasure you, you
shall pardon me: Whereunto the other answered: I, to Jerusalem I think well,
for that belike is your country.

Don Diego Garcia Paredez woonted to say, that all other nations speak with
their lips, but the Spaniard with his heart.

Gonzalo Fernandez said That Frenchmen at the first encounter are more then
men, and afterward less then women.

One saying that French paper was better cheap in England then English paper:
An other answered: No marvel, for why, they have more rags to make paper of
in France, then we have in England, by reason they have more beggars.

A Portugals wife calling a Castilian, skeruy Spaniard: Her husband said: Alas
(wife) it is mischief enough that the poor soul is a Spaniard, though he be
not skeruie too.

An Englishman brauing a Frenchman, and saying that it was not for naught that
England gives the Lions, so brave and magnanimous is our nation: The Frenchman
answered: I, but the Lion dreads the Cock: So said in reference that Frenchmen
are called in Latin Galli.

Isabel Queen of Spain hearing another City praised above Toledo, said: If it
be as great as Toledo, then is it not so strong, and if it be as strong, then
is it not so great.

A great Clearke being come to Toledo, where he noted the people very
ingenious, civil, and discreet, he said: Never till now that I am in Toledo,
did I think my self an errand fool.

It is the prouerbiall praise of Venice: Venice who never saw it, cannot
esteem it.

Isabell Queen of Spain asked one Don Alonso Carilio, what he thought of the
city of Cordua: who answered: A many villages met in Parliament.

A Spanish Jester woonted to say, that in the city of Sigouiae were eight
months of winter, and four of hell.

It is prouerbiall in our country, From Hull, Hell, and Halifax, good Lord
deliver us.

OF RELIGIONS.
ONe prayed thus: God bless and save my Father, my Mother, my Brothers, my
Sisters, my Wife, my Children, and me, and no more. An other that ouer-heard
him, answered: The Deu'll take thy Father, thy Mother, thy Brothers, thy
Sisters, thy Wife, thy Children, and thee, and no more.

A Scottish Evangelist quarrelling with an Englishman about Religion: Tut (said
he) you are all Papists yet in England, for that your Churches are still
standing every where.

An Italian Pessant hearing in a passion sermon upon a good Friday, that Jews
did crucify Christ, the Preacher much inueighing against their hard
hartednesse therein: Anon after the sermon ended, he demanded of one what
countrywoman the Virgin Marie was: to whom being answered that she was a Jew:
the Swain then remembering that she was their country woman that crucified
Christ, all in a rage he rusht upon her Image, and all to broke it: So
indiscreetly the fool hated Jews for Christ his sake.

A pure Dame caused her picture to be drawn, with a bible in her hand, and a
drop of blood falling down from heaven upon it, and written underneath thus.
By Gods blood and his word I am sure to be saved.

At what time the Inquisition was first established in Spain it was proclaimed
throughout all that Country, that all Jews and others that would not
subscribe thereunto, should within certain days void the Realm and pack
away. A company of Jews heerupon presently departed, and arrived at Marselles
a sea-Town in France: Now, one of them walking the next day upon the key, saw
another ship arrive thither, and some half dozen of his Jewish acquaintance
disembarke out of it: whom he heartily welcomed into those parts, and demanded
the cause of their coming: They (because a many Frenchmen were in place, and
loath they were to be known for Jews) answered: Hither we are come for the
death of a certain man: The other replied: And I even for the same cause.

One invited a Jew to dinner, and caused minced Porke to be served to the board
so deceiptfullie, that he thought the Jew could not suspect it: But the Jew
imagining the truth, asked notwithstanding what meat it was. They answered:
Minced birds of diverse sorts. Oh would they had wings (thensaid the Jew) to
fly away from this board.

A conuertite Jew traveling on the way with certain Spanish Gent. they arrived
at last at a brook, where because they knew not the certain depth of it,
they strained curt'sie who should go foremost: At last the Conuertite was the
hardy man that did it, and he did it safely, and then the rest followed after.
Being all safe on the other side, one of the Gent. said that he maruell'd how so
late a Christian as he, could have the heart to adventure himself to danger,
seeing such kind of men are commonly most fearful in all dangerous occasions:
Whereunto an other of them adjoined: From fire God bless him, for water (we
see) he little fears.

Two dissembling Christians, being indeed both Jews as well in their secret
belief, as in lineage, were at terms of brabble with one an other, the one
demanding a certain debt, and the other denying it: Whereupon the demandant
challenged his faithful promise made him at such a time for the repay thereof:
Which the other confessed, but adjoined withal, that that faith full promise
was but to amend his faith: With that in steps me a Spaniard, an acquaintance
of them both, and said: Being both one piece of cloth, how can any amendment be
perceived?

A Jewish Christian being at a banquet in a wood among many Ladies and Gent. a
Gammon of Bacon was served to the board, and he to avoid suspicion of Iudaisme,
tasted thereof: But when the banquet was done, he sorted himself alone into the
thickest of the wood, and behind a tree forced up all the Bacon again with a
fether out of his stomach: Which being seen by one or two of the company,
they all jested at him therefore, and called him Jew: Whereunto he answered: No
Jew (Gentlewomen) but thus: As Soon as ever the Deuilles saw, or smelt so good
a relicke as Bacon within my body, they straight flue out at my mouth in vomit.

One called a dissembling Jew, Turn-coat: Whereupon the Jew entered his actio^ of
slander against him, and having brought it to the issue, the party was
co^demn'd to confess in open court the slander, and withal to pay him a some
of money in consideration: Then the party thus in open Court retracted the
slander, saying: I confess that I have highly injured master N. in having
called him Turne-coat, for (on my conscience) I think he is still as errand a
Jew as ever he was.

A Preacher in Spain persuaded a Moore to Christianity, who seeming
conceiptlesse of what was said unto him: the Preacher said: For ought I see,
my words enter in at one ear of you, and go out at the other: The Moore
answered: They neither enter in, nor yet go out.

One in Queen Mary's days that had formerly under King Henry gotten much by
the fall of Abbayes, went about to build a Chapel: Whereupon a Gent. his
Neighbor said, that it was like, as if one having first ravished the mother,
would afterward pay for the nursing of the child.

One used to say that it is a merry world when folk account it folly to build
a Church.

One that was a Jews son, and passed for a Christian, met a Gent. an
adversary of his a horseback, he himself being also a horseback, and said
unto him: How chances it master N. you ride so weaponlesse to day? the other
answered: Marie because I mean not to kill him upon the Cross.

One hearing that a Jew had murdered his child, said: Better be a Jews hog
by that account, then his child. For Jews eat no Hogs-flesh.

A zealous virgin-Iew in Rome was held in high reverence among the Israelites
there, so very virtuous she seemed, and chaste in all her carriage: But a
Florentine found the way by night to her may den-bed, and did his deed so
thoroughly, that all her holiness would no longer conceal it, but still
swelled every day more and more: till being at last utterly detected, it was ten
to one that she was not reputed a baggage: but in lieu of such infamy, so
erroneus was the reverence the Jews had of her virginity that they persuaded
themselves she was verily with child of their Messiah: And in that error their
Rabins directed their letters and posts upon posts to all the Jewish
Synagogues throughout all Christendom and Greece, for certain Elders of every
Synagogue to come up to the nativity of that Babe; which accordingly was done:
Insomuch as during that season Rome was a world of Jews, so confluently they
repaired thither from all parts: Now mark the end: At nine months end this
Virgin Jew was brought a bed of a Florentine daughter.

OF ATTIRES.
AN elder brother was commending his yoonger brothers green cloak, and said it
became him passing well: The Other answered: But a black mourning cloak from
you, would become me better.

One wore his shoes garnished with cut and uncut fringe, and one seeing it,
said unto him: Wear a mask before your face for shame that the world
discouers your pimples.

One wore a strawe-hat in a strange place, and the people flocked about him,
all gazing at the novelty: At last a Churchman passed by, and pitying to see
a stranger so gar'd upon, asked him whether he had any acquaintance thereabout,
or no who answered: Why ask you? Marie to the end (quoth he) if you have any,
he may do well to come and defend you from these beasts, least happily they
eat up all your straw, and leave you nere a whit for your supper.

One seeing a Gentlewoman attyr'd all in white, said, that she had laid her
chastity a whiting.

One wore his cassack-sleeues close girt under his girdle, and one that saw
it, said, it was like a pinioned Goose.

A Spaniard having a Moore slave, let him go a long time in a poor ragg'd
mandilian without sleeves: one asking him why he dealt so sleeuelesly with the
poor wretch: He answered: I crop his wings for fear he fly away.

A Lady of high calling disguizing her self with a veil, and accompaned
only with her waiting Gentlewoman, went to a Goldsmiths to cheapen plate, and
standing at the shop a Gallant chanced to come by, who seeing her so, and
supposing her such a one as would easily admit conference in love and leuity*
began to common and complie with her in that kind: But she gave him a scornful
begone, saying: See here under this veil no common garment, nor am I as I
seem. The Gallant thereat all in a chafe, answered: Be what you be will, and
be so attyr'd then, or else be as you are attyr'd.

A Gent. prepared himself toward a day of tilting, and because money failed
him to furnish him passing brave against the time, he was feign to sell a very
rich Mandilian that he had: saying: Whiles others Mandilian themselves toward
Tilt, I vnmandilian me.

A Iester seeing a Gallant wear a little deminitiue bonnet upon his head, with
a band to it all to beset with gold buttons said: Foul befall the Smith, that
shod yonder Ass so close.

An vpstart Gallant was attyr'd in Taffeta all over figured with flames of
fire: which a Gent. seeing, and knowing his base parentage, said to the^ in his
company: Behold: yonder strawey Cottage goes in danger of fiering.

A fair Gentlewoman willed her servant on a day of tilting to attire himself
all in green, which he did: And coming into the Tylt-yard so attyr'd, Gonzalo
Fernandez the great Spanish Captain knew him, and guessing at his Mistress,
and at the cause of his Green, said unto him: If she know you not by your
habit, give it her in hand.

One that for the space of many years together was never seen on the
holy days other then in one cloak, a Gent. thus bejested him, saying: Nere a
holy day but I see clokes, but never saw I cloak of so many holidayes in all
my life.

A gallant came to run at the ring, all clad in haire-collour velvet, and
over it a veil of white Taffeta, girt close to him ala Mor^sco: Whereupon the
Emperor Charles asking his Iester what it was like: he answered: Like the
bowels of a beast wrapped in their call.

A Gent. came in a mask vested all in black, ouer-figured with Deaths heads,
and one that saw it said: Jesus, what a number of Fools faces have we there:
The Gent. Page standing by answered: Nay, there lackes yours to make it seem
so.

OF OFFICERS.
A Spanish Earl retained an Usher for his Lady, and bid his Steward set him
down twentie-pounde wages. The Steward for his Lords profit would not set him
down presently, according as he was encharg'd, but of a month after: In which
mean time the Earl asking the Vssher whether the Steward had yet set him
down in his book, or no: he answered, No and like your honor, he will have
me stand on my legs one month to an end.

A Gent. of her Majesty's priuie-chamber coming to a merry Recorder of
London, about some state-affaire, met him by chance in the street going to
dinner to the Lord Mayor, and proffered to deliver him his encharge. But the
dinnerly Officer was so hasty on his way, that he refused to hear him,
posting him over to an other season: The Gent. notwithstanding still urged him
to audience, without discovering unto him either who he was, or what he would:
Whereupon the Recorder then merrily turned back to his horse, and said: Horse,
tell this man that I am going to dinner to my L. Major, and that I cannot now
intend his tittle tattle, for (well I wot) he will not believe me: Whereunto
the Gent. no less pleasently answered: No horse, not so (I pray thee) but
thus: Tell the Ass thy master, that I am G. of the privy chamber, one that is
come to him about business of state, and will him to dispatch me presently, as
he will answer the contrary.

A Constable had direction to disarme all that passed through his quarter after
ten a clock at night: and a merry fellow chancing to pass that way, said
unto him; Are you the Gallant that must disarme all passengers this way too
night? Go ye then to such a Cooks house, and take from him a Corslet of
mine, which lies there in pawn for pies.

A Commendador of Spain being discharged of his office, vowed, never to make
his will until it had pleased the King to re-install him thereinto: which the
king shortly after daign'd to do: And then the first words of his will were
these: All that ever I have, the Kings Majesty gave it me.

A Canallio signifies in Spanish a horseback, and acaballio to end or
dispatch any thing: A Mayor of a town riding posse through the street to
pacify a tumult, a Gent. of his acquaintance met him, and asked him whether he
went so a Cauallio, that is, so mounted: The Mayor answered, acaballio.

Two Fellons were adjudg'd to die, and yet at last through much entreatie it
pleased the Judge in favor of life to ingalley them for seven years: The
hangman seeing that, straight stepped in and besought the Judge to rid him of his
office, and appoint some other in his place: Being asked wherefore: he
answered: Because you bar me of my right.

One chanced upon the night watch, and the Constable demanded his weapon, who
straight discovered his cloak, and showed him a bottle of wine, and said: Lo
here all my weapon: The Constable took his said weapon from him, and he and
his mates drunk up all the wine, and then delivered him the empty bottle,
saying: Hold here (friend) the sheath again.

A Constable raising up his parish by night, to assist justice, made his
proclamation thus: All you that do not forthwith rise, and come to assist the
Kings peace and Justice, shall forfeit unto the Exchecker a 100. stripes.

Thieves were a rifling a Gent. house by night, and the watch came in with
torches to attache them: Now, one of them to save himself by dark, struck out
one of their torches, and ran away: But being afterward apprehended, the
Constable said unto him: Belike (friend) you are next heir to the halter, that
you desired so much the torches death.

A Courtiers man came to Queen Isabels Harbinger, and told him that the
chamber which he assigned his master, was much at a fault: with that the
Harbinger pointing him to a gibbet that stood before the Court gate, answered:
If your masters chamber be at a fault, see yonder where stands a gibbet.

One being condemned to be shot to death for a rape: the maid in favor of his
life, was content to beg him for her husband: Which being condiscended unto by
the Judge, according to the law of Spain in that behalf: in steps me the
hangman all in a chafe, and said unto the Judge: How (I pray you sir) can that
be? seeing the stake is already in the ground, the rope, the arrrowes, the
Archers all in a readiness, and here I am come for him.

In a provincial visitation in the territory of Toledo, inquiry was made for
such kind of women as did cure folk with charms, and superstitions: And among
others a decrepit Beldam was brought before the Visitor, who asking her what
cures she did: she answered: Forsooth (master) I wash to the Merchants
masterships of Toledo.

A Soldier coming about a suit to a merry Recorder of London, the Recorder
seeing him out at the window, ran hastily into an inner room, and there put
on a Corslet and a headpeece, and then with a Lance in his hand came down unto
him, and said: How now Sir, are you the man that has somewhat to say to me?
Begin now when you dare, for behold (I trow) I am sufficiently provided for you.

A Mayor of London died the very same day that he was elected, vvhereupon one
thus merrily said: A vigilant Mayor he was, that never ^lept all the time of
his Maioralty.

A merry Recorder of London, being to discide a brable between two Citizens,
the one called Dunscombe, the other Cox* and understanding what a paltrie
matter it was, he thus jestinglie said unto them: Sirs, I very well conceive
your case, and thus I sentence it: Namely, you Dunscombe, deliuerye up to Cox
al your comb, reserving only Duns to your self: so be you still a Duns, and
he a Coxcombe.

A Gent. riding through a countrey-parish, and being destitute of money, sold
his horse to the Constable there, who seeing that he had an easy peniwoorth,
straight arrested the Gent. upon suspicion of fellonie: Namely, that he had
stolen the said horse.

An Abbot had bespoken of a Goldsmiths a dozen of rich Candlestickes, and paid
most of the money aforehand. Shortly after the Goldsmiths died, and the Abbot
came to demand the Candlesticks of his widow, which he knew were by that time
all finished: Whereunto she making denial, and refusing to take notice of any
such matter, th'Abbot was feign to get an O^ficer to enter the house, and to
seize upon them to his use: The Officer came, and searched, and the widow being
loath to leave the Candlestickes, took him aside, and solicited his love, and
withal offered him them in marriage with her, showing him besides a large
inuentory of what goods and moouables the foresaid Goldsmiths her husband had
left her, by his last will and Testament. Which the honest Officer viewing and
perusing and utterly misliking and detesting such her treachery, delivered it
her again, saying: Hold here (huswife) your Inventory, and see you deliver me
the Candlesticks presently: So was she foiled in her own policy, for having
confessed the having of them, she was fain to yield them up without any more a do.

A me^rie Recorder of London riding upon his Mule would needs take the wall of
all men, and riding in an evening all too ambitiouslie under the pentisses for
that prerogative, down he fell and his Mule both into an Ale-celler, and sore
bruised him: Insomuch as ever after he used to have a man go between him and
the wall as he rid, for fear of any more the like mischances.

The said Recorder passing along the street, and hearing a Soldier in an
Alehouse calling for a Kingston-pot of beer, straight stepped in unto him, and
arrested him of high treason, saying: Sir^ha, often have I heard, and tasted of
a pennie-pot of beer, and found good of the price, but of a Kingston-pot of
Beer I never heard: Sure, it is some counterfeit coin, and I must know how
thou camm'st by it.

The said Recorder mistaking the name of one Pepper, called him Piper:
Whereunto the party excepting, and saying: Sir, you mistake, my name is
Pepper, not Piper: he answered: Why, what difference is there (I pray thee)
between Piper in Latin, and Pepper in English; is it not all one? No sir
(replied the other) there is even as much difference between them, as is
between a Pipe and a Recorder.

OF GVEST AND ENTERtainment.
A Spanish Gent. being somewhat homely entertained in an Abbay, where he was
lodged in an obscure corner of a low dampy room, the night being very cold,
and he as coldly covered, chanced to fall into a sudden flixe, wherewith he all
to berayed the bed: Whereat being much ashamed, all early in the morning up he
arose, and away he would: and as he was ready to take horse, he said unto the
hors-keeper: I pray thee (fellow) tell my L. thy master, that in as much as he
did not afford me a bed in a chamber, I have left him a chamber in a bed:
Camera signifying in spanish both a chamber and a stool.

In regard of the many Chimneyes that are now adays built in houses, and the
slender hospitality that is kept, a pleasant companion said, that chimneyes
are built so cunningly now a days, that seldom or never they are seen to
fume.

Fernando King of Spain came in progress to the castle of Montillia, which
was newly built by one Don Alonso de Aguilar an Esquire, and finding the
stairs somewhat too straight for so stately a building: the Gent. said: And
like your Majesty I never thought so great a Guest should ever have mounted up
upon them.

A Householder having unruly Guestes allotted him, said unto the Harbinger:
Believe me (sir) I am greatly beholding to you for my guests: he asked him why:
Mary because (quoth he) they are so bad, as I shall rest most glad at their
departure.

One said to his Host: This fruit that you serve first in to this board, in my
country uses to be served in last: The Host answered: yea, and here too for
this once. For it was all his fare at that time.

One invited his friend to dinner, and having made him but slender cheer,
excused the matter saying: Insooth (sir) we have neither Fesant, nor Partridge,
nor Lark, nor any other good bird for you at this time, other then heartily
welcome: The Other answered: You please the birds well in that.

A churl enuited a Gent. to dinner, and having made him but homely cheer,
said, that he was heartily welcome, as a friend not as a stranger: The
Gentleman answered: Believe me I never thought we had been so great good
friends.

One said to his guest: Me thinks you drink very little wine, if all the
world drunk no more then you, wine would be good cheap: Not so (answered the
other) rather would it be very dear: For I assure you, I drink as much as I
can.

In Spain Bishops marry not: A Spanish Gent. had half a fool to his son,
and on a time he taught him how to entertain Gueste with talk, as to ask
them, how does your wife and your children, your brother and your sister, and
so forth. The next day a Bishop came to this Gentleman's house, and this young
Mai^ter his son thus saluted him: I pray you (my Lord) how does your wife and
your children, your sons and your daughters, your brothers and your sisters?
etc.

A Spaniard traveling on the way, alighted at a poor Inn, and they asked him
his name: he answered: Don Pedro Gonzales Gayetan de Gueuara: Whereunto they
replied: Sir, we have not meat enough for so many.

A Conie-catcher hyr'd a chamber, and said to his hostess, I assure you
(hostess) I never yet came in house in all my life, where at parting I was not
greatly lamented: And he said true, For he still departed without penie-paying.

One coming to lodge in a poor Alehouse, asked the hostess for a good bed:
With that she brought him into an inner room, and showed him the bare earth,
saying: Lo ye here seven foot length at least: Here rest ye: Content (quoth
he) but where (I pray you) is the pillow? She answered: Faith you are too
dainty.

An ill-fauor'd man invited a stranger to dinner, and at last in came his wife,
who had also as bad a face as he: The stranger seeing her, said unto him: I
pray ye (sir) is this your wife? he answered: yea: Then the stranger replied:
In sooth (sir) I would have thought she had been your sister.

Queen Isabels Harbinger buillited a Courtier in a Painters house, who when he
came to him, and showed him the bill, and that he had read it, and perceived
thereby that he was one of the Queens Gentlemen, he straight tore it, and said:
As sure as you are the Queens Gentleman, so sure am I the Duke of Nazareths
man: Go seek ye lodging else where, for here ye lodge not.

It was a Gent. chance to be benighted in a blind parish, where he was feign to
lie in as blind an Alehouse: who when he went to bed, they brought him a
little ladder to get up unto it, by reason it was very high: Which he seeing,
said: Is this (I pray) the Fleas ladder?

In Mourtia a town in Spain, there is an hospital of Bedlams and fools,
called S. Bennets hospital: whereupon the madmen and fools of that place are
also called San Benitos: A citizen of that town upon S. Bennets day, invited a
many of his friends to dinner, and after dinner was done, and the cloth taken
up, one of the company said unto him: We thank you for all this good cheer
to day, and many a San Benito I pray God may you see in your house: He meant
many a S. Bennets day.

OF MERCHANTS AND Misers.
TWo thieves came by night into a Marchantes house of Toledo, and stole away a
deske and a fetherbed: The merchant hearing a noise, arose and went down; and
finding they were but new gone, followed the^, to see what would become of his
goods. One of the thieves looking back espied him, and said: Why how now, do
you dog us? No (answered the Merchant) but only to see whether you remove me.

One asked a Merchant how he could sleep soundly a nights owing so much as he
did: he answered: Why man, my Creditors do sleep.

A Merchant asked a wise man, how he might preserve his wealth: who answered:
Commit it not to Fortune.

Hernando de Pulgar used to say, that who so desires to be soon rich, must have
two Muches, and two Littles: Much Avarice, and Much Diligence: Little Shame,
and Little Conscience.

An Alderman lying on his deathbed, certain his prentises came to see him,
and besought him to leave them some good advise, as a monument both of his
great wisdom and goodwill toward them: Then he reared himself up upon his
pillow, and said: Taste your pottage before you crumb in your bread: and so died.

A Merchant had agreed with a Wood-monger for all his fagots at pence a piece
one with another: The Woodmonger after having thus bargained, told him, that
unless he would give him somewhat over and above, he would not unload them, Go
too then (said the merchant) I am content thou shall etc. With that the
Wood-monger unloaded, and when he had done, did also help to carry them
down into the Celler, in hope of etc. Then the Merchant paid him for his
faggots: and he demanding his etc. the Merchant adswered: My meaning was that
thou should help to carry the f^ggots down into the Celler over and above
thy bargain: So art thou paid thy etc.

A Merchant being asked with what master he meant to place his son to
learn Arethmaticke, he answered: With the Hangman, ^or that he of all others
is the brauest Accomptant, viz. of men's deaths.

One said to his acquaintance: I greatly marueill that you are no richer,
considering that on my certain knowledge, you may dispend eight Testers a day,
and you spend not passing two of them: The Other answered: Two I pay, two I
lend, two I spend, and two I loose. The two I pay, are those I allow my poor
father and mother toward their maintenance: the two I lend, are those I allow
for my sons education in the Vniuer^itie: which I hope he will one day repay
me again (if I so long live) as now I do unto my father. The two I spend, are
upon my self, my wife, and family. The two I loose, are those my wife spends
every day in toys and bables upon her self, which I never look for more.

One that ought a merchant a great sum of money, and his day of payment being
near at hand, shifted away all his goods, and fled the Country. The wise
merchant hearing thereof, was heartily glad, and came to his wife and told her,
that in as much as his said debtor was now run away, and had forfeyted his
band, he would (before God) take the benefit of the double.

A merchant that ought much, and was not able to correspond, fled the Country,
and for haste left much of his goods undisposed of: Which his creditors seazing
upon, and selling at the street door to the most giuers: one came and bought a
fetherbed, and said: It is good sleeping in his bed, that ought so much money.

One passing by a miserly merchants new fair house, said to his companion:
Yonder fair house is built for wealth, not for Worship.

A Gentleman lent a merchant his horse, who at his return vaunted unto him
what a gallant horse it was, and how by the way as he rid, he out-gallop'd all
the horses he ouertooke, and had won with him half a dozen wagers, so swift
he paced it, and so bravely he had put him to it. The Gent. answered. For such
honor let my horse thank you.

A miserly Merchant asking one whom he greatly disdayned, how he came by so
rich a widow, he answered: Even as a man may come by yours after you are dead.

A officious Welshman seeing a cripple Merchants widow snayling over London
bridge, took pity on her trembling gate, and friendly offered her his helping
hand all along: And as they footed it together, the old woman asked him by the
way what countryman he was: he answered: A Welshman: whereupon she straight
desired him to shi^t on the other side of her: which he did, and so led her
safe to her house at the bridge-foot At parting she heartily thanked him for
such his good nature, and prayed God to bless him: and he asked her what was
the reason that upon his saying that he was a Welshma^, she straight desired
him to shift on the other side of her: she answered: Oh (son,) my purse hung
on that side.

An old Carmougion had worn a hat full fifteen years to an end, and seeing it
at last wax red and rotten, he said: See, see the falsehood of these
Habberdashers, how slight they make their wares.

A Nobleman sent a Gent. of his in great diligence, about some especial
affairs, and such was his diligence, that he killed his Lords horse by the
way. Being returned home, it pleased the Nobleman to make him pay fifty crowns
for the horse, saying that he was content to reward him so well as to forgive
him the rest: The Gentleman thought himself hardly dealt withal, and
answered: Sir, this is neither reward nor Almose.

Certain Serving men complained to their niggardlie master how that his
Steward allowed them but only Sallades and Cheese to their Suppers a nights:
Whereupon the Gentleman called the Steward before him, and in a great chafe
said unto him: Is it true (N.) that you give my men sallades and Cheese to
their suppers? I charge you do no more so, but give them their Sallades one
night, and their Cheese another, and so in order.

A niggardlie Gentleman found fault with a dish of unsavory Oliffes that was
set before him, and called it Cobblerie stuff: A Iester then to tax his
Miserlinesse, said: Belike (sir) they are fallen to that trade, because they
will not be beholding to you.

A Miser said unto his man: Sirrah, you had best be gone least I give you that
you would not willingly have. The seruing-man answered: Sir, I believe you
not, for you never give.

A rich Churl was so miserlie minded, that he thought all mischiefs that
befell any of his neighbors, was in respect that they wished him ill, or went
about to do him some despite It chanced that his man riding in an evening to
water his horse, both he and the horse drowned: Whereupon the miser said: See,
see, out of doubt the Varlet has done this to spite me.

One was commending a miserly Gent. and said that he was passing discreet, and
as orderly in all his actions as a clock: An other answered: The Clock that
gives not is naught worth.

One asked a rich Usurer how many sons he had, who answered eighteen:
Eighteen (replied the other) Believe me, had you as many more, the country has
curses enough for ye all.

A rich Miser lying on his deathbed, a preacher came to him, and willed him to
think on God: he answered: Oh, so would I, but it is all too late, I must now
despair and die: Oh, say not so (replied the good man) for Gods mercy is above
al his works and upon that maine mercy of his rely all your hope, for he
(dear Savior) di'd for all: With that in stepped a poor man to the Misers bed
side, and said: Sir, for the passion of God remember the five pounds you owe
me, for I am a poor man, and without it am utterly undone: The Miser heerat
reared himself up upon his pillow, and staring a good while on the poor man's
face, at last he answered: Sir, I owe thee no five pounds, for I have cast
all on Christ's back, as this good father has willed me.

One seeing a rich Churl lighting himself in the dark with a rush-candle,
said: Alas (poor man) will your purse affoorde you no better light? he
answered: This lights me to reckon my riches at the years end.

A liberal man gave three shillings for a couple of Partridges, and a churl
(his companion) rebuked him for such excess: whereunto he answered: Tell me
insooth, might you have these two Partridges for three pence, would you not
give it? Yes marie (answered the Churl) that were a very reasonable
penniewoorth: The other replied: As little set I by three shillinges as you by
three pence.

Two Gent. dwelling together in one house, were at deadly food with one
another: And the one of them being a most niggish and miserable man, for the
more safety of his person against all poison that the other might prepare
against him, entertained a trusty fellow into his service, and gave him due
instructions how to serve him at board, and especially to be very wary what
drink he gave him, and generally of all poison, and in conclusion, offered
him but 18. pence wages a month. The seruing-man seeing such his misery,
said: For ought I can see, your worship is rather in danger of famine then of
poison.

A miserable churl bestowed an old greasy hat upon an old servant of his, and
said: Hold here (N) this hat over and above thy wages, and see thou deserve it:
The seruing-man answered With such gifts your Worship shall be sure to be no
looser.

An ouer-pin'd miser complained that he had lost almost all the teeth in his
head with the reume: A stander by answered: Rather for want of use.

A worshipful Gent. used to promise much and perform little: Whereupon a
Gentlewoman merrily said unto him: In sooth (master N.) you were even the
best Gent. in the world, if your purse stringes hung at your mouth.

An extreme miser had gotten together a huge heap of treasure, wherewith he
purchased at one time 1600. pounds land a year: This wretch being at Church
was ouer-heard to pray; Lord, I thank thee that thou have given me sufficient,
whereby I need not to serve any man, and thy grace to retain none to serve me.

A Miser had great store of poultry about his house, and seldom or never killed
any of them, but let them live their utmost date, and so die. Being asked why
he did so: he answered: The surest penny in my purse is that I do not spend.

A boisterous Miser dwelt near a Iayle: and passing on a time under it, the
prisoner at the grate said unto him: Good your Worships charity among a many
poor prisoners here for Gods sake: he answered: Neither meat, nor money can
I spare thee. The beggar replied: Yes (sir) well we wot your worship keeps a
bountiful house, for never look we out at our Turret window, but we see great
smoke in your kitchen chimney: That is belike (answered the Miser) when my
folk make me sops: Sops (replied the prisoner) They are fat sops that make
such fat chops.

One that was reputed a very rich miser, and yet died but a poor man, and
greatly indebted, another said ofhim: Sure, I had not thought be had been so
honest a man*

OF ARTIZANS AND Prentises.
A Gent. looking out at his window, espied his neighbors wife in privy
familiarity with a Mason, who wrought in that house: Whereupon taking occasion
to walk abroad, and passing along by that door, he knocked thereat, and
straight forth stepped the Mason, and asked him what his Worship would. Then the
Gent. asked him what he made there: he answered, An Oven: An Oven? (^eply'd
the Gent.) Nay, it is horns, and that is no Masons work.

A poor countryman was desirous to make his son a Butcher, and came to a
Gentleman a neighbor of his, to crave his advise where to place him with some
cunning one: Who answered, with a Physician, for that they of all others (he
said) were the brauest Butchers.

A Ioyner was a making a slight Cubberd, and one that beheld it, said: it
seems (my good friend) you make this Cubberd for the father, and not for the
son.

A Gentleman willed an Arras-maker to work him a piece of Tapistrie, figured
with a fair Castle, and within the Castle a Dog barking, and at the
Castle-gate a man all in complete armor, brandishing in his hand a naked
sword: The workman wrought it, and brought it home: Which the Gent. viewing,
and missing the Dog, angerlie excepted thereunto: The workman then merrily
answered: Belike (Sir) it is now dinner time within the Castle, and the skeruie
Curre is a gnawing a bone somewhere in a corner.

One asked a Painter how it chanced he drew so fair pictures and begat so
foul children: He answered: I paint by day, and beget by night.

A Tyler and his son were a tyling of a house, and the father did his work
so loosely, that his son found fault therewith: Whereunto he answered: Fool,
do it well to day, and beg to morrow.

One asked a Cheesmonger what was the reason that butter and Cheese were so
dear: he answered: Because wood and coals are dear: meaning that because
Butter and cheese might be eaten without charge of fire, and therefore was much
bought up, his trade thought good to rear the prices of the^ to a higher rate.

A Passenger asking a water-man why he wrought that day being Trinity-sunday:
he answered: I owe here and there a many dribbling debtes, and my friends
are unkind and will not do for me, and therefore I am euenfain to borrow of
the Lord, God help me.

One gave over his Alehouse in London, and went to set up in Saint Albons: By
chance one of his London-mates passing by his door, and seeing him stand
there: asked him what he meant to give over his Alehouse at London and come
thither: he answered: To recollect myself.

A poor man traveling on the way, met with a poor Tailor, who offered him his
sheeres to sell: He (because it was an easy peniworth) gave him all the money
he had for the^, thinking that the next place he came at, he might happily sell
them for more. So traueilling on his way, at last he came to an Alehouse,
where by chance was then a Taylers wife a tippling among her Gossips, who
seeing his sheeres, straight thought he was a Tailor, and had him home to her
house to dinner. And after dinner, brought him forth a piece of cloth to cut
out in garments. He all this while was content, took the chalk in his hand,
and began to make and unmake, and countermake a many lines and dashes upon the
cloth, and so continued a good space: till at last she marueilling thereat,
asked him what he did: he answered: I measure out how many Sizzers these
sheeres will make.

One asked a plain fellow whether he could tyle or no: he answered: Yea, in
good hour be it spoken, I have tyl'd in London.

A disconte^ted Tailor said to a niggardly Gent. who had abridg'd him a third
part of his bill: You a Gentil? Faith (sir) no, a Jew you are.

An Artizan fed his Prentise only with Livers and Lights: And being on a day
to go do a little work out of town: he bid his Prentise come after, and
meet him at such a place: Mean time he went before, and being come to the
place appointed, there he staid for his Prentise, whom at last he might see
coming aloose off with a load on his shoulders, and being come near him, he
marueill'd thereat, and asked him why he brought that great log with him: the
Prentise answered: So many lights have I eaten, that I thought the open
country-ayre would have carried me quite away, and therefore did I take this
load upon me.

A Scauinger loading a dung-cart, by chance a Kyte flew over him, and a Tailor
in the next shop seeing it, said: Oh, see there (sirrah) your fellow Scauinger:
No, (answered the Scauinger) Prick-louse, it is a Bussard like you.

A Gentlewoman fearing to be drowned, said: Now, Jesus receive our souls: Soft
maistresse (answered the water-man) I trow we are not yet come to that pass.

A Butcher running after a sheep in the street, and crying to the people: Stop
the sheep, stop the sheep: An other ran after him, and cried: Stop the thief,
stop the thief.

A merry old Artizan seeing a milk-woman pass by his shop, and crying (fresh
Cheese and Cream,) called her to him, and tasting to her cream-pot, as though
he meant to buy, drunk it clean off, and so delivered her the pot again,
saying: Get ye gone (ye baggage,) come ye hither to cosen me with your sour
milk.

Within a while after an Aqua vitae-man past by: and he calling him into his
shop, took his Aqua vitae bottle out of his hand to taste thereof, as though
he meant to buy: and drank of it at least a six-pennie draught, and so
deliur'd him his bottle again, saying: I marie, this warmes my cold cream
well, and cheares me at the very heart.

One asking a Wood-monger whether such a widdowe were not in his debt: he
answered: No truly, she has always paid me very virtuously.

A London-Printer sent his Prentise for a mess of Mustard, who asking him
where he should fetch it, he surly answered: In France: Very good sir (quoth
the Prentise) And with that he took a Mustard-pot in his hand, and forth he
went to P^llinsgate where finding a ship bound for France, he embarked therein,
and to France he went: where he remained the space of almost a year: At last
returned home again, he came that very same day twelue-moneth to his master,
and delivered him the foresaid pot-full of Mustard, saying: Hold here (Master)
your mess of French Mustard.

The said Prentise entering by and by after into his masters Printing House,
and finding a Dutchman there working at the Press, straight stepped unto him,
and snatching the balls out of his hands, gave him a good cuffe on the ear,
and said: Why how now (Butter-boxe?) Cannot a man so soon turn his back to
fetch his master a mess of Mustard, but you to step straight into his place?

The end of the fourth part of this book.
Wits, Fittes, and Fancies. The Fifth part.
OF IESTERS.
ONe asked the Marquis of Villena his Iester, what virtue he thought was in a
Turkey stone: he answered: Marie if you should chance to fall from the top of a
high tower, you to break your neck, and the stone to have no hurt.

The Marquis of Villena willed his Chamberlain to give his Fool Perico de
Ayala one of his cloth of gold jerkins, and the Chamberlain delivered him
only the sleeves and the skirts of it: The Vice seeing himself so deluded,
went straight to the Father of the Confraternitie of the Court, and told him
that one was deceased that night out of the Marquis of Villena his rooms, and
willed him to come fetch away the Coorse forthwith to burial. The Priest
believed him, and came thither with a many people attending him, not knowing
but that he went in very deed for a dead body: Passing along (the Fool
foremost, tinckling the bell in his hand as the manner is,) the Marquis hearing
the bell, looked out at the window, and asked wherefore they came thither: The
Vice answered: We come (my Lord) for the body of the coat you gave me, which
I verily suppose is dead, because I have here some principal members of it,
without which out of doubt it cannot live.

The Emperor Charles being private on a time in his privy Chamber, accompaned
only with his Iester, one Romero de Figueroa a poor Gent. (whose small living
lay upon the edge of Portugal) came and desired to speak with his Majesty:
The Iester told the Emperor thereof: who answering: Bid him choose some other
time, for that I am now disposed to be private a while: No, I beseech you
Caesar (replied the Iester) let us have him in, for out of doubt, he will else
for very anger put up all his lands in a basket and fly to Portugal.

Alonso King of Spain progressing along the country, passed by a great hill in
the midst of a plain, which seemed to have bin cast up by the hands of men,
and asking the cause of it, answer was made, that in the time of Almanzar a
Moore King, Cordua was then chief town of all that country, and he enjoined
the inhabitants therabout, in token of their true allegiance to him, every
householder once a year to bring to that place a basket-full of earth, which
being performed the space of many years together, raised it to that hugenes^e
as did appear: Then the King asked his Iester how many baskets-full of earth
he thought it contained: he answered: Making one basket capable of the one
half, there are just two baskets-ful.

The Emperor Charles being present at a Bull-bay^ing with darts, a couple of
Gallantes bravely mounted showed themselves most forward in the game, which the
Emperor noting, asked his Iester what he thought of them: who answered, They
shall even perish both together, as did S. Philip and S. James. And indeed it
fell out so, that the Bull overthrew them both from their horses, and left them
there for dead.

A covetous Earl came to salute the Emperor Charles, and his Iester seeing
him, still pointed to him, and sai^ to the Emperor, Este es conde, Este es
Conde. viz. this is the Earl, this is the Earl: Esconde signifying also in
Spanish to hide or to hoord up.

The foresaid Iester was stabbed to death by a Courtier for his over insolent
mis-demeanour toward him: And as he was a carrying home to his lodging,
accompaned with a great multitude of people: at last his wife espied him out at
the window, and said: Alas my deer husband! what is it he? Oh what a piteous
sight do I see: The Iester ouer-hearing her, answered: Nay, nay, (wife) no
great matter (wife) only they have slain your husband.

The said Iester being at the point of death, another Iester came to see him,
and said: Ah my dear Francisco: and will thou needs be gone? Then (sweet
Francisco) when thou come to thy kingdom (I pray thee) pray for me. That
will I (answered Francisco) but to the end I may the better remember thee, hold
here, tie a thread about my finger.

The wagges of the Court had curtayl'd a Iesters nagge: and he in revenge
thereof cut off the upper lips of a maine Courtiers S^eeds in the base Court:
who coming down from the Presence every one to take his horse, and laughing
to see the Iesters nag at the court-gate so disfigured: Laugh on, laugh on
sirres, (said the Iester) I dare warrant ye, you shall see your horses laugh
too anon, and out-laugh ye all.

A little Nobleman wore a broad brim'd hat in the Court, and a Iester seeing
it, said: Give my Lord but such another hat below, and you may serve him up to
the Emperors board as between two dishes.

A Iester seeing a poor Gent. at dinner time now and then convey a Modicum of
every dish into the cape of his cloak, said unto the company: Sirs, I am now
determined to make my last will and Testament before you all: And first, I
bequeath my soul to God, and my body to be buried in the cape of yonder
Gentleman's cloak: and with that stepping to him, snatched his cloak from him,
and all to shook it before the company, Then out dropped here a bird, and
there a bird, and choice of much good cheer, he still shaking it and saying; I
mean this cloak (sirs) this cloak I mean.

A Iester used to say, that as soon as ever he perceived a fray toward, he
straight became a Launce-man: Being asked how so: he answered: Marie I lanch
forthwith into the next house.

A Iester meeting the Duke of Infantasgo between two fantastical gallants,
cried out aloud unto him: My Lord, my Lord you go in danger: The Duke asking
him: whereof: he answered of drowning, were it not for those two bladders on
either arm of you.

The Cardinal Siliceo being on a time merrily disposed, sent for one Rauago a
pleasant fellow to disport him withal: Who after he had pleasantly jested
before him a good while, at last fell to begging, and besought a good thing:
which the Cardinal granted him: Then he besought his Grace to put him in good
security for the performance of his said grant: With that the Cardinal naming a
certain singingman of that church, the Iester excepted unto him, and said: Nay,
nay (my Lord) I Will no such sureties as wear no buttons upon their doublets, for
fear the air carry them away.

A Iester seeing an old Gent. in the street homely attired, and wearing an old
fashioned Tablet hanging down his breast before, said: It is a good letter
though enterlined.

A Iester being asked what time he would gladliest choose to die in: he
answered: When John a Nokes dies: And why so? (said th'o^her) Marie because
(quoth he) he is so errand an Usuring Cuckold-maker, that whensoere he dies,
I am sure the deuilles will be all so busy about his soul, that mine may sneak
along by them and nere be seen.

A Iester lying a dying, sent for a shoo-maker, and willed him to make him a
pair of shoes for his soul, the soales all of Bell-mettle: The Shoo-maker
asking him why so: he answered: Marie, to the end my friends may know by my loud
trampling in heaven (after I am dead) that there I am.

OF SERVING-MEN AND PAGES.
THe Duke of Infantasgo sent his Page with a Peacocke between two curious
Venice-dishes to the Earl of Saldania: and it chanced that as the Page
discovered the upper dish* to show the Earl the present, down it fell and
broke all to pieces: The Earl received the Peacocke, and returned one of his
Gent. with the Page, to excuse him to the Duke: who hearing of the mischance,
all in anger asked the Page how he brake it: with that he having the other dish
in his hand, let it fall to the ground and broke it, and then said: Even thus
and like your Grace I broke it.

A plain Steward gave in amongst other his accomptes to his Master: Item, ^or
scouring the Privy, and trimming your Worships beard ij. shillings vj. pence.

Such an other Accomptant gave up in his accounts to his master amongst other
things: Item, for a peniworth of lace ij. pence.

A Gent. Cook forsook him, and went to serve another master, whom the Gent.
meeting certain months after attired all in green, said unto him: Me thinks
(N.) you look very green now a days: True sir (answered the Cook) for I am
sowed in a good ground.

A Nobleman of Spain, whose living was good, but not excessive, had a vain in
placing and displacing his servants, especially his Bayliffes, and
Accomptants: Whereupon his mother asking one of his men on a time what place he
had in his masters service, or what accounts he yielded up at the years end:
he answered: Acts and Monuments.

A Seruing-man was discoursing to his master how bountiful Don Diego Desa,
Bishop of Civil, was unto his Servants: who answered: He does well, for that
all that he has, he has it but during his life. The Seruing-man replied: Now
I pray you (sir) for how many lives enjoy you your goods?

One Gent. was a telling to an other, that his Page was run away from him,
notwithstanding he had always used him well, both with good clothes to his
back, and spending money in his purse: Whereunto the other answered: And I for
my part have a poor knave, whom I still keep bare and pennilesse, and yet he
loves me well, and will never forsake me: How can he forsake you, (replied
the other) having no wings wherewith to fly away?

Certain Gentlewomen came a gossipping to a kinswoman of theirs that was
lately brought a bed a mile out of Toledo: The Gentlewomans husband being
desirous to make them a brave banquet, called his man to him, and bid him
saddle a horse quickly and ride to Toledo for such and such kinds of sweet
meats, and hie him home again presently. The fellow went his way, and coming
into the stable to saddle a horse, he could not find the bridle: So whiles he
was a seeking for it, his master thought it long till he were returned: and
said to them that were with him. Now by this time my man is on horseback, and
away he flings: And anon after: Now is he half way (quoth he) Lord how the
Knave gallopeth: And within a while after he added; Now is he entered into
Toledo, and now he buies the sweet meats, and now he is half way home, and
at last saying, And now he alighteth at the stable-doore, and now hear where
he commes up* the stairs, and now see (sirres) where he enters in: Even as he
said so, in came the Seruing-man indeed, and said: Sir I cannot find the bridle.

A Gent. advised a poor man that was desirous of service, in any case to make
choice of so discreet a master, who happily, though he be not able to pay him
his wages in due season, or otherwise well reward his good desert, yet that at
leastwise will acknowledge his good service to deserve consideration.

Velvet in Spanish is called Tertie-pelo, as much to say in English as three
Piles: A Spanish Courtier promised one of his men his suit of Crymson
tertio-pelo: viz. of crimson Velvet, but wore it himself afterward till it
became all pill'd and bare, and withal ought his man three quarters wages: It
chanced on a day that going to the Court, he missed this seruingman, and sent
an other of his men to seek him out, and to bid him meet him in such a place:
Whereunto the fellow thus answered the Messenger: Tell my master, if he mean I
should come wait upon him, that he send me my Tertio: viz. my three quarters
wages, For as for the Pelo: viz. the Piles, that is already all too pill'd.

The Duke of Infantasgo sent a merry man o^ his about important business, and
by reason of much rain that fell that night, a brook which he was to pass,
was so swollen that he could go no further. Whereupon he turned back again
without dispatching his Lords affair: The Duke hereat was all in a chafe, and
sore beknau'd him: Whereunto he answered: It seems your Grace sent me rather to
dispatch my self then your business.

A Gent. having jerk'd his Page for a fault, bid him in the end pluck up his
clothes and make him ready: Whereunto the Page answered: Sir, they are
th'Executioners fee.

A Footman accompting to his master how he had spent his money; amongst other
things put in: Item, a Pie for my self iiij. pence, and for litter and
prouander for your horses xij. pence.

A many Pages prattling together in the Court, and every one of them wishing
his wish: I wish (said one of them) that I were a Mellown, that every man
might smelto my tail how good I am.

An old Earl being sent for to the Court to answer some dangerous matter that
was to be laid to his charge, walked up and down in his gallerie all in a
dump, and thus mumbled to himself: Good old Earl be gone, for the Emperor
(thou see) has sent for thee, and thou must be at the Court within ten
days, or be accounted a Traitor: go get thee gone then, good old Earl: A
Page ouer-hearing him, thus remumbled unto him: So shall you nevertheless,
good old Earl.

A Gent. said unto his man: When I leave of this suit, I give it thee. The next
morning the Gent. arising, missed that Suit, and (behold) in comes his man with
it upon his back: which he seeing, sore beknau'd him, and would have beat him.
Then the Seruing-man said: Why (sir) your Worship left it off yesternight.

A Gent. and his man passing through a field together, a Crow in a tree cried
Kaw, kaw: See yonder N. (quoth the Master) yonder Crow calls thee knave: No
sir (he answered) he beckens to your Worship, as to the better man.

A Seruing-man ouertook a coach by the way as he rid, and asked the rear-man of
the train, what Lady or Gentlewoman it was: the Seruing-man answered: The
Queen of Clubbes: I thought as much (replied the other) seeing the Knave of
Clubs to ride so fast after.

The Duke of Bejara sent his Page to the next town to buy him a Crosse-bow, and
the Page entering in at the town gate, saw certain Sarjeants apprehending an
Uncle of his for debt not without much bickering, and some bloud-shead:
Whereupon he betook himself to his heels, and ran back again to his Lord,
and said: I durst not bring your Honor a hitting thing, for fear to have been
hit my self.

A Gent. had an errand thief to his man, and he in seeming to praise his
fidelity, thus disprays'd him, saying: Not any thing in all my house is under
lock and key from A.B. and he knows it well enough: For in deed he had a
vice to pick open any lock whatsoever.

A Nobleman being to pass through a water, commanded his Trumpetter to go
before, and sound the depth of it: Who to show himself very mannerly, refused
this encharge, and pushed the Nobleman himself forward, saying. No (sir) not
I, your L. shall pardon me.

A young Seruing-man having a most miserly master, thus excused him with a
flout, saying: Insooth I cannot justly condemn my good master, for truly he
never promises or gives any thing, but he is straight penitent for it.

A Seruing-man used still to say to his master: Now I beseech God (sir) to
take away my days, and bestow them upon your worship, that long may ye live:
Riding before his master on a time in a dark evening, and in a great snow,
far from any housing, and quite out of the way, he then said unto his master:
Oh (sir) these are the days I ^lwayes prayed God to take from me and bestow
upon your Worship.

A Portugal Gent. traueilling into Spain with a civil retinue, a Spaniard
met him on the way, and asked the rear-man of his train what Gentleman he was:
The Portugal answered: No Gentleman: Then he asked him what Gallant he was: he
answered: No Gallant: Then he asked him, what Nobleman he was: he answered:
No Nobleman: At last he asked him what man he was: he answered: No man
neither, but the King of of Portugals Cousin.

One asking a Seruing-man how much his miserly masters revenue was: he
answered: Able to starve a thousand persons.

Queen Issabels Harbinger passing along the street, a Spaniard asked his
Portugall-seruant, who his Master was: Whereunto the Portugal made no answer
at all: With that the Spaniard (thinking happily he was deaf,) shook him a
little by the cloak, and then asked him as before: Wherewith the Portugal all
in a pelting chafe, then answered: My master, my master, who (forsooth) is my
master? why who (the deu'l) should he be but all the world?

A Gent. sent his man to one Preister his adversary in law, with the Courts
Injunction to avoid possession, and yield up his house to him: The Seruing-man
went and did his message thus: Good M. Preister, my master sends you his
Confession by me, and confesses unto you, how that to morrow (God willing) he
means to turn you out of house and home by virtue hereof, and with that showed
him the Injunction.

A great Gent. used much bounty toward his rich servants, and none at all to
his poor ones: It chanced on a time, that riding through a water, his horse
stood still, and stall'd in the midst of it: Whereupon one of his poor servants
merrily said unto him: Your Worship resembles your horse now, adding his
bounty to the needless stream, All to all, and none to nothing.

An angry Gent. gave one of his men two good flurrets in the ear, whereat one
of his fellows by, fell a laughing: which heperceiuing, flew straight to his
master, and gave him a box on the ear, and said: Sir, I return your Worship
this again, to bestow upon yonder knave that stands laughing at me so.

A Nobleman gave an old servant of his two boxes on the ear: And the next day
being displeased with one of his Pages, merrily then said unto him: I pray thee
N. restore me one of the boxes I gave thee yesterday, to bestow upon this
villain-boy: he answered: Not only that (my Lord) for your Boys, but the
other also (if you please) for your Hobberdchoyes.

A Seruing-man being brought before a Justice upon suspicion of fellonie, the
Justice asked him whom he served: he answered: God: With that the Justice
straight commanded him away to prison: Shortly after being brought before him
again at the Sessions, he asked him (as before) whom he served: And he
answered: My Lord Chancellor: My Lord Chancellor? (said the Justice) why what
(a deu'l) make thou here then? why told'st thou me not as much at first? He
answered: Because I did not think you had loved my L. Chancellor better then
God.

OF BISCAYNS AND FOOLS.
A Physician sent a sick Biscayn purging pills to loose him withal, and he
tasting and chewing one of them in his mouth, and finding it passing bitter,
spet it out again, the rest he wrapped in bundle of hay, saying: There rest ye
till ye be through ripe.

A Gentleman sending his Biscayn-man of an errand, bid him do it with great
efficacy: and the Biscayn answered: Efficacy me no Efficacies: for all were
M. Efficacy the devil himself I durst speak to him.

A Biscayn being demanded what Countri-man he thought God was, he answered:
Questionles a Castilian, for that never in all my life could I yet love him
heartily.

The Emperor Charles was preparing to strike a Deer with a crosse-bow, and a
Biscayn-page being by, mounted upon a gall'd-backe jade, suddenly whipped from
off his horse, and taking off the saddle, threw it toward the Dear, and so
fray'd him away: The Emperor angry heerat, asked him why (the deu'll) he did
so: Whereunto the boy (taking the Emperor by the sleeue and ^hewing him his
jades galled back) answered: The saddle that can do all this, is it not able
(trow ye) to kill a Dear?

A Spanish Preacher willed his Biscayn-boy to go break his fast at one David's
a Cook, upon his skore. Mean while he went to Church to preach: And reciting
in his sermon a many authorities out of Scripture, for the probate of his text,
he said: And now (sirs) what says David (trow ye) to this geere? Even as he
said so, in-stept the boy at the Church-door, and hearing him talk of David,
answered him aloud: Marie, no more Pies (he says) till you have paid him the
old skore.

A Cockney seeing a Squirrell in a shop, greatly admired it, and said. Jesus
God, what pretty things are made for money!

A Biscayn-Doctor had promised one an Ass, which Ass died shortly after. In
the end the party sent to him for it, and he returned him answer, viz. that
he was now not bound to send him the foresaid Ass, for as much as since the
day of such his promise made, the Ass was departed his natural life.

A Fool lay a sleep in a field, and had pricked his staff in the ground
before his face to fence him from the wind: By chance one coming by awaked
him, and asked him why he had pitched the staff there: he answered: To defend
me from the wind: Fool (said the other) that can not any whit shield thee: The
fool replied: Can the wind blow through it trow ye?

It was a controversy in law between two wise men, whether of them a Cuckoe
(which they saw in a tree) called cuckoe unto: And after that they had therein
wasted all their pence, in the end they agreed to put it to compremize to a
neighbor of theirs, who^ in the mean time they both plied with butter and
Bacon enough, and such other like country-cates to draw him on their side: But
he finding himself beholding to both their bounties alike, at last when the
hour was come, he thus awarded, saying: My good neighbors, to neither of you
both did the Cuckoe cry Cuckoe, but to me, and there an end.

A dog had bitten a Fool, and the Fool finding him the next day a sleep in
the grass, knocked out his brains, and said: He that has enemies, let him
take heed how and where he sleeps.

A Stranger came to see the Fools in Bedlam, and one of them asked him of
whence he was: He answered of Newarke: Then the Fool asked him whether his
father and mother were living, what brothers and sisters he had, and what trade
or occupation he was of: All which he told him, and withal that he was a
Goldsmiths: Then the Fool asked him what business brought him thither: he
answered: None, but only to see you To see us? (replied the Fool) Have you a
trade at Newarke, and come you hither but only to see us? Believe me (brother)
I am not in here for any such matter, viz. for so very a fool.

A Seruing-man was jesting with his masters fool, and made him believe he
would cut off his head: The Fool ran straight to his master and told him of
it: who answered: He shall not cut off thy head, if he do, I Will hang him the
next day after: Nay I pray (replied the Fool) rather hang him a day before.

One used to say that a Fool more benefits a wise man, then a wise man a
fool: for that the folly of a Fool admonishes a wise man from ^ollie, but a
fool cannot comprehend the wisdom of the wise.

A Gallant passing along by a Fool, the people willed him to do off his hat
unto him. With that he ran to the Gent. and stroke off his hat from his head.
For which being reprehended and told how he should have done it to himself, he
answered: That were to steal away my own hat from my head.

One chid a Fool for that he had thrown dust at his face, and some of it was
gotten into his eyes: The Fool answered: Truly I took you for a letter.

One asking a Fool how long he might be a learning to be like him: he
answered: That is according as the boys do plie ye forward.

One used to say, that the difference between a wise man and a fool is, that
a wise man dreams but a nights, and a Fool both day and night.

A Biscayn-Lackey came home to see his mother, and she asked him how he liked
his master: he answered: Faith (mother) an honest Gent. he is, but when he
rides in foul ways, then march I fair and softly after like a King: but when
he rides in fair ways, oh (mother) that is the devil, then run I, and then
sweat I my heart out: His mother replied: Marie then I pray God (son) send
thee still foul way where ever thou set thy foot.

In a tumult in a town of Biscay, the Mayor read the kings Proclamation thus:
King of Castile, Leon, Arragon, Navarre, etc. Whereunto they all answered: King
and Queen God bless them, but as for etc. the Devil take him, we will none of
him.

A Gent. sent his Biscayn to market to buy a couple of Partridges, and willed
him to choose them very sweet: The Biscayn went, and bought them and brought
them home unto his M. who smelling to their fundaments, and finding them
unsavory, threw them at his head, and all to beknau'd him: Then the Biscayn
said: What (a Deu'll) aill'd ye to smell there a ways, I warrant ye, there is
nere a Lady in this land but stinks in that cost.

A Biscayn was sore tormented to confess his committed fellonie, and he would
not do it to die: At last when they had tormented him almost to death, they
took him of the torture, and bespake him fair, saying: Well we see your
invincible heart, you are (truly) a man every inch of you. But (faith) tell
us now even as you are a Gent. Did you it not? Then the Biscayn answered: I
marie (sirres) as I am a Gentleman, that is another matter, why said ye not so
at the first? Go to, I did it: Confess and be hanged, and so was he.

A Physician having given to a sick Biscayn a purging potion, encharg'd him in
any case to hold his mouth close for fear of casting it up again, and so
left him: The Biscayn straight took his sword and buckler, and laid them upon
his pillow, and his mouth thereupon. In the end the Potecarie came in, and
seeing him lie so, asked him what he ayl'd: he answered: I keep my mouth close.

Two Biscaynes traueilling on the way, were a hunger'd, and into a
victualing-house they went, and called for meat: The good wife answered, that
she had nothing at that present, but only a couple of Honey-combes: Hony-combes
(said one of them) what is that I pray ye? Know ye not what a Honeycomb is
(answered the other?) I do. Go to (Hostess) Fry the one, and boil the
other, and bring them us presently piping hot.

A Biscayn brought his Master word how that his maistresse was brought a bed,
and he asked him whereof, whether of a boy or a daughter: Neither boy nor
daughter (answered the Biscayn) but of a better thing. What better thing? (said
his master) He answered: Of a dead gerle.

A Biscayn seeing a Castilian Gentlewoman going along the street, her maid
holding up her train after her, stood in a maze and said. If it be a tail,
why is it born up? and if it be to be born up, why (the Deu'll) is it a tail?

A Biscayn forgetting the name of the Halbardiers-street, demanded of one
which was the way to the coat of Malestreet.

An old man, whose beard was all ouer-growne with gray hairs, asked a Fool
how he might do to become young again: The Fool answered: Go to the Barber: But
how if that will not serve (said the old man) how then? The Fool replied: Then
bind your self Prentise to some body for a 100. years.

A Biscayn traveling on the way chanced to pass by a pleasant spring, which
seemed to laugh upon him: and he being extreme thirsty, and in sight of a
village, loath to drink water, where wine was so near at hand, he laid his
finger upon his mouth, and said unto the spring: Nay, laugh, and allure thou
nere so much, I tell thee true, thou gett'st not in here.

A Biscayn imagining the wheel of a water-mill to go by power divine, bowed
down his knee thereunto, and crept toward it to kiss it: The wheel
entertained him with a foul flap, striking off his nose clean, and half his
cheek away: Whereat the Biscayn impatient, and stark mad, rose up and ran away,
and said: I tell thee (villain) thou art no more Gods miracle, the Devil thou
art.

A Biscayn was commending what dainty meat a boiled cock was, and said: that
the hee-hen was much better meat then the shee-hen.

A Biscayn scalded a Cony, and scraping off the hair, said: Little Vrchin, I
marueill how thou scap'dst breaking thy neck, flying with so little wings.

A Biscayn enquiring for a shoo-maker, said: I pray ye, where dwells there ere a
shoo-tayler?

A Biscayn-woman complayn'd of the Castilians for pruning their Vines every
March, affirming that they did it of spite that their Vines might not branch
forth as far as Biscay.

One used to compare follies to mischances, for that they seldom come alone:
And therefore whenever he saw any man do or say a folly, he would still
say: Welfare it if it come alone.

One asked a wisacre, who inherited all his fathers innocence: he answered: I,
and my brothers, but because I am eldest, the fifteenes were allotted to me.

A foolish man fell out with a Fool, and in his rage ran at him with a
cudgel to beat him. The fool turned his back unto him, and sleering over his
shoulder, said: We are two, so we are, we are two.

One asked a Biscayn how many horses his father had: he answered: Five, with
four that are dead.

A Spanish Gent. borrowed his friends Biscayn-Page to attend him to his
Maistresse, and being there, he was disposed to jest with the boy, and said
unto him. Tell me (sirrah) is it true that all you Biscayns are descended of
the fart of a Jew? The Page answered: If that be true (sir) you may do well,
evermore when you are disposed to fart, to have a Biscayn your companion, and
not your borrowed Page.

A Biscayn coming to a Shoo-maker to bespeake a pair of three soal'd shoos,
and forgetting his right terms, said: I would have you make me a pair of
shoes, here a shoo and there a shoo an^ a shoo between.

One passing through the Stewes-street in Toledo, saw a very fair wench
standing at a door, and asked his companion whether he knew her: who answered:
I, she is a Biscayn: Then he replied: That Is the reason (belike) that she
betakes her self to a trade of so brief conceit.

A S. Albons-ma^ traveling on the way* his horse tired and would no further:
Whereupon he took the saddle from o^f his back, and clapped it upon his own,
and so marched on, leading the horse in hand fair and softly after: By chance
a Barnet-man of his acquaintance meeting him, and marueilling thereat, asked
him why he carried the saddle so himself: he answered: I shame the
villaine-jade.

Peter, Stephen, and Thomas were (...) ^hree brothers, and John a Nokes knew
them all: He being one d^y in place where they were all three spoken of, and
demanded whether Thomas were Peter's brother: he answered: No, he is Stephens
brother.

A Mayor of London being placed in a standing to strike a Dear, and a heard
being brought about unto him, and come now somewhat near him, the Keeper made
sign unto him to be ready: With that he loudlie answered: Let them come, let
them come: they are welcome, they are welcome: and so fray'd them all away.

OF COVNTRY-MEN AND Clownes.
PHilip the first, king of Spain, walking abroad in a summers evening, met a
forty or fifty Pesantes of the country, and being forewarned that in so
great a troop of Clownes together, it is their custom always to have a King
amongst them: the King passing by them, saluted their said King, with a veiled
bonnet, and a bended knee: whereunto the Pesant bravely corresponded, saying: To
a Kings salute join me but the Popes blessing, and there an end.

A Country-lad had stepped aside with a wench, and done I know not what, but his
father mainly belamb'd him for the fact, the wench proouing afterward with
child: Certain days after, one asking him wherefore his father had so
grieuouslie beaten him: he answered: Faith, for nothing but only for bounsing
at the next door to the privy.

A Country-Farmer asked a London-seruant what countri-woman she was: She
answered: No Cockney I warrant you: Good, (replied the Countri-man) and even
continue still in that honesty a Gods name.

A many Clownes were eating of a Posset together, and one of them burned his
chappes, and for very pain let fly a monstrous fart, and said: Go thy
ways, thou art even the happiest fart of al thy fellows, for had thou staid
still within, thou had been most miserably skalded.

A Countri-lad was desirous to wench away his honesty in a hay-mow, and the
Less being ouer-fierie, sore burned his dishonest part: His Surgeon asking
him afterward all the manner and circumstance thereof: he answered: The
hay-mow: and adjoined, that he most mareill'd how it had the good hap to
escape fiering, she being so extreme hot as she was.

A Gent. riding on the way, asked a poor country-boy whose pigs those were: he
answered: The Sowes: Whose is the Sow then he asked: he answered: My mothers.
Who is thy mother? My fathers wife. Who is thy father? he answered: Go ask
my mother. For these witty ouerthwarts the Gent. entertained the boy (...) his
service, and gave him good wages ever after.

A Seruing-man quarrelling upon the way with a Countryman, offered to snatch
his staff out of his hands to beat him therewith: But the Swain so well
defended it, that he recovered it wholly to himself, and then sore belamb'd
the Seruing-man therwithall, saying: Hold, take it; hold, thou shall have it,
and sore bruised him therewith, leaving him therefore dead.

In a Chapel at Rome was painted the picture of hell, and a countryman
viewing it, smiled to himself, and seemed very glad: A Gent. passing by, and
seeing him smile so, asked him whereat he smiled: he answered: Mary (sir)
because in all this hell, (I thank God) I see nere a russet coat.

A country-mans Ass dyed, and he going to the next Alehouse, roared most
piteously, and said: Well (sirres) seeing my Ass is dead and gone, I know what
I Will do: By chance certain Traueillers being then there, and hearing him say
so, thought verily that he meant to hang himself, and therefore for pity
sake, made him a Purse amongst them, to the price of another Ass: wherewith he
seemed reasonable well pleased: And being asked what his meaning was when he
said: I know now what I Will do: he answered: Marie (sirs) even to have sold
away my pack-saddle.

One shoou'd a countryman down a pair of stairs, and broke his nose: whereat
he ban'd most miserably, and said: It Was thou, (villain) it was thou: No
(answered the other) it was not I, but belike you are ouer-mellow, and so fell
down of your self.

A Countryman shent his wife, for that through her default their daughter had
strayed aside, and gotten a big belly, affirming that she ought to have locked
her up, and kept her short, so had not that mischaunce happened: The good-wife
answered. Lock me no lockings, the deu'il take the key that cannot open that
lock.

A crooked country-clowne of extreme rude behavior, was chosen by his
Parishioners to solicit their law-matter with their learned Counsel: Up he
came to the Term, and to his Counsel he hy'd him: who seeing so de^ormed and
slovenly a fellow, excepted unto him, and said: What (a deu'il) art thou the
only sufficient man of all thy parish to follow this matter? The Clown
answered: As for the matter (sir) I can not tell, but as for your Worship (well
I wot) they have thought me good enough to come to you.

Certain Gentlewomen walking in a field after supper, met a countryman
carrying a young Kid upon his shoulders: and one of them feeling unto it, how
tender it was, said it must needs be tender, having yet no horns out: The
Countrie-man answered: True (maistresse) for it is yet unmarried.

Two Noble-mens Caters met at a Fish-market, and squared about a Soale which of
them should have it for his Lord: At last one of them said: Hold here
(Fish-monger) five Crowns for the Soale: but the other offered ten, and he had
it: A countryman that stood by, and saw this, said: Fie of all tillage, fie of
it, a paltrie dead Fish to be more worth then two Asses: I Will be a Fish-monger
I. Perhaps he meant the two Caters.

A plain countryman riding up to the Term, met a prisoner carted on the way
to the gallows, and said aloud unto him: Happy man thou, that have no doings
at the Term.

A Countryman lent his neighbor an Ass, and he neglected to return him home
again at the day appointed, so as the party was fain to go fetch him himself:
Who when he came, the other denied that the Ass was yet come home, and made
many flim-flam excuses to detain him a while longer: In the mean time the
Ass brayed in the stable, whereby his master knew that there he was, who then
waxed very angry with his neighbor for so abusing him. Whereunto the other in a
rage answered: Gogs nails (neighbor) will you believe your Ass before me?

A plain Countryman came up to the term, and passing by a silk-mans shop,
saw a maid there weauing of fringe, to whom he stepped, and asked her how much
of that fringe she could weaue in one day: The maid answered ten yardes: Then
he replied: By that account have you wouen since I came to town (which is some
five days or thereupon,) a fifty yardes: Birladie a good huswife are ye, well
fare your heart.

A Gent. was a saying to a plain countrie-man: Believe me (father) if this hot
weather hold, it is like to go hard with poor beasts this next winter: The
Countrie-man answered: God preserve your Worship.

A countrie-swaine drove his Ass before the Court-gate, and a Gent. or two of
the Court seeing him all to beat and misuse the poor beast, bid him be more
mild and patient, and favor the silly Ass. With that the Clown straight
do his hat, and made a low curt'sie to the Ass, and said: I beseech your
good Worship (M. Ass) pardon my rudenes all this while, for (sure) I never
thought you had had kindred in the Court before now.

A Gent. married a Farmers daughter of whom afterward he waxed weary and
discontented: and on a day in a sullen mood he asked her, how many burdens of
straw her father used to serve his beasts every winter: She answered. Before
you married me, 300. and since 350. by reason he has one beast now more then
he had.

A Countryman entering into a City, stumbled and fell with his face into the
kennell, and all to bemyr'd himself therein: At rising up again, he turned
round about unto the people, and said: See, see (sirs) I had almost had a fall.

A Gent. riding through a village asked a countryman what a clock it was: he
answered: Clock (sir) we have none, but yet we have a pair of Organs.

A countryman lying on his deathbed, said: Now thanks be to God that he
takes me away before April and May.

A Fellon that was hanged was carted back again to the town to be buried,
and a many boys stood gazing upon the coorse: By chance a plain fellow of the
countery coming by, and seeing them so gaze, said unto them: Away, away,
(sirs) for shame, you are able to put the honest man besides his wits, to gape
and gaze so on him.

A widdowe Farmeresse in a plentiful year of corn, had much in her barn,
and much in her garrets: A creditor of hers came then to demand a debt of her,
and she answered: Good faith (neighbor) for my sins it is come to pass,
that corn is this year so exceeding good cheap, that (the deu'll) a penie can
I take for any.

A Preacher in his Good-fryday sermon said unto the people: Sirs, which of you
all will not in honor of this day forgive his enemy? A plain fellow then
stepped forth from behind a pillar, and answered: Mary (sir) I do. The
Preacher asking him whom: he answered: My father, who drowned himself
yesterday in a pond.

A Traueiller being come to a ponde, asked a countryman there by, whether it
were passable or no: who answered: Yea (sir) you may very well: With that the
Traueiller plunging thereinto, stoocke fast, and had much ado to get out
again: but at last getting out, he all to rated the poor Swain, and would
have beaten him: who answered: Truly (sir) all my neighbor Baals Geese and
mine pass over it every day.

A plain fellow took up an Ass at trust of his neighbor for certain
months, at six Crowns price: It chanced that within that time the Ass died,
and he not being able to pay the debt, and embarked for India: Where having
remained the space of 7. years, at last home again he returned worth 2000.
Crowns: and landing at Civil, wrote a letter from thence to his wife,
declaring both his return and his riches: She in answer thereof, advised him
(if he meant to come to her) in any case to do it very privily, for that the
owner of the foresaid Ass was yet living.

An old woman of the country being suspected for a witch, was highly offended
thereat, and on a time said to one of her Gossips: Now, and pleased God
(Gossip) would I were a witch indeed for their sakes, for then should I soon
be rid out of this wretched world, and of all their slander.

A Gent. meeting on the way certain Swains driving of Oxen on a Maie-morning,
said unto them: What mean you (sirs) to travel this day, being May Day? If
you care not to keep it holy day for S. Philip and S. Jacobs sake, yet at
leastwise do it for the May-poales sake.

A rich Farmer coming to pay his Landlord much rent, by chance a neighbor of
his meeting him at the door, and knowing his business said unto him: You
enter in like your self, but you shall come out like S. Fraences.

A Collier selling a sack of coals to a Citizens wife, by chance an old
drying pan lay by: then she asking him whether his coals were Oaken coals or
no, he straight took up the said drying pan, and gave it her in her hand,
saying: Fry some of them and you shall see.

A Countryman was lopping of a tree, and down he fell and broke his neck:
The clown his man straight ran home, and told his Dame of it, and telling
her a long tale, both how he advised him to stand fast, and how dangerously
he stood upon the tree, and how he fell down with the Axe in his hand: at last
he concluded: And I assure you (Dame) it was a fair grace of God, that he cut
not himself with the Axe.

A plain Countrey-fellow being to travel home-ward from the Term, and
passing along London-streets, asked of the shopmen and others whom he met,
which was the way to Wakefield.

A Country-maid coming to market, her Mare stumbled in the market place, and
down she fell over and over, showing all that ever God sent her: and then at
rising up again, she turned her round about unto the people and said: Gogs life
(sirs) did you ever see the like [before?

A Gent. asking a plain fellow of the Country in a raynie morning, whether he
thought it would not prove a fair day for all that. Mary sir (he answered)
that shall I show you at night.

John a Nokes was driving his cart toward Croydon, and by the way fell a sleep
therein: Mean time a good fellow came by and stole away his two horses, and went
fair away with them. In the end he awaking, and missing them, said: Either I am
John a Nokes, or I am not John a Nokes: If I be John a Nokes, then have I lost
two horses, and if I be not John a Nokes, then have I found a cart.

A Gallant alighting at a Country-Inne, took his horse to a Countryman to
walk, who seeing so brave a horse, and so richly trapped, asked the Gallant,
whether (and liked his worship) it were one man's labor to walk so trim a
horse as that: Yea (answered the Gallant) I warrant thee one man alone may do
it: Say you so sir (replied the Pesant) then hold here, you may even walk
him your self.

A miserlie Politician being advised by a friend of his to be more bountiful
in hous-keeping, thereby to gain the goodwill of the Country, which greatly
repined at such his Parcimonie: he answered: I will use these Pesants like
fatting beasts, only when I have need to use the^, then to give them a mouth
full of hay, and not else: For cheer ye them nere so much in prosperity, they
will sure fail you in adversity, and have but where with to win them at your
need, and they will then (notwithstanding your former misery) swarm to you as
thick as Beeties to a cow-share, so base and pesantly they are.

A Croydon-Collier had cuckolded a lubberlie Gallant, who coming home within
an hour or two after, and hearing thereof, straight remounted upon his horse,
and would needs after the Collier, to kill God a mercy on his soul: and
ouertaking him three or four miles out of town, there drew, and made toward
him resolutely to kill him: But the Collier leaping quickly from of his
Curtaile, stood to his tacklings at the whips end, and behau'd himself so
valiantly therewith, that the Cuckolds pottage was soon cooled, and his heart
began to faint. Then there he paused, and panted a while, and asked the collier
whether it were true indeed that he had lain with his wife: The Collier
frankly confessed that he did. With that the Chickin-hearted cuckold peaceably
put up his blade, and said unto him: Gogs nownes (villain) had thou not
confessed the truth, (before God) I had cut off thy head.

A Countryman had killed a dog, and a neighbor of his with a great codpeece,
meeting him the next day, quarrellously asked him why he did so: affirming that
it was his dog: The Other espying his codpeece, then answered: Had he had such
an other codpeece as yours, happily I should have taken him for your dog
indeed, and so forborne to have killed him.

A Countrie-woman dwelling upon Seuerne-bankes, and being with child, suddenly
longed to have the stream of that river turn the other way, and longed so
extremely to see it, that there in that very place she fell in labor, and was
brought a bed of a Salmon. Such being her husbands name.

A country-Viccar preaching to his parishioners, against the excess and
vanity of apparel that is now a days used, compared women's Vardingalles to
hell, and men's Codpeeces to the devil, and concluded: Now put that Devil in
that hell, and (behold) he is where he would be.

One meeting a Welshman carrying a Hare at his back asked him how he would
sell it: he answered: I will not sell it, but (hold here) give me a shilling,
and take it.

A Country-woman shent her daughter for gadding up and down among Alehouses:
and she answered. Indeed (mother) I cannot blame you if you be jealous of me,
for that I have often heard it; that I was your daughter before ever you were
married to my father.

A Countryman standing at a mark, an arrow lighted on his nose, and spitted
it through and through: At last the Archer coming to the mark to take up his
arrow, the Swain met him with it in his hand, and asked him whether it were
his arrowe: Yea (he answered) where had ye it? Marie see here (replied the
Swain) pointing to his nose: You have made me a proper nose, so you have:
Indeed if you serve me so any more, I Will break your arrow.

An Alehouse Groom came to a Gent. house in the Christmasse time, and there in
the hall fell a playing on his bag-pipe: The Gent. passing by, he asked him how
his Worship liked his music: He answered. Marie, not half so well as in an
Alehouse.

A Country-woman was commending what a goodly child God had sent her neighbor
that night, and said: It is even as goodly a child (God bles^e it) as the Queen
and the Council.

One saying to a Countrie-man: Faith (neighbor) if you mary Judge, you may
chance to repent it, for that (I assure you) she is a shrewd wench, and has
stomach enough: he answered: Tut (man) Stomach me no stomachs, she shall want
for no Bacon.

A certain Justice on the confines of Wales was an earnest puller down of
Crosses, and riding one day through a village, he spied at the towns end a
fair stone-Crosse: Whereupon not having the power to pass any further, there
he staid, and sent his man back to a lain Farmers house there by for ropes and
cordage to pull that Idol down: The Countryman understanding such the
Justices devotions, repined in his heart, and yet provided him not only
cordage for the purpose, but also went himself to assist the deed: And coming
to the place, the Justice bid him get up upon the ladder, and fasten the rope
to the top of the cross: which he did, and purposely cut the rope almost
clean asunder, leaving it only by one twist. Then the Justice and his man took
the other end of the rope, and began to draw and pull, and pulling
ouer-strongly, the rope burst, and down fell he and his man both backward into
a pond, whereat the Farmer laughed his heart out, leaving him there to fish for
him self as well as he could.

A Countryman passing through a street in London, stumbled and laid his tail
a ground: A Prentise seeing it fell a laughing, and said: See see (fellow) how
fine London is, it brooks no such Swains as you: With that the countryman
turned back, and answered: As fine as it is, it has kissed my tail for this
once.

A Swain saying to his wife, that she had as many lives as a Cat: she
answered: And you but one, and to many by that.

A countryman passing along the street, met with a Carre, and the horse spying
his bounsing beard, snap'd at it in steed of a bottle of hay: Then the
Countryman said: The Deu'll take thee, who made thee a Barber?

A Countryman had killed a Hare sitting, and because it was Lent he knew not
to whom to give it, and himself was no Lollard neither: So being grievously
perplexed about the matter, in the end he espied a Shepherd on the Down, and
went and offered it him: but the shepherd would likewise none of it, because it
was Lent, and bid him keep it to himself. With that the Swain being at his
wits end how to bestow it, repented that ever he killed it, and would needs
have gone back again and laid it where he killed it: But at last (to save a
labor) he offered the Shepherd six pence to take it.

A Countryman came up to the Term, and went to a Lawyer, (a friend of his)
for his advise in law, offering him a fee: which the Lawyer refused, in respect
he was his near neighbor and a good fellow: Then the Countryman said unto
him: well (sir) since you will take no fee of me, I hope when you come down into
the country, you will not refuse a Conie, or such a trifle at my hands: I,
(answered the Lawyer) a Conie or such a thing I care not if I [take: Say you so
sir? (replied the Swain) I promise you, that is more then I and my dog can do.

Two Swains were a brawling, and the one of them being quick of hand, took
the other a foul cuffe on the ear, and feld him, who at rising up said: Faith,
thou art a skeruie fellow, so thou art, can thou not brawle, but thou must
smite too? I could have brawll'd with thee a whole day together before ever I
would have smitten thee.

A Country-Parson preaching unto his Parishioners said, Neither by Peter nor
yet by Paul are we to be saved, but by Gods blood only: they all answered: Oh
swear not. Then he proceeded, and said: Nay, by Gods death then you are all
to be saved, and no otherwise: They all answered again: Oh swear not. Then he
adjoined: Yes, by Gods wounds, and his passion only you are to be saved, and if
you think otherwise you lie, and are deceived: And therefore tell not me of
swearing, for I tell ye again, and again, that by Gods death, Gods blood, his
wounds, and his passion only, and no otherwise, ye are to be saved. And so the
sermon ended.

OF FELLONS AND THIEVES.
A Brave Thief that used the highways about Toledo, it was his custom
always to share with the party who^ he robbed the one half of the booty:
and chancing one morning to rob a poor fellow, who had but 18. pence in all
the world, they wanted a single three pence to make even money: The poor
fellow then to be out of his clutches, offered him the said three pence: but he
refused it, saying: Nay, hold thou it, and God help me with that I have already.

Two Thieves were apprehended for a robbery, and being tormented to confess
the fact, the one did so, and was hanged: the other endured most horrible
pains, and never would confess any thing, notwithstanding the most plain
prooffes that were produced against him. Now, the law of Spain is, that if a
man by extremity of torture cannot be brought to confess his fellonious
fact, he to be absolu'd, notwithstanding what evident matter soever come in
against him. This Fellon being then absolu'd, and set at liberty, chanced to
be certain days after in the company of some his good friends, and they
marueilling how in so clear a case as that, he had the good hap to escape the
gallows: he answered: Mary thus: my fellow and I (whiles he lived) made this
covenant between us, that whosoever of us (as we traueill'd on the way) should
first chance to discover an Alehouse, he to pay the whole shot, and the other
to go scot-free. Now (as ye all know) he discovered first and foolishlie, and
so has paid the shot for us both.

It is the custom of Spain to traile murderers in a great round basket up
and down the streets, so fast as two horses can make way, and so by continual
revolution to toss them to death: A murderer was condemned so to die, and
being to be put into the basket, and seeing it somewhat myrie and slubber'd on
the outside, he excepted thereunto, and swear that unless that ordure were
wyp'd away, he would rather be hanged the^ enter thereinto.

A Fellon was to suffer death at Granada townes-end, and being carted on the
way to execution, a Swain met him, and said. Brother, now that you go to die,
for Gods sake discharge your conscience, and tell me what is become of my Mule.
The Fellon answered: Now before God (villain) thou lie: The Friar (his
ghostly Father) seeing such his impatience, rebuked him gently, and bid him
be of a better mind. But anon after the Swain urging him for his Mule, as
before, the Fellon all in a rage, answered: I tell thee (villain) if I had
thee in any other place but here, (by Jesus) I would tear thy ears from thy
head. Then the Friar said unto him. Fie, fie, what a mind is this you bear?
Believe me, if I hear any more such bugges words come from you, I will even
turn back, and leave you to die as please God: Mary, get you gone with a
vengeance (answered the Fellon) what (a Deu'll) make ye here? as little care I
for your company, as for this cart: and foul befall him that sent me this way.

A Smith had slain one, and was to be condemned for the fact: Then his
Parishioners came in and besought the Judge to spare him, affirming that they
had no more Smithes but him, nor any one near them of many a mile: They further
alleged, that besides that he was a good Farrier, he could also make locks
and keys, and all manner of Ironage belonging either to cart or plough:
whereunto the Judge answered: My masters, I have heard your allegations, but on
the other side, a man is slain, and how shall justice then be performed? They
replied: Mary, and like your L. we have here a couple of weauers amongst us,
and one of them will serve our turns well enough, we pray you therefore, hang the
other weauer, and save the smith.

A fellon being car^ed away toward the gallows, a countryman of his met him,
and said: Why whether away, (Countryman) what all a la mort? I faith (he
answered) even to yonder towns end, to end a pribble-prabble matter.

A murderer being condemned to die, said: When I am once dead, some good body
make dice of my bones.

Quarto is a small Spanish Brasse-coin, also it signifies in Spanish, a
quarter of any thing: A Judge pronouncing sentence upon a Fellon, and saying
[He to be hanged and made into four Quartos] The Fellon answered: Nay, I pray
(sir) turn me into better coin then so.

An old woman was whipped at a Carts tail for baudrie and witchcraft: And
after al was done, the Hangman demanded of her his fees and charges: namely, he
reckoned unto her (amongst other things) what the paper and the picture she
wore on her forehead all the whipping while cost him. All too dear a paper,
son (said the Witch) but hold here thy reckoning for this once, and see thou
keep that paper for me till the next time.

A Doctor of Physics man was apprehended for Felony, and being asked by the
Justice whom he would choose to be his Surgion in the pains he was to abide
till he had consest the fact: he answered: My master, because I know him to
be both a good Physician and a good Surgion too. Whereupon the Doctor standing
by, then said unto him: Lo here my Surgerie then: Hold thy mouth close, and
bleed a Gods name.

A Passenger complained to a Captain, how certain his Soldiers had robbed
him of all that ever he had. Whereunto the Captain answered: Tell me (friend)
ware you that doublet when they robbed you? He answered: Yea: Then get you
gone, (said the Captain) for well I wot, had they been my Soldiers, they
would have left you never a rag to your back.

A murderer being condemned to die, said unto the Judges: Faith (sirs) I see
you would make a proper piece of work of it, if a matter of waigh^ lay on your
hands, that thus for a trifle condemn me to die.

A Fellon being burned in the hand for his first offense, one asked him
certain days after how he had sped: he answered: Marie, the whole matter was
referred even to mine own handling.

A Fellon who had been pardoned many his former misdemeanors, being brought
again to the bar for a new matter, said, that if be might escape but that
time, he would never whiles he lived incur the like danger more: Whereunto
a Sarjeant standing by answered: Well may thou live to prove an honest man in
deed, for (well I wot) thou have hitherto outliu'd a great deal of villainy.

A Ruffian and a queen were to be whipped at a Carts tail in Civil: and the
wench being brought forth of the Iayle, and meeting her said mate at the cart
before her, said unto him: For your sake (Sir knave) come I hither to be whipped,
and dishonored to day: He answered: Gogs nownes (whore) and where am I? I
pray thee.

A Fellon being to be turned off the ladder, called for a glass ofwine, and
receiving the cup, he blew off the froth, and said: Oh, it is naught for the
raines of my back.

A Fellon being to suffer, a maid came to the gallows to beg him for her
husband, according as the custom of Spain dispenceth in that case: The people
seeing this, said unto the fellow. Now praise God, that he has thus
mercifully preserved thee, and see thou ever make much of this kind woman,
that so friendly saues thy life: With that the Fellon well viewing her, and
seeing a great skarre in her face, which did greatly disfigure her, and with
all she was old, and of a sour complexion, he then said unto the Hangman: On
(my good friend) do thy duty: I Will none of her.

A Fellon being brought to the Sessions house for a robbery, and being
convicted of the fact, and upon the point to receive judgment, the Judge asked
him, what he could say for himself, he answered: And like your honor, I
thought they were Papists goods.

A Fellon being to be thrown of the ladder, said to the people: Have at
yonder Daisie.

A Fellon that had lost one of his ears for his former fact, and was condemned
the second time to loose the other, his hair was so ouer-grown, and hung so
wildly about his face, that the Hangman could not readily find his ear, and
was thereat half angry: which the Fellon seeing, was no less chollericke, and
said: Gogs nails (villain) am I bound to find thee ears every Sessions?

Two Thieves came by night to rob a Marchantes shop, and it chanced that a boy
lay there that night, who ouer-hearing their attempt, said unto them: Sirs, get
you gone, and come again anon, for I am not yet asleep.

An Officer passing along the street in an evening, saw three or four good
fellows carrying a chest, and certain loose plate out of a house: and he
asked them whose goods they were: they answered: Of yonder house where you saw
us come out, which we carry to another house, because the good man there is
eue^ now dead of the plague, and his household remoues forth with: Then the
Officer asked them how it chanced that none of the house stood weeping at the
street-doore (such being the Spanish manner in that case:) they answered: I
warrant ye, you shall see weeping eyes enough there to morrow: And so he did
indeed: For walking that way in the morning, he saw the good wife weeping at
her door for the loss of her plate, and other rich goods, which they carried
away in that chest.

One did a robbery in one sheere, and was taken in an other, and being brought
before the Justice there, the Justice thought good to return him back again
to the other sheere where he committed the robbery: Whereupon the thief said
unto him: I pray (sir) if that be Law, let me ask you one question: How if a
man be taken a bed to night with his neighbors wife, ought he to be sent
thither again the next night too?

A Fellon at the bar pleading eagerly in his defense, and seeing the Judge
busy in talk with one that came and delivered him a message, said unto him: I
pray (my Lord) tend to your Justice, and let that knave alone till another
time: Whereunto the Judge answered: Fear not (sir knave) I warrant you, I Will see
to you well enough: The Fellon replied: I had rather you did not see me at all:
But seeing you do, I had rather you saw me less, and heard me more.

Thieves entering by night into a poor man's cottage in a Common, who was no
more worth then the very bare matteresse he lay upon, and the couerlet
thereunto: his doublet and hose serving him for his pillow a nights, they robbed
him of al: Then he all in vain entreating for his apparel, at last said unto
them: Why (sirres?) what I laid not down by day, will you take away by night?

A Countrie-man being set upon by a Thief, was so light of foot, that he
escaped away from him: Which the thief perceiving, and being quite out of hope
to overtake him, stood still, and fell extremely a laughing to himself: The
countrieman the^ turning back, and seeing him so merry, thought happily that he
was some old acquaintance of his grown out of remembrance, that in jest had all
that while pursued him: and in that conceit came toward him, and still the
thief laughed more and more, as seeming his acquaintance: Insomuch as the
plain fellow suspecting no danger, came within his danger, and fa^re loft his
purse.

A Scholar being to be hanged for robbing his father in law, at the very
instant that he was to be thrown off the ladder, said: Dulce mori pro Patria.

A Fellon at the bar saying to a pitiful Judge: And like your Honor, the
thing I am here accused of, was not worth above a Crown on my conscience:
With that the Judge turned him to the Jury, and said: Hear ye not (sirs) what
the poor fellow says? he says it was not worth above a Crown: And I say
unto you that a man's life is more worth then 20. Crowns.

A Fellon at the gallows said unto the Hangman: Villain, better yet be hanged,
then be a Hangman, like thee: True (answered the Hangman) were it not for
hanging.

A Judge condemned a Traitor to be hanged and quartered And the Traitor said:
Even so? ( Pilate) what? hanginges and curtains too?

OF CONY-CATCHERS.
A Merry Gent. landing at a sea-towne in this land, and lying there in an Inn
at greater charge the^ his present indigence could defray, bid his man in a
morning go down and mal-content himself before the Host and Hostess, and
mumblinglie to say: Lord, what a scalde master do I serve! This it is to
serve such Seminary Priests and Jesuits: Now (before God) I Will even leave
him in the lurch, and shift for my self: Here Is ado about Penance and
Mortification, as though (forsooth) the Lord had not died enough for all. The
fellow mumbled out these his instructions so disguisedly, that it struck a
constant jealousy in the Inholders heart, that (questionless) his Master was
such a kind of person indeed, namely a Seminary or a Jesuit Priest. Whereupon
he presently sent for the Constable, told him all the premises, and up they
went together to attatch the Gent. in his chamber: Who purposely had shut
himself close in, and betaken him to his knees, and to his crosses, to make
the matter seem more suspicious: which they espying through the keyhole, made
then no question of him, but in they rushed, and arrested him for a
Seminarie-Priest, defrayed his score there, bore his and his man's charges up to
London, and there presented him before my last Lord Bishop: Now mark the
jest. My Lord knew the Gent. passing well, entertained him with good respect,
and discharged him presently out of their hands: Who straight pointing and
broad jesting at such their folly, taught the^ by such a president more wit and
thrift against the next time.

A plain Conie-catcher not knowing where to go dine, went to the Sheriffs of
London about dinner time, and espying his opportunity, stepped to him, and said:
I pray you (sir) what may a wedge of gold thus long be worth? The Sheriff
straight thinking that he had found some such great piece, took him by the
hand, had him in to dinner with him, and carved him of the choicest meats upon
the board: In the end after dinner was done, the Conie-catcher arose with the
rest, and after having reverently thanked the Sheriff for his good cheer,
offered to be gone. With that the Sheriff called him back again, and
questioned him aside about the foresaid wedge of gold: affirming, that if he
would sell it, he would give him more for it then any man: Then the full-belly
fellow belching his good cheer upon the Sheriffs face, answered: In sooth
(sir) I thank ye, I have no such matter: only I thought good to ask you
aforehand, what such a wedge might be worth, in case I should hereafter
chance to find any such to bring you.

A Cony-catcher having made merry in an Inn, and wanting wherewith to
discharge the shot, stepped over the way to a Barbars shop, and would needs be
trimmed: The Barbar trimmed him, and when he had done, the Conie-catcher took
a Lute of his in his hand, and began to fumble thereon, and fumbled himself
quite out of doors, bidding the Barbar to come after him to his Inn to
breakfast, where he would discharge both him and his Hostess al-together: The
Barbar believed him, and let him have away his Lute with him: and by reason he
staid somewhat long after, the Conie-catcher in the mean time left the said
Lute in pawn for his good cheer, and rid clean away.

The said Conie-catcher making merry with a wench in a Tavern, and wanting
money (as before) to discharge the reckoning, sent for Musitions to play to him
as he was at dinner, and after dinner was done, sent away the wench privily
under color to call for a reckoning, he only and the Musitions remaining
there: Anon after seeming to marvel why she staid so long, he said unto the
Musitions: Play on (sirs) a while, till I go down and see what the matter is,
that they are so long about the reckoning, I Will come again presen^lie. So
down he went, and they below suspecting no such matter, by reason they hard
the Musitions still playing above: he making as though he would but step
aside to make water, slunke quite and clean away, leaving Music only to pay
the shot.

Two Conie-catchers came in an evening to a Tavern, and watching their
opportunity, the one of them slipped off his cloak to his fellow, and tucking on
an apron before him, stepped into a lower room where certain Gent. were at
supper, and in semblance of a servant of the house, whipped away a rich Salt
from off their table, under color and request that he might have it for
certain Knights, who (he said) were then come thither to supper, leaving a
pewter one in lieu of it, and so slipped clean away there with and was never
heard of more.

A Merchant sat in a summers evening at his street-doore and a Conie-catcher
came in the semblance of a civil Tailer, and doing obeisance unto him, offered
to step into his house: The Merchant asking him what he would, he answered: And
please you (sir) your maid willed me to fetch a gown of hers to mend, I pray,
can ye tell if she be within? Go in and see (answered the merchant.) So in
went the Cony-catcher, and meeting with one of the Merchants men, told him that
he came for one of his masters gowns to mend, named the gown, and willed him
to deliver it him presently: The fellow believing him, the rather because his
master sat at the door* and saw him come in, and it was also likely that he
would not so peremptorily demand it but upon a good ground, delivered him the
gown without any more ado: who straight whipped out a doors with it under the
Merchants nose, giving him only a cogging Conge, and a bare By your leave (Sir)
as he passed by.

A Conie-catcher hooking in the night time in at a Gent. chamber window,
fastened his hook by chance upon his bed-cloathes, wherewith the Gent. awaking,
and perceiving what the matter was, holp the Conie-catcher softly to vnfasten
his hook, and withal took hold of it with his hand, permitting himself as
it were to be drawn by it: The Conicatcher thinking he had fastened upon a
prize, drew still, and still the Gent. followed his twitches: till at last the
Cony-catcher thinking to vnfasten the booty, the Gent. caught him by the hand,
and with his dagger would have stabbed him, had he not cried Peccaui: So was
this Conie-catcher caught in his own train.

A venerious Doctor, and yet somewhat scrupulous withal, had gotten a
bonnie-Lasse into a grove, and there began to untruss his points toward the
bargain, still knocking his breast, and saying: Domine compesce
concupiscentiam carnis meae, Domine compesce concupiscentiam, etc. But minding
more Concupiscentiam carnis suae, then Domine compesce: he still untrust so
long, that he trust the wench with child.

A Seruing-man failing to win a Farmers fair daughter by fair means,
devised to ravish her, and thus he did it: The maid went every night to
milk her Fathers Cow in a rough ground full of Bushes and Birtches: and to the
end she might the more readilier find out the Cow a nights, had tied a bell
about the neck of it: The Seruing-man knowing her milking-houre, stole to the
place before, and took off the Cow bell from the Cow, and when he heard the
Maid was come, he tinckled it still before her from bush to bush, till at last
he drew her by the sound thereof into a secure place of the wood, and there won
her to his villainy.

An infinity of Emmots lay upon a Vine-yarde, and sore spoiled the Vines: A
Beggar by chance passing that way, and hearing thereof, undertook only for ten
days victuals to destroy them all. Then made he a little leather-bagge, and
sowed within it a Scrowle, as it might seem a Charm, and buried it in the
highest plot of the Vineyard, and so let it lie. At the ten days end away he
got him, and was never seen more, glad, that he had so well victual'd
himself at a Fools charge: At last the bag being taken out of the earth, and
vnript, the scrowle there enclosed was to this effect, You that are Cooks,
learn ye all of me,
To fall to your victuals, when you have it free.


OF BEGGARS.
ONe offered a Beggar a benefit, and he of daintiness refused it: Then
the other asked him, whether he could bestow such an other benefit on him: Oh no
(he answered) I am not so able, would I were: Then hold here (replied the
other,) refuse not a benefit at thy betters hand, who can and will afford it
thee.

A poor Scholar begged of a Scottishe Queen her gracious liberality, saying
Pauper sum: The Queen answered, Pauper vbique jacet: The Scholar replied, In
thalamis (Regina) tuis hac nocte jacerem,
Si verum hoc esset: Pauper ubique jacet.


A Constable asked a poor fellow on the way whereof he lived: he answered:
If your question were, whereof I die, I could better resolve you, for I die of
hunger.

At Valleodolid in Spain, it is the custom, that whatsoever Sacristane of
any Church there, can upon Corpus Christi-day devise any singular ceremony
for that solemn feast (not used before time) he to have a beneficial
benevolence awarded him by all the Churches of the town. A poor Sacristane
desirous to win that days prize, all threadbare and ragged as he was, came
over night to a chiese Gentleman of the Town, to crave his advise in that
behalf: who viewing his nakedness and extreme poverty, said unto him: Show
thy self in the Procession too morrow with a new pair of shoes on thy feet.

A Gent. gave a Beggar a penie: And the Beggar said: What? such a Gentleman as
you, give a poor man but a penie? One penny more to your poor brother for Gods
sake. Thy brother (quoth the Gent.) how so? Marie, in Adam (answered the
beggar.) With that the Gent. laughed, and replied): If all thy brothers in Adam
would give thee but as much, thou would soon be the richest Prince in the
world.

Certain wagges were beholding a fair Gentlewoman at a window, and one of
them said to the rest: Sirs, I suppose there is none of us all but would
willingly pawn his cloak for a nights lodging with yonder Gentlewoman: By
chance a lame Beggar stood by, and ouer-hearing him say so, stepped in and said:
I, and thither should my crutches go too.

A charitable person passing by a poor creature that lay in the street all
full of sores and byles, did away the Flies with his cloak from off his body:
Whereupon the beggar said: Sir, you wrong me with your charity, for these Flies
were almost full with my blood, and stung me the less, whereas now new hungry
ones will light in their places, and sting me sore.

A miser misusing a poor creature in terms, the poor man said: I may be
rich, and you may be poor, I may rise, and you may fall, for you are high and
I am low.

A Spanish Soldier returning from the rich wars of Lumbardie, being but a
beggars son, and borne in a most barraine heath, where was not so much as
water many a mile off, and where dwell'd only some half dozen Shepherds and
Colliers besides his Father, the richest of them being scarce worth three
farthings: This Gallant thus flauntinglie returned home to Spain, and
recompting the rich wars of Lumbardy in all places where he came, was asked
why he would leave such gallant wars, and come home: he answered: The love
of my country.

The end of the fifth part of this book.
Wits, Fittes, and Fancies. The sixth Part.
OF EQVIVOCATES IN SPEECH.
DEstogada signifies in Spanish vnarayed, and Destocada vnstabb'd or untouched:
A Spanish Genesis came early in a morning to visit his Virgin-mistresse, and her
maid told him that she was yet Destogada: viz. vnarrayed: Marie, therefore
come I (answered the Gent.) for wist I, that she were not merely Destocada,
viz. untouched, I would not thus early come to proffer her my service.

Solar in Spanish is any thing appertaining to the Sun: also it signifies a
Floor or a pauement: A testy Gallant finding him self aggrieu'd with words of
disgrace that were proffered him said: Villain, thou have abused my
reputation, I tell thee my Gentry is as manifest as the Solar, (viz. the
Sun,) and no less bright it shines: Whereunto the other answered: Yea, well
I wot, you are not only of the Solar (viz. of the Floor) but also above it,
for he stood upon the floor: Also it bears this Ironicall sense, that he
acknowledged him not only Sun-like, but also above the Sun: and so he flouted
him with an Hyperbolicall flattery.

Corredor signifies in Spanish a Broker, also it signifies a Footman: A Broker
came to a Fair to sell a silver cup, and one asked him the price thereof, as
also whether he would warrant the sale of it. Yes (said he) that I will, for I
am a Corredor. (viz. a Broker) and I dwell at such a place. With that the other
having the Cup in his hand, ran away with it, saying: If you be a Corredor, as
you say (viz. a Footman as he meant it) let me see if you can overtake me.

One said to an old Forrester: Faith, you are a senex-Fornicator so you are:
The Forrester asked him what that was: he answered: An old Forrester: True
(said the Forrester) indeed such a one have I been these full five and fifty
years.

One threw stones at an yll-fauor'd old woman's Owl, and the old woman said:
Faith (sir knave) you are well occupy'd, so you are, to throw stones at my
poor Owl, that does you no harm, so she does not: Yea marie (answered the
wag so would you be better occupy'd too (I wisse) if you were young again and
had a better face, so you would.

Don Alonso de Aguilar lying one night in a village, where he heard a great
rumbling and noise in the street and within the house, so as he could take no
rest all night long, asked his Host in the morning how that Village was
called: he answered Almachar: No (said Don Alonso) it is Alma-hechar: as much
to say in Spanish, as, Give up the Ghost.

At Madredejos in Spain it is the custom, every Corpus Christi-day certain
rich Farmers sons to make a breakfast in the Marketplace to a number of
wagges, such as they shall think good to elect; and this breake-fast place
they called Hell: It so fell out that these Farmers sons and their electes
being at breakfast in this place upon a Corpus Christi-day morning, a murder
was committed at the same instant without the town, and diverse were
apprehended for the fact: Among others a Fish-monger was one, who being brought
to his trial, was straight acquitted by the Jury, which gave in, that the
said Fish-monger was in hell at the time of the murder committed.

A Gentleman taking his leave of a Gentlewoman, said: May it please you to will
me any service; She answered: No, I do not yet make my will.

Calderon in Spanish signifies a Chaldron: A Gentleman, whose name was Calderon
dallying at a Well in an Orchard with two Lasses, an other Gentleman came by
and requested him to help him to a draught of that Well-water: he answered:
Sir with all my heart I would, but I lack wherewithal to draw it up: The Other
replied: Having a Calderon and two buckets, can you draw up none?

Roque in Spanish is a Chesse-man so called, and Dama is a Gentlewoman, and the
Queen at Chesse-play: One Senior Roque married a fair Dame and a rich, and a
friend of his hearing of it, said: Oh happy Roque that could give so fair a
Dama the mate.

Romero signifies in Spanish a Pilgrim: One whose name was so, asked an other
whether he knew him: who answered: Yea, very well, by the token you beg for
Gods sake.

A Gentleman whose maistresse name was Field, saying in a morning to a friend
of his: See how I am all bedewed with coming over yonder field: The other
answered: Rather is it with lying all night in the field.

One came to seek out a young Gentleman at a Dicinghouse, who having lost all
his money was but newly gone a walking, and one of the company said unto him:
You do well to seek him out, for he is lost: viz. he had lost.

One came to visit his enamored friend, and he found him all alone in a
Turret pensive: stepping in unto him, he said: Where is this enamored
Gallant? what, in a Turret? he answered: I, where should a dead man be, but
enterred?

One Beast was suspected to have cowardly beaten and bruised a weaponlesse
poor fellow by night, and he stoutly denying it before a Justice, a
Gentleman that stood by, said: Out of doubt, if a Beast did it not, yet was it
done like a Beast, who ere did it.

Certain Gentlewomen were eating of a Posset, and they all commended how good
it was: A Gentleman of the company for contradiction sake, said: No, it is not
good: Whereunto one of the Gentlewomen answered: You say what it is not, but
you do not say what it is.

A Gentlewoman that had two Paramours: the one called Spot, the other Fuller:
one merrily said of her: Having a Fuller, I marvel she can have ere a Spot.

EXTRAVAGANT SPEECH.
ONe being in danger of drowning, an other standing on the shore, said unto
him. Get to yo^der stooping tree, and you are safe: Tut (he answered) tell not
me of getting or gayning, for I care but only to save my self at this time.

A Spanish Gent. looking out at his window after a coorse that was carried out
of his house to be buried, said: Oh, how hard a matter were it to thrust me
out of my house, seeing to carry a dead man hence is four men's traueill.

A Spaniard seeing in a Church in Flanders all the Saints Images defaced and
broken, and anon after noting in the streets a many fair houses down, the
chimneyes only standing, said: It had been meet when these ruins were a doing,
that the Priests had conuay'd the Saints into these chymneyes, and the
Citizens their houses into the Church for Sanctuary. Whereunto an other
adjoined: Thus you see where Lutheranes prevail, Saints go to wrack.

One was a telling an other how one Fernando Ruis Cauesa of such a place, dwelt
26. miles from Civil, and 26. from Seres: An other coming in abruptly, and
asking him what he said: he answered: It is a whole pair of Cards.

One being asked what he made in those parts: he answered I have not done any
good deeds to be yet in heaven.

A Moore walking along the streets of Toledo, passed over a bridge where stood
a many shops and no housing: Seeing it, he asked a shop-boy, where his Master
lay a nights: who answered: At his house in the town, as all the rest besides
did: Oh, foolish people (then replied the Moore) no wife by day, nor no goods
by night.

A mighty fat Gent. had nere a child by his fair wife: And offering one day to
run for a wager with a familiar friend of his* and to give him a quoytes-cast
ods before him, the other answered: Give me but one cast more, and I Will deliver
you her with child.

A Father coming to see his son dressed of a wound in his face, said: It would
not have grieved me half so much if it had been in the arm, or in the leg,
or in any other place but there: The son answered: Oh Father, Receivers are no
Choosers.

One asking one whether his brother were yet alive: he answered: No, nothing
lively, but a very Lubber.

A widdow-Gentlewoman fearing least her lean son might happily converse
overmuch a nights with his fair Bride, and thereby incur a consumption, used
often times to send him abroad about her business some three or four days
together, and so many nights: which the young Gentlewoman his wife took very
unkindly at her hands: Insomuch as on a time her husband being from home, and
she looking out at a window, and chancing to see a many Sparrowes sitting in a
bush, she skarr'd them all away, saying. Faith (Sparrowes) you had best be
gone, least my mother in law come and send you going with a witness.

A Recusant making water against a church-wal, the Churchwarden seeing it,
excepted thereunto, as profanely done. Whereunto he answered: It is my Church,
not yours.

A kind wife followed her husband to the gallows, and he requesting her not to
trouble her self any further: she answered: Ah yes (dear husband) now that
I am come thus far, faith, I Will see you hanged too (God willing.)

A Cook seeing his far wife sit stradling at the shop door, said unto her:
Fie on thee (slut) shut up that shop of thine: The Goodwife answered: The
Deu'll take him that has the key and does it not.

One saying to his neighbor that he had a Pope in his belly, he answered:
Better so yet, then a devil in my heart.

One saying to his neighbor in an evening: God give you good night: The Other
answered: Amen.

Bishop Gardener seeing one of his men wait at the board with a monstrous
great Codpeece pricked full of pinnes on the top, took a piece of bread, and
crumbled it toward him, saying: Cob, cob, come cob, cob.

A wench saying to one: Thou art an errand knave, so thou art, to use me so
behind my back: By chance one coming by, and ouer-hearing it, said: Belike
you would have had it in your belly.

A Pothecarie was showing one an Unicorns horn, and an other came in
abruptly, and asked him what horn it was: he answered: A Cuckolds horn of a
hundred years old.

An Officer examining a poor Passenger where he dwelt, and how he lived: he
answered: If you would examine me about other matters, you should find I were
full of Lice.

OF EVASIONS AND EXCVses in speech.
DOn Diego Arias, Treasurer to John King of Spain, being sent for on a time by
the King, said unto the Messenger: Does the King send for me? Now a wedge
betide him I pray God: Being afterward called in question for so saying: he
answered: I meant your Majesty a wedge for your fortunes wheel.

Quemada signifies in Spanish to burn, or be on fire: A Gent. whose name was
Quemada was a certain fair Ladies Paramour: She whenever she affirmed any
thing in earnest used still to say. Quemada me vea, if it be not true: that is:
A fire light on me, if it be not true.

A Weauer that used to steal more yarne then his lawful allowance, had a privy
place in his house where to hide it, which he called Hell: He whenever any
of his Customers charged him with any such theft, used thus to protest and
swear: If I have any more then my due, now I pray God in hell I may find it.

At the change of Religion here in England, one Doctor Morgan was deposed from
his cure to give place to the Ministry. It chanced that being invited certain
days alter to a dinner whereat were present certain Justices and a many other
worshipful guests, he thus at dinner time mumbled unto himself: And is it even
so, Morgan? Faith* have they so hardly dealt with thee? well (I assure the^) it
shall cost many a man's life for it ere I have done. Such his mumblement being
ouer-heard, came afterward in question to his danger, as seeming to proceed
of a treasonable discontent with the present state: And being brought to his
answer, he thus justified this speech, saying: I confess I spoke the words,
and it is true that the loss of my Benefice is like to cost many a man's life:
for having now no other trade to live by, the^ physic (wherein as yet I am
altogether unskillful,) it is likely that my too timely practice will be the
death of many a one.

Castanio signifies in Spanish a Chesse-nut tree, also it is the name of the
best kinds of Iennets in Spain. An vpstart Gallant walking in the street in
company of a many Gentlemen, chanced to meet the Carier of his Country, and
asking him for letters from his friends, and what was the best news in those
parts, the Carier answered: No letters (sir) but bad news: Your father climing
a Castanio the other day to beat down Chesse-nuts for his hogs, fell down and
broke his neck: Which news some of the Gent. ouer-hearing, smiled to
themselves, and asked him what bad Castanio-news it was the Carier told him: he
answered: Mary (Gent.) even as I always feared: Know ye that my father was
the only brave horsman in all our country, and was never without half a dozen
of most especial choice Castaneos, (viz. Ienets of that kind,) and riding
the other day upon one of them to visit a fair Lady, it chanced that the horse
fell down a high hill, and has slain him.

A madman rusht into a chamber with a drawn sword: and finding one there a
bed, would have slain him, saying: Villain, were it not valiantly done to
strike off thy knaves head at one blow: The Other answered: Tut (sir) that is
nothing with your worship to do, you can as easily strike off two heads at a
blow as one: Wherefore, if you please, I Will go down and call up an other, that
you may strike off both our heads at once. The madman believed him, and so let
him slip away.

A Nobleman in this land called a Doctor errand Knave, and the Doctor
answered: Good (my L.) I would be loath to be so errand a Knave as your
Lordship: And heerat he made a pawse, as fayning to spet, and then adioyn'd:
Takes me to be.

A Noble-mans man on S. Georges day, for lack of a goldechaine, wore a Copper
one gilt, and fearing least it might be perceived, buttoned it close up to his
neck within his doublet: Coming in the afternoon to visit his maistresse,
she seeing him wear his chain so in hugger-mugger, asked him why he wore it
so: he answered: I give it suck, least it should cry, and be ouer-noysome to
any.

One that was none of the wisest was created Comptroller over a City in Spain
called Badajos, whereof he was natural: and another hearing of it, said: that
the Counsel had greatly erred to create him Comptroller of that place: Being
asked why: he answered: Because he cannot be Comptroller in his own country:
viz. he could not comptroll himself.

Two Soldiers being come to the place of single combat, the adversaries
ghostly Father asked the other Soldier if he had not any Rellicke or charm
about him, whereby he might hope to prevail against the other: This Soldiers
ghostly Father then standing by, thus aenigmatically thereunto answered: This
oath I dare take for him my self, who has no such matter about him.

A widow-Gentlewoman suspecting that a young Gallant who was a suter to her
fair daughter, had privily deflour'd her, and in that respect unless he would
take a booke-oath to the contrary, she swear she would give no portion with
her: The Gent. knowing himself guilty, took the Testament in his hand, and thus
aenigma^icallie swear: I here protest by the holy contents of this book
before you, that never in all my life did I know this Gentlewoman your daughter
carnally, as you or any other may imagine [but (indeed) I confess, I kissed her,
and embraced her, and toy'd with her, as I have done with many Gentlewomen more
in my days, and yet never any dishonestie came of it.

One objecting to a reverend man that he kept a queen, he answered: What
matter is it if I have a whore, and a whore have not me.

One being reprehended for living all to sloothfullie: he answered: We are not
bound to give account of our slooth, but of our labors.

One saying to a Gent. Sir, it were very good you told such a one of his
faults, that he may amend them: he answered: It is enough that I think him a
knave, though I tell him not so to his face.

One saying to a Gent. Faith, having so much intrest in N. as you have, me
thinks you might easly bridle his passions: he answered: I am no horse-coorser.

A Clown having surfeited of Beef, and being therewith extreme sick, vowed
never whiles he lived to eat Beef more, if it pleased God he might escape for
that once: Shortly after having his perfect health again, he would needs have
eaten beef, and his sister putting him in mind of his vow, he answered: True
(sister,) not without mustard (good L.) not without mustard.

SENSE REVERSED BY IDENtitie of speech.
A Poor Carpenter, yet a good workman, was employed to the building of a
bridge, wherein he became so good a gainer, that it set him up for ever. And in
one of the main posts thereof he had engraven these words: [ Sanchio Rodriguez
made this Bridge.] An other came after, and wrote underneath with a coal,
[This bridge made Sanchio Rodriguez.]

One commended half a fool for a very wise and profound person. Profound
indeed (answered an other) for (well I wot) 20. buckets can scarce draw him out
of his deeps.

One called an other fool, who answered: Indeed, so may I seem, because I
speak in such sort as you may understand me.

One chyding his son for lying long a bed a mornings, told him that such a
one with rising early in a morning chanced to find a bag of gold: The son
answered: Too early rose he (Father) that lost it.

A Gent. leading a fair Gentlewoman by the hand through a dark ruinous room,
said unto her: Lord, what a sweet room were this, were not you in it? She
answered: A sweet room were this, were not you in it.

A Prentise hearing a Tinker crying in the street [Haue ye any work for a
Tinker] bid him go to Banbery: The Tinker answered: I, there (boy) belike thy
father was hanged: he replied: Why would he be a Tinker then?

One seeing an old Pettyfogger in the street writing down a memorandum in his
note-booke, said unto him: Why how now (Grand^ire?) what scribbling make you
there? he answered: I register such knaves as you.

OF IMPROPER SPEECH.
One used an improper term to a Falkoner, saying, that his Hawk dung'd: The
Falkoner told him, that he should have said, Muted: Anon after this fellow
stumbled, and fell into a Cowshare, and the Falkoner asking him how he came so
beray'd: he answered: In a Cow-mute.

A Country-Gent. going to buy hogs some five or six miles from home, came to
a Farmers house, who had some to sell, and chancing on the sudden to see his
fair daughter as he entered in at the door, he mistook his terms, and said
unto her: If hogs bring you forth, they must needs be fair hogs: He would
have said: If you bring forth these hogs to see, they must needs be fair
hogs.

A Count Palatines Lady, and an other Lady in the Spanish Court were at
brabble, and taunted one another highly: The Palatine-Ladie returning shortly
after home to her Lord, told him a great tale of all the abuse was offered her,
and namelye how the other Lady denied her the Title of a Countess Palatine:
Whereunto The Earl answered: Dear Lady, (setting God aside), you are even as
great a Lady Palatine as the Countess of Beneuente.

One was a boasting how little he feared the plague, and said: All were I to
go to the devil, I would never fear the plague.

A Countryman being at the Term, and hearing much rumor that my Lord of
Lecester had won a Sconce in the Low Countries, told his neighbors for news
when he came home, that my L. of Lecester had won a Lantern.

A plain fellow came to borrow his neighbors Boar, and he asked him what he
would do with it, he answered: Mary, to take his pleasure of my Sow.

A Countryman sent his son with a Basket-full of Chickens to his Land-Lady,
and the Swain to be very fine, said: Maistresse, my father has sent you here
a nest of Peeps.

A Scowld was a saying, what a skeruie knave is he to use me so behind my
back. A Gent. by chance passing by, and ouerhearing it, answered: Well might he
so do, all were he not skeruy.

OF EMBLEMES, POESIES, AND Endorcements.
THe Marquis of Cortese wonted to say, that he that wants friends is like a
Honeycomb without honey, an ear without corn, a tree without fruit.

A religious Dame caused her picture to be drawn, holding her little child in
one hand, and a Bible in the other, and over the Bible was written, my Joy, and
over the Child, my Comfort.

A Gentlewoman was reading the poesy of another Gentlewomans ring, and it was,
God help me. A third Gentlewoman standing by, asked her what it was. She
answered: A very paltrie one.

Don Aluaro de Ayala gave the half Moon in his Crest, and a Page of his seeing
it engraven upon a wall, wrote underneath it with a coal, Nunca llena: viz.
Be it never at full: His Master checking him therefore, and asking him why he
wrote so, he answered: Mary (sir) because the Moon being once at full, of
force it must decrease.

A new married Bride had her picture drawn, holding in her hand ouer-thwart
her belly, a Bay-branch full of green leaves, whereof one sprig was made
mou^ting upwards toward her heart, and an other down toward her privy part,
and it was written upon the ouer-thwart branch thus: Fetched from the field let
me never wither: and upon the upper sprig, Hither: and upon the lower, Thither.

One whose name was Tutchiner, gave this Mot for his poesy, Tuciner.

One Peter in a Christmas-time, at my L. Keepers had written upon the backside
of a whole pair of Cards several Poesies, to be drawn by the
Christmasse-company and assembly there, and amongst others this was one,
Englands high Empress great Jove defend and bless her,
And keep in health (good Lord) my good L. Keeper:
Keep all awake, that none be found a sleeper,
And keep me too, thy faithful servant Peter.


One seeing his enemies Arms drawn upon a wall with a coal, drew the like
underneath, and in the first house drew his said enemies chief coat, and all
the rest of the escutchion he figured with twenty kinds of pots, cups, and
drinking glasses, and wrote underneath thus: These my forefathers left me, and
I will increase them.

A widow-Countesse used to subscribe all her Letters thus; The doleful
Countess N. Writing a letter to a plain Bayliffe others in the country, she
so subscribed it: and he in answer thereto subscribed his letter thus: Your
doleful servant R.

One who had married a Gentlewoman far his better in degree and calling, wrote
her a Letter, and subscribed it thus: Your worships base husband N.

A Noble-mans Secretary in a letter which he wrote for his Lord to an vpstart
Gent. interlin'd therein this word Senior: The gallant was heerat in a pelting
chafe, as supporting it done purposely to taunt his ignobility: Which the
Nobleman understanding by the bearer, willed his Secretary in his next letter
to leave out Senior for good and all, and to leave a great blancke over the
Letter, and as much margin on either side: The Secretary did so: Then the
Nobleman in a several piece of paper, wrote with his own hand this word
Senior in fair large letters, and subscribed underneath it thus: I send you
this word ( Senior) written with mine own hand, as acknowledging you a very
Gent. and withal have left you space enough both in the front of my letter, as
also in either Margin thereof to dispose it where you best please.

To a very old Gentlewoman, whose name was maistresse Touseners, one endorst
his letter thus: To the worshipful, etc. maistresse Thousand-yeers give this.

A Suter wrote a whole Loue-letter to his maistresse word for word out of
Amadis de Gaul: who when she had read it, and remembered from whence he had it,
she delivered it again to the bearer, saying: Friend, you mistake: This letter
is to Maistresse Laureola.

A simple Scholar endorc'd his letter to his Father thus: To my very obedient
good father, etc.

OF SIMILIES.
A Merry Gent. seeing among a many fair young Ladies one old withered
Beldame, said: Lo, there a Deaths head at the end of a Rosary.

One beholding a house fair carved and wrought toward the top, and rude and
rough below, said it was like a woman's smock.

One that had but here and there a scattred hair on his chin: an other said it
was like a countrey-parish wasted with the plague.

One being asked why he refused to answer one that had highly abused him in
outrageous terms: he answered: I am like a deaf man in a Belfrie, that
hears not the jangling of the Belles,

A poor Gent. made an old Seruiture of his, his horse-keeper, and having but
one horse in all the world, it was noted that when he rode abroad, his man
staid at home, and when his man rode forth, then he staid at home: Whereupon
one merrily compared them to Castor and Pollux, two stars in the Firmament,
whereof the one appearing in the evening, as soon as ever the other begins to
show, straight peepes in his head, and vanishes out of sight.

A Gentlewoman in a solemn festiuity danced with a young Gallant a most lofty
Lauolta: and a Nobleman there present, said, she resembled the crown of a
good felt hat, soon down, soon up

Of a Gentlewoman that had a bad face and a good waste, an other said, that the
circumstance was better then the sin.

An old Merchant had hanging at his girdle a pouch, a spectacle-case, a
punniard, a pen and inck-horne, and a hand-kertcher, with many other trinkets
besides: which a merry companion seeing, said: it was like a Haberdashers shop
of small wares. A man and his wife were chiding together, and in came a friend
of theirs, and besought them to forbear one an other, and agree as became man
and wife: Whereunto he answered: Know ye that my wife and I are like a pair of
cards still in shuffle with one an other all day long, and at night in a lump
together like good friends.

One seeing a many ^ubs in the street, some up, some down, said, they were
like Chanons singing Glory be to the Father etc.

One seeing a Gentlewoman whose face was pure red and white, said it was like a
shoulder of Mutton new cut off from the breast.

A Gent. gave a Gentlewoman a fine twisted bracelet of silk and gold, and
seeing it the next day upon another Gentlewomans wrest, said: it was like a
Barbers girdle soon slipped from one side to another.

A Nobleman coming into a Gent. house, and being showed all the rooms therein,
which he saw were many and small, he said: they were like Lenten dishes.

One seeing a many Seruing-men waiting on their Master, their clothes al too
big for them, and flagging vnhansomlie about them, said, they were like so many
rotten eggs.

One seeing in a Noble-mans hall a many Marble-Nymphs, every one holding before
them a broad Escutcheon, said, they were like so many Millers displaying their
sails.

One hearing a bagpipe sownd yll-fauouredly, said, it was like the noise of a
Cat, whiles her tail is a cutting off.

One seeing an other thrust out his head as though he stood harkening to
somewhat, said, it was like the head of a Gittern.

OF MONVMENTS.
AT Lisborn in the stewards study of the Orphants hospital is painted in great
Letters these words upon the wall, Ante que des escriue, ante que firmes
reciue: that is. Write before you pay, and receive before you sign.

A Gent. passing by the Shambles, a Butcher asked him what those Letters might
signify which were engraven over their Shambles-doore, viz. K.F.T.S. He
answered, K. Know ye. F. For very truth, T. That whosoever gives bad weight,
S. Shall be whipped at a carts tail.

Charles the seventh French King vewing the tomb of John Earl of Bedford in
our Ladies Church at Roane, a zealous Gallant of his train thinking to do a
high scorn to English valor, and please the King with such his French folly,
spurned the Monument with his foot, and mumbled out withal terms of
disgrace against the Ghost of that victorious Earl: Which the King seeing, and
disliking, said: Oh (Fool) scorn we not him dead, whom alive we dreaded.

A great Lady in this land walking with a merry Gent. in a Gallerie, where
were a many fair Anticke monuments both in picture and Alablaster: amongst the
rest she spied a Marble Statue of a Syluan-God all in his nakedness, and with
very bountiful perpendiculars hanging down below his belly before: Viewing
it a good space, in the end she asked the Gent. what it was like, he answered:
It is one of the six Clearks: One of the six Clearks? (quoth she) how so I
pray ye? He replied: Why? see you not (Madam) his huge Pen and inck-horne?

The end of the sixth part of this book.
Wits, Fittes, and Fancies. The seventh part.
OF DRVNKARDS,
A Gent. man was a great Drunkard, and falling off a ladder, broke his nose so
as he was feign to wear a plaster thereon so great, as covered his nose all
over: which his master seeing, asked him how it came so to pass: One of his
fellows the^ standing by, answered: And like your worship he is feign to case
his nose (as you see) for fear to run it against Tauernes.

A Flemming had drunk five quartes of wine all alone in a Tavern, and there
lay snorting under the board: At last he awaked and was sober, and the Drawer
asked him money for six quartes: he answered: Why (man) that cannot be, for my
belly never holds above 5. quartes at a time: Yes, (answered the Drawer) the
wine being passing good, one quart fumed up into your head, and then the other
five in your belly make six, so is there six quartes. You have reason (said
the Fleming) and so paid him for six quarts.

On Palm Sunday a great Drunkard carried a Palm-bough in Procession, and one
seeing it, said unto him: A house so well known needs nere a bush.

A Physician reprehended one for drinking wine so mightily in time of the
plague: who answered: I do it to the end the plague may take me for a tub, and
so ouer-passe me.

A great Drunkard lying sick of a burning Fever, said unto his Physician. I
would have you cure my heat, but not my thirst

A Doctor of physic advised a great Drunkard that had but one eye to beware of
wine, least he lost the other: he answered: Nay: Better destroy a window then
the whole house.

One advised a great Drunkard still to mingle water with his wine, he
answered: If that were good, God would have ^one it in the grape.

A rich Drunkard misused a poor man in terms, and the poor man being big
and gross, said unto him: Sir, if you please not to forbear me for my own
sake, yet (I beseech you) forbear me, because I am like a Tub.

A Drunkard that had scarce ere a good tooth in his head, one thus bejested
him, saying, that the continual watercourse had quite borne away his quearnes.

Because King Philip is the noblest Dutch-bloud at this day in all the world,
and a Duch-man the greatest Drunkard: Therefore a Spaniard dispraising one for
drunkenness, said: Thou are even as errand a Drunkard as King Philip.

A Drunkard passing over a bridge, his eyes so gla^'d, that he thought they
were two bridges: and stepping upon the wrong bridge down he tumbled into the
brook: where drinking his belly full of water, he continued, saying: No more
now (Hostess) no more now.

A merry Officer of London passing by an Alehouse, where he saw a couple of
good fellows a drinking, stepped in unto them, and asked them who they were:
They answered: Clearke of S. Magnes, and Sexten of Boe: He then adjoined: And I
Recorder of London: Hey (hostess) fill in my pot too.

In a countrey-parish an Alehouse stood close by the church porch, and the
Vicar saying service upon a time, ouer-heard certain good fellows a quaffing
and carrolling in the said Alehouse: Whereupon he fell from his function, and
said: Sirs, it is no reason that yonder fellows should partake of our prayers,
and we not taste of their Ale: And with that he shut up his book and to the
Alehouse he went, and all the parish after him.

One put a frogge into a Duch-mans pot, and he drinking swallowed it clean
down: Being asked whether he felt not any thing in his draught, he answered:
No, nothing but a little mo^e

OF NOSES.
ONe had a Nose like a bunch of grapes, and passing along the street, two women
met him and seeing such a nose, stood still a while, and gazed thereupon: He
asking them why they stood still and went not about their business, they
answered: because your nose stands in our way: With that he wry'd his nose
aside with his finger, and said: On (ye whoores) for (lo) now way is made ye.

One that had a huge nose hearing an other say that in Germany, thieves are
punished with diminution of their noses, said: Then will I go into Germany,
and commit some half dozen robberies there, and so return home again both
rich and with a better nose.

One was a saying that he greatly marueill'd at John a Nokes his great nose: An
other answered: Say not so, but thus: that you greatly marueill at John of
Noses: for in saying so, you giuethe less to the greater, if otherwise, the
greater to the less, which is improper.

One that had a mighty nose, and a very thin beard, an other commented
thereupon, saying, that the shadow of his nose hindered the growth of his beard,
as does the shadow of the Dock the growing up of the Nettle.

In Spain it is a law, all swords and Rapiers to be of one length: A huge nosed
Constable took one with a Rapier above that skantling, and took it from him,
and caused it to be cut shorter, and then delivered it him again, saying: Know
ye now from henceforth, that the law allows all too-much to be diminished:
The Other answered: Diminish then your nose.

A mightie-nos'd Courtier having retired himself for a time into the country,
asked a friend of his that came from the court, what news was said of him
there, he answered: Your Nose.

One seeing a great Drunkard with a huge nose all to bese^ with pimples blue
and red, said, it was the soul of the wine ascended into the region of his
nose, and those pimples the Meteors that redounded thereof.

Sir Thomas Moors Lady was very curious and neat in her attire, and going one
day to Church, she bid her Gentlewoman look whether her gown-pleates stood even
behind, and whether all were well and tight about her: Sir Thomas himself then
standing by, and noting her curiosity, and withal her wry nose said: Faith
(wife) there is yet one fault more then your maid sees neither do I well see
how it can be helped. She being then very earnest with her Gentlewoman to find
it out, and half out of patience that she was so long a looking it, at last
asked Sir Thomas what fault it was: he merrily answered: Your nose.

OF BREATH.
A Great tosted cheese-eater had baited his trap with cheese, and another
seeing it, said unto him: What need you bait your Trap with cheese? do you but
sleep with your mouth wide open a nights, and all the Mise in the chamber will
enter therinto.

One asking a Cony-catchers man, how it chanced his breath stunk so fore: he
answered: With keeping my masters counsel.

OF FACE AND SKARRES.
A Gent. not the best favored, came early in a cold winters morning to visit a
Gentlewoman, and by reason the frost had sore nipt his nose, and somewhat bluly
di^figur'd it, she said unto him: Lord (master N.) how ill-fauor'dly you
look this morning: he answered: Faith, neither of us both look very well when
we are at the best.

One that with overmuch fasting and austere life, had wrought himself
exceeding pale and lean in the cheeks: Another seeing him, said: Lord, how
yonder poor soul has terrefi'd himself with fasting.

One disprais'd unto his friend a certain Gentlewomans hard favor, and said;
If you saw her by day, you would loath her by night.

A Gent. entering into a prison to visit a friend of his, the porter (who had a
great skarre in his face) demanded his weapon: The Gent. gave it him, and
noting his skarre, said: Hold here (friend) and see thou make much of it, for
(I assure thee) it is not it that did thee that disgrace, pointing to his face.

A Gent. having a quarrel with a neighbor of his, sent up and down the
country for hackstars, and good fellows: Among others, two that had ugly
great skarres in their faces proffered him their service, which he refused,
saying: Bring me them that gave you those skarres.

A maid accused a sterne-fac'd fellow before a Justice, affirming that he had
ravished her, and the Justice asking him, whether it were tru^, he answered:
Your Worship sees my face, other force I offered her none.

A Gent. saying to a foule-fac'd fellow: How like you yonder maid? He seeing
her yll-fauor'd, answered: Like me.

OF BEARD.
ONe that had a bush-beard, and used evermore to swear thereby an other said
unto him: Keeping no Alehouse what need you swear so by your bush?

A Judge condemned a red bearded-fellow to be whipped at a cartes-taile: and it
was afterward evident that he was innocent of the fact: The Judge being told
as much, answered: Yet is he justly whipped for having a red beard.

OF BLINDNESS.
A Poor man's eye was strooken out with a stone, and it hong only by a little
string: Going presently to a Surgion to have it put in again, he whiles the
Surgion was busy about his preparatiues and trinkets, said unto him: How think
you (I pray) shall I loose my eye? No (answered the Surgion) for (behold) I
have it here in my hand.

A Gentlewoman who was blind of one eye, her rude husband called her evermore
both in mirth and anger, blind Bussard: Certain strangers being at dinner with
him on a time, a Gentleman of the company was also blind of one eye, and he
then calling his wife blind Bussard, adjoined afterward to please the Gent.
Sir, I mean not you, I mean the blind Bussard my wife.

One endorc'd his letter to a blind-man thus: To him that but by smelling
knows,
Nor good, nor bad before his nose.
this be delivered.

A Schoole-maister raising up his Scholars early in a morning, said unto them:
I having but one eye, can see to rise at break a day, and you with each of you
two eyes, can scarce see day at noone.

A sand-blind Gallant praising himself to himself, and saying: Faith (N.)
thou have a comely personage, a passing fair wife, and the world at will,
what will thou more? A wagge behind a door ouerhearing him, answered: Out with
those eyes.

A one-ey'd Judge being partial for the Plaintiff, threatened the defendant
that unless he held his peace, he would commit him. The Defendant then casting
his eye aside unto the company, said: Sirres, bear witness what an untoward
eye he castes upon me: I fear me, he will adjudge me blind anon.

A blind-man married a fair wife: and on the marriage-day be all to embraced
and kissed her before all the company: She in modesty requested him to
forbear till night: he answered: Nay (Mouse) all is night with me.

A one-ey'd Gent. served a very brown Maistresse, who on a time being
sullenly disposed, sore beflouted such his eyes defect: and he in reference to
her swart complexion, answered: I pray, be not you like the Sable-Crowe, that
still peckes at the eye. Take it interrogatiuely, and it sounds better.

A Countryman that had but one eye came to the Corne-market to buy wheat, and
resting there against a post with a great sack on his shoulder: by chance an
acquaintance of his came by, and seeing him, asked what price corn bare: he
answered: Me thinks they hold the bushel as dear as a man's eye: whereunto
the other replied: What make you here then with so great a sack, seeing you are
able to buy but one bushel?

A Captain that had but one eye, saying unto the Marquis of Pescara: My Lord,
it is now late within night: I pray give me leave to go sleep an hour: The
Marquis in reference that he wanted an eye, answered: You have slept one half
already.

A Seruing-man having but one eye, came into a Fence-Schoole, and played with
an other at fence, and it was his chance to have the other eye strooken out too:
He then seeing himself all in dark, laid down the foyles, and said unto the
company: My masters, God give you all good night.

One that had but one eye, saying to an other: How say ye? will you play with
me for an e^e? the other answered? I, but how will you see to play and stake too?

OF TALNES.
TWo sisters being in place together whereof the yoonger was tall and a maid,
and the other a wife and great with child, a Gent. in the company said unto
the elder: How chances it your yoonger sister out-groweth you in height? She
answered: Because I outgrow her in thicknes.

One seeing a little man and a tall man walk together, said: Lo yonder high
Almaine and low Almaine.

A very little Gent. riding on the way, out-rid his men a pretty way before:
They meeting with a Traueiler, asked him whether he met not such a Gent.
before: he answered: Not any, only I met some half mile hence a horse that
carried a hat upon the saddle-pummell, and a boot hanging down on either side.

A little Courtierran best at tilt before the Emperor Charles and the wags of
the Count said, that the paltry Ape did best.

A very little man talking with a monstrous Lunges, stepped to a ladder by, and
took it, and rested it against his shoulder, and began to clime up thereupon:
The Lunges marueilling thereat, asked him what (a Gods name) he ayl'd: he
answered: Marie, to of the end you may hear me.

One seeing a scab upon a little Dandeprats hand, said: Now see I that I never
saw, a scab upon a hand-worme.

One seeing a dwarf in the street of 44. years old, said: If he be as long a
going from a man, as he is growing to a man, out doubt the Ape will never die.

OF FAT AND GROSS.
ONe Hoops was apprehended upon suspicion of Fellonie, and two very big men
came to bail him: The Justice being thick of hearing, asked a Sarjeant by what
they said, who answered: Marie, (sir) these Tubbes are come for Hoopes.

A big Justice going in Circuit, a plain countryman came to him and said. I
humbly beseech your Highness to do me justice: he answered: Thou had
said better, My Bigness to do thee justice.

A Gent. was manning a fat fair Gentlewoman over a field, and being weary he
whispered to a friend of his, saying: How might I do to rest my self? he
answered: Lie down upon your pack.

One proffered his friend his big and fat daughter in marriage, and withal a
very rich portion. The other gave him hearty thanks therefore, and said: One
quarter of her will serve my turn well'ynough: wherefore you may do well to
seek her out some other husbands for the rest.

One asked an aged fat man how it chanced, that being of those years, he
continued so fat withal, he answered: Never was I yet a husband nor a servant.

A fat gross man challenged a lean man to run with him for a wager,
(condition) he to have as much weight laid upon him, as might counteruaile his
weight. The lean man answered: It were better your corpulence were equalled
with my leanness.

A Gentlewoman commending a Gent. to his face, and saying, that he was a goodly
big man: he answered: All that is great is not good, but all that is good, is
great.

One seeing a big fat Gent. and a lean Gent. standing together, said: Lo
yonder, Shroue-tide and Lent.

OF LEANNES.
A Gent. taxed a Gentlewoman of overmuch leanness, and she answered: Small
and delicate is the needle at the end of a Goad, that pricks the Ox forward.

Of a very lean Gentlewoman that had no more breasts then a board, one said,
that she was like a Hen robbed of all her garbadge.

One seeing a gross man and a lean man standing together, swear, that he never
in all his life saw a Lute and a Gitterne better consorted.

Upon the Tomb of a very lean Lady this Epitaph was engraven: Here in this
grave repose a Ladies bones,
As full of flesh as when they were living ones.
A lean Gentlewoman whose servants name was Ouncebred, one thus bejested her
to her face: It seems (quoth he) you eat ^ot above an ounce of bread at a
meal.

OF CROOKEDNES AND Lamenesse.
THe Duke of Medina Celi having a crook'd back-Ladie to his wife, asked his
Iester on a time, what he thought of his stately new hall at Madredejos: The
Vice answered: A stately hall indeed (my L.) and a tall, yet can not my Lady,
your Lady stand upright therein.

One that was a little crooked fellow and very crafty withal: an other
compared him to the common law.

One saying to a crook-back'd person that it was a great default to be
crook-back'd: he answered: Rather is it an ouer-plus

A crook-back'd Plaintiff besought a Judge to do him right, and the Judge
answered: Well may I hear you, but right I can not do ye.

A blind man of one eye met his bunch-back'd neighbor early in a morning, and
said unto him: Good morrow (neighbor) what? your burden on your back so rare
in a morning? The bunch-backe answered: If it be morning (as you say) how
chances it you have but one window yet open?

Some body having stolen away a stump'd-footed fellows shoes: he said: Now,
I pray God who ever has them, well may they fit him.

One seeing a very misshapen and crooked person in the street said, that he had
a Camel to his Nurse.

A Gent. seeing a monstrous yll-fauor'd and crooked woman in the street, said
to his companion: See yonder: The more a man can find in his heart to hate her,
the better may he love the devil.

A Captain dispatching a lame soldier out of his band, the soldier
mal-content said unto him: The wars need no men that can run away, but such
as can bide by it.

One condoling his friend for having married a lame wife: the other answered:
Why man, I mean not to lead her forth a hunting.

One quarrelling with a lame man, threatened that he would make him set his foot
straight ere he had done: The lame man answered: In so doing I will account you
my friend.

OF CHILDREN.
ONe said to a little child whose father died that morning, and was laid out in
a coffin in the Kitchen, Alas my pretty child, thy father is now in heaven: the
child answered: Nay, that is he not: for he is yet in the Kitchen.

The Earl of Aymonte used to say, that he is luckily unlucky that has no
children.

One who had 8. daughters, his wife was brought a bed of a ninth and so soon
as it was christened, it died: He seeming to take it very heavily, a friend
of his came to comfort him, and said: Having so many fair daughters besides,
what need you lament so grieuouslie for the loss of one? He answered: Oh give
me leave, for this was truly a good one.

One used to say that the benefit of children is, that now and then they tattle
somewhat which delights the father, whereby they partly mittigate his misery
at their mothers hands.

A Gent. walking without his gate, saw certain wagges tottring upon a cart, and
all too brake it, and he sore rated them therefore: In the mean time came by
a neighbor of his, who ought this carte, and the Gentleman asking him whether
he went, he answered: To seek out a Herod to avenge me of these boys.

A Physician discharged a Caliuer at an old Physic book which was left him by
his Grandfather, and it was his hap to shoot it clean through: which his
little child standing by, and seeing, said: I warrant you (father) my
grandfather never courst it through half so soon.

The father forgot to give his little child meat at dinner: Whereupon the
child prayed him to give him some salt: Salt said the Father) and wherefore
salt (my boy?) Marie father (he (answered) for the meat you are to give me.

One whose name was Blackmere was a very foul blackeman, and he had a very
fair child: Whereupon a friend of his meeting him in a morning with his said
little one in his arms, said unto him: Why how now? what? a Black a Moore
turned to white?

A Schoole-maister whose name was Salter read Terence to his Scholars in a
country-parish: A goodman and his wife were at ods about their pottage at
dinner time, he finding fault that they were too salt, and she affirming that
they were too fresh: At last the goodman said to his little boy, there at
dinner with them: Tell me ( Jack) how say thou? are these pottage fresh or
salt? The boy answered: They may very well read Terence (Father.)

A Passenger returning back by a blind Alehouse, where he had lain thatday
seuen-night before, desired his Host to boil him a joint of powdered Veale,
such as he provided him the time before, saying, it was the best meat that
ever he eat. You shall sir (answered the Host) and so departed: With that a
little child of his standing by, said unto the Passenger: If my Father should
loose a horse every week, it would be dear Veale to him.

A Physicians child was sick of a burning fever, and he forbad his folk in
any case to give him water to drink: The child hearing such his fathers
encharge, within a while after called for a little holy water to drink, which
they telling master Doctor of, he then said: What (a deu'll) does the Ape
call for water from heaven? Nay, then let him have it, or any other water
besides.

One that took upon him much gentry, and was no Gent. his little sons were a
tumbling in a heap of straw in the street, which a Gent. (a neighbor of his)
seeing out at his window, said unto his wife: It Were a good deed yonder
gallowses were whipped, see how they tumble and bedust themselves in the
straw: she answered: No, let the^ alone, for it fair betokens their Gentry.

The Countess of Beneuente advised a Gentlewoman her neighbor, not to dote
too dearly upon her little Babe, least the loss of it should grieve her all
too nearly.

OF AGE.
ONe that had a white head and a black beard, an other asked him how it came so
to pass: he answered: Marie, the hair of my head is twenty years older then
my beard.

A Nobleman had attained to 86. years of age, and never in all his life had
taken physic: at last he sickned very grievously; and at the earnest instants
of his friends condiscended to take physic: Then came the Pothecarie to him
three or four days together with preparatiue sirrops and potions; all which
he received, and bid his man after the Pothecary was gone, to put it al
together into a close stool. At last came master Doctor him self to visit
him, and viewing what filthy stuff was in the close stool, he said: Sir, you
are a happy man to be rid of these bad humors in your body: see here the
benefit of Physic, and your life preserved: The Nobleman answered: Gramercie
close stool.

One asked an old man how long he had lived: he answered: A while, but a great
many years.

One used to say, that a man being once arrived to 50. ought rather bethink
himself to receive death well, then to enlarge his life longer.

One meeting an old man all trembling on his staff, said unto him: The house
that is once come to a prop, is near falling.

One being demanded what was an old man's greatest difficulty, he answered:
To afford rewards.

One used to say, that an old man to cheer himself daintily, is to make his
death more bitter.

One woonted to say, that of all avarice the old man's is worst, considering
that to hoord up treasure in the age of death when a man is not likely to live
to spend it, is extreme folly.

An old Gent. woonted to say, that three things were increast unto him by old
age: viz. To see more, to do more, and command more: To see more, by reason
he was feign to use spectacles to make his letters seem the greater: To do
more, in that alighting off his horse, he was ready to draw the sadle after
him: To command more, for that he was feign to speak twenty times, before ere
he could get his men to stir.

An old Gentlewoman going to the house of office, espied a looking glass that
lay there upon a shelf: Taking it, and viewing her self therein, and seeing how
wrinkled and ylfauor'd she was, she threw it down again, saying: Fie on thee
false and ylfauor'd glass: even for being such, it is meet thou lie in such an
obscure place as this.

An old man viewing himself in a looking-glass all wrinkled and hoarie, his
eyes deep sunk into his head, and his cheeks also for want of teeth, said:
Lord, to see the difference of looking glasses: I remember when I was a young
man, I took pleasure to view my self in a glass, so well mettled were they in
those days

An old Nobleman lay in the same chamber in a several bed from his Lady, and
rising one night to put himself unto her, he chanced to stumble his nose
against the bed-sted: wherewith she awaking, and saying: Who is there? he
answered: Somewhat it was (Lady) was coming toward you, but now it is down
again.

A very old Gentleman making love to a gallant young Dame: she said unto
him: What mean you (sir) to talk to me of such matter at Complyne time?

A young Gentlewoman had bestowed her self upon an old Knight whose name was
Steven Templer: whereupon one merrily said, that she had buried her self quick
in the Tomb of an old Knight of the Temple.

An old Gentleman's young corriuall in love meeting him in a morning said unto
him: Old sir, sweet Love beseemes not your years: he answered: If you mean
it by me, know ye that in my country a man of fifty years is accounted
yoonger then an Ass of 15.

OF GARRVLITY.
A Talkatiue Gentlewoman had lost most ofher teeth, and asking a Physician the
cause of it, she being both young and healthy, he answered: Your tongue beats
too much against your teeth.

One that had a long skarre in his face, and was exceeding talkatiue, a friend
of his said unto him: Having the Reanes in your cheek, me thinks you should
have the bridle in your mouth.

Upon a passing talkatiue Gentlewomans tomb this Epitaph was engraven. Here
l^es interred a most renowned Dame,
Whose lips no closure ever misbecame:
But as she lived, and never linn'd to talk,
So now in death she leaves each tongue to walk
In daily tittle tattle of such her fault.


Sir Thomas Moore hearing one tell a monstrous lie, said: I would not for any
good hear him say his Creed, least it should seem a lie.

OF DREAMS.
A Iester begged a garment of Don Alonso de Aguilar, and said Sir, I dreamed
this last night that you gave me that ga^ment upon your back, how like you my
dream? he answered: Auaunt (drunken knave) believe no dreams.

John a Nokes had a chamber in Paul's Churchyard in London, and being one
night a sleep, he dreamed that an Angel came to him, and told him that Doomsday
was at hand: and therefore willed him in any case to have a great care of his
soul, and to do all manner of good deeds in the mean time; affirming, that
when he should hear the Trumpet sound, he was then forthwith to repair to
the vale of Iosaphat to judgment. After this, as he dreamed that he was a
doing all good deeds, giving his Alms to this poor man and to that, and
performing a great deal of Penance, in the end he dreamed that he heard the
trumpet sound: and with that up he started from out his bed, and running
ouer-hastilie to the vale, his nose being foremost, chanced against a post,
the which all to disfigured it: Such was his judgment.

One said to an other: I dreamed this other night that you kissed my Labell:
The Other answered: Dreams go by contraries: and therefore (belike) you must
kiss mine.

OF SICKNESS.
A Delicate Gent. finding himself somewhat distempered, sent his water to a
Physician, who seeing it to be very good, and arguing perfect health, came
anon after to visit the Gent. and asked him how he did: he answered: Sick:
How feel you your stomach? Well: How sleep you? Well: Is it even so? (then
said the Doctor) Are you sick with eating well and sleeping well? I Will give
you somewhat shall soon remedy all that.

One asking a Physician whether such a one were not dangerous-sicke: he
answered: No, not dangerous, but in danger.

A whole-man asked a sick-man in his fit, how he did: he answered: In respect
of God, even as you do.

A rich Farmer bestowed his daughter upon an old, poor, and sickly Gent. and
coming on a time to visit him sick a bed, he met his daughter at the chamber
door, and asking her how her husband did, she answered: Do as he do may for me
(father:) You (for your part) to endow me with his blood, have undone my flesh.

A Gent. being extreme sick, his kinsmen willed him in any case to send for a
Physician: he answered: No (I pray,) let me die at leisure.

A man of worship was so sore diseased of the Gout that he was feign to be
carried up and down in a chair, but at last through continual hot bathes he
recovered, and became a sound man again: and walking one day abroad lusty and
in good health, a Iester saw him, and cried out aloud: Chains, chains, no more
chaires.

A sick Gent. was forbidden to drink wine, and being extreme hot and thirsty,
he besought the Physicians to permit him one draught and no more: They through
his much importunity condiscended (condition) he to drink a draught of water
presently after: So, off he drunk the wine: and then being afterward offered
the water: he refused it, saying: Now am I not a thirst.

A Gent. being sick of the dropsy, called for a draught of water: and his
Physician willed him in any case to forbear, affirming that he could not live
above two hours at the most: Oh (answered the Gent.) then will I diue those two
hours in water.

A Gentlewoman having surfetted of green fruit, the Physician gave her a vomit:
and she in vomitting, cast up also all the good meat she had eaten; which she
espying, said: Now is virtue punished with vice.

A sick old woman asking her Physician how he thought she should die, he
answered: Even as a leaf that can no longer bide upon the tree: She replied:
What; like an Orange leaf (I pray?)

OF LITTLENES. This Chapter is misplaced with some of Tallness from fol. 192.
A Channon of Toledo, who was a man of a very low and slender stature,
scoffingly asked a poor Friar that had but one eye, what he used to pray for
at Gods hand, a^firming that it were rightnecessarie he prayed unto him for
another eye: Indeed sir (answered the Friar) I had need have two eyes to
discern so petty a go by ground as you.

A little pretty soldier dismounted his foe-man, and said: Now yield or die:
The Other looked round about him, and answered: I see not to whom.

A Jew said unto a petty Spaniard his familiar: In sooth you seem a little S.
James. The Spaniard answered: Were thou a Moore as thou art a Jew (by his
wounds) I would cut of thy head for so saying.

One being asked why he married so little a wife, he answered: Of evils, the
least is best.

A little personage being to have a case of debt adjudg'd against him, said
unto the plaintiff at the bar: If you have any such band of mine, let us
hear how it goes: Then the band was read openly in Court, and being to this
effect, that he bound himself both body and goods for the repay thereof: he
then said unto the Judge: Your Honor sees that body I have little or none and as
for my goods, let him take all he finds (a Gods name.)

A Gent. seeing an unlawful tall Gentlewoman pass along the street, asked her
hindmost man her name: Who answered: maistresse Hoap: The Gent. replied:
Ouer-large to be so called.

Of one that was a very tall and a big man an other said, he was good to make
a Porter, because if he should chance to find the door shut below, he might
discharge his pack in at the garret window.

One seeing a tall Lunges and a little man together, said, that it was like
Paul's steeple over S. Faithes Church.

A tall personable man offered to accompany a dwarf in the street, saying,
that the people would the less gaze and wonder at his miserable littleness:
The Dwarf answered: Rather will they wonder at my folly, to see me lead an
Ass along by me, and not ride.

OF DEATH.
ONe said to an other who had a very narrow mouth: Questionles, when you die,
your soul will fly out at your breech. A Gent. being ferried over a river by a
couple of boys, the boat leaked, and was in danger of drowning: The Gent. then
seeing the danger said unto them: Good boys, as ye are men row boys.

It is an ancient custom in Spain in favor of life, that any lewd woman
whatsoever, being known for such, and being neither widow nor maid, may save
any Batcheler from the Gallows, offering to marry him. It chanced that a
young Gent* who had been prisoner upon suspicion of fellonie, was acquitted by
the Jury: And passing that evening under a Gentlewomans window, who was a
loose maid of life: she said unto him: Lord (master N.) it is a joy to see
you at liberty: how (a Gods name) have you escaped the gallows to day? He
looking up unto her, answered: I needed not fear hanging, so long as you are
alive.

A Gent. lying very sick a bed, heard a passing bell ring out, and said unto
his Physician: Tell me (master Doctor) is yonder music for my dancing?

An old Gent. in his deathbed, ouerheard his wife praying at his beds feet,
thus: Lord, I beseech thee, revoke this doom of death from my dear husband,
and let it light upon me: Whereunto he answered: Gramercie (good wife) I for my
part am content, if God be agreed.

A Gent. lying sick at a Manour-house of his called Ponde, would needs be
removed thence to another house which he had a four or five miles off, and
being asked why he so desired change: he answered: Because I list not die like
a fish in a Pond.

A Spanish Earl was a great swearer, and hunting one day in a Forest, and
having lost his company, ranging up and down in the dark, chanced to fall
horse and man into a very deep Mine-pit, where he remained all that night,
not forgetting in the mean time to bethink himself of a many good thoughts,
and namely, among the rest he was right penitent of his sin in swearing,
vowing, that if it pleased God to deliver him out of that pickle, he would
never whiles he lived swear more. By chance his Spaniell being with him when
he fell, was so kind as he would not depart from the place, but there remained
bawling and howling all the while, till at last certain passengers
traueilling that way the next morning, and ouer-hearing the Dogs pitteous
clamor, made to the place, and there looking down into the pit, espied the
Earl: and then with such tackles as they had about them drew him up, and set
him on firm ground. Then he looking down into the hole to see how deeply he
had fallen, and seeing it very deep, rapt out a legion of huge oaths,
saying: Gogges nownes and his passion, is this a fit place for a Nobleman to
fall into.

A Gent. lying a dying, an old woman came to visit him, and asking him before
a great many there present, whether he knew her or no: he answered: Yes full
well: an errand Baude thou art (so God shall help me.) Then she telling him
that that was no meet time to slander his poor neighbor: he replied: Yes, it
is best telling a truth in the hour of death.

A Doctor being drawn along on a hurdle to execution, casting up his eyes, and
espying a multitude of people about him, said: Deus bone, quot Corui circae
vnum Cadauer!

A rich Churl and a beggar were buried at one time in the same Churchyard,
and the belles rung out amain for the miser: Now, the Wisacre his son and
Executor, to the end the world might not think that all that ringing was for
the beggar, but for his father, hyr'd a Trumpetter to stand all the
ringing-while in the Belfrie, and between every peale to sound his Trumpet,
and proclaim aloud, and say: Sirres, this next peale is not for R. but for
master N. his father.

One telling a virtuous Gentlewoman that her picture was broken; she answered:
Then is it but the shadow of a shadow gone.

FINIS.
A Table of all the Chapters of this Book.
The 1. Part.
OF Kings and princes. page 7 Of Nobleme^ and Ambassadors. page 12 Of
Gentlemen. page 23 Of Gallants and vpstarts. page 29 Of Coronels and Captains.
page 3^ Of Soldiers. page 35 Of Challenges and Combats. page 38 Of Travelers
by land and sea. page 40 Of Politicians. page 45 Of Suit and Suitors. page 46 Of
Game and Gamesters. page 47
The 2. Part.
Of Popes and Prelates. page 50 Of Priests and Friars. page 58 Of Doctors and
Scholars. page 64 Of Poets and Musitions. page 66 Of Physic and Physicians.
page 71 Of Justices, Lawyers, and Scriueners. page 74
The 3. Part.
Of Love and Lovers. page 79 Of Husbands and wiuing. page 83 Of Women. page 87
Of Cuckolds. page 94 Of Bastards. page 96 Of Table-matter. page 97 Of
Visitation. page 102
The 4. Part.
Of Nations and Cities. page 105 Of Religions. page 107 Of Attires. page 111 Of
Officers. page 113 Of Guest and Entertainment. page 117 Of Merchants and
Misers. page 120 Of Artizans and Prentises. page 126
The 5. part.
Of Iesters. page 130 Of Seruing-men and pages. page 133 Of Biscaines and
Fools. page 139 Of Countrie-men and Clownes. page 146 Of Fellons and Thieves.
page 156 Of Conie-catchers. page 163 Of Beggars. page 167
The 6 part.
Of Equiuocates in speech. page 169 Of Extrauagant speech. page 172 Of Euasions
and excuses in speech. page 174 Sense reuerst by ide^tity of speech. page 177
Of Improper speech. page 178 Of Emblems, Poesies, and Endorc. page 179 Of
Similies. page 182 Of Monumentes. page 183
The 7. part.
Of Drunkards. page 185 Of Noses. page 187 Of Breath. page 188 Of Face and
Skarres. page 188 Of Beard. page 189 Of Blindness. page 190 Of Tallness.
Mingled together page 191 Of Littleness. Mingled together page 202 Of Fat and
gross. page 192 Of Leanness. page 193 Of Crookedness and Lamenesse. page 194
Of Children. page 195 Of Age. page 197 Of Garrulitie. page 199 Of Dreams. page
199 Of Sickness. page 200 Of Death. page 203
FINIS.
Faults escaped in Printing.
Have I this page 88. lin. 14. read Have I had this
Years of standing page 81. l. 28 read Years standing.
Besides that that she p. 81 l. 30. read Besides that she.
And but even. p. 96 l. 18. read But even.
That we are not. p. 96. l 28* read, And that we are not.
Villiatos. p. 66. l. 12 read, Villialobos.
Debt and embarked p 151. l. 1. read, Debt, fled the country and
On a time to a time to a Noblemans. p 100 l. 1^. read,
On a time to a Noblemans.
Correspondend p. 122. l. 1 read. Correspond.
LOVES OWL. In dialogue-wise between Love, and an old man.
The old man.
TEll me naked wretch of sin,
My gates are shut, how came thou in,
Thou have committed Burglarie,
To venture all so hardily into my gardin.
I thought my age and good advise,
Had rid this garden long ere this
Of all thy baggage fooleries,
Thy weeds and briery fallaces, and sour seeds of sin.
Go to (sirrah) get you gone,
Let an aged man alone,
All retired as you see
To record repentingly his youths amisses.
Neither is this sap-lesse tree,
Fit for woonted iollitie:
Her fruits and flowers are long ago,
Withered in her root below all to anguishes.
All her green, and sweetes are done,
Her shadows dead for want of son:
All is bryer, and nettle now,
That whilom was a gallant bough, and fair flourished.
You come not now as erst you did
Into a garden beautifid:
With beds and Allies, herbs and flowers,
Fair Crystal streams, and banquet-boures, like heaven over head.
The Nightingale has not been here,
Heard to sing this many a year;
Frost and snow, and winters night,
Have defaced her beauty quight, and stain her glory.
This house, whose battlements on hie,
Whilom fair, brau'd the lofty sky,
Towering in pride, and luxury
The top of vain felicity: such was my folly.
See now a cottage it is becoom
Of withered sedge, fearne, brake and broom,
Ay-me, a rotten reed I am,
A cripple, iuyce-lesse aged man, deceast to pleasure.
Then get thee gone thou wanton boy,
Seek out some other place of joy:
This garden is a solitude,
With ghostly sollaces indu'd; I have no leisure
To entertain nor thee, nor thine,
Fools and furies of ruin
Oh, how happy are they all
That never tasted of the gall of thy lewd delights.
Wretched boy, I tell thee true,
Thou art a traitor to thy crew;
Protesting gracious complements,
Yet ministering but discontents, and all ill dispights.
These are thy trim benignities,
Incontinent desire of ease,
Envy, disdain, and ielosie,
Doubt, tears, and captivity, and all is foolerie.
Self-love, vainglorie, passion,
Unrest and desperation,
Intemperance, and enmity,
Vain hope, and melancholy, and impiety;
Grief, brabble, waste and cruelty,
Effeminate solemnity,
Treason, distrust, disloyalty,
And after all comes beggerie, and late repentance*
These are thy balefull outrages,
And benefits of little ease;
Ramping rages against reason,
Never yet out of season among thy Orphans.
Love. These angry terms do represent
You never skilled my blandishment;
My peace, my sweetes, my lullabies,
Wherewith al souls I ciuillize, that bid me welcome.
Old. Yes, well ^^ken thy stonishments,
And dangers by experience:
This same sin-writhled trunk of mine,
Is a fragment of thy ruin, and base martyrdom.
This nightshade garden well areeds
That all thy solaces are seeds,
And weeds of woe: thy sweets but snares
T'intangle souls in hell unawares, ridiculously.
A gracious garden once it was,
Al ouer-floured with solace
Till that thy brutish barbarism,
Through fallacies made entry in, such was my frailty.
And now it is, Oh now it is
A briery and weedy wilderness:
The map of infelicity,
A rag of all indignity: a badge of heavy cheer*
Love. Good aged Father, for I see
Your terms are terms of injury,
And flint with flint affoordes but fire,
I list not answer you in ire. but will forbear.
And all according to my name,
My language shall be free from blame:
How ever you in ignorance,
And chollericke misgouernance distaine your reverence.
Old. Adulterate synceritie,
Thy fair face is fallacy:
Thy speech is all hypocrisy,
And all thy drift is fellonie, and deadly vengeance.
As mildest Oils are most of force,
To penetrate the stubborn'st corse,
So happily thou hop'st with sweetes,
To draw me down into the deepes of all thy dangers.
Snakes and serpents often have I seen,
Faire-rowlling on the grassie green,
Their peckles pleasant to the eye,
Yet have they needles inwardly, to sting bystanders.
Not that I fear thy poisonous sting,
Or any danger thou can bring:
For well I wot these hoary hears,
Are Mithredate against the fears of thy infection*
Love. Now that I proffer to reply,
Why stop ye your ears so iealously?
Old man. The bird that sees and knows the snare
Blame it not, if it beware, of apprehension.
Love. Be not so mis-preiudicate.
Old man. Better now then all too late.
For though in show thou seem a friend
Yet mischief is the latter end of thy dissignment.
Love. Yet hear a while what I will say
Good for evil I will appay:
Thy disdain, and contumely,
I will recompense with glory, and most sweet content.
And though that you oppose your will
To contradict my kindness still;
Yet shall my gentle patience
Exemplify my good pretense, to make you blessed.
Old. Oh what a medly have we here?
Poison mixed with dainty cheer;
Thy words and looks are good enough
But care and hell is in the proof thereof possessed.
Then fie upon thy pipe and thee,
I list not hear thy melody,
I am too old a Mariner,
For Syrenes songs to endanger, then prate no more.
Love. These fierce offenses specify,
Your Natures harsh obliquitie;
Wherefore I Will leave you to the same,
And in compassion of your blame, all to deplore.
The Judge to doom a wretch to die
Answerlesse, is injury:
Yet you condemn mine innocence,
Without admitting my defense, ungentle Father.
Old. Nay, say not so, I am content
To listen to thy argument,
Condition that thou stand aloof,
And interrupt not my disproofe, but hear my answer.
For I am willing in this case,
To do thy trumperie due disgrace,
As well by power of argument,
As by the sprite of discontent and iustrude-language.
Then ware th'infringe not my decree,
But prate thy prates aloof from me,
For fear thy filth infect the air,
And so possess me unaware with one or other rage.
Love. Alas you much mistake my might,
My power it is no power of spite,
Mild, and merry ciuility,
And arm in arm in unity is my Philosophy.
Which (for I see your good intent
Is now disposed to argument)
I hope so well to justify,
As you will think it honesty, and thank me highly.
Nor will I challenge for my pains,
Any mercenarie gains:
But only as you credit me,
So live you ever merrily, and I am pleased.
Now in the front of your aggriefe,
You term me a fellon and a thief:
I say, he is no thief that takes
That which another freely forsakes, to be so eased.
Besides, to take a thing away,
The owner gazing on the pray,
Nor contradicting, but agrees,
And claps his hands, and glad he is, what theeuery is this?
Then heerin have you wronged me,
To blot me with such infamy.
Old. Nay, nay, that term is all too true,
How er'e I list not prove it now for very drowsinesse.
I feel a mist com'd over mine eyes,
Foul befall thy sorceries;
But well I wot to be aueng'd,
I Will sleep thy prattle to an end: then prate thy heart out.
Love. I: so my swauetie assigns
Rest to rage and angry minds:
Then sleep your sleep in peace and bless,
I hope you will hear me nearthelesse, I do not doubt.
For why? my speeches are a voice
Strong in power, and not in noise,
Full possessing the hearers ear,
Deaf or dead although he were, so sweet it pierces.
And since you cannot ease your mind,
With terms enough of raging kind:
In sooth you can not better do,
Then take a nap an hour or two, for rest remildeth.
Mean while I Will sing sweet Lullabies,
And warlble forth my swauities,
To show you as by argument,
How precious is my blandishment, and merry bounties.
LOVES SONNET.
NOw that I take my Lute in hand,
Rage and rancour I you command,
Take your sister Melancholy,
And down to dark hell all hie ye.
For here I mean to make my residence,
By virtue of my peaceful influence,
And cheer this aged man with louelements for ever. Lullalullabie, etc.
Though age be old and cold, I can
Re-young him to a lusty man,
And in his iointes infufe a fire,
To execute a kind desire.
I can reuegetate his dying year,
By fair be-priesting him to a bonny-pheere:
Or else dispensing him such like good cheer else where. Lullalullaby, etc.
As does the verdant vine amount,
Climing up her counter-mount,
Or as the hop or Yuy-vaine
Reach the top of their sustain:
So the religious of my unity,
Enjoying one another specialtie,
Attain the period of felicity. and content. Lulla lullabie.
Dull melancholy is a rust,
Ranckling all good mettles lust,
It is a dumpe of dreriments,
Fatuity is her whole pretense,
But I am an oil that fair bebrightens all,
Of all reioycements I am liberal,
And of all wit, I am pedagogicall. and so hent. Lulla lullabie, etc.
Nay more: I Will tell you wondrous nues
Fire int'yee I can infuse;
I can resuscitate the dead,
And give them lust and liuelihead:
The dotard I can make most passing wise,
The miser in expense to riotize
The coward hardy against his enemies, all for love. Lulla lullaby, etc.
The plough-lob I can ciuillize,
The frantic man with grace aguize;
Kings and Cesars I subdue,
And with my rites their souls in due.
All fair and goodly things I do detect
And with my veil I cover all defect,
And all in unity I do connect and approve. Lulla lullabie.
Look up to heaven, and I am there,
I reign in the celestial Sphere:
The Signs and Planets have from me
Their influence and harmony:
Nor heaven, nor earth have uniformity
Nor any faculty her simpathy,
Whereby to do her due actiuity. without me. Lulla lullabie, etc.
I do devise all gay attyres,
Calls, rebatoes, perwigs and wires:
Hoop-sleeues, French-bodies, vardingalles,
Paintings, perfumes and washing-balles;
With twenty thousand such like bonny things,
To grace fair Nature, and mis-natures doings,
And profit trades by doing my deuisings, workemanly. Lulla lullabie, etc.
Feasts and frollickes I do ordain,
And merry meetings on the plain;
Revels, and daunces in a row,
And morrow-musicke at the window:
Tilting, and iusts are my magnificence,
The pomp whereof forbeareth no expense,
If so my spirit be in the pretense, and grace it. Lulla lullabie, etc.
Maskes, and music is in the Court,
And Maie-pole mirth is country sport,
Maie-morning comes but once a year,
Yet are my doings every wheare,
The court, and country both have priuities,
In which I still maintain actiuities,
By coupling two, and two in sollaces all secret. Lulla lullaby etc.
Maids, and widows are of my train,
Hard it were they should refrain;
The very Clergy, and their wives,
Love me as they love their lives;
Men and women all are Salamanders,
Glutting my fires every where in corners,
Because they know such fires bode no dangers, nor consume. Lulla lullabie. etc
Wrinckles, and pimples I can cure,
And make the stutting tongue demure;
The trembling palsy I can stay,
And take the misers gowt away:
The cripple creature I can make to run,
The blind man with new eyes to see the sun,
And set in other teeth where the old are done with the rue me. Lulla lullabie.
The aged Beldams withered face,
I can give it a glittering grace;
Her breath unsavory to the nose,
I can besweeten like the Rose:
I can exchange her pale gray hairs to gold,
Her rewme-cough into music manifold,
Her bethred body all to lust embold, so can I. Lulla lullabie. etc.
The weakest impotent alive,
My quickening spirit can revive,
Nor drugs, nor drammes, I minister,
Nor pills, nor powltis, nor plaster,
But only a copletiue desire t'inioy
The full felicity of a privy toy,
That truly counter-giues sweet joy for joy, al-a-by. Lulla lullabie, etc.
Then since I am so physical,
So musical, so martial,
So Court-accepted, and rural,
And so ioy-mighty over all:
Be not t'your self so prejudicial,
As to refuse my beneficial
Bounties, in ouer-melancholie gall. Lulla lullabie, lulla lullabie.
Old. All me no alls, for all is naught,
Thy joys, and counter-ioyes are fraught
With heaps of hels; thy Lullabies
Are all accursed miseries, and foul befall men.
My ears are much too blame to hear
Such foul love lust-polluted geere;
I wisse mine eyes were better bent
To s^eep out all thy babblement and full-a-lying.
But as thou dealest in this case,
My settled senses to amaze,
So all thy bosted benefits
Do but bereave men of their wits, to ensuing yls.
Then so an errand thief thou art,
To steal away men's wits by art,
As Well as they are murderers,
That drown but willing mariners with their musickes wiles.
Thou also art a murderer,
In giving men false wings to houer,
About untrue felicity,
Whereby they fall into the sea of a thousand deaths.
Thou art that spirit that S. Powle,
Did feel to wrestle with his soul,
And prayed our Lord to set him free
From such a peevish enemy of his wel-wishes.
The Poets of Gentilitie,
Have penned down many a history,
How that their gods were turned to beasts,
In executing thy behestes, and dishonestie.
Thou art the excrement of lust,
Thy first and last is all unjust,
From lust enraged to ill asswag'd,
So is, so ends thy disparrage, and ignominy.
What lover yet did ever prove,
Other complement in love
Then lust? which every beast can do,
Doing but that, that longs thereto, even as well as man.
So then is it right evident,
Thou art but a disparagement,
And all thy grace indignity,
That so mankind do beastifie with lusts pollution.
Oh what a heavy case is it,
Man for lust to loose his wit,
And leave his true Nobility,
For brute-beastlie carnalitie, through thy base instinct.
King Solomon was passing wise.
Till love and lust did him surprise:
And Sampson that most valiant Iue.
Was never weakened but by you, nor in chains inlinckt.
As for thy bosted unity,
Troy can witness that is a lie,
Her ten years wars and latter fall
Tells, that thou were cause of all that topsie turuy.
What Natures consanguinity,
Dear friendship, or affinity,
Good law or custom does unite,
Thou turn'st to discord and despite through thy scurrility.
Thou breed'st debate in heretages,
Bastardizing familiesreversed;
Thou runst to witches and the devil,
All to compass thy foul evil, lust and luxury.
Thou use poisons for to kill,
And to intoxicate the will,
Witness the Emperor Caligula,
So used by Cesonia. t'intice his amity.
Rapes and incests are from thee,
Thou sparest not Vestality,
Nor any place of privilege,
So shameless is thy sacrilege, and vile presumption.
There is no just commandment,
Nor good obey in Loves intent;
For Love and lust preuaricates
Awe, and reason in all estates with lewd confusion.
And if thou make the miser free,
It is to buy more misery;
And if thou make the dotard wise,
It Is dotage turned to Ideotize, as dung to dirt.
And if thou make the coward stout,
It is to compass filth about,
His stoutnes is but shamelessness
To do and boast his beastliness. a stout piece of work.
If thou remilde the frantic man,
Thou make him but a tame fool than,
If kings and Cesars thou subdue,
What mischiefs do not then ensue to their commonweals?
Did not King Rodericke of Spain
Count Iulians bed with lust distaine?
From whence ensued 800. years
Of Spannish wars altogethers against infidels.
King David's case is scripturall,
What punishments did him befall,
And to his people from above,
For his unlawful lusty love with fair Bersabe,
As for thy vaunted Taylery,
Thy stillings, and perfumerie,
Thy physic and thy cookerie,
All Is but abuse of honesty, and trains to foolerie.
Upon a bad foundation,
All building's desolation,
No glorious guilt or gallant show,
Can warrant it from overthrow, the groundwork failing*
So nor thy brags can better thee,
Grounded on Lusts base infamy,
The mean-worke being passion,
The top a loathed fruition after once obtaining.
Then in like sort is vanity,
Thy Court-ship and thy country glee,
But specially thy priuities,
And all thy twinfold coplatiues in hugger mugger.
And where thou prat'st of miracles,
As fire infused int' yce-siccles:
The dead revived, the blind to see,
And such like cripple trumperie, I tell thee brother.
Such vile effects are monstrous,
Not any whit miraculous;
For miracles are holy-doomes,
And monsters are all but hel-doomes and imperfections.
The Devil I trow is scandalized,
To see a seuent-yeere man surpised
With Lusts undue lubricity,
In those years of philosophy, and tame fashions.
But say that Caesar, and the sage
And cripple age sometimes engage
It self to lust, that argues
Their frailty, and not thy nobleness, the fact being foul.
Much less is heaven beautified
With any grace from thee derived,
It being no fleshly creature,
But of a far better feature, and a better soul.
Extreme is thy presumption,
To vaunt so high a function,
Heaven to be ordered by thee,
That art earths only infamy, and high dishonor.
But as thou art a naked wretch,
So is it thy nature to out-stretch
Thy limbs to lust, thy lips to lies,
Heaven and earth to scandalize, with the one and the other.
Oh that mankind would but refrain
His idle and delicious vain
Of living, then were thy puissance
Quite quaild, or of petty mussance to our mortality.
For but in s^oth and daintiness,
Reigns thy lustful wretchedness;
Who-euer lives otherwise,
Does vanquish thee, and Caesarize over all thy villainy.
Long and helthy lives he,
Rich, happy, and merrily,
Nor botch, nor pox, nor lewd unrest
Does betide his noble breast in pains and temprance.
He riots not in gluttony,
Nor carroling ebriety;
He skils no brabble, nor blasphemes,
Nor lives by any ungodly means, but with due maintenance.
His speech, his gesture, and attire,
Represent a stayed desire;
No new-fangle, form or fashion,
Or fantastical passion taints his discretion.
His conversation is upright,
Shining through all despite:
Reason high dominioning
All his actions, as a king with reputation.
Reason is an Antelope,
That lust-full fellows follow not,
With peace and order at her heel,
She guides men to the common-weele of glory and fame.
She is my lantern and my light,
My Land-lady and my tergat bright,
By her I see, to her I fee,
By her I am defenc'd from thee, and from all thy shame.
She points me to a happy Love
Fair and chaste in heaven above,
Whose name is holy Charity,
Grandmother of all honesty and of all virtue.
In which fair love I see a light
Far passing all this worlds delight,
It Is virtues retribution
When death has done his function, which none can eschew.
Upon which light and sweet delight
Whiles I but newly set my sight,
Resolving to attain thereto
By all the good that I can do, what wind blew thee hither?
To interrupt so dear a thought
With thy Love lust-polluted taulk,
As though I were some errand fool
Doctrinable in thy School and baudy grammar,
Go get thee gone unhallowed Elfe,
And leave me alone unto my self
To Attend my speculation
Of th'aforesaid contentation my soul aspires to.
Love. Now have I heard with patience
All your chollericke offense,
And sooth to say there is amiss
Somewhat in my blessedness, but I Will show you how.
There is a kind of people, that
Being one half cold, the other hot,
Know not how to choose the mean,
But love in a vicious extreme, and so dishonor me.
Heerhence it is that some men call
Me frantic, and fantastical,
Cruel, disloyal, quarrellous,
Unconstant, blind, and impious, such being their frailty.
Will we condemn the parent-bird
If that her young one vnaffeard
Trans-flie her safe prescription,
And so fall down to destruction, skilling no caution?
Such is my case; God knows I mean
That no man should loue-misdemeane
Himself to danger or reproach;
Yet some men do, and I for such sustain detraction.
Not but that I must confess,
There is a kind of heaviness
In Loves pursuit, but that is to make
It (once obtained) more delicate to the paines-taker.
The more adventure, the more gains,
No pleasure's sweet without some pains
Who never wept, laughes sauour-lesse,
The fisherman fisheth boot-lesse that feels no water.
So is it then my property
To mix some sour with swauitie,
To make them know that sweet content
Is no fondelings base baublement, but of better worth.
The appetite that is foregon
With ouer-sweet commestion,
Tart meats recover it again
From out that ouer-fed famine with their prickle spurs.
And then as does that appetit
Re-sauor every dainty bit,
So all my sour contraries
Are shooing-hornes to swaueties, and refining files.
Then marvel not, if now and then
You see my sowres among men,
The which heerby well may ye know,
That still a woman strikes the blow with her wyle-beguiles.
The Sun is not so base a groom,
As to be tied to every room,
But here and there, and as it listes,
It flits by selfe-fits and shifts to show his freedom.
And why not I to show my state,
And make mankind more kind and grate,
Should not likewise sometimes bestow
My frets and checkes, and overthrow on pleasures kingdom?
The fruit of overmuch fruition,
Being of a loathed condition,
I deem it prudent policy
To turn familiarity sometimes to enmity.
That then as does the Suns return
Fructify and fair adorn
Each plain fore-withred with winter,
So likewise may my fair re-enter renew all iollity.
Then (gentle Eld) admit me now,
Coming to re-enter you,
And with my sweetest sollaces
I Will cheer your ages anguishes, and all to bless you.
I will quite renew your figure,
From cripple to youthful vigure,
And on that crased tenement
I Will rear a lofty battlement, for all the world to view.
Your garden I will fair replant,
And set with flowers all aflant,
There shall no bryre abide therein,
No weed, nor any unsavory thing, but I Will pluck it up.
Pleasant streams shall run along
All your plants and flowers among,
All manner sweet-throated birds
Shall sit and sing in the arbors where you dine or sup,
Then yield your self to my awardes,
Proffering you so sweet rewards,
Be pleased to change your churlish ire
To a delicious desire of all sweet sollace.
Old. These latter reasons and protests
Win me to your sweet behests,
For that I note sincerity
In this so plain discovery of your sweet-sowre case.
I feel within my conscience
Assurance of your innocence,
Besides your very nakedness,
That bodes and warranteth no less, so shone it shines.
Me thinks there can no sad mischance
Lodge in so fair a countenance,
Nor can that tongue avouch untruth,
Being as honey in the mouth, and so sweet sauoreth.
But be it true, or be it false,
I now recant my denials,
And pray you pardon my outrage
Imputing it to rude old age and testie passion.
And if that you complie with me
In true professed iollitie;
Perhaps in time my services
May honor your benignities, in some good fashion.
Love. So well advised I welcome thee,
Even to my dearest faculty,
The which eftsoons thou shall approve
With all the benefits of love, Love can afford thee.
And now in honor of accord
Unto this Lute I will record
A hymn of joyful Jubilee,
To rowse up thy Senechdochie to Loves actiuitie.
LOVES SONNET.
THe day is done, and night inuites
Man and woman to dear delights,
The candle's out, and curtains spread,
And he and she are both a bed,
All naked is their conversation,
And arm in arm their sociation,
The rest is void of attestation, as privily done,
Lo there she lies as one content
To give and take all blandishment,
Her front is as the yuorie bowl
Orient fair, and free from skowle;
Her hair is golden grass upon a mount,
Her ear is musickes happy counter-mount,
Her eye a lamp whereby to cast the account of all benediction.
Her cheek's a goodly garden bed,
With cherrie-lillie flowers or'e-spred,
Her nose a pipe of sweet perfumes,
There stilles down no unsavory rewmes:
Her lips are sweet, like Hyblas hony-comes,
Her tongue th'oracle of Loves freedoms,
Her teeth the ranks of gallant Mermedones in their brightest hue.
Her chinne and neck are severally
Snow-white temptations to the eye,
Her arms are farms of sweet abode,
Her fingers nets in pleasures flood,
The Alablaster orbs upon her breast
Are bout'fieu-belloes down unto the rest
Below, where chief^st pleasure is postest by the bedfellow.
There is no dumpe, nor drerement,
Nor galle, nor jawlle in Loves intent,
All Is naked like to innocence,
Boding no offense, nor yet defense.
Winter benummes not Lovers in a bed,
Nor any any Westminstry torments their head,
Nor any death kills their loue-liuelihed, except for joy they die.
Loves Tergate is a smile-faire face,
Her bulwark is another place,
With these she war-fareth dull death,
And does preserve mankind on earth,
Which else had been long since annihiled,
With all other living things beside,
Had not these implements of love prevailed man and woman-fully.
Love lusts after dainty diet,
And mirth and music must be by it,
It heeds no gross rusticitie,
But all that is dear and dainty:
Love is aduenturous for to obtain,
Having sweet counteruailes for every pain,
Besides the pleasure of possessed gain arm in arm at last.
Old age that Love reuiues to lust,
Has ouer-liued Natures worst:
His pleasant play-Feare in a bed
Hydra-like renewes his head,
Her fire is that Promotheus did bring
From heaven, of force to quicken every thing,
Even very stones that ner'had any living, but ^ay ever waste.
See how the musicke-Nightingale,
Chauntes daylight on nights sable vale,
Or as the Spring renewes the earth,
Vn-wintring it with new-come mirth,
So fares old age through loves benignities,
So sovereign are all her actiuities,
And Love with love so sweet a thing it is, drenching all in joy.
Then old and young be thus advised,
Be not with any weal suffis'd,
Nor health, nor wealth, nor sovereignty,
Except you love and loved be:
For Love's a salt that seasoneth all good,
Sance Love all other pleasure is but mud,
And love alonly is life's liuely-hood, killing all annoy.
Old. Oh now embrace we with a kiss
And pardon my vnlouingnisse.
Love. I do. Old. Then here withal I vow
Eternal loyalty to you, as to my Sovereign.
Love. Now that we have embraced and kissed
Tell me how you feel your brist.
Old. I feel a ravenous desire
Oflust, I feel a flaming fire through'out every vain.
I feel a fancy full of frets,
Rebellion in all my secrets,
I feel a foul exalted ill
Quite prevailed against my will, and against all reason.
I feel a wound, yet crave no cure,
But rather wish it may endure,
I feel it, yet I see it not,
So blind I am, or have forgot my seeing function.
Love. I so: Now will I sit me down
And beard thy gray-beard with a frown
I Will laugh to think how all thy fame
Of Chastity will turn to shame through base luxury.
Now where is all thy valiancie
And bosted prudence against me?
Is all thy Stoycal conceit
So soon subverted by deceit, and turned to foolery?
Thou have my kiss, now have my curse,
Ner' shall thy love deserve remorse:
Still sue and spend, and after all
Reap but disdain and denial at thy Maistresse hand.
And to the end thou may approve
Thy self the verrier fool in love,
Thy Maistresse age must not surpass
Full 15 years by the houre-glasse, so is thy case scanned.
The rest I leave to her to do,
Flouts, and freaks, and spights ynow,
And all the world to wonder at
Thee, as an errand Idiot to be so abused.
Oh what a goodly fight will it be
To see thee in thy foolerie:
Cap and curt'sie to the ground,
And yet no favor to be found, but be more misused.
How like a gallant will thou ride
With sword and dagger at thy side,
Cap and feather on thy crown
With a little Cupid hanging down thy breast before.
And then to hear thy grave requests
Accompaned with deep protestes
And many an anticke countenance
To grace each several circumstance, still sighing evermore.
Besides thy inward anguishes,
Far worse then all the premises,
Vain hope, and desperation,
And doubtful interpretation of every occurrent.
Presumption and jelousie,
Care, passion, and captivity,
Error, and indiscretion,
Unrest, and vain invention, and thy wealth misspent.
These and such like absurdities
Shall Owlefie thee'n all men's eyes:
Who when they have twitted thee to death
Yet shall thy shame suruine uneath, and thus thy Epitaph.
Who er'e thou art that readst this Epitaph above,
Know that here underneath does lie the Owl of Love.
Old. Why how now ( Love) is al thy bliss
And sweet protests returned to this?
Then I revoke my fealty,
As vowed to no such tyranny and cruel skath.
I vowed my vow to swaueties,
And not to infelicities;
Nor is it honorably done
To tyrannize submission and poor cripple age.
Love. Thy vow was not conditional
To sweetes; but wholly personal
To me; in my propriety
To use thee well or wretchedly in my bless, or rage.
Then art thou sure enough a slave
To row my galley in the wave
Of all accurse; thy contradiction
Meritting such malediction at my angry hands.
So art thou still a Mariner,
Nor I the foresaid murderer,
Only thy hoary Mithredates
Have proved themselves poor pote^^ates in their weak withstands.
But yet (courage,) I am content
To be thus much indifferent,
Either that thou take a married wife,
And be a Cuckold all thy life, or bide thy present doom.
Old. Nor that, nor this would I abide,
Were I again vncaptiuy'd;
But often have I heard it say,
Needs must that horse to hell away that the Deu'll rides on.
I slept a while, but now I see
That was thy charm and sorcerie,
Ther-hence thou did co^mence r^y foil
As Dear that is taken in a toil, and so sent blind away.
But since I see no remedy,
I yield me to thy lenity,
Whereby both thou the Conqueror,
And I thy poor Orator may honor enjoy.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in this Poem.
Fol. 1. b lin. 5. stain. read. slain.

Fol. 8. b. lin. penult. mussance. read nuissance.


