AN ABSTRACT, OF CERTAIN ACTS OF Parliament: of certain her Majesty's
Injunctions: of certain Canons, Constitutions, and Synodals provincial,
established and in force, for the peaceable government of the Church, within
her Majesty's Dominions and Countries, for the most part heretofore unknown
and vnpractized.

Cod. de Epis. and Cler. 1. Nulli licere. Neither let them fear, to be called
and suspected picke-thanks, seeing their faithfulness, and diligent travel
carries with it, as well praise, as honesty and godly Zeal: having published
the truth to the ears of all men, and brought it to the open light.

PROVERB. 31. 8. Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all the children
of destruction.

To the Christian Reader.
Thou have seen (beloved) by long experience, a lamentable contention, to have
grown and continued in our English Church, about reformation of
Ecclesiastical discipline, and popish ceremonies, whereby the quiet and
peaceable estate, both of the Church, and common wealth, have been shrewdly
troubled, and brought in hazard. The causes of which war and dissension, I
leave to the good consideration of thy godly wisdom: only I am to entreat
thee, to accept this my labor bestowed upon the study of the laws, appointed
for the governance of the same Church, hoping that by the authority of her
excellent majesty, and the counsel of the honorable fathers and governors
of her highness empire, they may hereafter, not only be better executed, but
also, if the case so require, be reuisited. For, were the same laws either
better known unto the whole Church, either better executed by those unto whom
our gracious Sovereign has committed their Execution, no doubt, but very many
and notable points of such controversies, as have been a long time amongst us,
would be easily and speedily by the same laws decyded. I am not (beloved) in
this so weighty a cause, absolutely to rest my self upon the skill of mine
own simple judgment: only according to the knowledge given unto me, I have
for my part, faithfully labored to cite the law, for that end and purpose,
whereunto I take the same to have been first ordained. And therefore I am
heartily to desire thee, to accept of this my labor and travail, undertaken,
not only for the defense of her highness Laws, but also for my brethren and
neighbors sakes, and that peace and prosperity might be within the walls and
palaces of Jerusalem: Farewell, and pray in thy spirit, for the preferuation of
the life of our gracious Queen ELIZABETH.

blished, and in force, for the peaceable government of the Church, within her
Majesty's Domini ons; heretofore for the most part unknown and unpracticed.
BY an act of Parliament, made the 25. H. 8. C. 19. entitled, An act
concerning the submission of the Clergy. etc. It was enacted as follows.

Provided also, that such Canons, constitutions, ordinances, and Synodals
provincial, being already made, which be not contrariant nor repugnant to the
laws, statutes, and customs of this Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the
Kings prerogative royal, shall now still be used and executed as they were
before the making of this act, etc. This act is revived 1. Eliza. ca. 1. Out of
this act I conclude, that all Canons, constitutions, ordinances, and synodals
prouincial, made before this act, requiring and commanding a learned
Ministry, prohibiting many benefices to be given to one man: prohibiting
civil jurisdiction to be in Ecclesiastical men, and prohibiting one man to
excommunicate: for that such Canons, etc. cannot be contrary or repugnant to
the laws of this Realm, nor hurtful to the Kings prerogative, are in force,
and ought to be executed: and therefore by this act, all the Canons specified in
any part of my treatise are in force, and so by virtue of this act, a learned
ministry commanded: Pluralities forbidden. etc.

A learned Ministry commanded by the Law.
NIHIL EST. etc. There is nothing that may Ex De elect. Cap. Nihil est.
hurt more the Church of God, then that men unworthy are taken to the
government of souls. We therefore willing to apply a medicine to this
disease, decree, by an inviolable constitution, that when any shall be chosen
to the government of souls, he (to whom the confirmation of his election
appertains) diligently examine both the process of the election, and the
person elected: to the end, that if all things concur aright, he may
confirm him in his function. For otherwise, if any thing shall be unadvisedly
attempted, not only he that is unworthily promoted, but also the unworthy
promoter himself shall be punished: and if any man shall approve any of
insufficient learning, of an unchaste life, or not of lawful age, when his
negligence herein shall appear, we decree him to be punished thus: not only
that he be quite deprived of power, to confirm the next successor: but least
by any means he might escape unpunished, that he be also suspended from the
commodity of his own benefice. Out of which constitution, these conclusions
may briefly thus be gathered. 1 Whatsoever is hurtful to the Church of God,
the same is to be forbidden. 2 But it is hurtful to the Church of God, to have
unworthy men taken to the government of souls. 3 Therefore the same is to be
forbidden.
1 He that cannot worthily execute his office, is not to be admitmitted to holy
orders, and Ecclefiasticall dignities. 2 But a man of insufficient learning,
and of dishonest conversation, cannot worthily execute his office. 3 Therefore
such a one, is not to be admitted to Ecclesiastical dignities.


Election and Confirmation, properly applied to such) and not to inferior
ministers (which are properly said to be presented, and instituted:) then is
such, both diligently to mark the reason of the decree, providing a remedy
against the detriment that might redound to the Church, in both cases, if for
both remedies were not before hand provided: And also to understand that the
name of Prelate, is by law attributed likewise to every Parson, and Uicar,
having cure of souls: Quia quilibet qui praeest ^^ae animarum, dicitur esse
Praelatus. Every one that is preferred to the cure D. ex. de eleric. ^grotant.
^^sud and gi^s. lynd. Consti. de s^cra. iter^nd. c. ignorantia verse. praelat^.
of souls, is named by this name Prelate: And also that election and
confirmation, in and to the superior functions, have but the very same effect,
to the obtaining of their promotions, that presentation, and institution have
to the inferior Ministers, for enjoying of their benefices: then is such. (I
say) to consider all these things, together with the end of the Chapter,
where special charge is given for inferior offices. And so no doubt he will
forthwith conceive the truth, and surcease this furmise, for otherwise the
decree following shall convince him manifestly of an error.

PRAESENTI DECRETO. etc. By this present decre, we Bx. de paenit. and remissio.
c. cum infirmitas. The soul is first to be cured.
charge and straightly command, that the Physicians for the body, when they
shall be called to any sick persons, they first warn, and induce, the
patients, to call for the physicians of their souls, that when they shall have
pronision for spiritual health, they may proceed to the more wholesome remedy
of bodily health, considering, the cause ceasing, the effect likewise cease.
Here you see the law is general, and extends to all in general, as well to
poor gentlemen and poor parishioners, as to greasy Monks, Friars, and
Canons, seeing the souls of both may he infected, and the reasons may be thus
gathered. 1 That which is most precious is first to be cured, and that which is
spiritually diseased, is spiritually to be cured. 2 But every man's soul is
most precious; and every man's soul is spiritually diseased. 3 Therefore every
man's soul ought first to be cured: and every man's soul ought spiritually to
be cured.


OUt of which conclusion follows this consequent, namely: sithence every
soul is spiritually infected, and every soul spiritually infected must be
spiritually cured, that therefore every soul ought to have a spiritual
Physician, able to apply a spiritual medicine, and to cure his spiritual
disease: otherwise it were absurd, to command, that spiritual diseases should
be healed, without spiritual physicians appointed to that purpose. But this is
too too plain. We will proceed.

CVM SIT ARS ARTIVM, etc. Considering the government Ex. de aetat. and q^ual^.
c. penult.
of souls is an Art of al Arts, we straightly command, that the bishops,
either by themselves, or by other fit me^ do instruct or diligently inform
them that are to be promoted to be Priests, touching holy offices and
Ecclesiastical Sacraments, how they may be able, rightly to celebrate them.
For if they shall henceforth presume to ordain such as are unskillful, and
ignorant, we decree, that both they that do ordain, and they that are
ordained, be subject to grievous punishment. For it is a thing more holy,
especially in the promotion of Clergy men, to have a few good ministers,
then a great many evil: because, if the blind lead the blind, they both shall
fall into the ditch. 1 Unskillfull and ignorant men ought not to be admitted to
an office, wherein greatest knowledge and cunning is required. 3 Therefore, to
the government of the souls of men, unskillful and ignorant men are not to be
admitted.


THe first proposition is proved by two reasons: the one a comparatis, by a
comparison: the other ab euentu, from the event. The second proposition, is the
reason of the law it self: because the government of souls, is ars artium, a
cunning past all cunnings. The former reason, which is by way of comparison, is
evident. It is a thing much more holy, to have a little good, then much evil:
whereunto agrees that which is written in the 23. distinction, chap. Tales.
Tales ad ministerium eligantur clerici, qui digne possunt, etc. Let such
Clearks be thosen unto the ministry, which may worthily handle the Lords
Sacraments. For it is better to have a few Ministers, which may worthily
exercise the work of God, then many unprofitable, etc. And in like case the
Emperor. Melius est pauca idonee effundere, D. Cod. De veter. lure. enuclea.
l. 55. contrariuam. Authen. De tabell. coll. 4. Authen. De referen. in fi^e
coll. 2.
quam multis inutilibus praegrauari: and melius est pauca agere caute, quam
multis periculose interesse: and multitudo onerosa nihil habet honesti. It is
better to utter a few things aptly, then to burden men with many things
unprofitably: and it is better to do a few things warely, then to be
conversant in many things daungerously. And a multitude altogether burdensome,
has no show of honesty. And again: the Canon concludes, Tutius est ea sine
periculo ex necessitate, quae legem non habet, omittere, etc. It is more safe
to omit those things without danger, upon necessity which has no law: then
that through rashness condemned by law, they should not without great danger be
vainly conferred. Whereas a certain shadow only may appear in the deed, but
no truth follow in effect. Talis debet eligi, cuius comparatione caeteri grex
dicantur. 15. Distine. and nomine Constitutio. Otho. quam ad venerabiles.
Et minister debet esse forma gregis, ad quam se debent subditi reformare: and
debent esse ministri in exemplum, quasi signa posita ad sagiuandum. Maxims,
they should be seers: where they should go, and slep before others in
knowledge, as guides to conduct them: where they should for their piety, and
honest conversation, be pa^terns for others to square out their actions by:
where they should be marks, for people to aim and shoot at, they be now for
the most part, clean contrary, even the very tailings, and garbage of the
people, and such as can scar^e say B. to a batledore. Marks in deed to a^me
at, but such as the nearer a man should shoot at, the more it would be his
hinderauce. Examples in deed they be, but alas such examples, as it tueth good
men to see, how many by them are drawn to ungodliness, and vnhouestie, to
Alehouse haunting, to dycing, to table* playing, to carding, to bowling, to
beare-bayting: yea, and that on the Lords day too. But I say, that
notwithstanding these things be thus abused, yet the law prescribes still how
they should be better used, as follows.

LICET CANON. etc. Although the Canon of Alexander the third, our predecessor,
among other things did ordain, that none (...) elect. (...). canon.
should take upon him the government of any parish Church, unless he had
accomplished the age of 25. years, and were commendable for his knowledge and
honesty: yet because in the observation of the foresaid Canon, many have
showed themselves negligent. We by execution of Law, willing to supply their
perilous negligence, ordain by this present decree, that none be admitted to
the government of any parish Church, unless he be fit, for his manners, for
his knowledge, and for his age.

And again, INFERIORA MINISTERIA, etc. Let no man take upon him, the inferior
ministeries: as a Deanrie, an Archdeaconrie, and others that have cure of
souls annexed; neither yet the charge of a parish Church, unless he have
accomplished the age of 15. years, and be to be approved for his knowledge and
conversation.

These constitutions do expressly prohibit any person to be admitted to the
government of souls, and so to any parish Church, that is not qualified (as
you hear) and why? Non conuenit talem alijs praefici in Magistr^n, qui nondum
se nouit esse discipulum. It is unseemly that such a one be appointed a
Master over others, which as yet has not known himself to be a disciple.
And again, Debet promotus esse literatus, quia cum ipse debet alios docere,
non debe^ipse discere. He 40. Distine. ca. sacerdotes. Authen. de sanct.
^pist.. Damus. ff. De Decurio 1. honores. 3. cap. distin.
that is promoted ought to be learned, in as much, as, taking upon him to teach
others, himself ought not now to learn. And again, Honores and munera non
ordinationi, sed potioribus iniungenda s^n^. Honors and offices are to be
given to the best approved, and not to an ordination alone. And again, Debet
promotus omni poscentireddere rationem. He that is promoted ought to give a
reason to every one that asks. And again, Cura animarum debet vigilijs
oncrosa esse, and sollicita, Glos. cons^^. Otho cum s^^.
v^^ste cui comnittitur, cure^ ne pereant subdit^, sed salnentur. The charge of
souls ought through watchfulness to be painful and careful, that he to whom
it is committed, be diligent to foresee that the people perish not, but rather
that they may be saved. And again, Et qui doctior est, and sanctior, est
eligendus. And he that is the more learned S. q. 1. Liect. ergo.
and the more holy, is to be chosen. And even upon the selfsame reason:
namely, that the souls of the people should not be in peril for want of
teaching:

NE PRO DEFECTV. etc. Least for want of a Pastor the Ex De elec, Ne pro defect.
ravening Wolf should destroy the Lord his flock: or that a Widow Church
should suffer great hinderance in her substance: we willing in this case, both
to meet with the peril that might happen Peril of souls, the cause why a
time is limited, for the placing of a Pastor within certain months.
to souls, and also to provide for the indemnities of the Churches, do
ordain, that a Cathedral Church or regular Church, be be not void above three
months. And again, even for the selfsame causes and considerations in the
Chapter, N^lli ex de concessio. prebend. And in the Chapter, Quoniam ex. de
iure patro. It is commanded, that if a lay man, or Clearg^e man, patron of a
benefice, present not his Clearke, the one within six months, the other
within four months: that then afterward it shall and may be lawful for the
superior to supply their negligence, and to place one able to go in and out
before the people, to guide them, to teach and instruct them. They, who by
usurpation exercised authority over the Lords people, did in the time of
darkness so carefully provide, that the people under their pretensed
government, should not be unprovided, (as they imagined of a seer) to foresee
the danger that might ensue toward the souls of the people, above the space
of four, or at the most of six months. What excuse now remains, for them
that challenge the like authority over the people of the Lord, in the time of
this great light, and manifestation of his son: suffering many thousand
flocks to want sheepherds, and so to be in danger of the Wolf: not only
six months, but now almost six and twenty years, for so long as they want
a sheepherd, so long are they in danger of the Wolf: but they want a
shepherd, so long as they want one able to govern them, to exhort and to
admonish them, to rebuke and comfort them. Pavia enim sunt omnion non fieri,
aut minus ff. De verb f^^ni. l. (...) dificium. profecisse.
vite fieri: qui minus soluit, non soluit: perfecisse aedificium videtur, qui
ita statuit, vt in vsu esse possit. It is al one in effect whether a thing be
not done at all, or not rightly and duly done: He is said not to pay at all,
which pays less than is his due to pay: And he is said to have perfected a
building, which has so framed it, that it may be inhabited. And again, for
this purpose, even to avoid the peril of seules, the Law provides, that if
any man through want of foresight of the waightinesse of the office,
unworthily have taken upon him the government Peril of souls, cause of
renunciation
of any Church (a burden too heavy for him to bear) he may forthwith
forgo and renounce the same, both so to be disburthened himself, and that the
Church also might be furnished with some able man, to supply the necessity
thereof.

PRO DEFECTV SCIENTIAE, etc. For want of Ex. deprabend. ^. vene^^bilis.
knowledge a man may desire cession: for whereas knowledge is chiefly
necessary about the administration of spiritual things, and also behoofefull
about the charge of temporal things, let it be lawful for him that has charge
to govern the Church in these things, to renounce the said Church, in case he
have no knowledge, whereby he may govern the same. For (says the Lord) thou
have rejected knowledge, and therefore I will reject thee, that thou be no
Priest unto me. Hence may be gathered two arguments, the one to prove the
necessity of knowledge in a spiritual Pastor: the other to prove a
lawfulness for the renouncing of that, which without great prejudice and hurt
to himself, and others he cannot retain. 2 But he that takes upon him the
government of the Church, takes upon him the administration of spiritual
things. 3 Therefore he that takes upon him the government of the Church,
must have the knowledge of spiritual things.
1 It is lawful for every man that takes upon him a charge or function,
without knowledge how to govern the same charge, to forgo and forsake the
said charge or function: 2 But every unlearned minister having a charge, is
without knowledge how to govern the same his charge: 3 Therefore it is lawful
for him to renounce his said charge.


ANd again: even to avoid the peril of souls, and that neither age, neither
any bodily disease or importencie should be any occasion or hinderance to
the people, from having and enjoying the benefit of a teacher, the law
provides in this case, also as follows.

PETISTI, etc. Thou desire that for thy age, growing upon 7, q, 1, Petisti:
thee, and thy bodily infirmity, thou might without advise, in the same
seat where thou gouernest, place one in thy stead: but we (God being our
helper) give counsel to thy holiness, that for the help of reasonable men's
souls, (Christ being thy guide) thou do not leave these which thou obtainest
in the Church of Ments: but if the Lord, according to thy request, shall give
unto thee a perfect man, who may take upon him the care for the health of
souls, thou shall ordain him Bishop in thy place, and he shall be in the
Gospel committed unto thee, and in bearing the ministry of Christ, in every
place shall visit and comfort the Church of God.

AD REGIMEN. etc. Although we by disposition from above, Ex. comm^^^. de Praeb.
and dig. c. Ad regimen.
unworthily called to the government of the universal church, as we ought, so
have we in our desires, that by our endeavor and diligence, fit men be taken
to the regiments of Churches and Monasteries, and other Ecclesiastical
benefices, according to the divine pleasure, and our purpose and intent, which
might rule and profit the Churches, Monasteries, and the foresaid benefices to
be committed unto them. And again.

CVM ECCLESIAE, etc. Forasmuch as the Churches Clement. de aeta^, and quali.
ep. 1.
whereunto unfit parsons in knowledge, manners, or age, are preferred suffer for
this cause (as experience teaches in their spiritualties and temporalities)
oftentimes great detriments: we willing that this thing, by the Diocesanes of
the places, unto whom this charge, by reason of their office appertains, be
more diligently foreseen: straightly inioyne, that they themselves more
diligently observe, and cause inuiolably to be observed by their subjects, such
canonical constitutions as have hitherto been published for the preferring of
parsons unto such Churches, if they will avoid the displeasure of God, and the
punishment due by the Apostolic sea And not only these Canons, established
and confirmed by the Popes Act of Parliament, but even our own provincial
constitutions, made long sithence, for the realm of England, have ordained and
established a learned ministry, and appointed an able and fit state of
Clergy men, to be had throughout the whole Empire and Dominions of her
Majesty: The tenor or some of which constitutions follows. First, Exigit
namque ars nostra catholica, vt sit vnicus in vna ecclesia Otho constitu c^^sit
ars. exigit.
sacerdos, alias magister perfectus ordine and habitu, vita sancta, scientia,
and doctrina. For our Catholic religion requires, that in one Church there
be one Priest, otherwise called a perfect teacher, in order and habit, in
holy life, in knowledge, and in doctrine. Absq, magistro praeterea ecclesia
desolata manet saepe die, nec persona in ea, nec saliem vicarius perpetuus
inuenitur, sed aliquis forte simplex sacerdos: de vita sancta, scientia, and
doctrina est ei nimis modica (heu) cura. Without a master the Church
oftentimes remains de solate, having neither parson, nor any continual
vicar, but perhaps some seely ignorant Priest: but as touching their holy
life, their knowledge, and their doctrine (alas) there is too too little care
had.

SACER ORDO, etc. A sacred order is to be conferred to Otho. constable. cum sit
a^^. absque.
him that is most worthy, to the end, that by him the other Sacraments might
be ministered. Wherefore, since it is a thing very perilous, to ordain men
unworthy, idiots, illegitimate, irregular, persons unlearned, persons
vagarant, and such as have not any certain or true title indeed: We ordain,
that before the conferring of orders, diligent inquisition and search be made
by the Bishop of al these things. Which constitution, whether it be observed,
or no, I refer the reader to the directions of the Bishops Canons: Wherein
they manifestly tell us, that they proceed first, and enquire afterward: that
they first give the Minister a charge, appointing him to teach: and afterward
send him to the Archdeacon or his officials court to learn, as is manifest in
their Canons, published in the year of our Lord 1571. Title, Archdeacon: and
also in the Aduertisements, Title, Ecclesiastical policy. Wherein they have
not attended the meaning and intent of Law, which always requires, Vt
qualitates adsint eo tempore, quo dispositio sumat effectum. That ^art. in l.
si quis posthumos., filium. n^. 3. ff. de li. and posth^^. ff. de. minor. l de.
aetate and de feriis le. 2.
qualities must then be had, when the disposition takes effect. Vt qualitas
testis attenditur tempore quo deponit. As the quality of a witness is then to
be considered, when he is deposed. Again, Quando quaeritur de ae^ate, quae est
talis, quae reddit personam inhabilem ad iudicium exercendum, Been potest de
hoc quaeri, ante omne iudicium. When there is any question of such an age, as
makes any parson unable to exercise judgment, this ought very well to be
enquired of, before all judgment. In like manner I say, considering certain
capablenesse, and special ability, by virtue of diverse qualities, wherewith
Ministers ought to be endued, is necessarily required, to be in them at the
time of their ordering, that therefore by law, they ought not to be ordained,
unless the said qualities be found in them at the time of ordering: and if
any other preposterous order be used, that therefore the whole actions are
void and frustrate. For where by disposition of law, a certain form and
prescript order is limited, there if any inuersion or preposteration be used,
all is clean matted. And why? because you follow not the direction of your
Letters patents: you exceed the bounds of your commission, and pass the
limits of your jurisdiction, the law making you a judge, to do that, and that,
after that, and that manner, you make your self no judge by doing after your
own fancy, thus, and thus, after this, and this manner, without any
commission. And where you were by a public consent of a public magistrate,
made a public person, to execute a public law, you make your self a
private person, by putting in practice, a private devise. Non ergo arbiter quod
libet statuere poterit, ff. de recept arbd. non distinguendum de officio.
nec in qua re libet, nisi de qua compromissum est, and quatenus compromissum
est. Therefore an Arbiter cannot determine every thing as he will, nor in what
thing he will, but only that thing whereof the compromise is made, and
according to the form of the compromise. Iudex ad certam rem datus, si de
alijs pronunciauit, quam quod ad eam rem ff. Si ano^ competetiiud. l. 1.
pertinet, nihil egit. A Judge appointed to one special matter, if he
pronounces any thing impertinent to the same, he has lost his labor.
Maritus id solum exequi debet, quod procuratio emissa praescripsit. A husband
ff. de procurat. l. maritus.
that is proctor for his wife, ought only to execute that that his proxy
prescribes. And the reason is this. Fines mandati sunt diligenter A learned
Ministry commanded by the civil law.
obseruandt. The bounds of a commandment are diligently to be kept. Neither
are the imperial laws barren and void of the like holy functions, but
exhibit unto us the selfsame provisions as before: namely, that men holy and
religious; men furnished with the best gifts and graces, should be preferred to
the sacred ministry. Page 16.
Nemo gradum sacerdotis venalitate pretij mercetur: quantum quisque meretur,
Cod. le. epis. and cler: L: si quoniam. Authent. de Sanctis episcop clericos
col. noua.
non quantum dare sufficit, estimetur. Let no man make marchaundize, or buie
the degree of a Minister, every one ought to be esteemed by his merits, and
not by his money.

Again, CLERICOS AVTEM, etc. We do not otherwise Note, that by civil law a
Bishop may not ordain a Minister, unless the people choose an unworthy man.
suffer Clearkes to be ordained, unless they be learned, and have a right
faith, and an honest life. But if holy rules shall forbid those which are
chosen by others, as unworthy to be ordained, then let the most holy Bishop,
procure to ordain whomsoever he shall think meetest. And thus common law,
provincial law, civil law, and statute law (for our statute laws have
ratified these laws) pronounce all with one voice, and one consent, that our
dumb and silent Curates and stipendaries, have no approbation or allowance, no
favor or intertainement from them, or by their authority. Why? What shall we
say then: or how are they allowed th^n? I will tell you. Certain perverse
conceited, and self weening men, soothing themselves, and fostering their
dotages and fond affectious errors, with these rules of law, Non requiritur
summa perfectio: and that Sufficit mediocris ff De aedil. edict. le. Sciend.
tllu^
scientia, A perfect knowledge is not required: and a mean knowledge ^ le. Si
quis vinditor. Ex. cap. cum Nob is olim de elect.
is sufficient. Imagine these our Sir John's, the very Asses of our schools,
having approbation from some Bishops, by whom they have vin tried and eramined
to have (as they term it,) Competentem quamuis non eminentem scientiam,
Co^petent, though not eminent knowledge, may, notwithstanding the former
provisions, lawfully take themselves for true Ministers, and be reputed by
others for lawful possessours, in, and to those places, whereunto they are
admitted? Whereunto I aunsweare, that the ignorance of these Answer to the
objection of a competent knowledge.
terms and words of law, namely, Summa perfestio, mediocris, and competens
scientia, is the ground of this error. And therefore it testeth briefly to
view, what manner of learning and knowledge, by justice and equity of law, may
be, and is reputed mean, competent, and Page 17.
sufficient for him that shall take upon him a pastoral charge: wherein also,
if our bare mumbling Ministers shall be found culpable, they are then by
definitive sentence, on the part and behoof of the law, not only to be
adjudged guilty of voluntary intrusion into the right and possession of
others, but also to be punished for taking upon them offices, without any
lawful calling.

IGNORANTIA MATTER, etc. Ignorance, the mother of errors, is specially to be
avoided in the Ministers of God, which have taken upon them the office to teach
amongst the people of God: Let the Ministers therefore be warned to read the
holy scriptures. Paul the Apostle willing Timothy to attend to reading, to
exhortation of doctrine, and always to abide in them. Let the Ministers
therefore know the holy Scriptures, and let all their labor consist in
preaching and doctrine: and let them edify, as well The Ministers must know
the Scriptures, and preach.
in knowledge of faith, as examples of good works. Out of which chapter these
conclusions may be gathered. First, that ignorance of the word of God is
especially to be avoided of every Minister, as before. Secondly, with what
knowledge every Minister ought to be qualified. 1 A teacher of Gods word must
especially avoid ignorance. 2 But a Minister is a teacher. 3 Therefore a
Minister must specially avoid ignorance.


Neither is here small store of little knowledge, such as wherewith our reading
Ministers are furnished, but such whereof express mention is made in this
decree, and may necessarily be concluded, thus: people of God, ought always to
attend to reading, to exhortation, and to dwell in the same. 3 Therefore he
ought to attend to reading, to exhortation, and to dwell in the same.


1 He that takes upon him the office of a teacher amongst the people of God,
ought to bestow his labor in preaching and in doctrine. 2 But a Minister has
taken upon him the office of a teacher. 3 Therefore he ought to bestow his
labor in preaching, and in doctrine. Whereunto agree diverse other decrees
following.


THe reason why a Prior should have knowledge and be learned, is, for that the
law charge him with cure of souls.

PRIOR AVTEM, etc. Let the Prior in comparison of the Ex de statut. Monacho c.
cum ad Moenasterium prior.
rest, next after the Abbot, be a man of power, as well in deed as in word,
that by his example of life, and word of doctrine, he may instruct his
brethren in that which is good, and draw them from evil, having zeal of
religion according unto knowledge, both to correct and chastise offenders, and
also to comfort and cherish the obedient. Out of which constitution I conclude
thus, a similibus ad similia, From like unto like.

1 Whosoever cherishes and comfort the obedient to the faith, and
corrects or improoueth the disobedient, must be mighty in word and deed. 2
But every Minister ought to cherish and comfort the obedient to the faith, and
to correct and improoue the disobedient. 3 Therefore every Minister ought to be
mighty in word and deed.
who have not yet abandoned the policy of this traitorous lawmakers, as
perilous for the government of the state of the Lords household, over whom
they challenge the government, but with tooth and nail maintain this his
policy, to be a policy meet for the Lords servant to be guided by: what
can they ans^ere in defense of their wilful disloyalty to the Lord in this
behalf: The law which the enemy unto the Lord did make in the time of
Popery, for maintenance of popish procurations, popish dispensations, popish
ceremonies, popish non residents, popish excommunications, popish visitations,
popish paiments of oblations, popish courts of faculties, popish licenses: the
very same laws, and the selfsame ordinances, to serve their own turns, they
turn to the maintenance of their prelacies, dignities, and ministeries, under
the Gospel. A reason of these their doings if they were demanded, I
conjecture would be this: namely, that a law appointed by the adversary to
abuses, having good grounds, may be applied to good uses: and that it is not
executed now any more as the popish law, but as the law appertaining to her
Highness crown, and regal dignity, being established by the high court of
Parliament. inter pares, and not the most highest, as it were accusing him, that
he had not dealt faithfully in his fathers household, giving them as perfect a
law for the government of his household by discipline as by doctrine: And yet by
their leaves, why then should not this law of the enemy last specified, nay
rather now their own law, having better grounds, and better reasons for the
validity thereof, than the laws mentioned before, concerning their prelaties
and dignities, etc. Why (I say) should not this be as available with them now,
to exhort the people unto the truth, as it was with the idolaters, to exhort
unto lies? to dehort now from popery, as it was then from the Gospel? to
instruct men now in the true knowledge of Christ, as it was then to teach men
the knowledge of Antichrist? to correct offenders now against piety and holy
religion, as it was then to correct contemners of impiety and profane
religion? to comfort and cherish the obedient now to the faith, as it was then
to comfort and cherish the disobedient to infidelity, and Paganism? Touching
the Acts of Parliament: sithence they challenge by them immunitie, for the
confirmation of their abuses: it were requisite for them to give the servant
of the Lord leave a little to challenge as great a privilege, by the same, for
the stabishment of the right use of things through their default yet amiss and
out of frame with us. If the cause of the former, in truth and verity, be as
good as the cause of the latter, in show and semblance only: yea if it be far
better (for theirs in truth is stark naught) and the law authorize for the one
indeed that that the same law in appearance only approves for the other. If
for their fellow servants sakes, they will not be more favorable unto their
Lord and masters cause yet were it expedient for the^ to be entreated to be
more favorable to the justice and equity of their own laws, than continually,
by placing unable men in ye ministry, thereby, as it were, accusing the same
of imperfection, and insufficiency:

VERVM QVI. A, etc. But because after Baptism, amongst Extra. Cum: de
priuilegiis. c. mtcr cu^ctas verum quia.
other things, the propounding of the word of God, is most necessary unto
salvation, whereby the hearers hearing that which is our victory, be
instructed in the faith, be taught to flee things to be avoided, and to follow
things to be followed, by which, such as by sin are fallen, do rise again, we
have great care, that such brethren be promoted, which by sweet oil of the
word may comfort our subjects, may forbid them sins, may nippe the wounds
of their sins by reprehension, and may provoke and induce them to purge and
wipe their offenses with bitterness of repentance. Unto the execution whereof,
the knowledge of the law of God is required, the integrity of life and soul
is to be had. For it is written: Thou have refused knowledge, and I will refuse
thee, that thou be no Priest unto me, because the lips of the Priests keep
knowledge, and they search the law at his mouth. For otherwise he can not, as
his duty is, discern between sin and sin, etc. All which decrees of
themselves, are plain and sufficient enough* to impugn and overthrow all
opinions whatsoever vainly conceived against the provision, and validity of
Law, authorizing or ratifying (as it is untruly surmized) either any
unpreaching and unlearned ministry, or any indiscreet, dishonest, or ungodly
persons, to execute any offices in the Church. For by these decrees
(established first by the enemy of true religion, for the planting of his
superstition, but now turned by our policy from that use, and made a law for
the government of the Church) are so many special proprieties of a true
pastor, so substantially pointed out, that none, without too too great
immodestie, may in any wise affirm the law to be defective herein. Whereunto
our English constitutions and synodals prouincial may be annexed, as directly
and evidently proouing, with what manner of competent and convenient knowledge
every Minister ought to be adorned.

PRAECIPIMVS (says the provincial constitution) VT QVILIBET Sacerdos plebi
praesidens, quater in anno: hoc est, semel in qualibet quarta anni, die vna
solemni vel pluribus, per se, vel per alium exponat Prou^gu. lind. de osti.
Archi. pres. ignorantia saccrdotum.
populo vulgariter, absque cuiussque subtilitatis textura fantastica 14. fidei
articulos, december mandata Decalogi, duo praecepta Euangely, etc. We command,
that every Priest, president over any people, four times every year, that
is to say, every quarter of the year, in one or more solemn days, by
himself, or some others, expound unto the people in their vulgar tongue,
without any subtlety, the 14. Articles of the faith, the ten
Commandments, the two precepts of the Gospel, etc.

Here are you to see the particularities laid forth, wherein every Minister
ought to be exercised, how often, how plainly and sincerely he ought to teach.
Wherein our fathers in time of ignorance and superstition, were more zealous,
than we in these days of the true light and knowledge of the Gospel. For from
hence quarter Sermons, now amongst us, have crept in, and had their Quarter
sermons from whence they came.
beginning, though now fostered with greater corruption, than in those former
days they were. For proof whereof, the Reader shall understand, that these
words, Semel in qualibet quarta anni, die vna solemni, vel pluribus, per se,
vel per alium. In every quarter of the year, in one or more solemn days by
him self, or some other have not this meaning, that it was sufficient for the
president of the people, absolutely by an other, four times in the year
only, to preach and to instruct the people, as it is nowadaies amongst us
Page 2^.
practiced: but the meaning is, that the Articles of the faith, the ten
Commandments, the two precepts of the Gospel, etc. should indeed of them
be expounded, and made known unto the people four times in the year, and
that in four several solemn days, if it were so possible. But because the
lawmakers did foresee, that it was impossible, that with any fruit. this so
great a work, could be finished: therefore both to take away all cauisting
from the people, who might think it sufficient to have quarterly Sermons: and
also, to the end the Pastor might be kept in a continual exercise of his
duty, this Pluribus was added, to the intent, that the whole dotrines might
once every quarter, be wholly expounded: So that semel is not here taken for
simul, that these doctrines should once Glossa. ibid.
every quarter all together, and at one time alone be taught, but that they
should be once every quarter at particular and several times: particularly,
and severally be taught: for so, though they be at many times particularly
taught, yet in the whole, they may be said to be but once in a quarter wholly
taught. And these words, per se, vel per alium, by himself or by an other,
have an other manner of exposition than a great many understand or think them
to have. For it is commonly thought sufficient, that these words, per alium,
(by another) be understood, in case the Pastor himself be altogether
ignorant. But the meaning thereof, only is thus.

CVM CONTINGAT quod Episcopi propter su as corruptiones multiplices, vel
inualitudines corporales, aut hostiles incursus, seu occasiones alias (ne dicam
us defectum scientiae, quod in eis reprobandum est Ex. de offi. iud. ordin. c.
inter caetera.
omnino, nec de caetero tollerandum) per se ipsos non sufficium ministrare
verbum Dei populo, etc. If the Bishops, for some necessary business, or
bodily infirmity, or hostile invasion, or other occasions (we will not say
for want of learning, which is to be reproved in them, and hereafter not to
be tolerated) can not by them selves minister the word of God unto the
people, that then it shall be lawful for him to choose some other fit person
to supply his room.

Infirmus, vel aliter legitime impeditus, Glos. linw. cle. cens. ca. verb.
rationabili.
quo minus possit personaliter visitare, Diseased, or have some other lawful
impediment, so that he can not visit in his own person. And it is concluded
in the case of residence, that one bound to keep residence, must keep it by
himself. Et quis debet residentiam facere Ex. de cler. non residen. c.
conquerenti.
per se, non per alium: and nisi fecerit, potest priuari. Moreover, it is
directly forbidden, that the office of preaching should be deputed to any
other.

C AETERVM SALVO, etc. But saving the Legate of the The office of preaching may
not be deputed to others.
Apostolic sea, let it be lawful to no man, to whom it shall be commanded
to preach the cross, to excommunicate, or absolve any, hereafter to commit
the same things to others: because not any jurisdiction, but rather a certain
ministry, is committed unto him in this behalf. All which things are more at
large manifested by the last chapter of the former title in Lindwood: where the
Priests are commanded to be diligent teachers of Gods word, that they be not
accounted dumb dogs. The words of the Chapter are these.

PRAESENTIS CONSILII, etc. By the final determination of this present counsel,
we have straightly enjoined, that Parsons and Vicars labor to inform the
people committed unto them, with the food of Gods word, according to the
measure that shall be inspired unto them, that they be not worthily adjudged
dumb dogs, seeing that with wholesome barking they chase not away the biting
of spiritual Wolves from the Lords sheepefold. And the reason of this
prouincial is derived from another decree.

INTER CAETERA, etc. Amongst other things belonging to the salvation of
Christian people, the food of the word Extra. de off. ^^ed. ord c. inter caete
ra.
of God is known to be most necessary for them, because that as the body
with material, so the soul with spiritual food is nourished: for man lives
not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God.

DE PVBLICATIONE ARTICVLORVM, etc. Touching Johan. Peccham de offic. archi.
the publication to be made of such articles, whereby a man forthwith does
incur sentence of excommunication let the Archdeacons make diligent
inquisition, and as often as they shall find the Elders, not to have preached,
or published at the times appointed the moral instruction of the 14. Articles
of faith, the 10. commandments of the decalogue, the 2. commandments of the
gospel, etc. so often let them rebuke them, and by chastisement, and some
canonical punishment, compel them to supply that which rashly they have
omitted. Hence may aptly and necessarily be inferred, that he Competent
knowledge is a knowledge to preach.
may be said to have a competent knowledge, that has knowledge to preach:
otherways not preaching, should not be punishable. And to this end tends
that which is written before: namely, Exigit ars nostra catholica, etc. Our
catholic religion requires, that in one Church, be one perfect teacher, in
knowledge and doctrine. And as the gloss in the same place says: Absit ergo
quod sic perfectus sit, vt ad Glos. ibi. ver. scientia.
lileram dicere possit illud Hier: cap. 1. a, a, a. Domine Deus, nescio loqui,
quia puer ego sum. God forbid, that he should be so perfect, as, that by rote
he were able to say, a, a, a, Lord God behold, I can not speak, because I am
a Child: but this perfection ought to be such, as the gloss tells you in the
same place, in these words.

AD MAGISTRVM, etc. To a Master or teacher Glos. ibi. ver. abseue magistro.
pertains that which is written in the sixth of Wisdom, I will bring
wisdom into light, and will not keep back the truth. And in the same book
the 7. chapter. As I my self learned unfeignedly, so do I make other men
partakers of her, and hide her riches from no man, that that may be verified of
him, which is written in the 28. Job. He searches the deapth of the floudes,
that i^, the secrets of the Scriptures: and the thing that is hid brings he
to light. And Rebuff affirms, that Penitus illiterati dicuntur, qui nesciunt
officium facere, ad quod t^nentur. They are said, to be altogether unlearned,
which cannot perform the duty whereto they are bound. And the gloss upon
the law in the Good says, that they be not Deanes, which hasten to be called
Deanes, and be not Deanes, when they do not the office of Deanes. Her majesty
also by her injunctions has ratified and commanded the same: for as much
(says she) as in these latter days many have been made Priests, being
children, and otherwise utterly unlearned, so that they could read Mattins or
Mass: the Ordinaries shall not admit any such to any care, or spiritual
function. Wherefore, in as much as by these ordinances it is evident, that
every Minister to whom cure of souls is committed, ought not to err or be
ignorant in the word of God, but ought always to attend to reading, to
exhortation, to preaching to doctrine, to edification, to be of power in word
and deed, to instruct, to inform, and to comfort, to rebuke, to reform, and
to correct, to expound the Articles of faith, the ten Commandments, and to
teach other holy doctrines, concerning the love of God, and the love of our
neighbors, to be able to make others partakers of the riches of wisdom, and
to bring wisdom into light, and not to kecpe back the truth: In as much as I
say, as by the laws of our government, the Ministers of the Gospel ought to
be endued with such qualities, and beautified with such graces: Let every one
cease to maintain any competencie, or conueniencie of learning to be in our
dumb and unpreaching ministers: For let them read, and read till their lips
be tired, and their eyes blinded, they shall notwithstanding by their bare
reading, ordinarily be no instruments of the holy Ghost, to work faith in the
hearers.

And as touching the Idol Ministers themselves. Besides those reasons, there
remain many other very necessary for them diligently to look into, that so
understanding their own desperate estate, they may more willingly, and
duetifully yield them selves to be reformed, and to shake off those rags
under which they now shower them selves. They are diligently to hearken unto
the Canon of Gregory against them. Si quis neque sanctis 1. q. 1 c. Si
quineque.
pollens moribus, etc. If any, neither adorned with holy manners, neither
called by the Clergy and people, or constrained by compulsion, through love
of his own heart, or filthy entreaty of his lips: or for fellowshippe, or
seruilitie, or fraudulent reward, and not for gain of souls, but puffed up
with desire of vainglory, shall take any Bishoply or Priestly dignity upon
him, and shall not, even of his own accord, leave the same agains in his life
time, but suffer sudden death to take him unrepentant, without all doubt he
shall perish for ever. Ordo non solum Glos. in constitu. Otho. de seruti. in
ordin ver. ad.
gratia suscipientis, sedetiam aliorum confertur. An order is not conferred,
for his sake only that takes it, but also for other men's sakes A Minister is
not called to minister to himself, but to others: to labor for himself, but
for others: to be served himself, but to serve others: And the Lord came not
to be fed, but to feed others. Thirdly, Periculosum est ipsi ordinato quia
tanquam mercenarius se ingerit, non vt pastor. It is dangerous to him that is
ordained, because he rusheth in as an hireling, not as a sheepherd. Fourthly,
Periculosum est subditis, quibus sacramenta ministrare, and quos curare
deberet, ne diuer simode inficeret eosdom moribus, and exemplo. It is perilous
for the people under him, to whom he ought to minister the Sacraments, and
whom he ought to heal, that he diversely infect them not, with his manners
and examples: for that, Diluere aliena peccata, non valet is, quem propria
deuastant. He cannot put away other men's sins, whom his own sins
devour. And again, Periculosum est decentiae ecclesiae, in scandalo populari.
It is dangerous for the Decency of the church, to be in any public slander
or offense. Again, Malus praelatus dicitur lupus rapiens praedam. An evil
prelate is said to be a wolf, 83. distine. nihil. 2. q. 7. Quinec.
ravening his pray. He is said to be, Canis impudicus, propter defectum
regiminis. A shameless dog, for want of government. He is said to be,
Coruus, propter peccatorum nigredinem. As black as a Raven, for the foulness
of his sins. He is said to be, Sal 2. q. 7. Non omnis.
infatnatus, ad nihilum proficiens. Unsauorie salt, profitable for nothing. He
is said to be, Porcus, A Swine. He is said to be, 4 c. Did. in mandaris
Glos lind. de offic. Archis pres. c. fin. v. canss.
Capo. A Capon, because, as a Capon can not crow, no more can a dumb Prelate
preach. And to conclude, Praelatus, qui in doctrina mutus est, non est vere
Praelatus, cum officium praelati non exerceat, etc. A Prelate which is mute in
teaching, is not in truth a Prelate, in so much as he exercises not the
office of a Prelate. better known, and better executed, by our chief
Prelates, then by the space of these 25. years they seem generally to have
been. But yet besides these former decrees, laws and ordinances, and the
several reasons, principles, and maxims, whereupon they were first grounded,
there remains somewhat more behind, diligently to be considered: the which
thing the more earnestly every man shall rightly weigh, the more may he be
astonished. A thing done in Israel, at the doing whereof it is a wonder, that
the ears of the hearers tingle not, and the very hair of the heads of the
standers by stare not, for fear least the Lord in his righteous judgment,
should execute his terrible vengeance upon them. Thus stands the case, some
pastoral church, or churches being destitute of a Pastor, or Pastors, to feed
the people, a solemn assembly and convocation of the chiefest of the
governors of the Church must be gathered together, and that not in an angle of
a poor country village, but in the chiefest city of the Diocese, and that
not on a workeday, but either on the Lords day, or on some other of their own
festival days, and that for no small matters, or to no small purpose, but
even to present and offer unto the Lord an holy sacrifice, and to call upon his
most holy name: To present (I say) unto the Lord, a present meet and
acceptable for his majesty, even men meet to serve him in his spiritual
wars, and to be Pastors to feed his people with spiritual food of his holy
word, men meet to take upon them the most highest and most noblest callings,
that he has appointed to the sons of men, the office and dignity of the
preaching of his holy Gospel

In the time of that virtuous King, Coward the firt, an order and form was
appointed by act of Parliament, for consecrating Archbishops, and Bishops, and
for the making of Priests, Deacons, and ministers: Which statute is revived,
and the same order and form approved, in the right year of his most excellent
reign. The words of the statute are these.

(And that such order and form, for the consecrating of Archbishops, and
Bishops, and for the making of Priests, Deacons, and Ministers, as was set
forth in the time of the said late King, and authorized by Parliament, in the
fifth and fifth year of the said late King, shall stand, and be in full force
and effect, and shall from henceforth be used and observed, in all places
within this Realm, and other the Dutines majesty's dominions and countries.]
The title of the book is this.

Ordering of Deacons.
the form of the book, you shall understand, that in the order and form of
making Deacons, three things principally are to be observed: First, the
qualities requisite to be in him that is to be made a Deacon: Secondly, the
circumstances in making him a Deacon: And thirdly, the proper duty and office
belonging to him, that is made a Deacon. Touching his qualities, they must be
such, as were requisite for the same First, he must be a man of virtuous
conversation, and without crime: Secondly, he must be learned in the Latin
tongue: Thirdly, he must be sufficiently instructed in the holy Scriptures:
Fourthly, he must be a man meet to exercise his ministry duly: Fifthly, he
must believe all the Canonical Scriptures: Sixthly, he must be diligent in his
calling: Seventhly, he must be inwardly moved to that office, by the holy
Ghost. And as touching the circumstances. First, he must be called Secondly,
tried. Thirdly, examined. Fourthly, he must be twenty one years of age, at
the least: he must be presented by the Archdeacon, or his Deputy. Fifthly, he
must be made on a Sunday, or holy day: Sixthly, he must be made openly in the
face of the Church: where must be an exhortation made, declaring the duty and
office, as well of the Deacons toward the people, as of the people toward the
Deacons. Lastly, touching the office committed unto him, it is: First, to
assist the minister in divine service: Secondly, to read holy Scriptures and
Homelies in the congregation: Thirdly, to instruct the youth in the Catechism.
Fourthly, to search for the sick, poor and impotent of the parrish, and to
intimate their estates, names, and places, to the Curate, that they may be
relieved by convenient aims.


COncerning the making of Ministers, not only all those things before
mentioned in the making of Deacons, but other circumstances and solemnities are
required also: these demands and answers following, must be made and given.

Bishop. Do you think in your heart, that you be truly called, according to
the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the order of this Church of England?

Answer. I think it.

Bishop. Be you persuaded that the holy scriptures contain sufficiently all
doctrine, required of necessity, for eternal salvation, through faith in Jesus
Christ? And are you determined with the said Scriptures, to instruct the people
committed to your charge, and to teach nothing (as required of necessity to
eternal salvation), but that you shall be persuaded, may be concluded and
proved by the Scripture.

Answer. I am so persuaded, and have so determined by Gods grace.

Bishop. Will you give your faithful diligence, always to minister the
doctrine and sacraments, and the discipline of Christ, as the Lord has
commanded, and as this realm has received the same, according to the
commandment of God, so that you may teach the people committed to your care
and charge, with all diligence to keep and observe the same.

Answer. I will. In these two answers and demands last specified, are
principally contained two things. First, the Minister charge himself, by a
solemn vow, to teach, and instruct the people committed to his charge, with
the doctrine of holy Scriptures. Secondly the Bishop by virtue of the order and
form appointed by act of Parliament binds him, The Discipline of Christ
commanded by Parliament.
as well to minister the Discipline of Christ, within his cure, as the doctrine
and sacraments of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as this realm has
received it, according to the commandments of God. And therefore every
Minister, by virtue of this statute law, may as well adinonish, denounce, and
excommunicate offenders within his charge, as a Bishop may within his Diocese,
the words are copulatiues: and therefore. Non sufficit alterum, sed oportet
v^^umque fieri. It is not sufficient to do one, but both. And these words
before rehearsed. (Will you give your faithful diligence, always to minister
the Doctrine and Sacraments, and discipline of Christ, as the Lord has
commanded, and as this Realm has received the same, according to the
commandments of God:) have in them two special points to be considered: one,
touching the doctrine and sacraments of Christ: the other concerning the
discipline of Christ: out of which two branches, proceed two other questions.
First, whether every minister ought not to exercise the Discipline of Christ,
by force of this demand and answer, as well as the doctrine and sacraments.
Secondly, whether these, namely the doctrine, sacraments, and the discipline,
be to be ministered simply, as the Lord has commanded, or else whether they be
to be ministered only, as this Realm has received the same, without the
commandment of God? For these words, (according to the commandments of God)
are but Synonima, unto those which went before (Viz. as the Lord has
commanded) and so signify but one thing. viz. (As this Realm has received
the same, according to the commandment of God) conuinceth you of a
slanderous tongue against the whole state and Church of God. For hereby you
accuse them of great impiety and ungodliness, and attaint them of high
treason, to the majesty of God, as though the intent of the whole state were
to have the doctrine and Sacrament, and Discipline of Christ, ministered
according to the commandments of God; in case the laws of the Realm, had so
received the same, and not otherwise: And so to have restrained the
commandments of God, by the laws of the Realm, and so to have concluded an
impossibility, limiting and restraining the greater by the less; and a law
most perfect, by a law imperfect, and not rather the contrary, to have
restrained in deed the less by the greater: the laws of the Realm, by the
commandments of God: an imperfect law; the law of man, by a most perfect and
absolute law, the law of the most Highest:

the Realm, in all schools of their Diocese: yet notwithstanding, the
Minister, contrary to a vow made by him, at the commandment of his
Ordinary, appointed thereunto by law, is very injuriously dealt with, for
that he is not permitted to exercise any discipline at all: our Bishops and
Archdeacons, challenging unto themselves a principal prerogative, to punish
all malefactors, within their several jurisdictions. An other reason, that
this statute has appointed, as well the discipline of Christ, as the doctrine
and sacraments to be ministered, as the Lord commanded only, and none
otherwise is this: namely, for that this statute was made, to reform as well
the disordered discipline, used in the time of popery, amongst the popish
idolatrous Priests: as it was to reprove their false doctrine, and profanation
of the sacraments: so that neither the one, neither the other, should be
ministered by the Ministers of the Gospel; for otherwise, this branch of the
statute, should ordain nothing, and so contrary to the nature of a law, be
Lex absurda, an absurd law.

Bishop. Will you be diligent to frame and fashion your own selves, and your
families, according to the Doctrine of Christ, and to make both your selves,
and them, as much as in you lies, wholesome examples, and spectacles of the
flock of Christ?

Answer. I will.

Bishop. Will you maintain and set forwards, as much as lies in you,
quietness, peace and love, amongst all Christian people, and specially amongst
them that are, or shall be committed to your charge?

Answer. I will. In the end, when he lays on his hands, he says to every
one: be thou a faithful Dispensor of the word of God, and of his holy
Sacraments. And again: Take thou authority to preach the word of God, and to
minister the holy Sacraments. Which action and speeches of the Bishop, are to
be well wayed, and considered. The words which the Bishop pronounces: [Be thou
a faithful Dispensor], etc. (Take thou authority to preach) are words
appointed him by the whole State, to be pronounced. What? was it, trow you,
the meaning of all the States and Nobles of the Realm? or was it our most
excellent Sovereign, the Queens Highness her pleasure, to have enacted by
Parliament, that a Bishop should command an Apothecarie, not exercised at all
in holy Scriptures, and altogether unable to teach, to be notwithstanding a
faithful dispensor of the word of God, and to take authority to preach:
Promissio facti alieni inutilis Institu. de inu^tilistipu si quis.
est, and quod si testator iusserit aliquem in certum locum abire, vel
liberalibus studijs imbui, vel domum suis manibus extruere vel pingere, vel
vxorem ducere, per alium id facere non potest, quia haec omnia testatoris
voluntas in ipsius solius persona intelligitur conclusisse. A promise made of
an other man's fact, is unprofitable, and that if a Testator shall will any to
go to a certain place, or to be furnished with the liberal Sciences, or to
build an house, or to paynt a table with his own hands, or to marry a wife:
that he can not do any of these things by an other man, because the will of
the Testator has concluded all these things only in his own person. Was
their meaning, that the Bishop pronouncing these words. the holy Communion, and
to help him in the distribution thereof, and to read holy Scriptures, and
Homelies, in the congregation,) etc. I take it, and hold it for a principle,
that the Bishop has no authority, by his Lordship, to alter or transform an
act of Parliament, and therefore I take it, that I may safely conclude, without
offense to his Lordship, that he can not by law appoint any Minister, to read
any Homilies in any Church, Statute law is Siricti Iuris, and may not be
extended.

What will you then by law positive, bar reading of Homilies in the Church?
No. But I would have the Law positive observed, and so bar reading of
Homilies from a Minister, because the Law positive has appointed that office
to a Deacon. For it is not lawful for one private man, and fellow-seruant, to
transpose from his fellowseruant an office committed unto him by public
authority.

preach only, and yet in saying that he must preach only, I do not exclude
him from doing those other duties, Sine quibus illud fieri non potest. Currat
lex. Let the law run: and let him that has defiled his hands, by laying them
upon such a one, contrary to the commandment of the Lord, and contrary to the
laws of his governor, under whom he lives, and by whom he has his
preferment, hold up his guilty hands unto the Lord for mercy, in the day of
the Lord, and fall down before her Highness, for her gracious pardon, in so
abusing her Highness laws. And to the end, you may see more apparently,
these two offices, by the law it self, to be thus distinguished, I have set
down the Bishops words, pronounced by virtue of the statute, unto the
Ministers, as follows. [You have heard brethren, as well in your private
examination, as in the exhortation, and in the holy lessons taken out of the
Gospel, and out of the writings of the Apostles, of what dignity, and of how
great importance this office is, whereunto ye be called: and moreover, I exhort
you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to have in remembrance into how high
a dignity, and to how chargeable an office ye be called: that is to say, to be
the messengers, the watchmen, the Pastors, and the stewards of the Lord, to
teach, to premonish, to feed, and provide for the Lords family, to seek for
Christ his sheep, that be dispersed abroad, and for his children which be in
the midst of this naughty world, to be saved thorough Christ for ever: or
shall be committed to your charge, unto that agreement in faith and knowledge
of God, and to that ripeness and perfectness of age in Christ, that there be
no place left among them, either for error in religion, or for viciousness in
life. As here you see the whole sum of the office of a Minister, recited by
act of Parliament, and pronounced by the Bishop: So in the whole action of
ordering Ministers, both the Bishops interrogatories, and the parties answers,
and all tend to admonish the Minister still of his duty, in teaching and
instructing the people, and in preaching. Where the whole action of ordering
Deacons, tends to admonish the Deacon of his office in reading: As thus.
(Will you diligently read the same unto the people assembled in the Church,
where you shall be appointed to serve)

Answer. I will.

importing time. But had this word (When) been placed in steed of (Where)
they might perhaps, have had some cloak for the rain: for so the word
(When) and the word (Shall) might both have had relation to the time to come.

QVIA VERO NONNVLLI, etc. But because some, Ex. de hare^ ^^excom. Quia vero.
under the color of godliness, denying (as the Apostle says) the power
thereof, challenge unto themselves authority to preach, whereas the Apostle
says. How shall they preach, unless they be sent, all they which are
forbidden, or not sent, shall (besides authority given unto them, either from
the Apostolic sea, or the Catholic Bishop of the place) publicly, or
privately presume to usurp the office of preaching, let them be
excommunicated, and unless they speedily repent, let them be punished, with
some other competent pain.

gate of my pasture, where my gray ambling gelding runs, open the gate,
bring him out, take him to your own use: I give him you frankly, has he not
as good a title and interest to my horse, as if I had made him a bill of sale,
under my hand and seal? And has not the Minister likewise, as well a
special license, from a Bishop, to preach, that is willed openly in the
presence of God, men, and angels: as he, that has a special license given him
alone in a corner: the one is pronounced, solemnly in the midst of the
congregation: the other is done secretly, by a Goose quill. Moreover, neither
does the foresaid Canon, neither yet the Iniunction, require a special license
in writing, to the end, that the Minister should have power thereby only to
preach. For so should you take away the form and order, appointed by act of
Parliament, whereby authority is given to a Minister to preach, and commit the
making of a Minister, to the Bishop, without a congregation. But the end, why
a special license, ought to be had, is not so much, for the party himself to
preach within his own cure, as for them, that shall admit him to preach out of
his own cure: And that appears manifestly by the eight article of the
Injunctions. The words are these. (Also that they shall admit no man within any
their cures, but such as shall appear unto them to be sufficiently licensed
thereunto, etc.) And in the end of this Iniunction, it is expressly permitted
to every Minister, to preach within his own sure, though he be not specially
licensed thereunto. be sent by the said Ordinary, to some one Church, or more,
as shall be thought expedient, by the said Ordinary, according to the quality
of the person Nor any person aforesaid, shall presume ^o preach, except first
he give faithful signification in due form of his sending, and authority:
that is, that he that is authorized, do come in form appointed him in that
behalf, and those that affirm they come by special privilege, do show
their privilege unto the Parson or Vicar of the place, where they preach. And
those that pretend themselves to be sent by the Ordinary of the place, shall
likewise show the Ordinaries letters, made unto him for that purpose, under his
great seal. In primis, I shall not preach, or publicly interpret, but only
read that which is appointed by public authority, without special license of
the Bishop, under his seal, though her Majesty's most excellent name be used
by the publishers of the said aduertisements for confirmation of them, and that
they affirm her M. to have commanded them thereunto, by her highness letters:
yet because the book it self comes forth without her M privilege, and is
not printed by her M. Printer, nor any in his name, therefore it carries no
such credit and authority with it, as whereunto her M. subjects are
necessarily bound to subscribe, having other laws, and other Injunctions under
her M. name, and authorized by her M. privilege, contrary to the same. For her
M. by her Injunctions, commands every Minister to preach within his own
cure, without license, as before you have heard. But let us go forward. It
has been showed before, that every one, to be made a Deacon, or a minister,
ought be to called, tried, examined, known to have such qualities, as were
requisite, and that mention also has been made of y^ face of a church, of the
Latin tongue, and of many other circumstances, necessary to that action: all
which things set down rather generally, then particularly described, require a
larger discourse. Panormitan, and y^ doctors, upon y^ civil and canonical law,
have these co^clusions.

Statuta debent interpretari, secundum ius commune, sieve debentinterpretationem
^x. n. ^a. dict^^ de consu^t^^. nu. 22.
recipere a iure communi, and statuti verba dubia debent interpretari, vt minus
laedat ius commune, quam sit possible. Statutes ought to be interpreted,
according to common law: or statutes ought to receive their interpretation
from common law, and doubtful words of a statute, ought to be so construed,
that they be as little prejudicial to the common law, as is possible. Out of
which conclusions, I collect this rule: Namely, that where a statute shall
establish an office, practiced and had in use before the making of the statute,
and shall require a calling, a trial, an examination, and qualities in an
officer, meet to execute that office, and shall not specify and declare any
particular kind of calling, of trial, of examination, and such qualities, etc.
that then such manner of calling, of trial, of examination, and such
qualities, are required by that statute, to be in such an officer, as by common
right were requisite for such an officer, before the making of that statute.
And because by the view of the former order it self, it is very apparent that
the same form and order was appointed, by men very desirous to promote, as
much as in them lay, the honor and glory of God, and to abolish all
superstitions and trumperies brought into his Church: Therefore because I ought
by duty, to conceive their meaning to the best, and most agreeable to their
profession: I say, that they meant herein, only such calling, such trial,
such examination, and such qualities, as are requisite to be in a Deacon, and
in a Minister, by the law of God. Which is evident both by the order of
prayer, used at the time of their orderings, and also by the Scripture read for
that purpose. The prayer follows. (Almighty God, which by thy divine
providence, have appointed diverse orders of Ministers in the Church, and
did inspyre thine holy Apostles, to choose unto this order of Deacons, the
first Martyr S. Steven, with other; mercifully behold these thy servant, now
called to the like office, and administration:

After this prayer, follows the Epistle out of Timothy. Likewise, must the
Ministers be honest, not double tongued, not given to much wine, neither greedy
of filthy lucre, but holding the mystery of the faith with a true conscience.
And let them first be proved, and let them minister so that no man be able to
reprove them. Even so must their wives be honest, not evil speakers, but sober
and faithful in all things. Let the Deacons be the husbands of one wife, and
such as rule their children well, and their own households. For they that
minister well, get themselves a good degree, and a great liberty in the faith,
which is in Jesus Christ, etc. or else this out of the sixth of the Acts.

Then the twelve, called the multitude of the Disciples together, and said: It
is not meet, that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables: wherefore
brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest report, and full of the
holy Ghost and wisdom, to whom we may commit this business, but we will
give our selves to continual prayer, and to the administration of the word.
And that saying pleased the whole multitude, and they chose Steven, a man full
of faith, and full of the holy Ghost, and Philip, and Procorus, and Nicanor,
and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas, a convert of Antioche. These they set
before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them,
etc.

this Collect.
ALmighty God, giver of all good things, which of thy great goodness, have
vouchsafed to accept and take these thy servant unto the office of Deacons:
make them we beseech thee, O Lord, to be modest, humble, and constant in their
ministration, to have a ready will to observe all Spiritual Discipline, that
they having always the testimony of a good conscience, and continuing ever
stable and strong Fol. 1. page 8.
in thy Son Christ, may so well use themselves in this inferior office, that
they may be found worthy to be called to the higher ministeries in the Church,
thorough the same thy Son our Savior Christ, to whom be glory and honor
world without end. Amen.

The Epistle appointed at the time of ordering of Ministers, shall be read out
of the twenty chapter of the Acts.
FRom Mileto Paul sent messengers to Ephesus, and called the Elders For ^.
page ^.
of the Congregation, which when they were come to him he said unto them. Ye
know, that from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have
been with you, at all seasons, serving the Lord with all humbleness of mind,
and with many tears and temptations which happened unto me, by the layings
awaite of the Jews, because I would keep back nothing that was profitable
unto you, but to show you, and teach you openly, thorough every Page 3. 51.
house, witnessing both to the Jews and Greeks, the repentance that is
toward God, and the faith which is toward our Lord Jesus. And now behold, I
go bound in the spirit, unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall
come to me there, but that the holy Ghost witnesses in every city, saying:
that bonds and trouble abide me: but none of these things move me, neither is
my life dear unto my self, that I might fulfill my course with joy; and the
ministration of the word, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify
the Gospel of the Grace of God. And now behold, I am sure that henceforth you
all, thorough whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my
face no more. Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the
blood of all men. For I have spared no labor, but have showed you all the
counsel of God. Take heed therefore to your selves, and to all the flock,
among whom the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to rule the congregation of
God, which he has purchased with his blond, etc.

Or else the third chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy.
THis is a true saying. If any man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires
an honest work. A Bishop therefore must be blameles, the husband of one wife,
diligent, sober, discreet, a keeper of hospitality, apt to teach, not given
to overmuch wine, no fighter, not greedy of filthy lucre: but courteous, gentle,
abhorring fighting, abhorring covetousness, Page 5^.
one that rules well his own house, one that has children in subjection with
all reverence. For if a man cannot rule his own house, how shall he care for
the Congregation of God? He may not be a young scholar, least he swell, and
fall into the judgment of the evil speaker. He must also have a good report
of them which are without, least he fall into rebuke, and snare of the evil
speaker.

After this shall be read for the Gospel, a piece of the last chapter of
Matthewe.
THen Jesus came, and spoke unto them, saying: All power is given ^
unto me, in heaven and in earth: Go ye therefore, and teach all nations,
Baptizing them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost: teaching them to observe all all things whatsoever I have commanded
you. And lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.

The prayer used by the Bishop, in the ordering of Ministers.
Fol. 11. page ^.
mercifully behold these thy servants, now called to the office of
Priesthood, and replenished them so with the truth of thy doctrine and
innocence of life, that both by word and good example, they may faithfully
serve thee in this office, to the glory of thy name, and profit of the
congregation, through the merits of our savior Jesus Christ, who lives and
reigns, with thee and the holy ghost world without end, Amen.

These prayers, and places of Scripture appointed by the whole consent of the
realm, to be made and read at the time of making Deacons and Ministers, most
strongly prove, that their intent and purpose was, to have such men placed in
the office of Deacons, and Ministers, as whom the holy Scriptures has
commanded should be placed, and as they pray might be placed. But suppose
that they, being not so faithful to the Lord as were expedient for them,
account not the Lords ways to be the best ways, his councels not to be the
wisest counsels, to interpret the meaning of the statute, because they are
such ways, as wherein the Lords servants apply them selves precisely to
walk, and therefore ignominiously are termed Precisians: Suppose this, I say,
yea, and suppose, that they have preferred their own inventions, and set the
consultations of the grauest Senators, and wisest Counselors, and chiefest
Rulers of the land behind their backs: yet, if reason might have ruled them,
and their will might have been no law, there was, and is, an other manner of
calling, of trial, of examination, other qualities, an other face of the
Church, an other Latin tongue, by other positive laws required, which as
(partly by sequel of their proceedings, and partly by their own records
appears) was never or very seldom used by any of them. The manner of calling
ought to have been thus.

QVANDO EPISCOPVS, etc. When the Bishop The (...) of calling.
is disposed to make an ordination, all they which will come to the holy
ministry, the fourth day before the ordination, are to be called to the
City, together wivh the Elders, which ought to present them. And this kind of
calling is a solemn publishing the Bishops purposes, either by some process
openly fixed upon the doors of the Cathedral Church, or proclaimed Voce
Praeconis, by the voice of an Apparatour, to make the Bishops intent knowne^,
^ol. 2 p. 2. 27. Article.
by the Bishop is come, etc. And in the Articles of religion, the self same is
expressed. It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public
preaching, or ministering the Sacraments In the title Articles, for certain
orders in ecclesiastical policy. The manner of trial.
in the congregation, before he be lawfully called, and sent to execute the
same. In the Aduertisements likewise, you have these words. First, against the
day of giving orders appointed, the Bishop shall give open monitions to all
men, to except against such as they know not to be worthy, either for life or
conversation. The manner of trial follows, and ought to be after this sort.

ET TVNC EPISCOPVS, etc. And then the Bishop ought to choose him Ministers
and other men skillful of the law of God, exercised in Ecclesiastical
functions, who first of all ought diligently to enquire out the life of them
that are to be ordained, their kindred, their Country, their age, their
bringing up, the place where they were borne, whether they be learned, whether
instructed in the law of God, whether they firmly hold the Catholic faith,
and in plain words can utter the same, and they to whom this charge is
committed, ought to take heed, that they do not for favor, or for desire of
reward, decline from the truth, to present any to the hands of the Bishop,
either unworthily, or not meet to take holy orders. And therefore let them
continually three days together be examined, and so on the sabbath in the
which they are approved, let them be presented unto the Bishop. Out of the
constitutions of Otho, I have before cited this decree following, which
Constitu. Otho Sacer.
may aptly be repeated again, to prove the having of a scrutine to be
necessary before the making of Ministers, as it was there to prove what
qualities were requisite in them. Quare cum nimis periculosum sit, etc.
Considering that it is a thing very perilous, to ordain men unworthy,
idiots illegitimate, irregular, persons unlearned, persons vagarant, and such
as have not any certain or true title: indeed we ordain, that before the
conferring of orders, diligent inquisition and search be made by the Bishop
of all these things. And the gloss upon the word ante. Est ergo necessarium,
etc. It is therefore necessary, that this scrutine of the examinants preceede
the conferring of orders, even as the commandment of the father or master,
must necessarily prevent the taking of an inheritance by the son, or by the
servant, and this must be so done for the irreuocable prejudice that otherwise
might happen. And because this collation hangs on the disposition of law, any
preposteration, contrary to the order appointed by law, shall annihilate the
whole act. Again, an other gloss has these words, Ordinandi ita sunt,
subtiliter examinandi, and inquirendum est, de natione, in qua nati sunt, an
sint de illa diocesi. an legitime nati, an bonae famae. Men to be ordained, are
Glos in cap. constitutus ver. ordinan^ dos exide purgatione c.
narrowly to be examined, and there must inquiry be made, what country men
they are, whether they be of the same Diocese, whether they be legitimate,
whether they be of good fame. Quia in nullo debet eorum opi^^o v^cillare,
Because their credit ought not to be Distinc. 33. (...).
shaken in any case. And the Pope in that Chapter, reprehending the curiosity
of the Bishop, unto whom he writes, for too too narrowly inquiring after the
manners of certain compurgatours. Vtinam (says he) sic discuteres ordinandos.
I wish thou would make such inquisition of those, whom thou preferrest to
holy orders. Another reason why a Minister should be tried, is, because he
must be learned: but qualitas extrinseca, vt literatura non praesumitur, nisi
probetur. Glos. de elec. le. ^. ca si ^orte ver (...), ^^ D^ ^^tu: ^^p. l. qui
liberos.
An outward quality, as learning, is not presumed to be in a man, unless it
be so proved, and therefore he is to be examined upon the same. Et vbi dare
volo filiam meam, id est, ecclesiam in sponsam, debeo inquirere de dignitate
sponsi^ ratio, quia eligens tenetur inuenire conditionem debitam filio, And
where I mind to give my daughter, that is to say, a Church to be a Bryde, I
ought to Extrauag. ^om. c. ad ^uius^^bet de praeb^nd. and dig* The trial of
Ministers.
enquire of the worthiness of the Brydegroome, videlicet, of the Prelate, the
Brydegroome of the Church: and the reason is; for that every father choosing
an husband for his daughter, is bound by law to choose one of condition
meet for his daughter. In form and manner of ordering Deacons, by the Book
of Edward the sixth, a certain trial is likewise commanded, the Bishop
using these words to the Archedeacon. (Take heed that the Persons whom ye
present unto us, be apt and meet, for their learning, and godly conversation,
to exercise their ministry duly, to the honor of God, and edifying of his
Church.) This manner of trial cannot better appear, than by a comparison to
the proceedings and Commencements in Oxenford or Cambridge, familiarly known
to Schoolmen in both Uniuersities, Whosoever is to take any degree in School,
either Bacheler Master or Doctor in any faculty, he must first set upon the
schole doors, his questions where in he is to aunsweare: He must publicly
aunsweare to every one that will appose him: he must afterward in the
University Church, submit himself privately to the examination of every one
of that degree, whereunto he desires to be promoted: He must afterward be
brought by his presenter into the congregation house, to the judgment and
trial of the whole house, and if he shall there have a sufficient number of
his superiors voices, allowing his manners, and pleased with his learning, he
is then presented, by one of the house to the Vice-chauncellour, and Proctours,
and by them as Judges in the name of the whole house, admitted to his degree.
The examination whereof mention is made in the Book of King Edward the sixth,
somewhat varieth from this kind of trial, and consists in the
interrogatories between the Bishop demanding, and the parttie aunswering.
For, says the Bishop, (Do you think, etc. Do you unfeignedly believe, etc.
Will you apply, etc.) ^l. 7. page 1.
manner following. (Do ye trust, etc. Do ye believe, etc.) There is also to be
required by the Book, that the Bishop should have knowledge of the party
to be made a Deacon or Minister. Which knowledge every man will guess should not
be a bare view, or external sight of the comeliness and proportion of his
bodily shape and personage, but a sure and steadfast judgment, grounded upon
substantial proofs of the virtues and ornaments of his mind: and the same
also should be a far more exquisite knowledge, than only to know the man to
be an honest man, because the Book requires him also, to be an apt and meet
man, to execute his ministry duly, for which, one amongst even the meanest
of us all, having upon a sudden espied one like an honest man, yea, or one
happily commended unto us to be a right honest man indeed, which one (I say)
of us, would forthwith familiarly greet this man, clappe his hands upon his
head, and liberally entertain him, to teach his sons Demosthenes in Greek,
or Cicero in Latin, the party him self being such a one as never had learned
the Greek Alphabet, or the Latin Grammar? Would we not be thus circumspect,
trow you, as to try his cunning, ere we trusted his honesty in this case?
With what qualities, such as are to be made Ministers or Deacons ought to be
adorned, has been already sufficiently declared out of the laws positive in
force. And now what is to be understood by the face of the Church, whereof
mention is made in the said book, that that follows may sufficiently
instruct Distinct. 24. c. quando.
us. The Canon law touching this point says thus: Alias autem, etc. 70.
Distinct. c. ordinationes.
the presence of many standers by, you make ordination both of Elders and
Levites. And again: the other Priests, let them be ordained of their own
Bishop, so that the Citizens and other Priests give their assent, and so
likewise must the Deacons be ordained. And again, let not a Bishop ordain
any Clearkes 24. Distinct. c. Episcopus,
without the advice of his Clergy, and so too, that he seek the allowance
and good liking of the Citizens. And again: let the requests of the Citizens,
the testimony of the people, the judgment of the honorable, the election of
Clearkes be had in the ordination of Clearks. And note, that these texts and
many other mo do all affirm, that elections and ordinations must be made by
Citizens and Priests or Clearkes in the plural number, and not by one Citizen
or one Priest in the singular number: Neither are these decrees to be
understood of the chief Priest of every Diocese alone, but are verified of
every Priest throughout the the Country, as appears by the Canon following.
Sed nec ille Distinct. 64. c. Si forte.
deinceps sacerdos erit, quem nec clerus, nec populus propriae ciuitatis
eligit. But he shall be no Priest henceforth, whom neither Clergy, nor
people of his own City has elected. Whereunto also the Civil law accords.
Si vero, etc. But if holy rules shall prohibit such Authen. de sanct Epis
clericos colla nona.
as be chosen by them, as men unworthy, then let the most holy Bishop
procure to ordain whomesoeuer he shall think best. A Bishop alone, may then
ordain, says this law, when the people and Clergy have chosen unworthy
men: it says not, that he may always ordain alone without contradiction, or
that the people and Clergy have no interest in the action. But this law
only provides in this case a remedy, to supply the negligence of those
unto whom the election appertains, if they shall do otherwise therein than
becomes them. And to make this matter whereof we entreat more plain and
evident, even by the statutes and ordinances of the realm, the choice and
ordination of a Minister, is not apropried to the Bishop alone. and maintane
her prerogative royal, as afterward shall be declared, they ought now to be
executed. Secondly, by a Statute made 21. of H. the 8. chap. 13. It is enacted,
that a Bishop may have six Chaplains, because six Ministers at the least, ought
to be present when the Bishop gives orders: Thirdly, in the Book of making
Priests, etc. are these words: there shall be an exhortation unto the people,
declaring how the people ought to esteem them (meaning the Ministers) in their
vocation. And these words: the Bishop shall say unto the people. Brethren, if
there be any, etc. And these words the Bishop commending such to the prayers
of the congregation, with the Clergy and people present shall say, etc. Then
shall the Bishop examine every one of them that are to be ordered in the
presence of the people. By which words and branches of the Book it is
evident, that that people, over whom the Minister is to be placed, ought
especially to be present. For what profit can a people dwelling at York reap
by exhortation of the preacher unto love and obedience unto their Minister,
when their Minister shall be made at London? Her Highness, the nobility and
fathers of the land, were of more wisdom and understanding, I am sure, than to
imagine* that a people dwelling at Carlisle, could be taught or instructed by a
Sermon made at Excester. And by the former decrees, wherein mention is made of
people and Citizens, the same people and Citizens (if we will know what Citizens
be properly) are not taken for the Quiristers, the Singers, the Organ-plaiers,
the Canons, the Archdeacon of the Cathedral Church (for all these by the Canon
law bear the names of Clearks) neither are the Bishops servants, taken in
these Canons for Citizens: serui and domestici, in re non domestica. Servants
and folk domestical, in a thing not domestical, are not allowed fit
witnesses, neither have servants, as servants, any interest: And therefore
Citizens in these former Canons are Citizens, Et re, and nomine, Citizens in
deed, and in name. And as I proved before out of the statute of the land, that
as the people of the place destitute of a Pastor must be present, and give
their consent at the choice of their Minister, so is the same also stablished
by Canon law, and confirmed by Act of Parliament. For this word Consensus sieve
collaudatio, Consentor approbation, described to be multorum voluntas, ad quos
res pertinet simul Glos. in. c. ^. de reb^eccle. non alienand. ver. tractatus
lib. 6.
iniuncta: the will of many, unto whom the matter appertains, jointly lincked
together, proves, that not only Citizens indeed, but also that Citizens of
the place, where the party should afterward serus as a Minister, ought to
give their consent and allowance to the making him a Minister, because the
matter of having a Minister appertains properly unto none other, but chiefly
and altogether concerns them. And therefore the law wills, Vt quod omnes
tangit, ab omnibus approbetur. That that be allowed of all, which touches all.
Whereat our Bishops themselves, in their English Canons of discipline have
aimed, and whereunto in words they have agreed. The Bishop shall lay his
hands on none (say they) nor at Bishops Canons. fol. 5.
any other time, but when it shall chance some place of ministration to be
void in the Diocese. Nullus Laicorum principum, etc. Let none 63. Did. cap.
nullus, etc. non est.
of the lay Princes or Potentates join him self to the election or promotion
of a Patriarch Metropolitan, or any Bishop, etc. Neither ought this and such
like Canons (I say) any whit impeach the truth of my former assertions. First,
for that these latter Canons are directly opposite, and contrary to the
ordidinance of almighty God: And the Apostles (says the holy Scripture) Act.
6.
calling the multitude of the disciples together, said unto them, choose
therefore brethren out from among you, seven men of good report, etc. whom we
may appoint to this business: and this speech pleased the whole multitude then
present: and they choose seven, etc. Which ordinance of the Apostles,
whosoever shall think, that the same may receive a counterbuffe, by an Angel
coming from heaven, much less by a Pope, coming from the bottomless pit,
for my part, I hold him accursed, and so utterly unworthy the name of a
Disciple. Secondly, the said Canons of Adrian, plainly, and in flat terms are
derogatorie to her Majesty's prerogative royal, and therefore by the statute
of 25. Henry the eight utterly abolished. Thirdly, they are against the
customs and statutes of the realm. For by all the customs of the realm,
where any Mayor, Bayliffe, Sheriff, or head officer of any Borough, town, or
any incorporation is to be elected, or where any Knight of the shire, any
Burgess, any Constable, any Crowner, any Vergerer within any for^est, and such
like are chosen, the same officers are always chosen* by the greatest part of
such men's voices, as have interest in the action.

And thus, as briefly as I could, I have examined these words mentioned in the
book, videlicet, calling, tried, examined, known, qualities, the face of the
Church, and the Latin tongue, what meaning and signification by laws in force
the same words have. And also what order and form our Bishops ought by Law
positive to have used in making Deacons, and Ministers: and what credit and
fidelity her Highness, and the whole body of our Church, and common weal
have reposed in them, for an orderly, upright, and sincere disposition of these
things. Unto which trust, how aunswerable their service and government has
been, I doubt not, but upon their examinations they will approve the same,
to have been faithful, just, and equal. But by way of supposition, if any
shall deny their fidelities to have been such as is pretended, what remedy
then? or what is to be done then? Hereunto I answer: since the peril
happening unto others through their negligences in time past is unrecoverable,
that therefore the Law established against such excesses, would be executed in
time to come: the punishment of one is a terror to many, and by fear of
punishment a man is made good. The sum and effect of which Law, confirmed by
Act of Parliament, is this, videlicet, Tam indigne promouens, quam indigne
promotus est deijciendus. As well the man unworthily promoting, as the man
unworthily promoted, is to be deposed. Proofs and examples whereof are these.
In the chapter, NIHIL EST? EX. DE PRAEBEND. Order was taken, as you have seen
before, that not only men unworthy should not be admitted to regiment of
souls, but it is also in that place provided, in case any thing shall be
otherwise unadvisedly attempted, Ex de aetate and qualit. c. penult.
decreed thus: If they shall henceforth presume to ordain any that are
unskillful and ignorant, which may easily be espied: we decree, that both the
ordainours, and the ordained be subject to grievous So. did. c ex penitentibus
and 51 did. c. aliquantos. 1. q. 1. c. Si qui episc.
punishment. Again, Qui ex certa scientia indignum ordinat, aut deponitur, aut
priuatur potestate ordinandi. He that wittingly ordains an unworthy man, is
either to be deposed or* deprived from power to ordain. Again, Si qui
Episcopi, etc. If any Bishop have consecrated any such Priest as ought not
to be consecrated, although in some sort they escape infamy, yet they shall
not thencefoorth have ordinations, neither shall they ever be present at that
Sacrament, which they vnworth^ly have administered. Upon which decree, and the
word Ordinations, the gloss flatly concludes, Quod semper est veritas, quod
qui promouet indignum depositionem meretur. That the truth evermore is this,
videlicet, that, whosoever promoteth an unworthy man, deserves to be deposed:
Quia culpareus, etc. Because he is culpable, committing an order, Glos in
constable. Otho. de scr^^. in ord. faci^n. c. 1. ver. ab.
charge, or office to such an unworthy person. And because he is unfaithful,
communicating his ministry unto an unworthy man, to the hurt of the Church*
and honor of God, which by good Ministers ought to be furthered. A ship
master or an Inne-keeper, using the service of an evil mate, or ship boy,
or ff. de exercit. l. 1. magistru^.
of an unthrifty (...) or Ostler, is to make restitution, if any thing be
imbezled from his passengers, or guests: for the negligence of either of these,
in this case is punishable, Quia oper a malorum seruorum vtitur. Because he
uses the service of evil servant. By which Laws the gloss proves, that
though an Archdeacon have authority by his office to examine, and do present
unfit men to the Bishop, that yet the Bishop notwithstanding ought to be
punished, because the Bishop is answerable for the fact of the examinour,
sithence the examination is made by his commandment, and also for that
Reseruatum est episcopo ius examinandi illum, Right is reserved unto the Bishop
to examine him, examinatus enim examinatur in hijs praecipue in quibus vertitur
periculum animae. A man once examined Glos. c, ad haec ver. examinentur.
Extrauag. de offi. Archid. Glos. 1. l. no^ est. ff de transact.
is to be reexamined, especially touching those things, wherein peril of soul
consists, Et factum quod est, mutatur ex superuenienti causa. And a deed
once done is altered upon a new cause. An Archdeacon having by law the custody
of candlestikes, copes, and vestments, and other idolatrous garments, was
remiss in safe keeping these things, whereupon the Pope wrote to the
Archbishop, and willed him straightly to require the said ornaments at his
hands: and Extrauag. de statut. regul. c. cum ad Monasterium penu.
further commanded him to be punished, and to make restitution, if through his
negligence or default any thing were perished, in so much as by his office he
was bound to the safe custody of them. Neither did he behave himself, Vt
bonus pater familias in re sua gessisset. As a good father of an household
would have done his own houhoushold affairs. And thus far touching the
Bishops, unworthily promoting unworthy men unto the ministry, touching
unworthy persons unworthily promoted, the decrees following tell us what in
like case should be done with them.

QVAMVIS MVLTA FVERVNT, etc. Although many things were proposed against the
Bishop of Calinea, yet because Extrauag. de ^tat. and qua. ^ap. vlt.
he him self had confessed before us, that he never learned Grammar, neither
ever has read Donate, and by evidence of the fact his ignorance of learning
and insufficiency is so apparent unto us, that it were against God and
Canonical Constitutions to tolerate so great a defect in a Bishop, we have
thought good, utterly to remove him from the execution of the office of a
Bishop, and also from the administration of the Church of Calinea. If it
might stand with the good pleasure of the Lord, to move once Iehosophat: first
with the Book of God: secondly, with the Laws of the Realm, to make a
general visitation by men of sound and sincere religion, and by men of
valiant and stont courages, I dare boldly avouch, that the value of the first
fruits of benefices that might be made void, by the just deprivation of unjust
possessours, even by the evidence of the fact it self, would amount to a
greater increase of her Highness treasure, than the best Subsidy that she
has levied of them since the time of her gracious government. Neither is this
Chapter impertinent to this purpose, though herein express mention be made
only of a Bishop. For if you weigh and consider why the Bishop was
deposed, the same reason is sufficient likewise to deprive any inferior person
offending in the like case. The cause of the Bishops deprivation was his
insufficiency and defect of learning, and why then should not insufficiency
and defect of learning, be as just a cause to deprive a Minister, of an
inferior calling, being infected with the same disease? The charge and
function of the Bishop was, to teach and govern others: The same end is
allotted to every one that takes upon him the cure of souls. The Bishop
wanting skill and ability to perform an office taken upon him, is degraded
and cast out: and an inferior Minister, destitute of the same furniture, is
maintained and kept in. Again.

ABBAS VERO, etc. But the Abbot, (whom all men Epis. de statu. Monacho cum ad
Monast. Abbas.
ought reverently to obey in all things) how much more should he be frequent
with his brethren in all things, having vigilant care, and diligent
circumspection, that he may be able to give an acceptable account unto God of
his office committed unto him. But if the said Abbot be a preuaricator or
despiser of his order, or negligent, or remiss, let him know for a surety,
that he is not only to be deposed from his office, but also some other way
to be chastised, considering not only his own fault, but the fault of others
is to be required at his hand. And again, Si quis Abbas cautus 18. q. 2. Si
qui^ Abbas.
in regimine, humilis, castus, misericors, discretus, sobri^sque, non fuerit,
ac diuina praecepta verbis and exempln on ostenderit, ab episcopo, i^n cuius
territorio consistit, and a vicinis, etc. If any Abbot shall not be circumspect
in government, humble, chaste, merciful, discreet and sober, and shall not
show forth godly precepts, both in word and example of life, let him be
removed from his honor, by the Bishop in whose territory he dwells, and by
the next Abbots and others fearing God, notwithstanding all the congregation
consenting unto his sin, would have him to be Abbot. And therefore both these
constitutions may serve to deprive all such Ministers, as in life, learning,
manners, and conversation, are like unto such Abbots. Yea, and touching
inferior Ministers, the law has likewise specially provided as follows.
Quod si forte necessitas postulauerit, vt sacerdos, Extrauag. de hereti. cap.
cum ex.
tanquam inutilis, and indignus, a cura gregis debeat remoueri, agendum est
ordinate apud episcopum, etc. But if happily necessity require, that a Priest
as unprofitable and unworthy, ought to be removed from the charge of his
flock, you must ordinarily repair unto the Bishop, Again, Dictum est nobis
presbyteros propter suam negligentiam canonice degradatos. It is told us, that
certain Elders were canonically degraded for their negligence. And here it
appears (says the gloss (Quod quis aeque deponitur propter negligen^iam,
sicut propter dolum, That one is as justly deposed for negligence, as for
collusion, according to the Tenor of the Canon following. Non 1. q. 1^ Si qui
episc.
modo pro heresi vel pro qualibet maiori culpa, sed etiam pro negligentia remou
ebitur. He shall not only be removed for heresy, or other greater offense,
but for negligence also. Whereunto also the laws of the Empire agree.

QVI NON SERVIT, etc. He that does no service to the Church, or faineth him
self to be a Clearke, when in deed he is none, he ought not to enioie the
privilege of Clearkes, but an other is to be surrogated in his room. And
again, Ne argentariorum 47. page 2
vel numulariorum munera, etc. We command, that the charge of Bankers, and
such as lend and exchange money for gain, be not left off by those which
only hastily desire to be collegiate men or Deanes. If any therefore under
the bare covering of a name or title, term him self a Collegiat man, or one
of a brotherhoode, let him know that an other is to be deputed in his room,
who may be approved sufficient to execute the same office. The reasons and
principal grounds of which Laws and Canons are these. Sola possessio non
sufficit in beneficijs Ecclesiasticis, nisi adsit Extrauag. de institu. cap. ex
frequentibus. ff de decurio. ^ Hereminus.
canonica institutio. A sole possession is not sufficient in Ecclesiastical
benefices, unless there concur also a Canonical institution. Sola possessio
non facit aliquem decurionem, sed iusta electio. A sole possession makes not
one a Senator or Captain, but a lawful electiction. Et praescriptio non
prodest, cum habent malam fidem. A prescription Extrauag. de praescript. c. 51.
diligenti and ^. cum omne.
does not profit, in case it be grounded upon an evil conscience, and
therefore sithence men so ordained, be malae fidei possessores unjust
possessours, fraus and d^lus eorum sibi patrocinari non debet, Their deceit and
collusion ought not to support them. Neque debet quis locupletari alterius
iactura, Neither ought any man to be enriched with the loss and hinderaunce of
an other: For these considerations, the law, I say, has provided, that both
the promotor, and the promoted, Agentes and consentientes pari poena puniantur,
As well the Abettours as the deed dooers are to sustain equal punishment. And
once again, as touching the displacing of idol sheepherds, and remoouing of
unpreaching hirelings, besides these former laws, there are many mo notable
conclusions to be drawn from the Civil laws, for ff. de muneribus and honor.
l. vt gradatim. reprobar^ authen. de col. iubemus colla. 9
the proof thereof, Reprobari posse medicum a republica, quamuis semel
probatus sit, Diuus magnus Antonius cum patre rescripsit. That a Physician once
proved, and admitted by public consent, to practice of Physike, may be
removed again from that function, in case afterward he be found rechlesse,
the holy and great Antonie and his father before him have answered: and that,
Propter hominum sanitatem ff. Job. iudic.
tuendam, for the preservation of men's health. SI QVOS IV DICES, Cod. de offic.
praefec. orient. l. 3.
etc. If thine excellency shall find any Judges, either for their long and
tedious infirmities, or for their negligence, or for any other like defect to
be unprofitable, thou may remove them from their administrations, and place
other in their stead. Si carceri praepositus (says the same Emperor) praetio
corruptus, If a Cod de cust, and exhibi. ceu le. carceri.
keeper of a common Goal corrupted with money, suffer a prisoner to go without
fetters, or to bring any weapon, or poison into the prison, he is to be
punished by the office of the Judge: but if he shall unwittingly suffer these
things, he is for his negligence to be displaced. Again, the same Emperor
says, Grammaticos Cod, de. profess. and medi, l. 2. lib. 10.
seu oratores, etc. If Grammarians, or Orators, once appointed by common
consent to teach Grammar or Oratorie, approve not themselves profitable to the
students of Grammar and Oratorie, for them to be again reproved, is not a
thing unaccustomed. For, says the same Emperor, Reddatur, etc. Let every
Cod. de profess. and med, l. reddatur.
one be admitted home to his Country, which is known unorderly and insolently
to use the exercise of Philosophy. In belle, etc. A Soldier, who in time of
war, does any thing forbidden by his Captain, or does not keep his
Generalles commandment, is to be punished by death, though his enterprise
take good success. And shall then a pretensed Minister, that forsakes his
standing, and only wears the ensign of the proclaimed enemy to his Lord
and Master, maugre the Law of his Lord and Master, and maugre Extrauag. de
renunc c sina. l. 2. ignominiae ss. de h^^s, qui nol. ^f.
the law of man, enjoy life and lands and livings and all. Panormitane, a
famous Canonist, concludes, that a Doctor allowed may be disallowed again:
yea, rather says Bartoll, a more famous Ciuilian, he may be degraded as a
Soldier, and as Clearke: For those things, says he, which I have spoken in
the degrading of soldiers, the same is to be verified touching the degrading
of Doctors and Clearkes. And this is a common and infallible conclusion, by
all the learned in the law, that Doctors, which by their readings or lectures,
or not approve them selves beneficial and ^id. cap. de, grad^^^o de ^^ni^
lib. 6. Vid. faeli. de rescript. ex lit^ris.
profitable unto students and scholars of their profession, may, and ought
well and rightly be removed from their office of reading and teaching. Yea
moreover, whatsoever he be that takes upon him the office of a Doctor,
wearing the arms and ensigns of Doctors, when as indeed he is no Doctor:
Tenetur poena falsi, ff. de f^l. l. eos i^^i. v^d. ^^rt. (...). Cod. de poss.
and (...). lib. ^0
is to be punished by pain appointed for forgerie. In like case, by like
reason, if an idol Minister take upon him by stealth and lying, the office of
a true Pastor, and carry the name and title of a true Pastor, being indeed
but an hireling, and profane Gentile: why should not he be punished with pain
appointed for theeuerie? In Panor. in c. auris, extrauag de ^tate at. qua^.
the Court of Conscience, a Doctor giving advice, but through ignorance or
want of experience, not following in his counsel the rules and precepts of
Law, is bound by equity unto his Client, for that through his unskillfulness
he is damnified. A Physician in the same Court, who, without peril of soul,
or danger to incur irregularitie, would safely cure his patient, must be
learned: he must practice according to the actions of Physic, he must be
diligent in the exercise of his faculty: he must not minister after any vnked
manner, but only according to the usual and ordinary opinion of the learned
in Physic, he must be circumspect and not sluggish to search out the disease,
he must be prudent and careful, When he is ordained, he solemnly vovveth to
preach, therefore he promises to be come a Doctor. In ^ vlt. ext(...)g. de
^^a, ^e and qualit.
both before, and at, and after the ministering of his medicine. A Minister then
taking upon him to be a Doctor of far greater wisdom: to be a Physician
of much more excellency: namely, to instruct and cure the souls of men with
the doctrines of the Gospel: can he unblameably consult without knowledge, or
safely practice without skill? Can he teach being unlearned? or heal being not
experienced? And here if the Magistrate would Page 7^.
know the manner already set down to redress the same, and how and in what
sort he may safely proceed against an ignorant and unlearned man, he must,
says Panormitane, see that the witnesses depose, how that the party did never
read any Books of learning: or that he did never go unto any School of
learning, because no man can attain unto learning, unless he have been
taught by one endued with learning, or spent his time in the study of Books
of learning: for, without a teacher, and without Books no man can be learned,
which may be proved, as well by the confession of the party, as by the
notoriousnesse of the fact. And here Panormitane wills the practitioner in
Law, diligently to mark how insufficiency, inability, and unskillfulness
of a Clearke may be proved evident and notorious, by not reading of Books. As
thus, Seius never read any Book of Physic: or Seius never resorted unto any
Physic Lecture: therefore Seius is no Physician. Titius never studied any
books containing the doctrines or controversies of the Gospel: or, has not
heard any preacher of the Gospel: Therefore Titius knows not the truth or
glad tidings of the Gospel.

Our idol Ministers, neither in times past have had, neither now have any
Books of Scriptures: Therefore they neither have been, neither now can be
learned in the Scriptures. They have not gone, neither now do go to any
School of divine learning: Therefore they have not been, nor yet now are any
Scholars in Divinity: And their insufficiency and inability, being by this
means palpable, are therefore notoriously depriueable, yea, degradable from
their benefices and offices.

all the professors of the Gospel within the land to be heretics, and
schismatikes, and themselves only with their crew and rabble of Seminaries, to
be Catholics, as though the Laws in force no whit appertained unto us: but
were only reserved by them selves against their day of Jubilee long sithence
gaped for of them, and hitherto by the infinite mercies of the Lord denied
them. Non debet quis schismaticus etiam abiurato schismate eligi. A
schismatique, though he Extrauag. de elect. quis.
abjure his schism ought not to be chosen a Bishop. Heretici autem credentes,
receptores, defensores and fautores eorum, istorum^ filij ad secundam Lib. 6.
de heret. c. 1 beretici.
generationem, ad nullum ecclesiasticum beneficium seu officium publicum
admittantur. But believing heretics, their receivers, defenders and abettors,
and their sons unto the second generation, let them be admitted unto no
Ecclesiastical benefice, or public office. And therefore from these
principles, Canons, and Act of Parliament, I argue thus: 1 No schismatique or
heretic, though he abjure his schism, or forsake his heresy, may be chosen
a Bishop, or admitted unto any Ecclesiastical benefice, or bear any public
office. 2 But every popish Priest is a schismatique or heretic. mayor
proposition is the law of Popery: The minor, the law of the Gospel.


NEither does this rule of law: Multa non sunt facienda, quae tamen facta
valent, any whit gain say the truth of this argument. For though it seem
probably by this rule, that a popish priest being once admitted unto popish
priesthood, should not be removed: Yet thereby it follows not, that religion
being restored, and idolatry abolished, he could not at the first restitution
of the Gospel, and entry of her gracious reign, have been secluded from the
office of a Minister, under the Gospel. For what though an Heretic, by the
judgment of an heretical Synagogue, obtain the room of a sacrificer in the
same Synagogue, and having once obtained it, may not be removed from the same
room, by the former rule of law: Though this be true I say, what avails it
to confirm, that a sacrificing Priest, by virtue of his admission unto the
Synagogue, ought to have a place of ministration in the Church of Christ? For
though he were admitted in the one, yet was he never admitted in the other. And
therefore it rests firm, that they ought not to have been admitted then,
when as the whole manner of the government of the Synagogue should have been
altered. For as at that time, their laws were unadvisedly translated from them
unto us: So by their laws we might advisedly have transformed them from
amongst us. They were Schismatikes and Heretics, by the laws of our religion,
and therefore not to have been admitted by the laws of their own profession.
Yea if they remain Idolaters still, or keep back from the people of God the
word of God, they are to be removed still: their ietting up and down in their
square ruffling and white philacteries, or mumbling their mattens and euensong,
are not so forcible to keep them in, as their insufficiency, negligence,
contempt, and idolatrous hearts are to thrust them out. And yet no part of
good, wholesome, and christian government and policy changed. For though
Josiah, moved by compassion, benignly suffered the Priests of Baal (repenting
of their idolatry) to receive tithes and offerings with their brethren* the
Levites: Yet he straightly charged them not to enter into the Lords Sanctuary,
to do any manner of service there: Neither did this his religious fact any whit
hinder the outward peace of his kingdom. Wherefore if a Bishop, an Abbot, an
Archdeacon, an Elder, a Physician, a Judge, an Advocate, a Iaylor, a Tutor, a
Schoolemaister, an ^rator, and a Philosopher, by justice and equity of law,
for inability, insufficiency, negligence, or other defects, ought to be
deposed, and removed off and from their rooms, places, offices, and honors:
how should a pretensed Minister, only intruding himself to an office of most
high calling, and excellency, and utterly destitute of all gifts and graces
sit for the same, be suffered to keep and retain the proper right and title
of an other, as his own lawful possession and inheritance. Had the
worshippers of the false gods care, that their idolatrous Priests should have
knowledge of their idol service: and shall we, the worshippers of the true
God, be blameles before his judgment seat, in case we maintain such to serve
him in the ministry of his holy Gospel as whose service, the veriest
Paynymes and Idolaters would Cod. de Epis^. co. and (...) l. Si quis (...) 12.
refuse to have in their Idol temples? And though these be sufficient proofs
to every one, not addicted to his own will (preferring the same to all reason)
that prohibitus clerica^i debet reuocari ad pristinum s^atum, per manus
iniectionem; and that serui vitam monasticam deserentes, Cod. de. Ep^sc. ^. and
cler^ l. (...).
ad prioris domini seruitutem restituuntur. One prohibited to be a Clarke,
ought to be reduced to his former estate, by authority of the Magistrate: and
servants, forsaking their monastical life, to be restored to the bondage of
their former master. Infamia non solum impedit praefici, sed etiam remoueri
facit a dignitatibus habitis. An infamy does not only hinder a man to be
preferred, but also causes him to be removed from dignities already recovered.
Though I say, these former proofs be sufficient, to confirm these assertions,
yet to make Cod de corre^. ^^nfamia. lib. 10. and de dig^^tat^ l. Iudices lib.
12.
the matter somewhat more plain, I have thought good, to reexamine the order
and form appointed by the former statute, for the making of Deacons and
Ministers: that, if upon examination thereof also, there do appear such a
defect by statute law, as whereby our dumb and idol ministers be no ministers
in deed and truth, but only in show and appearance; that then, thereupon
order may be taken by her Majesty, for the displacing of them, and for the
placing of other lawful and godly Ministers in their rooms. For as the
statute has limited a certain order and form of making Deacons and
Ministers: so has it appointed, that all that are made according to that order
and form, should be in deed lawful Deacons and Ministers. The words of the
statute are these. (And that all persons, that have been, or shall be made,
ordered or consecrated Archbishop, Bishop, Priests and Ministers of Gods his
holy word and sacraments, or Deacons after the form and order prescribed in
the said order and form, how Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons and
Ministers should be consecrated, made and ordered, be in very deed, and also
by authority hereof declared and enacred to be and shall be Archbishops,
Priests, Ministers, and Deacons, and rightly made, ordered, and consecrated,
any statute, law, Canon, or other thing to the contrary nowwithstanding.)
Which statute has two branches: the one appointing the form and manner of
making Deacons and Ministers, the other authorizing Deacons, and Ministers,
made and ordered, after the form and manner prescribed in the said book, to
be in very deed, rightly and lawfully Deacons and Ministers, and so to be
taken and reputed. It follows then, that if the first branch of the statute
be broken, and that the form and order be not observed, that the second
branch can take no place: for that in deed the validity of the latter,
depends altogether upon the observation of the first. For it is plain and
evident by law, that if you would have a second or latter action to be good,
and effectual, because it is done (say you) according to a form and order
precedent, you must first prove, that the precedent was accordingly done, or
else the consequent can take no place. And therefore, if the form and order
prescribed by the book, be not observed in making unlearned Ministers, I say
then, that unlearned Ministers, by law, are no Ministers at all. And why? Neque
eum ff. ad ^^g fall. l. si^^ qui quaedam.
v^^um balneum, aut vllum theatrum, aut stadium ^ecisse intelligitur, qui ei
propriam formam quae ex consummatione contingit, non dederit. Neither can he be
thought to have made any ^ath, or any theater, or any race, who shall not give
it that form which perfecteth the same. Again: ^^^or. in ea. ^. extra. de
Iudi^ (...).
Vbi ad substantiam ali^^ius actus exigitur certa forma (...) s^ super alio
actu, debet quis probare formam prae^^ssisse. Where to the substance of any
act, a certain form is required, founding it self upon an other act, there a
man ought to prove the form to have passed before. As for example. In an
Evangelical denunciation, if thou seek to have thy brother cast forth of the
Congregation: First it is to required, that thy brother have offended thee:
Secondly, that thou privately admonish him, and brotherly wish him to amend;
Thirdly, if he continue obstinate, thou must tell it him before two or three
witnesses, and if he hear not them, then thou must tell it to the Church:
Forma quotiescun^ non est seruata, actus est ipso ^^re nullus. How often
soever the form of an act is not kept, the act by mere law, is no act at all:
because (says the Canon) a solemn and diligent entreaty required in such
perpetual graunts and alienations of Church goods, has not been observed
therein; we, by the advice of our brethren, decree, the same grant to be void.

By civil law, Church goods can no otherwise be pawned, or laid Cod. De
Sacrosa^^^. (...) and (...) praedium.
to gage, then as the law formally prescribes, because a due solemnity ought
to be observed. In fines and recoueries le^yed by the common laws of this
Realm, A^torneyes on both sides must be warranted; there must be vouchers and
vouch^es; the^^ must be writs and returns of writs* there must be
proclamations, there must be warrantes, and many other circumstances, which
being not observed, the parties in reuersion or remainder, being grieved, may
bring their writs of error, and recover the land passed by erroneous fines or
recoueries.

Forma dat esse rei, and eius omissio inducit nullitatem actus. The form
gives being Panor. in c. null li. nu. 7. de rebu^ eccle. non ali^. fol. 59.
Specula in tit. de aduo^
and essence to a thing, and the omission thereof, induces a nullitie of the
act. Si deficit forma in priuilegio, res caret priuilegio. If a privilege want
the form of a privilege, the thing laketh privilege. And again:
Solemnitates quae requiruntur in aliquo actu, si non seruentur, actus corruit.
Solemnities required to be in any act, if they be not observed, 5. verse. cum
ante. Panor. in c. fin. vt lit. non co^test. nu. 20. Panor. in c. publicat. de
elec. (...) ^. Panor. in c. super quaestionu^. veru^^m. de off. deleg. and id
in c. prude^tiam. nu. ^. cod.
the act fails. And again: Forma non seruata in vna part actus, violat
totum actum. The form not kept in one part of the act, violateth the whole
act. Quia verum est, di cit, excessisse istum fines mandati. Because it is
true, says he, that this man has passed the bounds of his commandment. And
therefore in an other place, Panormitane concludes thus. Forma certa
procedendi vbi datur, processus corruit, non solum quando est attentatum contra
formam, sed etiam citra, vel praeter formam: quia vbi forma certa datur, paria
sunt aliquid facere contra, praeter vel citra formam. Where a certain form of
process is limited, the process fails, not only when any thing is
attempted against the form, but also either without, or besides the form; the
observation of which solemnities and form of an act, are of such force and
necessity by law, that neither custom, or yet a consent of parties, can
alter or change the law herein. Solemnitatis omissio ex sola consuetudine
inducta, violat actum. The omission of a solemnity brought in only by
custom, Panor. in Greg. nu. 14. sol. 17.
marreth the act. Ea quae inducunt certam solemnitatem in actibus hominum, non
possunt consensu partium tolli, quia pacta priuatorum iuri publico non
derogant. And those things which induce a certain solemnity (...).
in men's doings; cannot be abolished by consent of parties, because private
men's compacts cannot be derogatory to common right. Insomuch that in this case,
Forma debet seruari ad vnguem, and specifice and non per aequipollens. A form
ought to be kept at an inche, and specially, and not by any thing equivalent,
though in many other cases, this rule takes place. Nihil interest quid ex
aequipollentibus fiat. It is no whit material, whether of the things that be
equivalent be done. Moreover, Forma data a lege, vel statut^, debet seruari a
^^stico, muliere, and (...). A form given by law or statute, ought to be kept
by an husbandman, by a woman, and by one under age, though in many other things
these three have their several privileges. And to make this more plain, and
the certainty thereof to be infallible: you shall understand, that the law
has been executed according to these rules, even in this self some case of
making Deacons and Ministers. And first, touching their trial and examination.
Si quis Presbiter, aut Diaconus, Glos c. quando distinct. 24. ver. in vest.
gent.
sine aliqua examinatione ordinati sunt, abijciantur ex Cl^ro. E^ si non fuerit
in aetate* literatura, and honestate examinatus, deponendus est. If any be made
an Elder or Deacon, without examination, let him be cast out from the Clergy:
And if he shall not be examined touching his age, his learning, and his
honesty, he is to be deposed. Secondly, touching the time. If a Minister or
Deacon have been made at any other time, then at the time appointed by law, it
has been decreed against them, as follows.

EPISCOPVM, etc. A Bishop that celebrateth orders in a day Extrauag. de tempo.
ordinand. c. cum quidam.
wherein he ought not, do thou correct with Canonical discipline, and until
they have received grace from us to be restored, so long ought thou to make
them to be void of orders received. And again. Sane super eo, etc. Truly
concerning that the manner is (as thou say) in certain Churches of Scotland
and Wales, to promote Clearks unto holy orders in the days of the dedication
of Churches and altars, out of the four times appointed for fastes: We
declare that that custom, as enemy to Ecclesiastical institution, is utterly
to be improued. And had we not regard unto the multitude and ancient custom
of the land, men ordained should not be suffered to minister in orders so
taken: for with us men so ordained should be deposed, and the ordainors should
be deprived of authority to ordain. Thirdly, touching the presentation of
Deacons to be made by the Fol. 1. page 2. Fol. 1. 1.
Archdeacon or his Deputy, and of Ministers by the Archdeacon only, out of
many particular laws, this general Maxim is verified.

SI PRINCEPS, etc. If the Prince commit a cause to any, Panor. in c. fin. is
autem nu. 5. de offic. deleg. De offi. c. del^g l. 6. c. si cui etc. fin.
extra. de off. c. del^gat.
and command him personally to execute the same* if in this case consist
public commodity, this his commissarie can not substitute an other, no not
even with consent of parties, because where the Prince either covertly, or
expressly, does make choice of the industry of any one particular person, there
the party so chosen, can not surrogate an other. For the Prince herein does
personally qualify the man, and gives to him the form of his commission. An
example of this may be thus. Suppose that the Treasurership in Paul's were
void, and that her highness had commanded the Bishop of London to provide a
fit man for the same room; whether De offic. delegat. lib. 6. c. si cui. and
ext. de offic. deleg. c. vlt.
now the Bishop may commit this his charge, to be performed by an other, then
by himself or no? And it is answered negatiuely, because in the choice of a
fit person consists great danger, and therefore the Bishop being but an
executor of her Majesty's pleasure, he may not substitute any other. But
because her highness had commanded the same Bishop of London to have given
the same prebend to Lucius Titius, whether then might the Bishop in this case
subdelegat Archdeacon Sempronius. And the answer is affirmative, that he
might: for now her Majesty by her selfe-hath nominated the party to be
placed, and has not chosen the Bishops industry for that purpose, and
therefore he may assign this provision unto another. But it is otherwise,
where the industry of a Person is chosen, concerning one to be elected: for
then, he may not set over that his office to any other. Publica vtilitas est
pars agens. Public ff. de pact. l. in publicum.
utility is the party agent in this business, and Pacta priuatorum iuri
publico non derogant. The covenants and agreements of private men does not
derogate from common right. And if the contrary have been practiced, what may
be concluded thereof, shall follow immediately. And again by these proofs you
may evidently see, that the calling, the trial, the examination, the time, the
person appointed to present and the age of one to be presented, have not been
things mere contingent, but rather essential, not causas sine quibus non, but
causes formal to the making of Deacons and Ministers, and such causes as being
omitted, have been sufficient causes both to depose from their functions, those
that have been contrariwise ordained, and to punish the ordainers for their
negligence in that behalf. And therefore that our conguetied Ministers, not
made according to the order and form of the statute, be in deed and truth no
Ministers at all: the act it self, whereby they be made, and whereby they
challenge their dignities, being in deed no act in law, having no law to
approve the same, and therefore to be punished by the law of man, as well for
entering into a calling against the law of man, as also for profaning the holy
and sacred mysteries of God. pastor and steward to the Lord, to teach, to
premonish, to feed and provide Foll. 11. page 2.
for the Lords flock: if such a one I say, yea if too too many such have been
admitted into the holy Ministry, and all these solemnities vnsolemnly abused:
may it not be rightly concluded, that such by our statute law, be no lawful
Ministers at all? Was the word of any Bishop (only the word of the high
Bishop Jesus Christ excepted) in any time or in any place, a law against the
Law of a nation? Was the law of a whole Empire ever tied to the will of one
man in a Diocese? If the thing it self were not manifest to the view of the
whole Realm: and that the unlearned ministers in every part of the Realm
were not glasses, to see these deformities by: and that the daily and
lamentable complaints, in the ears of her honorable council, were not evident
testimonies thereof: Yet were their own registers and records thoroughly
perused, they would teach us sufficiently, that these things (yea and worse too
(if worse may be) are neither fained nor forged. And therefore I conclude thus.
1 Wheresoever a certain form and order to proceed, is appointed to any,
having no authority before his commission, that there, if the form be not
kept, the process by law is merely void: 2 But our Bishops, before the
making of the statute of Edward the sixth and the confirmation thereof, 8.
Elizabeth. had no authority to make Deacons or ministers.


Herennius Modestinus answered, that a Senator was not therefore a Senator,
because he had his name only in the table or register, where the names of
Senators were written* unless he also were made a Senator, according to law.
And the gloss upon that law verifieth the same to be an argument, Contra (...)
qui non sunt recte in Ecclesi^^ co^stitu^. ff. quand. die^. l^g. vel. fide^.
sed l. quod p^pillae i^^at. gloss.
Against those that are not rightly placed in Churches. If a Legacy be given
unto a Pupil whenever she shall marry, if she shall marry before she be
Vi^i potens, the Legacy is not due until she be Viri potens, quia non potest
videri nupta, quae virum pati non potest: nec videri factum quod non l^gitime
fit. Finally, in the preface of the book of ordering Ministers, are these
words. (And therefore to the intent these orders should be continued, and
reverently used and received in this Church of England; it is requisite, that
no man, not being at this present, Bishop, Priest, nor Deacon, shall execute
any of them, except he be called, tried, examined and admitted, according to
the form hereafter following.) And in the 13. year of Elizabeth, cap 12. it
is enacted, that all adm^ssions to benefices, institutions, and inductions to
be made of any person, contrary to the form or provision of this act, and all
tollerations, dispensations, qualifications, and license whatsoever, to be made
to the contrary hereof, shall be merely void in law, as if they never were.
Another principal reason, why these idol Ministers should not have so much as
the only name, or title of Ministers in word, much less the place and
benefit of Ministers Cod. de autorita. praestand. l. eum qui. 6. ^. 7. si quis
deinceps ^x. de simo. non satis.
in deed, may be, for that in deed and truth, they have intruded themselves
into the Ministry, only by fraud and deceit, and have not entered
thereinto, Bona fide, and iusto titulo, In good faith, and by a just title. He
that knows a Pupil to be under age, and yet will contract with him without
consent of his Tutor: Cod. de autorit. praestand. l. eum qui. 6. q. 7. si
quideinceps extra. de simo. non satis. Extra. de r^gu. in c. qui contra. A
contract made between the Bishop and the minister, not observed
things dedicate to religious uses, cannot in these actions mean any good
faith, or use any good conscience, because qui contra iura mercatur, bonam
fidem praesumitur non habere. He that against law makes merchandise, is
presumed not to have good faith. Now in the manner and form of making
Ministers, and their admission, you have heard of a solemn covenant and
contract by open protestations on both sides, made between the Bishop, and the
party: the Bishop demanding, spondes? putas? facies? do thou promise?
do thou think? will thou do? The party answering, spondeo, I do promise,
puto, I do think, faciam, I will do it. This contract or covenant by law
Civil, is called stipulatio verborum, a sure bond made by words, and may be
called a contract by word. By the law of England, it is called an assumption.
And to the end this contract be good in effect, as in all other co^tracts, so in
this especially it is requisite, that the same be made bona In ff. pro solut.
l. 3. Cod. de v^ sur. l. venditioni. In Cod. de actio. and obl^g. l. bonam.
fide interueniente, good faith coming between, as well on the part of ye
demandant, as on the part of the answerer. For says the Emperor. Bonam fidem
considerari in contractibus aequum est. Equity requires that good faith be
considered in contracts. And that, either to this end. Vt cessei dolus ad
eorum essentiam, or to this end, vt cesset dolus ad eorum effectum, that guile
may cease, to the substance of the contract, or y^ guile may cease to the
effect of the contract. For though according to the nature ff. de dol. l.
elegant^r. ff. de verb. obl^g. l si quis e^m.
and condition of this contract by word, the party fraudulently deceived, be
notwithstanding by rigor and subtilty of law bound to the contract: yet
inasmuch as the law provides him a remedy against this mischief, and gives
him a peremptory exception, utterly to exclude y^ agent from any benefit of his
action; the contract, I say, in effect being reuersible, is in effect no
contract, and the adverse party to be cleared Quia contractas non sortitur
effectum, p^opter exceptionem doli. The covenant takes no effect, by reason of
the exception of guile. The law it self follows. Si quis, etc. If any when
he had couenanted to be bound after one manner, yet notwithstanding, by
circumuention is bound after another manner, he shall in deed stand bound unto
thee, by the subtlety of law, but he may use an exception of deceit: for in
as much as he is bound by deceit, an exception is given him. As for example: I
have promised unto you my ground, excepting the use of the fruit thereof,
afterward by collusion you persuade me to promise you y^ same ground, together
with the use of the fruit thereof: this promise in effect is void, because you
used deceit, in getting my promise. Yea, suppose that you for your part had not
beguiled me, and that there had been no deceit on your part, but that I had
been beguiled only, because the thing it self was wrongful and injurious: in
this case also your action shall cease, and your writ shall abate. I d^m est,
etc. If no deceit on the part of the demandant have been used, but the thing
it self has in it deceit, it is all and the self same one case with the
former. For when soever any man shall make a demand by virtue of that
contract, inasmuch as he does demand it, he does it by deceit. As for example:
suppose I have bought in good faith, without collusion of you, a piece of
plate, for less then the one half of the just value thereof: as suppose for
eight pound, which was worth twenty pound: afterward I covenant with you
simply, and you promise to deliver me the same plate: in this case, if I sue
you for the delivery of the plate, you may use an exception of guile against
me, because I deal deceitfully in demanding the performance of a contract,
which in it self contains iniquity. For this contract it self is against
the equity of law, providing that a man should not be so improvident in
selling his goods, as to sell them under the one half of the just value. bona
fides, good faith, in this contract ought to be in this sort: You for your
part, and I for my part, and we both ought in truth to think and be of
opinion, that you have interest and right in the plate, and so power to
alienate, and to sell it unto me. And therefore concerning the contract made
between the Bishop and the party, because the Bishop oftentimes knows the
party that is to be made a Minister by him, to be a man altogether unlearned,
unfit, and unapt to execute his ministry duly, and therefore cannot think
him to be a man quallified as were requisite. And because the party that is to
be made a Minister, knows himself utterly void of those graces and gifts
which ought to be in him, and therefore cannot believe him self to be truly
called, or moved to that office by the holy Ghost. And because they both know
that there has been no such calling, no such trial, no such examination, no
such presentation, etc. As (by the form and order of the book) should be, I
say therefore that good faith wanting on both parts, this contract made
coulourably between them is merely void, and the one not bound by law to
the other, to the performance of the same: and therefore much less the common
wealth, or the Church of Christ to tolerate their conspiracy, or to bear
with their collusion. Non debet alterius collusione aut inertia alterius ff. de
Liber. causa. l. si pariter. Extrauag de regni iure. c. non est. Extrauag. eo.
ius corrumpi. No man's right ought to be impaired by collusion or sloth of
another. Fraus and dolus nemini patrocinari debet. Deceit and guile, ought not
to patronage any. And therefore sithence, Non est obligatorium contra bonos
mores iuramentum. An oath made against good manners, is not obligatorie: and
that Nemo potest ad impossible obligari. Impossibilium nulla est obligatio. Of
things impossible there is no band. And ff. de reg. in l. impossibilium.
Extrauag. de reg. nu in malis The impossibility of the contract made betvveene
the Bishop and the minister, cause that the contract is void.
that, In malis promissis fidem non expedit obseruari. It is not expedient that
faith be kept in wicked promises, I conclude that the impossibility or
iniquity of conditions to be performed by him that is made a Minister, make
the contract between the Bishop and him, merely void and of none effect in
law. And that the Bishop, according to the true intent and meaning of the
laws, whereof he has the execution, ought to cite, and Ex officio, to
proceed, and object against him in this sort. You A. B. Parson of C. about
twenty four years passed, at what time I had appointed a solemn day for
making of Deacons and ministers, and had called by my mandate, men meet to
serve the Lord in his holy services, to teach his people, and to be examples to
his flock, in honest life and godly conversation, came before me, making a
great brag and fair show of zeal and conscience, and of your knowledge in
the holy Scriptures, and that you would instruct them faithfully, and exhort
them diligently in the doctrine of salvation by Christ, and in holiness of
life: that you would exercise his discipline according to his commandment;
and that you would be a peacemaker: And all these things you faithfully
promised, and took upon you to perform, joining your self openly to the
Lords people in prayer, with a solemn vow. Now so it is, as I understand, by
your demeanor ever since, that in truth, you had no other end, but to steal a
living from the church, though it were with the murder of many souls. You
dishonored the Lord: you made an open lie in his holy Congregation: you
circum^ented me by guile, and by craft deluded me: you have ever since
falsified your word: You have not preached one Sermon these many years: you
have not instructed one of your parrishe in the doctrine of Salvation by Christ
alone: you have not governed your family, as became one of your coat: you
have not exercised the Discipline of Christ against any adulterer, any swearer,
any drunkard, lany breaker of the Lords Sabbothes: Quod inconsulto fecimus,
consulto reuocamus. That which we unadvisedly have done, we advisedly will
revoke and undo. And Sir, for your part, it is very necessary and expedient
for you, that we depose you in deed, because Tanto grauiora sunt tua peccata,
quanto diutius infelicem animam detinent alligatam. So much more grievous are
your sins, by how much longer they have your unhappy soul fettered with
their boultes. To do this, or the like, were in my simple understanding, a
noble and famous practice of a good and godly Bishop, laboring to procure
peace and prosperity unto Jerusalem. What? may a Bishop deprive an honest
poor man from his benefice, dispossess a faithful man of his Ministry,
stop the mouth of the Lords watchmen, and imprison a painful teacher in
the Clinke, in case he wear not a Surplesse, in case he marry not with a
Ring, in case he cross not in Baptism, or in case he subscribe not to every
new Article invented by Extrauag de elec. c. cum d^^ lectus.
he pronounces any man fit and capable of the ministry, is a definitive and
irreuocable judgment, in case no appeal be made from the same: though my
former answer were sufficient for the same election, yet to answer law with
law: I answer, with the gloss, that propter aliquam causam postea emergentem
potest quaeri, quia quae de nouo emergunt, nouo indigent auxilio; and ita semel
probatus, ^^er^m probatur and reprobatur. For some cause afterward arising,
inquisition may be made: because things newly happening, do want a new
^upplie; and so one being once allowed, may again be allowed and disalowed.



If by these former conclusions any shall surmise, that by them I s^ily, and
covertly, as one captious over the whole state of the church, should infinuate,
no lawful ministry to be in England, because some one of these points,
perhaps have been, and are daily omitted in making even the best men that are
in the ministry at this day: I answer, touching as well the whole Church, as
the learned and unlearned Minister: the Preacher, and him that is no Preacher:
the Pastor, and him that is no Pastor: I answer (I say) touching them all, as
follows. First, I confess that our Lord Jesus Christ has a true Church, and
a faithful spouse in England, receiving the doctriue, and sacraments of
Christ, publicly taught and administered in the Church of England, wherein we
have Elizabeth, by the grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland, a
Sovereign, a sole, and a lawful Gouernesse, in all causes, and over all
persons, Civil and Ecclesiastical. Moreover I confess, that the doctrines
delivered unto her out of the word of God, by the Ministers, for the abolishing
Page 9^.
of all and all manner superstitions and abuses, retained in the Church, and
for the establishing of a perfect government of the said Church, ought to be
faithfully embraced, and diligently put in execution by her Majesty, according
to the prescript rule of the blessed word of God. And again, that the
Ministers ought evermore, in a reverent and holy fear, to teach whatsoever
they know to be commanded or forbidden by the same word, and t^ ^hewe the
danger as well to the Magistrate, as to the people, if either, or both of them
shall be negligent, or remiss in the Lords service. And again, that the
people in all holy and honorable obedience, should yield unto the Magistrates,
and Ministers, all such love, reverence, fear, and obeisance herein, as the
Lord by his sacred word prescribes, and their own salvation requires.
Again, that neither the Magistrate with^^^ true instruction from the
Ministers, nor the Ministers without due authority from the Magistrate, ought
to wrest any thing into the government of the Church. For both offices, and
governments, magistracy and ministry, are very holy and honorable, and
being several, tend to several ends, and bring forth several events in the
administration and government of the Church: the one is the mouth, the other is
the hand of God: the one by word, the other by sword, ought to execute the
Lords judgments in the Lords house. The Prophet Esaias, at the commandment of
the Lord, teaching that the princes of Judah and Jerusalem should cast away the
rich ornaments of gold, as a menstruous cloth, did stay himself with the
publishing of this his doctrine: he only reformed himself, and taught and
exhorted others to do the like. The Prophet Jeremy used only this weapon of
reformation. Of a truth, says he, the Lord has sent me unto you, to speak
all these words in your ears: he has sent me to prophecy against this house,
and against this city, all the things that ye have heard: 2. King. 2^. ^.
Lords house, to speak unto all the cities of Judah, all the words that were
commanded him to speak, and kept not a word back. When Hilkiah the Priest
had found the book of the law, and caused Josiah to read the same: it is
written, that the King stood by the pillar, and made a covenant before the
Lord, that he the King, and the Priests, and the Prophets, and all the people
both small and great, should walk after the Lord, and keep his
commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with all their heart,
and with all their soul. And that the King commanded Hilkiah the high Priest,
and the Priests of the second order, to bring out of the Temple of the Lord,
all the vessels that were made for Baal, and for the grove, and for all the
host of heaven, and that He King burnt them without Jerusalem, in the fields
of Kidron: and that the King carried the powder of them into Bethel: and that
He put down the Chemerym, and that He brake down the houses of the Sodomites:
and that He brake the images in pieces, etc. When the spirit of the Lord came
upon Azariah, to tell Asa and all Judah, and Benjamin, that the Lord was with
him, whilst they were with him, encouraged them in their affliction, to turn
unto the Lord God of Israel, for that their confidence and trust in him
should not be frustrate, but have a reward: Asa hearing these words of the
Prophet, was encouraged, and took away all the abominations out of the land
of Judah and Benjamin. And King Asa deposed Maachah his mother, from her
regencie. 2. Chro. 15.
brake down her Idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook ^idron: and
King Asa did all these things at the counsel of the Prophet. Neither can the
holy doctrine of the Gospel be said to be repugnant hereunto. God is evermore
one, and the self same God in all ages: he is evermore the author of peace and
order, not of discord, or disorder. If therefore the Lord have not yet
graciously opened her Majesty's eyes, to understand all and singular mysteries
of his Testament: or if he will some blemish to remain in the government of a
faithful Queen, under the Gospel, as it pleased him to have blots in the
reign of good Kings, in the time of the law: or if he will that the
adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, hire counselors to trouble their building,
and hinder their devise, all the days of Cyrus: or if he will the Temple to be
built in the days of Esra the chief Priest, but the walls to be reedified by
a Eliash^b, and his brethren: or if he will have his Church tarry his holy
leasu^e, and appointed time: or if he have any other glorious purpose to work
in our days by her Highness: what is that to him that is a Minister of the
Gospel? Only it behooves him to be a faithful Steward in his function. For
an woe hangs over his head, if he preach not, because necessity is laid upon
him. And let him be assured, that whatsoever is either bound or loosed by him
in earth, the same is bound and loosed by the Lord in heaven. The repentant and
faithful shall be forgiven: the obstinate and impenitent shall be hardened.
And thus having delivered my mind touching these things, which otherwise by
sinister construction, might have been dangerous to my self, and offens^ue to
others. Touching the former cavil, I answer as follows. First, I confess
that every one meet and apt to teach: that every one qualified as is
requisite: that every one moved inwardly by the holy Ghost, and outwardly
called and appointed by the Bishop, having authority by the order of this
Church of England in this behalf, is Page 96,
in deed, and by law, a Minister. First, because he is in deed and truth a
Messenger, sent and appointed to this office by the Lord himself. Secondly, he
is a Minister by the law of this land. For the state of this man, learned,
qualified, and inwardly called: and the state of the unlearned, and
vnqualified, and not inwardly moved, differ as much as light and darkness.
For where the life, the learning, the conversation, the pains of the former,
do appear in deed to be sincere, sufficient, honest, and diligent, even such
as the law it self requires, should be in him, and so the end of the law
satisfied in that behalf, in this case, and for this man, there is a
presumption Iuris and de iure, of law and by law, that in his outward
calling, and trial, etc. all things required by law, were accordingly
performed by the Bishop, and so he a lawful Minister. But touching the other
man, it is quite contrary, and therefore this presumption by law must cease.
For where his life, his learning, his conversation, do appear manifestly
^los. extrauag. de prebend. cu^ secundum As postolum ver. ^eeat.
to be vile, corrupt, and dishonest, and not such as the law requires, and so
the law frustrated, in this case there is a presumption, Iuris and de iure, of
law and by law, against him, that he came to his office per surreptionem, by
stealth, and unorderly. Letters obtained for enjoying benefices, until it
appear they were obtained, either veritate tacita, or falsitate expressa,
truth concealed, or falsehood expressed, are good, and to be obeyed: but if
afterward, either of these appear, they shall be accounted surreptitious and
void. A Bull or dispensation from the Pope authentically sealed, is presumed to
have been gotten bona fide, in good faith: but if in the tenor thereof
appear false Latin, it is then presumed to have been obtained per
surreptionem. A sentence given by a Judge, is presumed to be a just judgment,
and every one for the authority and reverence of the Page 97.
Judge ought so to deem of the same. But in case the matter be appealed, and
there be found a nullitie in his process, the former presumption cease, and
the sentence as an injurious sentence, is to be reuersed. In like manner, if a
Bishop should make an hundred ministers in one day, for the authority and
reverence of the Bishop, and the good opinion I ought to conceive of his right
and sincere dealing, of his holy religion and fervent zeal to the Lords
house (were I absent, and saw not his proceedings to be contrary to law) as I
ought, so I trust I should both esteem his doings therein* to be lawful, and
orderly, and also reverence those whom he had so made, as messengers sent from
the Lord. But if afterward when any of the^ shall come to execute his office of
ministry: when he came to teach the people, he should then manifest himself
to be but an hipocrite, but to have fained a certain kind of holiness and
zeal, when he shall himself descrie his own unableness, and display his
wants: were it reason, that having now by mine own experience, certain
knowledge of his misdemeanour, and dishonest conversation, of his unaptness and
unskillfulness, and of his ignorance, I should presume, notwithstanding that
he was at the first orderly called and examined, and found to have such
qualities as were requisite? But to answer an other objection, concerning the
administration of the Sacraments by these kind of men, and execution of their
offices, because hitherto no controversy has been moved, touching the
validity of their calling, of their state and condition, and because, Cod. de
tes^. lib. 1.
Cum incertum est aliquid, perinde est ac si nec illud sit. When any thing is
uncertain, the same is as though it were not at all: That therefore (I say)
as well in this case, and in this respect, as also propter communem vtilitatem,
and publicum errorem, for common utility, and a general error, the things
done by them, are rightly and duly done. Cod. de sentent. and interlo. iud. l.
si Arbit^r.


S1 ARBITRER DATVS a magistratibus, cum sententiam Page 98.
dixit, in liberate morabatur, quamuis postea in seruitutem depulsus sit,
sententia tamen ab eo dicta habet rei iudicatae authoritatem. If any arbiter
given by the Magistrate were a free man when he gave sentence, though
afterward the same arbiter be brought again into servitude, the sentence
notwithstanding given by him, has authority ff ad Maced. l si quis.
of judgment. And again, Si quis patrem familias esse credideris, non vana
simplicitate deceptus, nec iuris ignorantia, sed quia public patrem familias
plerisque videbatur, sic agebat, sic contrahebat, sic muneribus fungebatur,
cessabit senatusconsultum. If any shall think one to be a father of any
household, not deceiving him self through a vain simplicity, or ignorance of
law, but because he seemed to many to be a father of an household indeed, he
did as a father of an household did, he did covenant, he executed offices,
etc. In this case the Senates decree shall cease. And again, Hodi^ (propter
vsum ff. de suppel. leg. l. 3.
imperatorum) si in argento relatum sit candelabrum argenteum, argentum esse
videtur, and error ius facit. Nowadaies (because of the use of Emperors) if a
silver candlestick be accounted amongst his money, it seems to be money:
and this error makes law, etc. And again, Serui liberi non in hac causa
tractari oportet, cum eo tempore, quo testamentum, etc. When a testament is to
be proved by witnesses, it is not material whether the witnesses be bond or
free, at the time they be produced, if at the time that the Testament was
signed, they were by consent of all reputed in the place of free men, and that
no man at that time moved any controuerfie of their estate. Propter Digest.
de officio pratoris l. Barbarius.
publicam vtilitatem and communem errorem, praetura scruo decreta, etc. For
public utility and general error, a Pretorshippe given to a bondsman makes
him Praetor: business dispatched by him are of force, and he made a free man:
And therefore I answer, that things heretofore done, and executed by our
idol Ministers, by law to be rightly and duly executed. And yet
notwithstanding I urge still, that they are not in truth any lawful Ministers,
and that they ought, and may instly be deposed from their ministry, and Page
99.
deprived from their benefices. An Arbiter reputed to be a free man, if in
truth he be a bondsman, obtains not by this common opinion, or by giving
judgment, his freedom and liberty, but continues still a bondsman unto him
whose bondsman he was, before any judgment given by him, or that any such fame
went of his freedom: the decree of the Senate cease against me, for
contracting with one under rule and government, so long as he is generally
reputed to have power and authority over himself: but if I willingly contract
with him afterward it shall appear that indeed he was a son, under the
guard and tuition of his parents, then the decree shall be effectual, and take
place against me, Witnesses at the time of signing any Testament commonly
reputed freemen, after a controuers^e moved of their estate, may in other
matters be refused, as unlawful witnesses. For though common error make a
law in respect of public profit, yet common error plucketh not from any
private man the possession or interest of his private goods. And therefore
though Barbarius Philippus, in that the people decreed unto him the Pretorship,
was by the decree made a freeman, (the people of Rome having authority to make
a Freeman:) yet for that he was indeed a servant fugitive from his Master,
his Master was by law to have the price of the same his servant at the peoples
hands: much less can common error of a few in authority, or a common
error of a few in their own right bar the public wealth, or the Church
from a public benefit due unto them. But there is a defense commonly used by
some, to excuse the Bishop, and to exempt them from just reprehension, for
placing unlearned men in benefices. The Patrones (say some) are covetous, Page
100.
they will present none, but such as from whom they may either hir^ the benefice
again for some small rent, or have some annual revenue out of the same. And
if the Bishop (say they) shall refuse to admit this covetous Patrous Clearke
for insufficiency, or for evil conversation, he may bring an action, Quare
non admisit, against the Bishop, and so the matter being put in trial unto
the Country, the Bishop, by this means might not only be counted litigious,
but also should be at great expenses through the multitude of suits in law,
brought against him continually by such kind of Patrons: and yet the matter
passing against him by the verdict of xii. men, in her Highness secular
Courts, no remedy at all against this great mischief. A high point in a low
house: if the matter were true, as it is but fained. For to let pass, that the
Bishops office is oneris, and not honoris, more paineful, than gaineful, Et
damnum quod De reg. luris l. 6. c. damnum, De reg. iuris l. 6. qui sentit.
quis sua culpa sentit, sibi debet, non alijs imputari: and qui sentit
commodum, debet sentire onus. The hurt which a man sustaineth by his own
fault, ought to be imputed to him self, and not to others: and he that tastes
the sweet, ought also to taste the four. And to ^ette pass, that the
Bishops have according to their Canons, earnestly and diligently exhorted
Patrones of benefices to consider Title patrons. proprietaries. fol. a7.
the necessities of the Churches, and to have before their eyes the last day,
the judgment and tribunal seat of God, and that therefore they prefer no
man to any Ecclesiastical living, but him which by doctrine, judgment,
godliness, honesty, and i^nocencie of life, is able to bear so heavy a
burden: that they do nothing therein, but uprightly, incorruptly, and truly.
To let these pass, I say, I ask, Who made this evil man, or this
unlearned man presented by a covetous Patron, a Minister? Did the covetous
Patron? No, he is a lay man, he may give no orders. And what reason is it
then that a Bishop should find fault with a patron, presenting an unlearned
man to a benefice, whom he himself before had preferred unto Page 101.
so high an office, as is the office of the ministry? Is the benefice of more
value than the office? Yea rather, is not the benefice due only by reason of
the office? If a man then be unworthy of a benefice, is not the same man much
more unworthy of an office? If unwise Bishops did not make unlearned ministers,
covetous patrons could Lib. 6. de re^ script c. fin. Extra^^ag de aetat. and
qua. litat c. accepi^ mus iunct. Glos in c. cum secundum. Apostolum. verse.
Liceat. extra. Depree hend.
never present unlearned Ministers: yea, and I say more, Quos idone^s Episcopus
reputauit ad erdines, debet reputare idoneos ad beneficium. Whom the Bishop
has reputed meet unto orders, them he ought to repute meet unto a benefice.
But (alas) these covetous patrons are great beams in the eyes of the
Bishops, Dluralitie-men, and Nonresidents. They fear, if a covetous patron
may catch a simple poor man to bestow a benefice on him, allowing him twenty
pounds or forty marks by the year, and he to have the profits, that the
fat should be wiped from their own beardes: and for that hereby they
themselves are barred sometimes from fifty pounds, sometimes from ^ hundred
marks, sometime from an hundredth pounds: and yet themselves allowing their
own Curates not past ten pounds, or twelve pounds at the most: yea, and
sometimes binding them to to provide their quarter Sermons too. I hope a
Christian in modesty, displaying unchristian practices, may without offense
report a merry and true ieft. And therefore upon a time in the audience of
many standers by, it happened this Pluralitie-man, and Nonresident, taking
opportunity by the presence of a Patron at the table, and entering into speech
of these matters, seemed to lay the whole fault of not having the people better
taught, and having so bad men in the ministry, upon such patrones as he
supposed to be present at the Table. The Gentleman hearing his discourse, and
perhaps galled too, and knowing him to be a Pluralitie-man, and a Nonresident,
in the end made this demand of him. Sir (says he) is it not as lawful for
me, a poor Gentleman in the country, Page 102.
having the patronage of a benefice, to bestow the same upon some honest poor
man, conditionally, to let me have the profits thereof at a reasonable price,
allowing him a reasonable stipend for his service and pains in the ministry,
though he can not preach; as it were for me to give the same benefice unto you
an Drenford man, and a great Scholar and able to preath, and yet will not, or
do not preach: Is it not as lawful for me to place such a one (as I have
spoken of) in a benefice of my gift, and to allow him his wages sirteene or
twenty pounds by the year, and to get quarter Sermons preached for him: as it
were lawful for you (had I frankly bestowed the same benefice upon you) to
hire the same person, or some other more ignorant, and to give him less wages,
and scarcely to preach quarter Sermons your self: Had not this man suddenly
been stricken dumb and dead as a door nail, you should as well have heard
his reply, as you have read the demand, And in good sooth, what greater loss
and hinderance has the people of ^^1^^. by an unlearned man, their Parson not
preaching, and hiring out his benefice to his Patron, for fifteen pounds by
the year, then has the people of P by a learned man, their Parson not
resident, not preaching, and hiring out his benefice of the same valewe to his
Curate for forty pounds by the year? Surely, as there comes no greater good
to the people of the one place, by the one, than comes to the people of the
other place by the other: so is the one both less hurtefull to the common
weal, and also less sinful to the Lord than the other. Less hurtful,
because the poor and needle of the one, have often a good sliuer of bread, a
good dish of drink at the Patrones door, yea sometimes a good meals meat at
his table, and a good fire in his Hall. (...) wh^^^^ (...) consist in learning
or in li^e, is and ever has been only in the authority of the Church, and
never in the power of the ^aitie. First, touching the enqurie of their ability
for learning, (to leave to speak of the Canon Law, which a^^^ng (...) unto the
Clergy) the Civil law, and ^
the Canon laws of th^^ (...) agree herein together, and attribute the inquiry
thereof to the (...) only. The Civil law says ^
thus: (...) which are chosen by them (...) unworthy, before bid^^* to be
(...), then let the (...) holy Bishop procure (...) to be or^^^^d, whom he
should think mee^est. And thus ^
(...) thing to belong to the honor and worship of your (...) building, Church,
or otherwise be^owing (...) upon them (...) therein, be thus bold, as by power
to bring unto you^ (...) then to be ordained: but our mind is, that by your
Holiness and ^^dgement, they be examined ^
touching the idoneitie of a person preseured to an Ecclesiastiacll be (...):
by the laws of the (...), the examination of him likewise pert^^^^th to the
Ecclesiastical Judge, and so it has hitherto been used, and so le^ it be
d^^^ h^^reafter. And again, Where the Ordinary refuses the Clearke for non
ability which is in assue, and the Oridinarie is par^ie, that shall not be
tried by him because ^
he is party, but by the Metropolitan, if the Clearke be alive, and if he be
dead, then by the Co^^^^ie where the examination was had. And again, Where the
Ordinary, after the patron has presented, does enquire and find the Clearke
to be criminous, and the ^^me of the lapse by this means pass, there he shall
not make any ^
^ollation by lapse, but first give notice unto the party, if he be a (...)
but cont^^^wise, if he be a spiritual man, note the difference: for he may
know his own Clearke. But were it so, that the La^^^ had power therein, and
that the Archbishop were exciu^ed yet if the Bishop, after he were compelied by
process from any of ^er highness temporal courts of Justice, to admit an unable
Cleark, ^^d forthwith call this unable Clearke into his Constitorie, and ob^^ct
against him his unabilitie, and for the same degrade him of his ^ffice, What
^emedi^ had the same Clearke against his Ordinary (...) this case? He being
once deposed from his office by his Ordinary, the common laws should have now
no remedy to help him, he ^^ing no more to be called a Clearke, and therefore
not to bring any ^^it, or comm^^ce any suit against his Ordinary in the name
of a Clearke. But we will conclude. to the laws and customs of the (...) her
Majesty's preroga^^e royal, to be (...) and also since these Canons,
Consitutions, and (...) ^^^^^ciall before specified, were ma^^ before the (...)
trariant nor repugnant to the laws and (...) of the (...) ^^rogatorie to her
highness (...) royal^: (...) since they are agreeable to the laws and vsages
of the tealms, and uphold her (...) royal: And, since by these canons and
other Ar^s of Parliament, and her highness, Injunctions i^ is (...), that men
learn^^^ that men (...) meet to ^each, are to be placed Ministers in the
Church, and that men utterly unlearned, and such as ran (...), in (...) or
Mass, are not to be admitted: that therefore a (...) Ministry is commaund^^
by the Laws of (...): And if so then an unlearned Ministry forbidden by the
same Laws: and if so, then by the same Laws, such penalties (...) and
in^^^^^^ upon the (...) of the (...), as by the (...) laws are hol^^^^^^ (...)
against (...) wilful Law-breakers.

AN ANSWER To the two first and principal Treatises of a certain factious
Libell, put forth lately, without name of Author or Printer, and without
approbation by authority, under the title of An Abstract of certain Acts of
Parliament: of certain her Majesty's Iniuctions: of certain Canons, etc.

Galath. 5. He that troubles you, shall bear his condemnation whosoever he be.

Hieron: ad Pammachium. epist. 26. Facile abiicitur, quod haeret extrinsecus:
intestinum bellum periculosus est: coniuncta disglutinamus, vnita dissuimus.

Published by authority.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Chard. 1584.

Concerning the Title and the Epistle of the Book.
IF the author of that book whosoever, had been moved of good zeal and
conscience (whereof in every passage of it he gives evident proof to the
contrary) to have advertised governors of this church and church matters, of
some wholesome laws Enforce, to them) as he pretends) Vnkno^ne, and therefore
necessarily by them unpracticed, to the intent his admonition might indeed
have been profitable hereafter, For the peaceable government of the church,
it had bin then as much thank worthy in him, as now, savoring so strongly of
rancor and contention, it deserves punishment. But the^ would he not have
foisted it to a make-shift, to have been printed in hugger mugger, but would
have addressed it to those, unto whom the execution of such pretended
necessary, and yet disused laws, apperteineth: then should not the printed
copyes there of, as not daring to look out at nooneday, have been so soon
shufled up, and sent by hundreds into mutinous places abroad, thought most to
favor such factious writings: then should not his alleged texts of acts,
canons, etc: have come out accompanied with such perverse glosses Quae
corrumpunt textum, particularizing at pleasure, Tanquam (...), upon such
persons as his distempered affections cannot brook: neither would his book
have grown to that bigness, but that it might well have carried the title of an
Abstract, whereas now by wringing and wresting, by shrinking and stretching of
laws, by gnawing and nipping at particular men's dealings calumnious^ie, and
traducing them Quasi in veteri comoedia both the author does seem Distract of
modesty, and by his book is found Tanquam sorex proprio iudicio, to want
that insight in law, that he would so feign be entitled unto. In which Acts,
iniuctions, canons, etc: because he was loath to appear to have no more skill
than ordinary, he says they were For the most part heretofore unknown:
whereby he must needs For the most part hold those excused, of whom they
were unpracticed: and therefore in his book ought not so egerlie to have
bitten at them, for undue practice of such mysteries, as till now it pleased
him not to reveal unto them. And surely, looking into the present time and
occasion, I cannot be otherwise led to think, but that this proctor, of
perverseness being netled that his clients are now by force of her Majesty's
godly laws, sought something to be recalled back, from their fantastical
breaches of the lawful unity and uniformity of this church, too long by them
used to the great animating of the papist: and that none of his private hot
apologies for them do give any sufficient color of law or equity to protect
them, does now think, he shall be sufficiently therefore revenged, by beating
back one nail with another, and by obiecting breach of law also unto those
grave Fathers, whom her Majesty has put in authority, for reducing of
others to conformity of her laws ecclesiastical. Whose faults and ouersights
(if any such be as are supposed) as they are not by themselves defended, or by
others to be excused: so in christian charity, ought they not in this manner,
as Cham did his fathers nakedness, to be laid open, and Quasi in scena
insulted upon, to the thrusting through of religion, by the sides of the
ancientest, learnedest, and most godly professors thereof. Neither does it
become every triobolar mate, thus covertly to carpe, either at her Majesty's
singular wisdom, who with the advice and assistance of her renowned wise
Conncell, has made choice of those Fathers, as having more integrity and
sufficiency than he is willing by any means to agnise: or at the laws of the
land by parliament heretofore established, where they satisfy not his
appetite, not only disputing against them, but ouer-ruling Quasi ^^nsoria
virga, in what manner they ought to be altered, according to his deep
judgment: or so dangerouslye to enforce so great innovation, or yet so
spitefully to sow seeds of dissension, amongst the Great men of the land. Which
course of his, if others should upon this occasion begin to use against
himself, and those whom he so affects by setting down, out of their
speeches, preachings and writings, gross absurdities, and dangerous errors in
opinion, and by their practice the vyolent breaches of sundry laws and
statutes of this realm, not committed upon ignorance or frailtye, but stoutly
stood unto, and maintained; I do conjecture, that both he and they would
quicklye repent them, for offering to put their matter to trial upon such an
issue. But it is well known to children, that, although it is 3. q. 7. c.
quisine c. iudicet. c. postulatus.
most convenient for him to be free from blame, who is ready to accuse or judge
another, yet one man's fault is not any warrantise for another man to do
amiss, and yet how little he has found or effected of that, which he hoped
for, and Tanto cum hiatu promised, the discourse following shall (I hope) in
part make manifest.

IN his Epistle to the Reader is pretended, these pains of his, cheeflye to
have been undertaken, that By better execution of these laws, many and
notable points of such controversies as have been a long time amongst us,
might more easilye and speedily by the same laws he decided. By which
controversies and contention about Reformation of Ecclesiastical discipline
and popish ceremonies, he says, The quiet and peaceable estate both of the
church and commonwealth, have been shrewdlye troubled, and brought in hazard.
Surely though his wish of excommunication, not to be inflicted by one alone,
would (if it were expedient) put some of them in a kind of Paradise, of
obteining their souereigntie of seniors in every parish, the want whereof
breeds these threats of hazard to the commonwealth, and which is the only
thing they mean, by Reformation of ecclesiastical discipline, and the Helena
which they contend for, naie the popedom which they gape after, as though no
other course (this now in use being once abrogated) could be taken or devised,
but that: yet can I not conceive, but their seniors, which will sometime
intermeddle under pretense of conscience or charity, with every kind of
matter most civil, even to the reuersall of judgments, as is notorious where
that consistory is settled: shall leese as much another way, if all matters
now handled in ecclesiastical courts should Page 234.
(according to this man's devise) as mere civil causes be haled away from
them, unto the temporal courts. As for all the other points of the book, if
this turbulent Tribune, might of his absolute power, inspire them with the life
of laws: they would no more do good unto his clients about their breaches or
impugnings of the book of Common prayer, or for their hot skirmishing with the
ceremonies of our church, odiously by him termed Popish, than (...), or the
smoke of a hot ladle would do good to a man that is hungry. And therefore
herein, he has not (otherwise than by tickling factious humors, which are
delighted to hear their betters girded) any ^ot pleasured His brethren and
neighbors, for whose sakes he has achieved this doutie piece of work.
Another cause is alleged for the enterprise of this work, The defense of her
Highness laws, How many of these by him brought, are to be called in truth her
Majesty's laws in force, remains to be discussed. But how agrees this with
that Page 238.
part of his book, where he calls these her Majesty's laws and all The
ecelesiasticall law popish, to be abandoned, and as a froth or filth to be
spewed A contrariety in the author.
out of the commonweal: that her Majesty cannot gratify her capital enemy
so much, as by authorizing and practicing his laws: that it were not a dodkin
matter, all the books thereof were laid on a heap in Smithfield, and
sacrificed in a fire unto the Lord: etc. Such faults as these being (...) will
seldom be wanting In multiloquio. But I pray God, send her Majesty's laws
better patrones, than such: as in a published book dare dispute against sundry
of them, father such for laws as be not, and which he himself in a generality
does condemn: and which fostereth and cherishes manifest and wilful
breakers of her Majesty's laws in deed, and also inueigheth bitterly against
such, as according to law and trust reposed in them, by her Majesty, do seek
to reform and reclaim such offenders of law, from their former contempts, in
despite of whom, and in favor of such wilful law breakers, all in this book
to have been written, a man which has but half an eye, may easily discern:
and not In defense of her Highness laws, as hypocriticallie is avouched,
neither yet for any Peace and prosperity in the walls and palaces of Jerusalem,
which I pray God by other better means than this, to grant to this church,
under the long, peaceable, and prosperous government of our sovereign Lady
Elizabeth, for his Christ's sake: Amen.

The Book, Page 1, and 2.
WE read of some politic capteines of this our country, that have partlye
used the arrows shot short at themselves, against their enemies, and
partlye have suffered them to stick still, to annoye their first owners at the
joining of the battle: even so, our author is here content very politikely,
to allege against us the establishing by act of parliament 25. H. 8. of Canons,
constitutions, ordinances, and synodals provincial, to the intent, and in hope
to beat us with our own weapons, and not for any love or liking he bears
unto them: which he sufficiently bewrays in sundry Page 238.
parts of his book, and is sorry (I dare say) that so much of them is in
force. And although it cannot be denied, but that many of them were published
by latter Popes, after that See was become the chair of pestilence, a cage of
unclean birds: Et postquam ciuitas fidelis facta fuit meretrix: yet such
amongst them as fight not with the everlasting word of GOD, or the laws and
customs of this land, being set down no doubt by advise of the best learned
lawyers in those times, though under Antichrists authority, and being now
indenized and made English by the whole church and commonweal in parliament,
are no more in that regard to be abandoned, than wheat because it was
invented by the heathen goddess Ceres, many good civil laws of the Romans,
set out by Paynims and cruel persecutors of Gods saints, (for no one author of
the Pandects is thought to have been christian but Gaius) or than precious
Stones, and gold of Ophir in Salomons time, because as some Goropius.
think they were fet from among the Cannibals, eaters of man's flesh, and other
parts now called the West Indies, being both then and now gross idolaters.
And howsoever many of the said Canons, etc: do carrye with them, the dross
and superstition of those times, being promulged for the upholding of Poperye:
yet for many points (I believe) all the best heads now in the world being
laid together, and taking no light from thence, were not in many years able
for sincerity and equity, to set down the like ordinances in those causes.
And no marvel, seeing they were both upon mature deliberation of the best
lawyers delivered, and were so long in gathering together, upon several
occasions, from time to time falling out, which for the variety of them, no
one man's life is possible to have experience of, and therefore ^^ns wit not
able to forecast or provide for. But I muse how this could so escape the
critical and Lynceus eyes of such an Aristarchus, as that he which rappeth out
so many syllogismes in Barbara and Darij, throughout his whole book, should be
so ignorant (for I will not say it was of malice) as, in that argument which he
makes the groundworke to set his whole frame upon, to deliver us a Fallax
(...), by curtaling off, in Assumpto a A childish fallacy in his principal
reason.
piece of his Dedium, and so (...) to make Quatuor terminos in his principal
syllogism. For although it be confessed on all parts, Such canons,
constitutions, etc: as be not contrariant nor repugnant to the laws, statutes,
and customs of this Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the Queens
prerogative royal, as they were used and executed before the making of that
act, shall now still be used and executed: yet if he would have assumed in
his Minor proposition (as by the rules of reason and reasoning he ought to
have done) that those points which he touches in his book, were Not
repugnant to the customs of this realm, but were in use and execution before
the making of that act. (All which he cunningly left out:) then because we
learn by law, Quod facta non praesumuntur, matters in fact are not intended to
be done, till they be proved so: we would have put him to his proof herein,
as we must do still, and in the mean time say, that he has gaped wide to
say nothing to the purpose, and that in his whole book he has talked, but not
reasoned. So that till he can make it appear, that The canons specified in any
part of his treatise, are not contrariant or repuguant to the customs of this
realm, but were used and executed before the making of that act: he can not
enforce the use of them now, being by the act limited to be used and executed
no otherwise, but as they were before the making of it. Which answer might
serve, without any more adoo, unto his whole discourse, which therefore hangs
no otherwise together, than Scopae dissolute, or than a rope of sand. Yet we
will not deal so sparingly and peremptorily with the man, but will show unto
him diverse canons, constitutions, and synodals provincial, neither Contrary
nor repugnant to the laws, nor to the damage or hurt of her Majesty's
prerogative royal, which having not by the customs of this realm been used,
and executed, he himself being better advised, will not say to be in force of
law, or now necessary to be put in v^e or practice. And although the general
word of Constitutions, put down in the act may seem to extend unto
constitutions made by christian emperors, for ecclesiastical persons and
matters, as the author seems to think, whereof sundry to this purpose might
be brought: Canons, whereof (saving some canons for matter of faith agreed on
before, by certain general counsels) there were but few set out at that
time: I do conjecture uone other constitutions to be meant thereby, but such
Provincial, as were gathered together by Lindewood, or National, as were
framed by Ottho and Octobonus: and therefore I will not weary the reader with
such superfluous allegations. First therefore to begin with the canons
collected by Gratian, it will easilye appear that there be very many such
which are neither repugnant to any laws that I do know, or have heard
reported for laws within this land, nor hurtful any way to her Majesty's
royal prerogative, which yet are by general custom thereof, so long disused,
that no man can iustlye say they are in force still, amongst us, which for
brevity sake, I will set down in as short a summarye as I can find them
gathered. De confir. did. 5. c. cont.
That rules of Physike are to be holden as contrary to a divine state, which in
some case forbid fasting. Ibid. c. vt ieium. c. vt episc.
That none are to confirm, or to be confirmed, but fasting. c. in Synodo.
did. 4. de Baptismo.
That baptism must be conferred with three dippings into the water. c.
peruen^ did. 3. de feriis.
That a man may not fast on the Thursday. c. quoniam ibidem.
That on the Lords day, or in the feast of Whitsontide, in prayeng we ought
not to kneel. c. ecclesiam 1. did. 1. de feriis.
That a church may not be consecrated to holy assemblies, wherein a pagan or
heathen has been buried. Did. 3. de paenit. per totum.
That public and solemn penance may not twice be inflicted. 32. q. 1. c. apud
S. crimen.
That women may not sue their husbands for adultery. 32. q. 1. c. sicut.
That he is an abbettor of filthiness, that puts not away his adultres
wife. 30. q. 3. c. quod autem.
That a man and a wife may not promise for a child in baptism together. 30. q.
1. c. peruenit.
That if a man by any casualtie should offer his own child to the Bishop to
be confirmed, he ought to be separated from his wife. 28. q. 1. c. idololat.
That a man may lawfully put away his wife, which seeks to persuade him to
that which is evil. Ibid. c. non solum.
That she which makes an image. and will not repent, is to be put away by the
husband. 26. q. 2. sed and illud.
That it is a kind of idolatry to search after the course of the stars. 24 q
2. c. vlt.
That heretics after their death are to be excommunicated. 23. q. 8. c. si
nulla.
That without great necessity, it is not lawful to go to war in Lent time.
23. q. 4. c. sicut.
That with the enemies to religion, we are bound to wage war. 22. q. 5. c.
honestum.
That a man ought to be fasting when he takes an oath. Ibid. c. si quis
conuictu
That he shall never during life be admitted to communicate, which has
suborned periurye. 22. q. 2. c. dolo.
That he may be accounted to have forsworn himself, that goes about to do
otherwise than he has promised. 15. q. 3. c. terrio.
That a woman may not be admitted to accuse a priest, or to bear witness
against him. 14. q. 2. c. quanquam.
That to public instruments, priests are not to be called to bear witness.
14. q. 1. c. Episcopus.
That a Bishop though he be urged, ought not to go to law about temporal
matters. 12 q. ^. c. vlt.
That a Bishop dyeng intestate, the church succeeds wholye into all his
goods. 12. ^. 4. c. presbyter.
That of those things which priests do buie, they should make the writings in
the churches name. 12. q. 2. c. Episcopus.
That a Bishop having no heir, ought to make the church ^ys heir. 12. q. 1.
c. dilect.
That all clearkes are to live together in a community. 11. q. 3. c. Clericus.
That he which would appeal from a Bishop, must she to a synod 11. q. 3. c. si
Episcopus.
That a priest, which is deposed by a Bishop must complain thereof to the next
Bishops. 1. q. 1. c. decreuimus.
That the Bishop ought yearly to visit his diocese. Ibidem. c. antiquos.
That he ought to have the half of all oblations. 2. q. 7. c. ipsi.
That none should be admitted to accuse or testify against a Priest, which
either was not or could not be a priest himself. Ibid. c. oues.
That the sheep ought not to accuse the sheepeheard, except the swerve from
the true faith. Ibid. c. sicut.
That lay men may not accuse clergy men, nor clergy men those of the
laity. 2. q. 5. c. nullam.
That a Bishop cannot be condemned, but with seventy and two witnesses. 3. q.
4. c. sacramentum.
That an oath is not to be exacted of priests. 1. q. 2. c. Clericos.
That he which is able to sustain himself of his own charges, should receive
no stipend of the church. c. dictum est did. 94.
That Archdeacons should not exercise jurisdiction over priests. c. Diaconi.
did. 93.
That there ought to be seven Deacons in every city. c. si euangelia. did.
55.
That a priest which has lost his eye, is not to receive any duties. c.
aliquantos. did. 51.
That such as have served in wars, or have sued in courts after they were
baptized, may not be ordained. c. illud. did. 50.
That it is not lawful for a clearke to do public and solemn penance, nor
for him* that has such penance to be performed, to be ordained. c. non oportet
did. 42.
That it is not lawful to eat, or to have a bed set in a place that is
dedicated to God. c. elegant. did. 37.
That Bishops are to be reprehended which train up their children in human
learning. c. Episcopus ibidem.
That Bishops may not read books compiled by heathen men. c. Presbyteri did.
34.
That priests may not be at marriage feasts. c. denique d^st. 4.
That those which be in clericall orders, should begin to fast at
Quinquagesima. gl. in verb. supra vires c. illud 10. q. 3.
That all clerks should abstain from flesh, seven whole weeks before Easter.
ad eius did. 5,
That a Bishop when he visits, must have nothing to drink but milk. And
that a husband ought not to keep company with his wife, till the child that
was borne betwixt them were weaned, with diverse other not unlike to these. In
like manner there be diverse other parts of the canon law, which neither being
repugnant to any laws in this land, nor hurtefull to her Majesty's
prerogative: yet being disused, and therefore repugnant to the customs of the
realm, do stand in no force with us at this day.

As ( c. cum(...)ses etc. relatum extra de testamentis.
] where it is required to the testification of every testament, even in that
which is Ad pias causas, that the minister of the parish be present, beside two
other sufficient witnesses. Whereas by general custom among us received, and
as it is testified by diverse lawyers reports hereupon, two good witnesses are
sufficient. Also if a man make his son his heir, or (as we equiualently to
that do now use and speak) his universal and sole executor, and do charge him
to pay and make over to some other his whole goods, dues, and credits, by the
canon law he c. Rainutius etc. Rainaldus extra. de testam.
may retain Legitimam iure naturae debitum, his child's part, which by the
civil law Falcidia and T^ebellianica is a fourth part, but by the canon law a
third part: and also the fourth part of the remnant per Trebellianicam, L.
Papinianus S. si quis impubes ff* de en off. testam. iuncta gl in S. meminisse
ib.
especially if the said charge were to be performed after some certain day or
condition happening: yet by the custom in England which has prevailed, he
shall in this case without either of these deductions, so long as there is
Assetzentre les mains des biens and chattels paternelles, restore and pay
according to the devise comprised in the will. c. 2. Ext. de adulteriis.
Again, if a single man commit fornication with a single woman not espoused to
any, he is to end^ where with a dowry in stead of her father, and to take her
to wife, according to the like law of God in the 22. of Exodus And the canon
adds, that if he refuse to marry her, he shall besides endowing of her, be
also corporally chastised: yet we have no such necessary exacting of a dowrye
in use among us. De consecrat. did. 3. c. celebritatem and 6. q. 1. c. omnes,
etc. illi qui.
Moreover, by the canon law every sinn^ is reputed to make a man infamous,
which is not observed in England. c. hoc ius. 12. q. 2.
Likewise the canons do forbid, any thing belonging to the church to be sold
any whit above the just value, which is not required nor looked unto in this
realm. L. scimus C. de iure deliberandi. and l. haere ditariis C. de haered.
acti.
Furthermore, though both by the civil law and practice in this land, the
heir or executor is not tied to pay more than the inuentarie (truly made) will
amount unto: yet the c. in literis Ext. de rapt. 16. q. 6. c. si. Episcopum.
canon law seems not so to distinguish, but to bind the heir or executor, to
whom any part of the deads goods do come, to a full satisfaction. And the canon
law seems wholly to c. 1. de torneamentis c. vnico de sagi^
condemn by the word Torneamenta, all iusting, running at tilt, tourney, or
such like commendable exercise of the body used in England. Yea, and elsewhere
prohibiteth even our notable old renowned defense of archerie, to be used
against any christians. c. 1. and 2. did. 6.
Moreover, the canons (clean contrary to the practice in many places of
England) do forbid all bastards to bear any office of credit or charge. And I
think that it is not ordinarily in practice in this realm, if a clergy man
being a patron, do present an unworthy clearke to a benefice, that thereby the
right of collating should be deuolued to the superior, which the c. cum nobis
Ext. de off. ordina^ii etc. cum in cunc^^s Ext. de electione.
canons do appoint against him as a punishment. Moreover though the canon ^.
cum in off. Ext. de testament^^.
law be directly to the contrary, yet it is a general custom through England,
and so testified to be by the Gl. in verb. lega^. c. statut. prouin. constit.
de consuetud.
gloss in Lindewood, that a beneficed person may freely declare his last will
and testament of all (...)h mooueable goods as he is poss^ssed of, being gotten
in respect of the church. And again, even against our own provincial
constitutions, custom in some part has very far prevailed. For the
constitution provincial is so far from taking away from the executors the
emblements sown upon the glebe land by the incumbent before his death: that if
he do Prou. Constitutio. De consuetudine c. nullus Rec^or.
live till the feast of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin, all the fruits
which for the other part of the year are to be received, shall be employed to
the payment of his debts, and fulfilling of his legacies and devises: which now
is generally grown out of use* and the exetutors of such a beneficed person
shall have no more fruits, what ti^^ soever the incumbent shall dye, but that
which the d(...) of his death (whether it were hay, corn, or fruit) was
severed from the free hold. Which course I have read to have been also
observed, even before the statute of 28 Hen 8. Besides it ^ 3. H. ^. (...).
(...) Encumbent and ^^l^b. 1.
appears by diverse books at the common law, that if a beneficed person do
die before the conception of our Lady (as they term it) being the 8. of
December, the emblements and corn which he had sown before upon his
glebe-land, are due to his successor, and not to his executor. There is another
Constitution also out of use, as being such, which custom has very^ long
prevailed against^ that in a cause of matrimony, (...) sentence were given for
the matrimony, the advocate which was of counsel against the matrimony,
should be suspended from practice, by the space of one whole year afterward.
And again, there was a provincial Prou. (...) stit. de vita and honesta^^
cl^ricorum. (...).
constitution made, being neither repugnant to the laws of this land, nor
prejudicial to her Majesty's royal prerogative, for certain kind of
apparel, not to be worn by any clergy man: which I may not doubt but our
Abstractor and all his accomplices will easilye grant to be past date, as being
foreworne by contrary custom. Like as there be some other also, which though
I do no^ doubt but that they obtain still the force of law amongst us, yet
these men will willinglye yield to be sufficient, that they have lost their
string, even by custom it self. Albeit the Abstractor left it forth of the
Minor of his main syllogism, as though it were not able to impeach the
validity of a law once established. ^ ^ ^ ^.
For a Constitution provincial decideth, that he which denies that a Synod
assembled may not make such laws, which may inhibit a preacher from preaching
^ill he be tried, is to be excommunicated. Which is to be understood of such
laws as were established in convocation before any act of Parliament was set
down to abridge that liberty. Again, ^bidem
another constitution has d^creed* that Where either the clergy or the people
of any place, have admitted any man to preach which is not licenced, there that
church should be interdicted. And another has Ibidem.
also determined, that If a preacher before the clergy shall preach of the
faults of the laity, or before the people shall preach of enormities of the
clergy, he shall be punished by the Ordinary of the place, according to the
quality of his offense. These few thus alleged, being such as for the
present time I could hit upon, I thought good to touch as a surplusage for the
more manifest refelling of the crafty defective Minor of his chief argument,
which if he had dealt plainly in, and had laid forth the Medium thereof
fully, as it is in the act of parliament, he could not but have foreseen, that
he should have had more adoo, to have proved all those Canons, which he
alleges to Have been used and executed before the making of the said act, in
such sort as he would urge: than he had to gather so much stuff together in
view of the simple, being in truth to so slender purpose, in the judgment even
of all such as be but even meanelye skilled in those laws.

To the first treatise of the Abstract, That a learned ministry is commanded
by law.
A Preamble before the examination of his proofs.
IT seems to me that the principal scope of the author of this book was,
covertly to bring the governors and government ecclesiastical of this
church of England, into contempt, hatred and obloquie, specially with
preiudicate and unwary readers of it; as though the said governors were
either grossly ignorant, or wilful breakers of laws, canons, etc, in force,
touched in this book; yet in other points ready enough to put in ure other
Canons, Constitutions and Synodals provincial of like nature, which serve
better for their purpose. If this were not his drift and mark whereat he aimed,
he would not have set the article of A learned ministry by law commanded, in
the vaward, and therein have spent almost half his book: whereby belike he
thought simple or affectionate readers would easily be led to imagine, that
the chief governors in our church matters, do hold some opinion to the
contrary thereof, tending to the upholding of ignorance in ministers. Wherein
let the wise consider, what injury and indignity (under hand) he has offered
to this church, to feign that to be holden and maintained, A slanderous
insinuation.
which is not: and by ioining heerin with the common enemies the papists, and
strengthening their hands, who also, in their seditious books, do harp much
upon the ignorance and dissoluteness of our clergy. And yet (howsoever some
Bishops peradventure inconsideratelie heretofore have laid their hands upon
some very ignorant ministers, which thing, neither other godly men in them,
nor they in themselves do afterward like well of) his own conscience (I dare
say) does witness unto him, that this church, and the godly governors
therein, do disallowe an ignorant ministry, and do with all their hearts
wish it were possible (Rebus sic stantibus) that every parish had a sufficient
able preacher. And therefore his thick allegations of canon law as to this
purpose, are Page 239.
(as he speaks of the said law elsewhere) Needles, bootlesse, and footlesse
too: brought in to no purpose, but to puff up, and to make his book swell,
and withal to give him a plain song or ground, to make his scolding faburden
upon. But seeing throughout his discourse upon the said first article, he
exacteth of every minister more than Mediocrem and competentem scientiam, immo
eminentem, and as Page 16.
it seems such as S. Paul propounds to every minister as a perfect Idaea,
what is requisite in him: which is, that he be able to teach sound doctrine, to
comfort, to correct 2. Tim. 3, 16.
and instruct, and to reuince any error; and thinks Grammarians and Poets,
Philosophers and Rhetoricians, though they have spent many years in the
universities, Page 72.
not fit straight-waies to be made Physicians of souls: insinuating withal
hereby, that the Bishops that have ordered or tolerated any not so perfectly
qualified, to have neglected their duty, etc: In these respects (I say) it
had been more convenient for him, to have tendered another issue, upon some
points in practice of our church, rather than thus to have fought with his own
shadow, Et in re minime dubia testibus vti non necessarijs, in seeking to
prove that which no man denies to be most requisite, if it could be brought
to pass. For the issue ought to have been to this or like effect? Whether it
be simply Romans 15, 4. 2. Tim. 3, 16. 1. Tim. 3, 26. Titus. 1, 9.
that is, to divide the word of GOD aright, and is also (...), able to teach
the truth and convince error, and to correct sin, and instruct to virtue and
good life, and to comfort the weak. Or else,

But seeing it was not for his advantage to speak to purpose, being an easy
matter to carry away the prise, where no man strives; it were a sufficient
answer to all his first article, to yield: that there ought to be established
(as near as possibly may be) a learned ministry every where in the church.
Yet will it not be amiss a little to look into his clerkelie proofs hereof,
and by the way to point at the violent and furious affections, whereunto the
sharpness of his humor, against particulars, does lead him: and also to
touch diverse other absurd positions and paradoxes, upon occasion of this
treatise, by him here and there interlarded.

1. Section. Page 3, and 4.
AN ancient Father says, that the friends of Job did handle an evil cause
well and cunningly, but Job having a good cause, did handle it but slenderly.
In like manner it fares with this author in this section, and some other parts
of this first article: so that except I saw where matter wants, that he
furnishes out his talk with bitter and earnest words, a man would judge that
he does but Praeuaricari, as the civil law calls it: when a man seeming
seriously to deal against a cause, omitteth purposelie, what to best purpose
might be said, and plaieth booty, to betraie the goodness of the cause. For
where he should prove, that the canons do require such learning in him that
is to be made a minister, as he painteth out in diverse parts of this treatise:
in stead hereof, he chooses to set in the first rank out of the Decretall De
electione, the chapter Nihilest, in deed to no purpose. For the said chapter
(as he himself well perceived) and therefore by preoccupation sought to answer
(Sed quam foeliciter?) pertains A law wrested.
only to dignities elective, whose elections to the said dignities, are to be
confirmed by their superiors, whether by Bishops, Abbats, Prouincials of their
order, or other whosoever. Now such so to be elected, are for the most part
before their elections, in some clericall orders, Gl. in c. officij tui ver.
incontin. Ext. de electione, and electi potestate.
or else there were no color at all, according to later canons, for the
superior to confirm them, the election of their person being otherwise to all
intents meerelie void. But he says, that What election and confirmation is to
superior functions; that is, presentation and institution for enioieng of
inferior benefices. Wherein he disputes not Ad idem: for he knows that one,
who is a minister already, and of competent gifts to answer in Latin to the
articles of religion, agreed upon, etc: can not in this Realm upon
presentation be hindered from institution by the Bishop, but he may recover the
benefice by Quare impedit at the common law; and therefore this canon can not
be in force, or be extended to punish the Bishop, for instituting such a one,
whom he cannot by the laws of the land refuse. But peradventure (he will say)
by presentation and institution he meant the first ordering of him to the
ministry, which is mere voluntary in the Bishop. A contrariety to himself.
Yet herein, as he speaks improperlie, so does it impugn the rest of this
man's platform: for he would not have any absolute orders given, but when some
place is void, and that with election of the people. And if to bring a Bishop
within danger of the penalty of this canon, he will have him to have something
to do in this action of calling to the ministry, which shall be arbitrarie
for him to do, or not to do; as to lay his hands on the elected: then are he
and his clients at another mischief by leaving it still in the Bishops power
to reject their new elect. He inforceth also, that howsoever the words may lead
a man, to think this canon to be meant for superior and elective prelacies
only; yet the reason of the decree fighting also as strongly for ministers,
ought to make the law to be accounted alike in both. Which being grounded upon
this rule, Vbi eadem ratio idem ius, I must put him in mind that the said rule
L. solemn ^61. in fine ff. de iudicijs. l. illicitas. 6. qui vniuersas ff. de
officio praesidis.
holds not, where the law it self, notwithstanding some general reason
thereof be alike, does otherwise in another place dispose L. 1. a ff. de reg.
iuris.
Quia non exregula ius, sed ex iure regula sumitur. And so it does in this
matter, as may appear in the same chapter Nihil est, where a little after the
words by him alleged not this punishment of suspension and bereauing of power
to confirm the next successors election, is inflicted for that Bishop which
shall prefer to holy orders or ecclesiastical benefie^s, such as cannot
woorthilie fulfill the office to them committed, but the penalty in that case
by canons provided. Which words though the author thought good not to allege;
because they make no mention of any insufficiency of knowledge, and would be
racked to no further office than to an ability of saying mass, wherein the
chief and as it were the only mystery of popish priestcraft consisted: yet
in the Mayor of his second syllogism, where in a generality Of worthy
executing his office, they seemed to speak more aptly to his purpose, he was
content to use them, though they do indeed quite overthrow his answer of the
identitie of reason, in both the cases. For how can it be intended, that one
and the selfsame thing is by those words meant and disposed of, where the
lawgiver (as in this place) provided a diversity of punishment in the cases
of confirming a man's election: for knowledge insufficient etc, from the
penalty of such a Bishop, which should order a man, that could not execute
woorthilie the office committed to him? For the penalty inflicted elsewhere
by the canons upon the Bishop, which shall prefer men utterly unworthy, to
holy orders, ecclesiastical preferments, or benefices (of which the Gl. ibid.
in verbo suspenditur.
gloss shows this decretall to be meant in that behalf, where it says; If
they will escape the penalty of the canons) is to be C. cum in cunctis Ext. de
electione, etc. grave Ext. de prebendis.
suspended from giving of orders, or collating of benefices. And to make it
more clear, that so much of this d^cretall, as our author alleges, is only
to be understood of superior prelacies and dignities, and not to inferior
benefices, the gloss obiecteth and resolves thus; This seems contrary
(says the gloss) to C. grave infra de praebendis, because there, he that
prefers unworthy men, is not punished till he have been twice or thrice
rebuked and admonished of it, but here he is presently punished without any
admonition: also here, those that are promoted, are removed, but there they
are not: it is to be answered, that here he speaks of those that are
promoted to dignities and government of souls, and for that they do more
deeply offend, they are more greeuouslie punished, even without any
admonition: but in the other place he speaks of mean benefices, in which
such great ripenes is not required. Which to be no greater or exacter a matter
than to be able to say mass, does appear by that which Panorm. in c. vlt. de
etat. and qualit. in fine. A fallacy (...).
Panormitane allegeth out of Bartol. Neither can the general acception in law
of this word (Praelatus) sometimes applied to an inferior minister, help this
pitiful proof of his. It is a Fallax to gather, because it sometimes so
signifies, that therefore in this place it should so be taken: yet there is no
such place as he quoteth here out of C. sua. de clerico aegrotante. But if we
should gratify him so much, as to suffer this canon to go for good payment in
this behalf: yet if it be A law forged.
said, that most of the ministers of this church, at whom he shoots this
bolt, are not of that insufficiency of knowledge, or unaptness to execute
their office, that is here meant to be condemned: he were still new to begin
again, to prove that this canon requires also such a sufficiency in all
ministers, whereby they should be perfectly well able to preach the word. For
every one that has not a special gift to preach, is not straightwaie to be
accounted (according to this canon) a man insufficient for knowledge, or not
able to execute his office woorthilie. In the former syllogism of this
section, if by the word Hurtful he understand not only that, which Per se is
hurtful, but that also which is so Per accidens, and upon some occasion may
endamage the church of God: then his Mayor is to be denied as untrue. For so,
even excellent and singular learning happening into such one as Arrius was, may
do great harm in the church. And likewise in both the assumpts of his
syllogismes he notably plaieth upon the petition A fallacy A petitione
principij.
of the principle, taking that as granted, which is utterly to be denied.

2. Section. Page 4, 5.
ALl that is said in this section, being in effect nothing else but that
ministers, being called physicians of souls, ought to be able to apply a
spiritual medicine; as it proves not pregnantly the scope of the issue, to
wit; that every minister ought of necessity to be of such ability to preach,
as this treatise requires: so does it not limit that the said physician of
the soul, which in sickness is to be sent for, must needs be the pastor of
that parish, more than that the physician for the body (of whom also it
speaks) must be of the said place necessarily. And truly, I must needs
confess that he is a very simple and ignorant minister, of what parish
soever, that is not able (howsoever he be to preach) yet to apply some
spiritual medicine to the soul of a sick man for his consolation: although
in truth by the spiritual medicines is not here meant any inward comfort A
canon racked.
by faith in Christ, in those days least respected, but the shriuing to a
priest, the housling, and aneeling of the party diseased.

3. Section. Page 5, 6, 7, and 8.
Under my former protestation, and the benefit thereof always to me being
reserved, that I favor not, nor seek not to establish ignorance in the
ministry: I do say that this which the author here brings out of the
Chapter, Cum sit ars Ext. de aetate, qualit. etc. for to prove that ministers
ought to be learned, upon color of those words, For if they shall henceforth
presume to ordeine such as are unskillful and ignorant, does not any way
directly relieve him. For that decretall speaks of such as Being to be
promoted to A canon wrested by the author.
be priests, are by the Bishops themselves, or other fit men, to be instructed,
etc: not of or touching divine offices and ecclesiastical sacraments, but how
and in what manner they may aright celebrate them, that is to say, how to turn
their pie, portesse, and missall, and to use gaily the infinite ceremonies of
the mass, hard to be learned without a schoolmaister, which Viua voce might
open the same unto them. For else we must needs hereupon affirm, if any such
instruction should be required at the Bishop hands, or such as he should
appoint, as the author here would enforce: that the Bishop must read or
procure to be read to such as he would afterward ordeine to be ministers, a
continual set lecture of all good learning, but specially of divinity. Also
it is spoken of such as are to be ordained priests, which having gone thorough
all the lesser orders, and Subdeaconship and Deaconship, are not to be intended
then, newly to be instructed by the Bishop in so short a time, even a little
before their priesting in all the doctrine of divine offices and
ecclesiastical sacraments, which thing also the word Diuina officia for the
most part in these latter canons used for nothing but the mass, with the
appurtenances, does sufficiently make manifest unto us; neither can those
general words of Unskillful and ignorant be drawn further than to such
things, wherein the disposition and body of that law is before bestowed. Yet
will I not deny, but that hence we may profitablie gather, how behoouefull it
is for us to have as great a care to the sufficiency of such as are to be
called to be the ministers of the gospel, as they had for the instructing of
their idolatrous priests, in their apish gesticulations at the mass. And to no
other end serves that which is brought out of the Cap. tales, 23. Did. in the
discourse upon the said section. But of all other, Impertinent allegations.
that his common place of the baseness of many mean things in respect of a few
very good, pulled out of the [Code and Nouelles,] but borrowed of the gloss
upon this Decretall; I marvel that he would bring it for the enlarging of this
particularitie which he has here in hand. The other allegation out of the 15.
Did. and Constit. Otho. quam advenerabiles, touches wholly the conversation
and not the learning and knowledge of the minister, and therefore is besides
his purpose. Yet nevertheless there is no such canon to be found as he
quoteth: and the constitution legatiue of Otho. quid advenerabiles, speaks
only False and wrested allegations.
of Archbishops and Bishops, and not of inferior ministers, whereupon our
author entreats: and therefore it is to be taken as a witness suborned, and
by him taught to give evidence in a matter wherein he has nothing in deed to
depose. Whereupon, because (all this notwithstanding) he takes occasion to
enter into a very bitter, and (I trust) a slanderous accusation against the
most of our ministry, for evil example, by their ungodliness, dishonestie,
and dissolutenes of behavior, no otherwise but in a generality, and therefore
not possible to be answered but by denial; I must wholly remit the same to
him, who best knows, whether herein he be an unjust accuser of the most of
his brethren, and of this church wherein he lives. And I would to God that all
they, whom thus he inueigheth against, were as clear from those faults, as I
am assured some others, who are so ready to spy a mote in other men's eyes,
and pretend greater zeal and sincerity than ordinary, are far off from
true godliness, mortification and charity.

4. Section. Page 8, 9.
Constit. of Otho. not so much as once naming the words of learning, knowledge,
or any such like, being brought in but to make a number, without any
derogation to the authors great reading, might well have been spared: so the
other five allegations of this section tending hitherto, that knowledge ought
to be in ministers, that they are masters, and ought to teach others; because
they speak not to the point of the issue, may well be put from the bar. For
his purpose is to prove, that none deserves to be called a minister or
pastor, which is not able to govern, to exhort, to admonish, to rebuke and
comfort his flock: yea, and that (as it seems by him elsewhere) after a
perfect and exquisite sort. Now, seeing knowledge and ability to teach, is in
diverse measures and degrees, and may be verified (as Logicians speak)
Secundum magis and minus; it may well be, that a minister is in some measure
learned, has knowledge, and is able to teach, and to deal in these duties,
which yet has not aspired to the heigh of perfection, required as an Idaea,
rather to be propounded to be followed, than of any one of his own Rabbines,
or any other hitherto attained unto. But to put the matter out of doubt, that
no such knowledge to preach, as our author would enforce, is here required; the
gloss upon his first allegation in this section, referring us to the C. quae
ipsis, Did. 38. does plainly show, that it is but the skill in the missall,
the antiphonarie, the book of the form of baptizing, the calendar, the rules
for penance, and such like, which is required to make him a skillful priest,
and a seer or guide. And therefore in the Chapter Sedulo in the same
distinction, it is provided, that scholars, and those who are learned, are not
to mock at the prelates and ministers of the church, when they hear them use
Barbarismes and Soloecismes in their prayers, and to pronounce confusedly
words which they do not understand: where the prelates also and ministers are
in that respect excused. Whereupon the Gl. ibidem in verbo intelligere.
gloss gathers, that a man for his ignorance is not to be deposed: yet I
cannot but signify that his second, fourth, and sixth allegations are left
without quotations, his third is not alleged as it lies in the text, and his
last being spoken Corrupt dealing in allegations.
only of a Bishops election, is by him racked out, to serve for every
ministers ordination.

5. Section. Page 10, 11.
THis decretall Ne pro defectu, brought in besides the principal matter, as a
corollarie deduced thereof, though the reason and preamble of it, which is,
Least the wolf destroy the flock, do retch unto all flocks: yet in the
body of it no mention is made of inferior churches within any time after
auoidance to be furnished, but of cathedral and regular churches to be within
three months supplied again, and therefore will not serve his turn (as he
desires) to lay any blame upon Bishops, nor upon any other in this realm;
except in the pride of his heart he meant to teach some, (whom in all humility
and submission he ought rather to reverence and obeie) what speed is to be used
in furnishing cathedral churches being void. The Decretall Quoniam Ext. de
iure patronatus, C. cum propter. d. C. cum dec^t. d.
which authoriseth the Bishop to collate, if the controversy of patronage be
not within four months (where the patron is a lay man) after the voidance
determined, does give an evident example of that which I said in the
beginning, that canons neither repugnant to the laws, nor hurtful to the
prerogative royal, yet being disused before the making of the Act 25. H. 8.
Cap. 19. and therefore repugnant to the customs of this realm, are not by the
said Act established to remain in force. For else, why should both patrones
of the Clergy and of the Laity of this realm, contrary to this canon, have
six months to present in, before lapse can accrue? All these words, Able to
go in and out before the people, to guide them, to teach and to instruct them,
are the words of the author, and not of the Decretall, cunningly by him wouen
with the other by way of paraphrase: which I do therefore observe, least the
reader should do the author that wrong, as either to think the places he
brings to be thus pregnant for his purpose, or that the canon law had that
elegant he braisme of Going in and out before the people.

And here, upon occasion of this deep point of law deciphered, that Benefices
are not to be left destitute above six months, the author leapeth into a
fierce Philippike against Bishops, for Suffering many thousand flocks to want
sheepheards by the space of almost xxvj. years, snatching up by the way, that
they who were Bishops in the time of darkness, did more carefully provide
for such as they imagined to be Seers, than at this time is done by our
Bishops. What sufficiency was in priests, in time of darkness and popery,
the thing it self speaks, and the world can judge. But this man (as it
seems) cares not whom he ouerloades with commendations, so he may debase
those whom he would wreake his teene of. And to this end is that his speech,
where having said that The pretended government and authority exercised over
the Lords people in the time of darkness, was by usurpation, he does
afterward insinuate, that There are some now which challenge the same
authority; A slanderous implication of the author.
whereas it is well and notoriously known, no authority, either
ecclesiastical or civil, to be exercised in this realm, under any but God
and her Majesty, and according to her Highness laws: which if this man
account Usurpation, he must withal account all that which either he, or any in
this realm enioieth by the laws thereof, to be in like manner usurped; and all
good men must account him in so saying, no well advised nor dutiful subject.
But because he saw that his grievous complaints against Bishops, For suffering
so many thousand flocks, xxvj. years almost to want sheepheards, would seem
untrue even to children; seeing that Bishops and Archbishops do seldom suffer
any benefices, which they know deuolued to their collation by lapse of time,
to remain void; and in case any do escape them, yet after the space of a
year be run, or sooner, (where the Sees be void) they are deuolued to her
Majesty's gift, whence they do not reuert, till they be once by her Highness
bestowed. Therefore to salve up this sore, or rather to cover it with a few
fig leaves, Suaue nobis excogitauit commentum. Forsooth he says, that The
flocks do so long want a shepherd, as they want one able to govern them, to
exhort and admonish them, to rebuke and to comfort them. But how does it lie
in the Bishops to have all ministers cast in this mould? Peradventure he will
say, they should not have instituted any but such. Yet he is not ignorant,
how great so ever the endeavor of the Bishop be to this effect, to hinder such
a clerk presented as cannot hold this touch, nor bear this finenesse of 24.
caracts or (...); yet if he can hold weight in the beams of law, he and other
patrones will (maugre the Bishop) have him placed upon a writ at the common
law. If he reply that the Bishop should not then have made him minister; I
reioine, that peradventure he was not of his making: it may be also he was fit
for the cure he was first appointed unto, though not so fit for some other
populous congregation, or troublesome people: and lastly, that if none should
be assumed to the ministry, but with those especial endowments: surely all
the learned of all professions in England, if they were in the ministry,
would scarce be able thus to supply one tenth part of the parishes. So that we
are come by this means to the second issue by me tendered In page 3.
at the beginning of this discourse: Whether it be expedient, that parishes
should wholly be destitute of public assemblies for prayers and administration
of sacraments, rather than to have a minister not correspondent to this
pattern?

But that which he brings for the proof of his paradox His allegation
retorted against himself.
out of the law which he quoteth, makes directly against himself: for as he
in law, for safeguard of his bond, may truly be said to have built a house,
which has brought it to that pass that it may be inhabited, though he have
not perfected it: so well enough may he be a minister, that in some reasonable
measure is endowed with gifts for that calling, though he be not of the
perfectest sort. As for the other two rules of law, which he brings, without
quotations as maisterlesse hounds; I do marvel he will deal so
ridiculouslie, and play so childishlie with these generalities, for proof of
this cause so seriously by him avouched. It might be answered, and truly,
that it is Fallax a petitione principij, to take as granted, that a minister
made, though far under that sublimitie of perfection which he fansieth, [is
not rightly and dulie] called. But in truth that rule which says, It is all
alike, that a thing be not done at all, or not to be done as it ought, is
especially to be understood where a man is exactlie tied to perform some
thing in this or that sort, wherein the bond in rigor of law is not satisfied,
except the precise form and manner of the covenant be observed. But as the
physicians do teach us, that a man may be truly said to be in health, though
he have not that most exact temperature of qualities, in which nothing is
superfluous nor wanting, because he is In latitudine sanitatis: even so,
because the sufficiency required in a minister, consists not in a point of
perfection, where no degree of more or less is admitted, but has his latitude
(if I may so term it) a man may well enough (...) deserve the name of a
sufficient minister, which does not attain to the highest degree of
comparison. So there is a rule, that it is in effect all one, not to be, and
not to appear to be. Which though in a judge, who must follow Allegata and
probata, it have his place; yet to other intents it cannot be said that a thing
is not at all, because it appears not. As to the other rule which he
brings, that [he is not said to pay which paieth less than he ought] every
child knows, that though it be no full satisfaction; yet if the creditor do
demand the whole sum, having received part, Dabitur aduersus eum exceptio de
dolo. And here in England, if the obligor accept of part of his money, it is a
bar against him that he cannot sue the forfeiture. And therefore, as it may
truly be said, that a man paieth money, though he pay not all that he ought;
so may one well enough be said to be a minister, though he be not so
exquisitelie qualified as might be devised.

6. Section. Page 11, 12.
THis. Pro defectu scientiae, quoted False quotation with corruption.
in the margent Ext. de Praebendis C. venerabilis, and brought by the author to
prove that He which has unworthily taken upon him the government of any
church, may forth with forgo and renounce the same: if it had been honestly
handled, and had made so fully to his purpose, as he would seem, he would not
have set us a work thus upon a pair of tarriers to seek it where it was not;
or else he would have noted it amongst other as a fault escaped in printing.
But the saying, though fondly depraved by him, is found C. nisi cum pridem
Ext. de renuntiatione; and no tidings are of it in the place whither he sends
us. The text it self has For the most part a man may desire to give place for
want of knowledge, which in his allegation is altogether omitted, as though it
were general. The text has Praesul salubriter ei renuntiat, The Bishop or
prelat does not amiss to renounce the church to him committed, which he must
govern in both, that is in spiritual and temporal things. The Abstractor in
steed hereof has: Let it be lawful for him that has charge to govern the
church in these things to renounce, etc. omitting wholly the word Praesul,
because he would have retched it out to have served to every inferior
minister: being nevertheless sufficiently bewraied by those words, About the
charge of temporal things, in which also as in spiritual things, he which is
here spoken of, is to govern the church; whereas in inferior benefices there
are no temporalties to be governed in right of such churches. But the
insufficiency of knowledge which here is understood, and the authors plain
dealing herein, is set out sufficiently in the very next word following:
Nevertheless, although notable or eminent knowledge is to be wished for in a
pastor, yet competent knowledge in him is also to be borne with; because
(according to the apostle) Knowledge puffs up, but charity does edify: and
therefore the perfection of charity may supply that which is imperfect in
knowledge. C. post translationem d.
Whereby appears, that every insufficiency of knowledge, yea in a Bishop,
much less in a minister, is no sufficient ground for him to desire to give
place and to resign: but such ignorance and want of discretion, as makes him
utterly unfit to weeld the spiritual and temporal matters of his church. And
where the text says, He may desire to give place, it overthrows the purpose
for which it is by the Abstractor alleged; as though a man might of himself
forthwith forgo and renounce his charge, whereas C. d. in fine. C. dilecti. d.
C. quidam tendendi d. C. admonet. d. C. literas. d. C. cum venerabilis Ext. de
consuetudine.
indeed he is to desire it at his superiors hands; or else he cannot resign
nor be deuested of his function. And therefore the Mayor of his second
syllogism of this section, page 12. is not simply true, as by these laws here
quoted more fully may appear.

7. Section. Page 12, 13, 14.
IT is not denied but that the debilities and infirmities of age may be such,
as it should be requisite the superior to give such a one upon his request
leave (looking sufficiently into the cause) to give place unto another more
able to execute that function: and in case he do not desire the relinquishment
of it, then Ext. de clerico aegrotante, per totum c. quia frater. 7. 9. 1.
the law in such cases provides, that a coadiutor with some competent portion
out of the living be assigned unto him, and not that he should violently be
thrust out from a right Reg. sine culpa. de regulis iuris Pontificij.
once grown unto him, without his own fault, contrary to all reason,
example, and humanity. It were too lamentable that men, which either as
magistrates or counselors in the commonwealth, or as faithful stewards in
the Lords house, have by due desert atteined dignities and offices during their
life, by reason of Gods visitation by sickness, or for his blessing of many
years and old age, which of it self (as physicians say) is Quidam morbus,
should as old hounds be utterly shaken off to the wide world.

And where the Bishop mentioned in this canon did desire of the pope, in regard
of his age and infirmity, that by his advise he might place another in his
steed: our author plainly falsifieng the text, translateth Cum nostro
consulto, Falsification of the law.
Without advise; to the intent he might justify, that without license of his
superior, a Bishop or minister may renounce their function. Yet every
debilitie of body arising of infirmity, or of old age, is not a sufficient
cause why a man either should desire or have liberty granted to resign. And
C. nisi cum pridem. alia vero causa Ext. de renunc.
therefore the decretall epistle to the Bishop of Arles says: There is another
cause, for the which a man may desire to be released from the burden of a
Bishops charge, which is weakness of body, arising either of sickness or of
old age: and yet every debilitie is not such, but that only, whereby a man
is made unable to execute his pastoral duty: for if, upon every weakness of
body, the office of service once taken in hand might be forsaken, in vain had
the apostle confessed, that he did even glory in some his infirmities. Seeing
that the weakness of age ought sometime no more to wey with a man, to make him
resign, than that ripenes of behavior (which often accompanies old men)
ought to persuade with him, to continue in his own function. For of such
(says the apostle) When I am in weakness, then am I stronger: for sometimes
the weakness of the body does increase the valor of the mind. But now
again, he leaves the matter of resignation: and for proof of his principal
issue he brings two allegations; one out of the common Extrauagants, and the
other out of the Clementines: which do seem to me to be brought in but to
make a number, and culled out without choice, there being much more pregnant
places to that purpose, which in his cursorie and desultorie perusal of these
books did escape his hands. For these do only require, that unfit persons
in knowledge, manners, or age, be not preferred to ecclesiastical livings:
whereof I would gladly learn how it could follow, that therefore whosoever is
not able to preach, and is not endowed with all those gifts which are in this
discourse required, is for want of knowledge unfit: which is his general scope
where at he leuelleth. Which knowledge and skill to be able to profit the
churches where they serve, that it is no such exact cunning as he does bear
us in hand, has partly appeared before, and better shall appear afterward.
And truly his choice was very slender, when he chose the preamble of that
canon, wherein the pope pretends, because he would be sure to have such
chosen, as should both govern and profit the church; that therefore he takes
the provision and bestowing of all ecclesiastical livings into his own hands,
which should happen to fall void in the court of Rome, or within two days
iorneie of the same. The Constitution of Otho. alleged, tells what kind of
master is indeed required; yet without mention of any preaching, nor yet in
that strict manner, but that occasions may happen, that a man more meanly
qualified, may be tolerated in the ministry. In which respect, the Gl. in
constit. Otho. Sacer ordo. verbo: illiteratos.
gloss says; If the preests should be poor, either by their parentage, or
through the barrennes or wasting of the country, so that they could not apply
their study, but should be driven otherwise to get their living by handie
labor, it is to be thought, that then they ought with favor to be tolerated;
yet so, that they be something more skillful than lay men, especially about
the sacrament of the altar, whereabout they are daily occupied. Which is the
very case of this our church in many places; the more is the pity. His next
allegation out of the same place, he has both mangled Falsificatio^.
and falsified. For where the Constitution inueiheth against those that have
the living and room of priests being not in orders, but more like soldiers
than priests, As having no care of holy life or learning; this he makes
general unto many besides. And where the text has Simplex sacerdos, that is,
says the Gl. ibidem verbo simplex sacerdos.
gloss, not entitled to the church, but a stipendarie curate: he adding to
the text, translateth it, A silly ignorant priest.

8. Section. Page 14, 15.
THis Constitution of Otho. amongst other things forbidding unlearned men to be
ordered ministers, does not prove every one to be unlearned that is not fit
to preach and expound scriptures, which is a point of more competent skill than
an ability (as occasion is offered) to exhort to good life, to dehort from
vice, or to comfort in adversity; though the same cannot to any purpose be
done without some skill and practice in the scriptures. And therefore the author
having so slenderly proved that which is his intention, had the less cause
hereupon thus to set up his feathers, and untruly and gibinglie to say, that
the canons published 1571. and the aduertisements do yield testimony, that
the Bishops A slanderous untruth.
do proceed first, and inquire afterward, that they first give the minister a
charge, appointing him to teach, and afterward send him to the Archdeacons or
his Officials court to learn: whereas the said canon (agreed upon, but not yet
(that I can learn) confirmed by authority) and the aduertisements alleged,
do only charge the Archdeacons and their Substitutes to take an account in
their visitations of the meaner sort of the clergy, of certain chapters of
the new testament without book; to the intent it may appear, both how they
profit in scripture, and that thereby they may be the more perfect in the text.
Which thing if it should be also performed voluntarily, as a private exercise,
by the best and most learned ministers that we have; I think it might greatly
profit them: and no modest man would interpret it so, that they did but then
begin to learn the scriptures, as here is odious^^e insinuated. It is
reported of B. Latymer of reverend memory, being accused by his persecutors
never to have exercised himself in scripture, because they saw some debilities
of old age appear in him, that he should answer, that the baie trees in Clare
hall in Cambridge were able (if they could speak) to witness with him, that
he conned without book under them, all the epistles of S. Paul.

The words of Barthol. are not as our author has alleged them, but thus;
Qualitas adiecta verbo intelligitur secundum tempus verbi: and they are brought
in by him only in way of objection against the text, which is contrary to
this Corrupt dealing of the author.
rule, as his solution of the said objection does plainly show. For he
says; It is a Bartol. in l. si quis posthumos. filium ff. de liberis and posth.
sufficient verification of these words [he dies intestat] though a man have
made a will the day of his death, if upon any occasion afterward falling out
(as by the birth of a child unto him after his burial) the said will and
testament be reuersed. So that we see it is not general, that The quality
adioined to any verb, must be construed according to the tense of the same
verb. The law which he quoteth ff. de ferijs, has no one word giving any
color, or sounding any thing that way. The other L. 43. de aetate ibidem.
quoted ff. de minoribus, is by him wholly altered from that which the law it
self sets down: Proof must be made (says the law) of the age of him,
which alleges he is above xxv. years old, by examination of the cause:
because such proof will prejudice and work against the reuersall of acts of
the said young man as executed in his nonage. Which being wholly otherwise
alleged by our author, it makes me (ioining his like practices in other
places of this book together) to deem that he has not collected his
allegations, or examined them himself according to the law; but has taken the
collections and rapsodies of some other man by retaile, which makes him
bewraie so often his long ears out of the lions skin: whereof he gives even
in this section a larger taste, where he alleges, ff. si a non competenti,
there being no such title in the Digests, but in the Code, and L. maritus ff.
de procuratoribus, where no such law is to be found.

But although no man will deny, but qualities requisite must then be found to
be in a person when he is to be employed, yet this hinders not, but that in
an office which is not tied to one circumstance of time, but has a
continuance, all honest means for the better and better furnishing of him with
such qualities in that charge, are and may be from time to time used, without
any impeachment to his credit, as though he had been at his first entrance
into it, not a sufficient man for that function. But that which is here said
concerning the nullitie of that which is done beyond the bounds of a
compromisse or commission, is no way appliable to a trust committed for
adiudgeing the qualities of the mind considerable only by his discretion, and
therefore cannot prove if one be made minister by a Bishop, not so fully
qualified, as the law in all points requires, that thereby the whole actions
are void and frustrate. Shall we say that an Ambassador having instruction to
imploie a discreet, faithful, and secret man about some service, shall be
guilty (...) if the party employed seeming to him thus qualified, shall be
after found to fail in all or some of these, and be insufficient? And a
Sheriff being to return by his writ a jury De probis and legalibus
hominibus, if after the verdict given up, it shall be proved, that they or
some of them were not such at the time of the return, shall we therefore quash
and reuerse Vide respons. sect. 39.
all, and say there was no return, no impanell, no trial, no verdict nor
judgment? And yet the Bishop has no authority to ordeine ministers by
commission, but by operation of law. And if this which he says be true, Where
by disposition of law, a certain form and prescript order is limited, that
there if any inuersion or preposteration be used, all is clean marred, and
therefore the whole actions are void and frustrate: What are we then to judge
of those, who are here in England baptized without the sign of the cross,
those which are married without the ring, and those who are punished for not
coming to divine service, there where the form of our Liturgy by law
established, is not exactlie observed? Which I set down, neither to impeach
that baptism or marriage (howsoever to the intent of inheriting by the common
law a doubt of such marriages has been made) nor yet to excuse any wilful
recusants, whom it is well known in any such regard not to absent themselves
from prayers, but to set down the rash generalities and paradoxes, which the
Abstractor so confidentlie rusheth into, even with the overthrow of those, in
whose favor this treatise is made. Notwithstanding many of his clients,
though they adventure to preach, are as void of good learning (as I could in
particularitie show) as the most of these Dumb, silent, and idol ministers,
which he so deeply lanceth. Yet nevertheless, that is not generally true which
he here avouches, that an inuersion or preposteration used does make always
the act void. For to this effect it is required, that it be committed in some
Bald. in L. ambiguitates C. de testamentis and Castr. consil. 39. alias. 43.
visis Actis.
matter of substance, and also that it be the inuersion of some substantial
order set down by man. For if it be the preposteration of an order set down
by Bald. in L. 1. C. de appellat. 3. nota.
law, it is to be appealed from, and therefore produces not a direct nullitie
Ipsoiure.

9. Section. Page 15, 16.
THis which the Abstractor here brings out of the Code, that merit, not money
in making of a minister is to be regarded, as it is too general to prove by
the word of merit, such a worthiness as he inforceth, so being (as appears
by the whole constitution) spoken of a Bishop only, and not of every
minister, as he indefinitelie does translate it, though otherwise it may be as
truly said of the one as of the other, it is not so direct for the purpose
which it is brought for. The first member of that which he alleges out of the
Authentikes, but not the second, do I find either in Haloander his edition, or
in the Greek or Latin edition of Contius. And whereas the constitution is
(...), unless Constit. 133.
they know letters, that is, can read, he has helped the matter a little by
interpreting it Aliquanto pinguius, unless they be learned, which
nevertheless might be granted unto him, and yet no such learning necessarily
employed as he seeks to establish hereby. But the word Clerici clerks,
Wresting of law.
and not Presbyteri priests here used, whereby not only in this constitution,
but in all other the novel constitutions, any, whether he be Ostiarius,
Lector, Cantor, Subdiaconus, Diaconus, or Diaconissa, is signified, does put
the matter wholly out of doubt, that neither ministers are here especially
provided for, nor such exquisitnes of learning as he would gather, can be any
way intended in them to be hereby exacted. Unless he will also say, that the
100. deacons, Constitutio. 3.. and sane.
the 40. deaconesses women, the 90. subdeacons, the 110. readers, the 25.
singers, and the 100. doorekeepers or sextens, being the limited number of
clerks, and so called by Justinian for the great church in Constantinople, to
have all been of that learning, which he makes to be the only touch of his
minister. And if I were persuaded, as in this place he is, that by the word
Constitutions mentioned in the Act 25. H. 8. Cap. 29. the constitutions
imperial were meant, I could bring many such, neither repugnant to our laws,
nor to the hurt of the prerogative royal, which I believe he himself will not
say to have the force of law amongst us, and therefore must hereby be driven
to yield that he made a defective Minor in his first fundamental syllogism.
And thus hitherto, neither the canon, provincial, civil, nor statute law has
given any direct condemnation against such ministers as are not sufficiently
able to preach and expound the scriptures, having otherwise competent gifts of
learning in some measure. Neither are such of them (though they be no
preachers) to be accounted Dumb and silent, who in their churches do exhort,
dehort, rebuke, comfort, and also in some degree instruct their parishioners,
as their ability serves, and occasion is offered. Which I know they may as
profitablie do, as some, who of as mean gifts, but of more audacitie than
they, dare take upon them to expound and divide the scripture, by preaching
upon some text, unto which they in their whole discourse do come just as near
as Germans lips are said to come together. But why should he vpbraid them with
the name of Stipendaries, seeing neither they alone, neither all they be such?
and it is a part of the new platform and church model, to have all ministers
put to a certain standing pension of money, which may more aptly be called a
stipend, because if they displease the paiemaisters, they shall perhaps be
driven to seek it Tanquam stipem ostiatim, and so it shall rightly bear the
name of a stipend.

10. Section. Page 16, 17, 18.
Because the Abstractor here makes himself angry, and is in a pelting chafe
with those that dare presume to answer any thing to his former proofs, and
that will tell him that the knowledge there spoken of may be verified to be in
many, which yet are not fit to preach, whom he for such answers calls
Perverse, conceited, selfe-weening men, soothing themselves, and fostering
their dotages and fond affectious errors with certain rules of law, whereof
they are ignorant, as he takes upon him here to prove: it shall not be amiss
to set down their answers by him rather pointed at, than truly produced, as
they lie in the law, that they being conferred with his reply, the truth may
better appear. The civil law says, The performance of that which the L. 18.
si quid venditor. ff. de aedilitio ^dic. verse. haec omnia.
seller shall speak in commendation of the thing sold, is not rigorously to
be exacted of him, but to be taken with a reasonable construction. As if he
affirm the servant he sells to be a stayed man, we are not thereby to
require such a settled g^auitie and constancy as is in a philosopher. If he
affirm him to be painful and watchful, we may not hereupon look for
continual toil both night and day at his hands: but all these are with an
equity in some measure to be looked after. And again in the same place, He
that in the sale of his servant shall without further addition affirm him to
be a cook, be satisfies the buyer, if he perform him to be measureablie
skillful in that trade: and the like is to be said of all other kind of arts.
And in the next law following, This is to be understood, L. 19. sciendum ff.
d.. illud sciendum.
that if a man promise one to be an artificer, he is not hereby strait bound to
perform that he is exquisitelie, but in some good measure skillful: so that
you are neither hereupon to take him to be an absolute workman, nor yet
altogether unskillful; and therefore it suffices he be such an one as those
be, who commonly are called artificers. Where by the way may be noted that
acception of these words, knowledge, cunning, and learning, which before
Scientia. Peritus. Non indoctus.
in sundry places has been spoken of. That which is quoted by the author, as
an answer of some to his allegations out of the canon law, is to this effect:
whereas the Chapter of Capua had chosen an Archbishop, Cuius literatura licet
non eminens, tamen conueniens extitit: whose learning though it was not above
his fellows, yet was convenient or competent as he reads it, that in this
respect as for want of knowledge the election made of him was not to be
reuersed. And if this seemed a reasonable decision in an Archbishops election,
whose high degree and place requires a greater and more excellent measure of
learning: shall we not admit with good reason, according to the great
inequality of places, and diversity of rewards for learning, and variety of
times, some degrees, as of excellency, competencie, and mediocritie of gifts
and learning, required in a minister? Or else shall we, vainelie dreaming of a
Platonicall Idaea, fancy with our selves, that a man which a long time has
spent in study, his body, and of his friends or of his own money in the
Universities perhaps as much as would have purchased unto him double as much
yeerelie annuitie for his life, as the greater part of the several benefices
in England be annuallie worth, can so put off to be a man, as that then he can
endure to take as a reward of all his travel to sustain in his declining
years, him and his family withal, such a living, as the meanest husbandman
in most countries having a plough tilt shall be able to spend as much in his
house in a year as he? And surely, if a surueie were taken of all parish
churches and parochial chapels in England, I dare auow that it would fall out
that there be double or treble as many more livings allotted for ministers
under the true value of thirty pounds by year, Vltra omnia onera and
reprisas, as be above that rate. And how those which be of better liueload, are
fleeced, and corruptly bestowed in many places, some of those know best, who
do seem most to urge a reformation in other points: whose clamors are like
that of him, who cried in the pursuit of himself, Stop the thief, Stay the
thief, etc, as fast as the best: and are only to divert the eyes of
preachers from looking on their own vsuries, simonies, monopolies, and
oppressions, and to procure them to whet their toongs upon their brethren,
whom they see in better case than themselves are, though perhaps in their
opinions not so worthy. But our author here tells us (though something
darkly) that the Learning and knowledge of our ministers which are not able
to preach, whom he very mildly and charitablie calls Bare mumbling
ministers, is so far from being to be accounted competent or sufficient, that
is not by Justice and equity of law to be reputed mean in that sense which
the law takes it. Which if it were true, that they were far under that
measure which the law requires, yet the illation which hereupon he infers,
that Then they are guilty of voluntary intrusion, and to be punished for
taking upon them offices without any lawful calling, can no way follow of
those premises: for seeing every man is an evil and partial judge toward
himself, then not they who offer themselves to the trial and examination for
sufficiency of those whom the law herein authoriseth; but those who should
see more in them than they are able in themselves, are to be blamed for
approbation of them, as appears by the C. innotuit nobis Ext. de elect..
habito ergo.
law here quoted.

C. ignorantia did. 38.
us from whence he borrowed it, belike he would have us to take it upon his
own poor credit. By the way this I observe, that the highest degree of
knowledge, which the law terms Eminent or excellent, he in his discourse
terms Sufficient, perhaps to insinuate that no knowledge is sufficient for a
minister but that which is eminent. Yet this exhortation that Ignorance be
avoided in ministers, that because they have An office of teaching, the
scriptures by them are to be read, and that all their labor consist in
preaching and doctrine: does neither overthrow the said distinction of mean,
competent, and eminent, because these points may be in men according to all
these degrees; nor yet argues, if these be not so exactlie performed by them,
that therefore they are intruders. S. Paul exhorts a minister to rebuke,
reprove, and to be instant in season, and out of season: yet if some perform
these offices more perfectly, other more sparingly, according to their
several gifts of mildness and knowledge; shall we say, that he which
fulfilleth not those in the highest degree, and according to the best, is
therefore no true minister? or rather that he does not the duty required of
a minister so fully as he ought? And so in this place by him alleged, though
a perfect pattern of the most necessary part of their function of laboring
wholly in preaching and doctrine, is set before them for to strive to be
attained unto: yet, neither is prayer, visiting of the afflicted, hospitality,
or administration of the sacraments hereby inhibited to a minister: neither are
all condemned hereby for Intrudors, which being not so fully furnished to
perform that which in common speech we call preaching, do teach according to
the ability given unto them of God, and publish forth his will out of the
word, though it be only by reading. But in another respect, this canon cannot
necessarily infer such a skill in every minister, whereby he may be a
preacher: because as in the most of the old canons Presbyteri are taken for
ministers, and Clerici for inferior ecclesiastical persons; so is this word
Sacerdos taken, not for every inferior minister, but (...) for the chief
minister in the diocese, or Bishop: and so Gl. in C. quando, did. 38. verbo a
sacerdote.
the gloss in the next chapter following does expound it, a sacerdote, id
est, ab episcopo, of the priest, that is, of the Bishop: of whom the law in
sundry places lays both a greater care in preaching, and also a greater
sufficiency thereunto than ordinary. Also it may be truly said, that by
Preaching, in law is not always meant that solemn expounding and breaking of
the scriptures, as we do usually speak; but sometimes any publishing of the
word of God, even such as is done by reading, may well be understood. And
therefore the gloss does Gl. in verbo praedicare, did. 25. C. perlectis. ad
lectorem.
interpret those words of the canon: Quae prophetae vaticinati sunt, populis
praedicare, hoc est, legere: to preach those things to the people which the
prophets have prophesied, that is to say, to read them openly to the people.
But yet, if we should admit this canon to be spoken of inferior ministers, and
of preaching in the most usual signification, we might with more probability
thus conclude, than as our author does: seeing for increase of his knowledge,
a minister is exhorted to attend to reading and exhortation of doctrine,
therefore he may rightly be called a minister, before he have atteined to that
perfection of knowledge, which he ought to endeavor for. And though he, which
does not bestow his labor in preaching and doctrine to the uttermost of that
ability which God has endowed him withal, does not as he ought; yet as it
follows not of any thing by him brought, so may we not peremptorily thus
say, that he is no minister at all, or pronounce him An intrudor, or without
any lawful calling, as the anthor does in this discourse, though he come
short of the proof thereof, in the conclusions of his syllogismes: which are
nothing else but foolish fallacies, proouing a matter unknown or doubted of,
by a matter no less doubtful.

11. Section. Page 18, 19, 20.
HE draws near the dregs of his proofs here, when upon a bare occasion of
this, to be Mighty in word and deed, required of a prior being next to the
abbat, not to any intent of preaching, but for observation of the regular
discipline of the monastery, consisting (as in the same chapter is mentioned)
in the manner of their meats, their apparel, their not enioyeng their goods in
property, and in the manner of their silence in some places, and upon the
largeness of Law racked.
that word as it is used in scripture for much more excellent gifts; he would
enforce that there cannot be such degrees in ministers, as some to be of mean,
some of competent, some of eminent knowledge and learning: or else would No
consequence in his reason.
gather, whosoever is not so mighty in word and deed, as this speech is
sometime in scripture used for, to be an intrudor, and to have no lawful
calling. Whereas we see no such matter of learning is hereby required to be in
the prior, as he imagines, neither if it were, is it necessary that every
minister should be of as great sufficiency as a prior, though in a generality
some offices incident to the one, were also required to be in the other. In his
gloss or discourse hereupon, as having proved that which he promises, he
climeth into his throne, and stoutly demands of our chief prelates; What
they can answer in defense of their wilful disloialtie to the Lord, in not
being so careful, as the superstitious lawemaker was, for his superstitious
time? And by the way he accuses them To maintain tooth and nail a policy
of a traitorous lawemaker, a policy perilous for the government of the state
of the Lords household: and as though that government which they use, were
rather by them Challenged, than duly attributed unto them. And for proof
that the policy by them used is such, he reckons diverse points as popish,
Which they turn (as he says) to the maintenance of their prelacies,
dignities, and ministeries under the Gospel. Surely a very grievous
accusation, being so general and indefinite, against so many reverend
Fathers, supplieng one at the least of the three estates of the land in
parliament, even by the ancient policy of the same, being also according to our
laws Magnates and Pares regni; and such as have been the cheifest either
planters or waterers of this church under the time of the gospel: but
especially when it comes from such a one as would seem to be a professor of
the gospel, whereof these and such like speeches, too too many in this book,
are neither branch, bud, nor fruit. And except they were the voices of some
son of Beliall, as was Sheba, that is without yoke of all christian humility
and patience, I cannot see how such contumelious lofty speeches (though they
were maintenable) could become any subject in this land, thus to publish in a
printed book; but much less this virulent spirited companion, whosoever he
be. Slanderous speeches of the whole s^ate.
And is indeed all our Government ecclesiastical but challenged? Is the
policy and state of our church Perilous for the government of the state of
the Lords household? Is it the policy of a Traitorous lawmaker? Are our chief
prelates Mainteiners of such by tooth and nail? And are they abbettours of such
Traitorous laws or lawemakers? Do They maintain their prelacies, dignities,
and ministeries under the gospel by the laws of Gods enemy? And can the
pope, being no subject, be called a traitor, or a traitorous lawmaker, though
he be a suborner or stirrer up of as many traitors as he can inuegle? Truly
these injuries debase the great blessings of God, which by her Majesty's
gracious means we enjoy by the pure preaching of the gospel, and reformation
of this church from all popery and superstition, and is dishonorable to her
Highness government: yea, it reaches both to those godly laws and lawmakers,
which by parliament have established this policy, and the government
ecclesiastical, which we now by Gods mercy enjoy: men who are as loath justly
to be accounted mainteiners of popery, or of perilous and traitorous policies
and gouernements, as this man is unwilling not to show himself dogged and
spiteful. For it is well known, that no other policy is practiced, nor
government put in ure, but such as the wholesome laws of this land have
fortified: and therefore for Factious speaking against the laws in force.
him thus to carpe at the laws in a slanderous libell, before the same
authority has reuersed them, it is intolerable, and would in some places be
accounted seditious. Neither will his evasion serve him, because the question
is not [Inter pares, amongst equals] as he says: as though he could not speak
better of the said laws and acts of parliament, without prejudice Of the honor
of the son of God, by accusing him not to have given a perfect law for the
government of his fathers household by discipline, as well as by doctrine. For,
as hereby he would excuse himself for his contemptuous and opprobrious
speeches against her Majesty's laws, and the whole state of the land, and the
policy and discipline of this church; as though he were forced for the
safeguard of the honor of Christ: so would he insinuate that all other not of
his opinion, are recklesse of Gods honor, and that both the policy and
government of our church is contrary to Gods will revealed by his word, and
also that Christ has left a set external form of policy and discipline to
be exercised Disloyal and presumptuous speeches grounded upon an error.
in every particular point throughout all the several churches in the world.

Indeed if these two were true, which I think will be very long in proouing,
he might with more reason have said as he does; yet does in milder manner, and
in a place more convenient than in a pamphlet, whereby a gelousie may be bred
amongst the simple, that they have been all the time of her Majesty's reign
misseled by their governors. I do therefore say and offer in the name of the
learned, to him or other to consider of, that it is taken by us for an
undoubted truth, the contrary whereof by no proof we do essure our selves
can be showed: that There are not set down in particular by scripture, or by
necessary collection to be gathered, all circumstances of policy,
government, discipline and ceremonies necessary and vniformlie to be used in
every several church: and that the christian magistrates and governors are not
in the said former points, whereof something is touched in scripture, of
necessity tied to that precise form that is there set down, but to the
general doctrine concerning them; to wit, that all be done to edifieng,
orderly, comely, and such like: if any will affirm otherwise, let him set
down his plat and his proofs for every particular, and he shall see whether
he come not short in most points. Neither do I see why he should so odiouslie
traduce certain things used in our church, till he have proved them
ungodly, in this respect only; because they have been either invented or
practiced under some bad popes, more than he does all the nations of
Christendom, as well in reformed as not reformed churches, for giving a
notable place in their commonweals, unto the civil laws of the Romans,
devised for the most part by painims and idolaters, or than he does the common
or municipall laws of our own nation taken either from the old Saxons being
heathen, or from the Normans being but newly christened, howbeit still gross
papists and idolaters. But as touching his questions, How our chief prelates
can answer to the Lord for their wilful disloyalty, for want of carefulnes
requisite, seeing They continually place unable men in the ministry, and why
they should not let those canons before brought for a learned ministry, being
now their own laws, be auailable with them? (he might have said as well his
and every Englishmans laws, for all be parties to an parliament.) I answer
first, that in those able men for the ministry which they have laid their
hands upon, I am persuaded they have not done it so much for a bare
satisfaction of law, as for the exigence of the cause, and for discharge of a
good conscience. Further, if they have ordered some of mean ability, it has
been in respect of the slender portions of living allotted out in most places
for the finding of ministers, which places other wise should be destitute
wholly, whereby the people would in short time become as heathens and painims,
or be as savage as the wild Irish, to the great danger of their souls, and
hazard of this state. And if it shall be said, that they have preferred any to
the ministry utterly ignorant and unworthy, willingly: Charity teaches
me not to judge the worst, nor to judge ^. Cor. 4, 5.
before the time, until the Lord come, who will lighten things that are hid in
darkness, and make the counsels of the hearts manifest. So far am I from judging
it to come of any disloyalty to God, especially of wilfulness, which is the
next degree to the greatest sin that may be: for if any of them had wilfully
admitted such a person into the ministry and of set purpose, then would he
also have rejected such as being very worthy, have offered themselves to that
function, which to this day I never did hear to have been surmised by any
man against any of those reverend fathers, whom I persuade my self it is a
singular comfort unto, when they may be means and instruments of bringing
worthy workmen into the Lords harvest.

12. Section. Page 21.
THat which is here brought out of the common Extrauagants, though the Author
tells us, that it overthrows the authorizing or ratifieng of an unpreaching
or unlearned ministry, which no man I hope wishes to have established,
whereas yet many do think that he is not straightwaie to be accounted An
intrudor, without any lawful calling, or no minister at all, which wants
that perfect ability required to be in a preacher: yet does the said
constitution speak no one word concerning ministers or secular priests, as
they then termed them, as to that effect and purpose: but only provides
certain privileges for so many as should be deputed thereunto of the order
of friars preachers and minors, commonly called graiefriers, common
extrauagants Wilful corrupting of the text.
indeed and wanderers, that they might hear confessions, have certain
benefits at burials, and preach in any church or street freely without license
of the Bishops Diocesan, saving in certain cases; these friars indeed, and not
only Brethren, as the author craftily and untruely has translated them,
under the favor of the equivocation of the word Fratres, yea nor all of them
neither, but such as by their prouincials should be especially culled out for
that purpose, the Pope meaning to authorize to preach where they list, least
the secular priests, (of whom also mention is made, but without any mention of
their preaching) should think themselves wholly disgraced by this unbounded
and vnconfined liberty given unto the friars: he did therefore think good,
besides an apology in the friars behalf full of commiseration made by him in
the end of this constitution unto the secular priests, to exact also some
special qualities in these friars thus to be sent on shriuing and preaching,
unto the which the secular priests looking and finding themselves inferior,
might with more patience be induced to tolerate the friars to preach and hear
confessions in their cures. Yet to the intent it may fully and plainly
appear, that neither this canon, nor any other in force, exacteth of every
inferior minister necessarily to be a preacher, it is to be understood, that
though this canon alleged, be plainly by him falsified, and pertains
only to a few friars which should be chosen out of all the heard for this
function, yet is it also cl. 2. dudum de sepulturis.
reuersed by a later pope, and stands in no force, otherwise than it agrees
with the canon of Repeal. Furthermore the c. 1. excommunicamus. quiae vero
Ext. de haereticis.
law flatly decrees thus; Seeing the apostle says, How shall they preach
except they be sent? Therefore all that either be expresselie forbidden, or not
sent by the authority of the apostolic See, or of the catholic Bishop of the
place, and yet shall presume to usurp the office of preaching publikelie or
privately, let them be excommunicate, and except they shall speedily reform
themselves, let them be further punished according to their deserts. And the
gloss unto this purpose does Gl. in c. quod Dei timorem. in verbo
priuilegiatum, Ext. de statu monacho.
thus gather; In this is the office of preaching privileged, because no man
ought to preach except it be committed unto him by the Bishop of the place, or
the apostolic See, and those who by election are chosen unto it: as is
expressed in Cl. 1. de regula, and in Cl. dudum: huiusmodi. de sepulturis:
which be places spoken of these friars, whereof we do entreat. And so you see
the authors plain dealing, and his impregnable proofs both against those
three degrees of learning in ministers before mentioned, and also for this
conclusion, that none may upon any occasion whatsoever be tolerated in the
ministry which is not an able preacher, yea even by the canon law it self.

13. Section. Page 22, 23, 24.
THe principal scope of this section containing a provincial constitution of
this land, and the authors exposition of it, is to prove that the Competent
and convenient knowledge which every minister ought to be adorned with, is at
the least to be able To expound in the vulgar tongue, unto the people every
quarter of a year once, certain principles of christian religion there
specified. Surely, if by this Expounding in the vulgar tongue, he think such
an exposition to be meant as preachers usually do make upon a text, he will
be easily convinced by the words here used, and the circumstances. For if a
sermon had been meant by Expounding, in vain was that added, In the vulgar
tongue; except otherwise the lawemakers had feared they would have upon those
texts preached in Latin unto the people, whereof there was no great danger at
that time, that it needed so to be provided for. And therefore [to expound in
the vulgar toong] must needs be understood to declare it into English, word by
word as it lay in the Latin; except you will say it should be done in more
words with some reasonable paraphrase for the peoples better conceiving of it,
which yet seems to be somewhat abridged and restrained in these words,
Without intermedling of any subtlety according to his own fancy. Further,
why should this alternatiue be set down, Either upon some one or more
festival days? seeing by no possibility it could be intended, that he could
run thorough by sermon or lecture in one days exercise, all the Articles of
our belief, the ten commandments, and the two precepts of the gospel,
concerning the love to God and to our neighbor, The seven works of mercy,
the seven deadly sins with their offspring, the seven principal virtues,
and the seven sacraments of grace: all which last our author thought good to
omit, least thereby all color should be taken away from his interpretation.
And if upon this constitution he will gather, that in every priest an ability
of preaching or expounding the scriptures was then necessarily required: it
may be retorted back thus, that then the synod would have suffered men of that
ability and discretion, both to preach of what text they had thought good at
all times, and would not have restreined them from intermedling such
expositions as they should think convenient. Which things are sufficient to
show unto us what is meant both by Once in a quarter, and by those words, On
more festival days; that is to say, that once a quarter they shall go over
all the said principles of religion in the English tongue, either all in one
day, or else upon mo days, in case they cannot conveniently in one day
dispatch all. But yet that the authors wilful racking may be more manifest,
and that a mean learning indeed will serve this turn to preach, as here is
spoken of, I would they which trust our author for a plain dealing and an
honest man, would but take the pains to peruse this c. 1. de officio
archipreabyteri, constitu. prouin.
constitution which he alleges; they should then find that this preaching
which he so extolleth, and which he thinks to implie more than a mean or
sufficient measure of learning, is nothing but a brief paraphrase, not to be
devised by the priests themselves, but word by word here set down for them to
be learned and uttered like the lesson of a scholar without book. In which
respect also, in the end of the constitution it is plainly signified, that
they have concerning the said points of christian religion [Taken pains to
make that brief exposition, for the instruction of such priests as were
simple.] Yea, the practice and learning of the priests of that age is so mean
a rule for us to square out our ministers sufficiency by, or exercise of their
function; that it c. 1.. sacerdotes vero constitu. prou. de haereticis.
was forbidden here in England, unto every priest, how sufficient soever
otherwise his learning were, being not licenced a public preacher, so much as
to catechize or instruct his parish of any other points of religion, or in any
other manner, than was set down unto him by that paraphrasticall exposition
contained in the said constitution. Illa sola simpliciter praedicet, vna cum
precibus consuetis, quae in constitutione prouinciali a bonae memoriae Iohanne,
etc; whereupon the Gl. ibidem, verbo simpliciter.
gloss says Simpliciter, [that is to say, without any theme or text to
entreat of, or other solemnity, but even as the words do lie.] Furthermore he
tells us upon his own bare credit, that from hence Quarter sermons now
amongst us have crept in and had their beginning. But it is rather to be
thought, seeing it could not (as the times are) be hoped for, that in every
church there Iniunct. artic. 4.
might a preacher be placed, that yet they would provide as near as they
could, that the people should not be wholly without instruction of the word
preached. And where he says, that the said Quarter sermons are suffered with
greater A great slander.
corruption, than in those former days they were, and thinks the same
sufficiently proved by that it ishere said In one or in more festival days,
as though hereby more sermons were required in a quarter of a year, in those
days than are now, I think it is sufficiently answered before. But because
the author imagines some advantage would be taken against him hereby, seeing
it is here said, the priest may make this exposition By himself or another, he
thought good to stop this gap also: and answers to this effect, as I conceive
it; that this is not therefore tolerated to be done by another in respect of
the disabilitie of the minister himself, but in respect either of manifold
businesses, bodily infirmity, open hostility, or some other necessary
occasions. And he proves this to be the sense of the said constitution
provincial, by an argument taken out of the canon law, reasoning A maiori ad
minus affirmative, An absurd reason
like a deep Logician: that because it is not tolerable for a Bishop to
procure the people whom he ought to teach, to be preached unto by another,
only (for want of skill) in himself, but upon some of the before recited
considerations, therefore it is not lawful for a common minister to procure
another to preach for him; where his own skill is not sufficient. This he
enlarges also by two examples altogether unlike to this matter we have in
hand. For though want of learning may and ought to be a sufficient cause to
keep a man from preaching in his own person, and to force him to supply it
by some other, though a very slender skill will serve for the preaching which
here is meant; yet for not personally visiting: not that, but other lawful
impediments must be alleged, considering the like skill is not in the one as
in the other required. That which he quoteth out of the chapter Conquerenti,
Ext. de clericis non residentibus, is not found there, but taken by him from
some other man's gatherings out of it. All the words thereof looking toward this
purpose any way, are these, Vel quod eidem ecclesiae non deseruiat, or if he
serve not the said church. Which indeed must needs be meant of personal serving
or residence, because a man cannot reside by another, no more than he can
Corporaliter rei incumbere, naturally possess by another, though ciuilie he
may do. The decision of that chapter is this: Whereas one would have extorted
twenty shillings annuitie from the incumbent of a benefice, by color that the
said benefice had been once collated upon him; it is decided that he should
surcease for ever that claim, if either he had other ecclesiastical
benefices, or did not serve the said church himself: which is very far from
proouing that he may not procure another to preach in his cure, which is not a
preacher himself.

14. Section. Page 24, 25.
THat which is brought here in the first place to prove, that It is directly
forbidden to depute another in the office of preaching, has no direction to
lead us to know from whence it came: which therefore would (as by other
dealings we have had cause) give suspicion to fear some wresting or
perverting, if it had any show of substance for that purpose. But nothing can
be gathered of it, but that such as especially C. vlt.. caeterum Ext. de
officio de legati.
and extraordinarily had that office of preaching the cross recommended unto
them; which (as I take it) was to persuade men to go to war against the
Saracens and inhabitants of the holy land, because their industry and
sufficiency was before the rest herein chosen, could not therefore commit
over that duty unto others from themselves: Nam substitutus, cuius industria
praecipue est electa, non potest substituere sine speciali mandato. And I hope
that the author will not hereby gather, that by law now in force, a man is
utterly and simply forbidden to have another to preach in his cure upon any
occasion, for then all our new doctors De robe curte, who intrude themselves
upon other preachers having pastoral charge, must be feign to give over their
cloaks, and put up their pipes. This also is a fallacy, A secundum quid ad
simpliciter, thus to reason: Those that have the preaching of the cross, to
excommunicate or to absolve, by letters of commission committed unto them,
cannot depute others in their rooms; Ergo none appointed to preach, may
procure others to preach for them. Again, it is untrue, as shall appear
after, that every minister by his ordination is made a preacher. Also the law
Reg. iniuncti. art. 80, and 40. Vide resp. ad. 40. sectionem
does expresselie in many places authorize a minister to suffer preachers to
preach in his cure, and therefore it cannot be doubted but they may have this
duty furnished by another. The next alleged out of our provincial
constitutions does reason thus: [Persons and Vicars ought to labor to
inform the people committed unto them with the food of Gods word, according to
the measure that shall be inspired them; Ergo, it is directly forbidden that
the office of preaching should be deputed to any other.] Hereof me think a
man might more probably collect against the principal matter now handled,
seeing the synod knew well enough the words of preaching, sermons, and such
like: which nevertheless in this place having so fit an occasion, it does not
use, but tempereth it in other manner by [Feeding according to the measure that
shall be inspired into them, that therefore it was not the meaning of the synod
to exact of every beueficed person a necessary ability of preaching, but
were contented to stay upon a competent skill, where more exact learning could
not be procured. But a modest man would have been ashamed thus purposely to
have abused his readers, by sending them to seek the last constitution by him
alleged in stead of C. presbyterorum consti. prou. de off. archipresbyteri.
another brought in before, or yet to avouch that this place more at large
manifests his purpose, to prove that one may not preach for another: whereof
it has never a word, nor yet any resemblance: neither yet does it exact of
them to preach, but to Inform their parishioners by the food of Gods word,
which may be done many ways beside preaching, though not so profitablie. And
therefore the gloss distinguishes preaching from doctrine and other Glossa
ibid. verbo latraeu.
information by a disjunctive, as being diverse things. The beginning of the
decretall Inter caetera Ext: de off. iudicis ordin. perteining only to the
Bishop, may well be a reason to enforce a necessity to have the people of God
fed with the word of God, but it nothing helps any of these his Three issues
by the author to be prooned.
principal issues, that he is no minister at all, who cannot preach, or that
there may not be admitted the former degrees of several measure in learning,
or that a man not able to preach, may not procure that duty by another to be
supplied. And if it had pleased him to have called to remembrance the next
words following the allegation which he brought in the next page before, out of
the same Page, 23. in fine.
chapter, he might have seen Inter caeterae Ext. de off. iud. ord. verse.
generali.
there, that Bishops either hindered (as there is said) or having great
diocesses, should choose fit men for the office of holy preaching, which in
their stead (when they are otherwise let) may execute the said office, and
carefully visiting their flocks committed unto them, might edify them by word
and by example, and so be ioint-helpers and workers with them. Therefore if that
decretall should contain a reason, why one might not preach in another sted
(as the author seems to think) it were a very strange Antinomie and Brocard
hardly to be reconciled by any supersubdistinction whatsoever.

15. Section. Page 25, 26, 27.
Elders, have done their duties, being no otherwise than is showed before,
does not add any weight to the former proofs, for any of the said three
issues set out: and the words of Preaching or publishing, used with a
disjunctive, do argue plainly, that he did not deal simply before, when
he would have the expounding in the vulgar tongue, of the articles of belief,
the ten commandments, etc: to be so many sermons, seeing they are here
plainly distinguished, so that any publication thereof suffices. For a Bald.
in l. 4. C. de. ver. and rerum. signif. gl. in c. Ext. part Ext. de rescript.
disjunctive being put betwixt two persons is understood for a copulative, but
being set betwixt two things, (as in this place) it is far otherwise, and
implies a disjunctive indeed, though the gloss do seem otherwise to salve
it. For every publication of a thing cannot be called preaching, as we use the
term in common speech. But why are Presbyteri such as are to expound in the
church, translated Elders? I trust he minds not hereby to shut out all lay
men from the eldership or seigniorie which is dreamed of, least peradventure he
himself be Exclusisstmus. But here he enforces again, a place before
alleged, accompanied with two other glosses: the place was before spoken unto,
and the glosses speak not to any other purpose (as is evident) than to require
and with as great ability in a minister as conveniently may be had; yet not
condemning thereby all As intrudors or as no ministers at all, that have not
aspired to that perfection, which is the point in issue by him laid down. But
in these two glosses also he keeps his old wont, to quote them so
generally, that a man may seek them where he will, for he shall be sure (by
any direction he gives) never to find them. For although in nine or ten pages
before (many other allegations being brought betwixt) he alleged the Constit.
Othoni^ cum sit ars.
place from whence he borrowed them, yet now as though it had been the next
allegation before, he uses the quotation of Glossa ibidem, the which dealing
with other like by him used, do argue this at the least, that he was loath to
seem to borrowe so much out of one place, least he should thereby bewraie his
want. I the will gather for his purpose any thing of that which Rebuff. says,
[That those are accounted utterly unlearned, that know not how to do the
office to the which they are bound; then must he first prove that no ministers
besides preachers do know how to do the office to which they are bound, and
that of necessity the office of preaching is incident to every minister,
according to that understanding that this word Preaching is usually taken in.
Yet it is very general thns to allege Rebuff. without quotation, who has
written many books, and some of them of great largenes. All that I can find
any thing sounding this way, is Rebuff. in praxi benef. page 9. infol.
this; Illiteratus, etc. A man unlettered cannot be preferred, because he that
(caret literis) that is, cannot read, or is not book-learned, cannot be fit
for divine offices. The Art. 43. Iniunct. Regi.
iniunction which he alleges, provides that such as not long before the
making of the said injunctions had been made priests, being children, and
otherwise utterly unlearned, should not by the Ordinaries be received to any
benefice or cure, but rejected. The equity of which iniunction I grant (though
it be out of the letter) remains still vnuiolablie to be observed, that
children and men utterly ignorant, be neither received into orders, neither if
by any sinister means they have crept in, that they be admitted to benefices
and cure of souls. Now the author having by way of recapitulation ministered
forth all his former proofs, he tells us in effect plainly though he made
show to prove, that no competencie or conueniencie of learning, without an
especial ability of preaching, would serve any ministers turn to be excused
from intrnding, and from being accounted no minister at all: yet it was A
malicious conclusion, yet far from his proofs.
not this which he looked at especially, but to leave an impression in the
minds of the readers, That our dumb and unpreaching ministers have not so much
as a competencie or conueniencie of learning, whereby he might debase them and
bring them into obloquie. So that it seems they might have his commendation
and allowance to continue their rooms, if this competencie were but in them,
whatsoever he has aforesaid sounding to the contrary. But he is angry also
with their Bare reading, and very peremptorily assures us, That they shall
never be instruments of the Holie-ghost to work faith in the hearers: but he
limiteth it with this word Ordinarily: which he seeks to establish by shat
of S. Paul; And how shall they hear without a preacher? Truly, as it must
needs be confessed that the plain resolution and unfolding of the word, in
scripture called (...), The aright cutting thereof [and the giving of the due
and fit allotment of it in season] which is performed by discreet and pithie
preaching, is an ordinary and the most excellent means to engender faith: so
is it a great error in divinity, to think that God never blesses the
reading, or the hearing of his word read, but extraordinarily. For then, why
is it commanded Deuteronomy. 6.
that the law of God should be rehearsed continually to our children, that we
should talk of the commandments in our houses, as we walk by the way, and
when we lie down, and when we rise up, that they should be tied for a sign
upon our hands, and as frontlets between our eyes, that they should be written
upon the posts of the house, and Psalm. 1. Psalm. 119. John. Act.
upon our gates: that we should meditate therein day and night, that all the
day long our study should be in his law, and that we should search the
scriptures? Also why was Moses read in the synagogs every sabbath day, and
they of Thessalonica commended for their reading of scripture, and conferring
it with that which they heard? And shall we say that so many thousands, as in
late time of persecution were converted from idolatry by reading of scriptures
A perilous and uncharitable doctrine.
and divine treatises, obtained not faith by ordinary means, or that without
especial miracle and extraordinary working none are saned in this church of
England, where their minister is no public preacher? And is not the declaring
and publishing the word in the mother tongue, wherein (as Augustine says) In
those things that are there plainly set down, is sufficient for faith and
conversation, a kind of declaration and preaching forth of the Lords will unto
us? But upon what ground that other vehement accusation of his stands against
such our ministers as be no preachers, That they rob the Holie-ghost of his
proper honor and office, whereby he inspireth the preachers of the gospel
with the spirit of wisdom, etc. in truth I cannot conjecture, except he will
gather it thus: Preachers of the gospel are in good measure inspired by the
Holy Ghost with the spirit of wisdom: Ergo, whosoever be no preachers, but do
only read the word of God to others, do rob the Holie-ghost of his proper
honor and office. Which argument if I should deny, having but propounded it
once, I should do wrong to the simplest reders capacity that may be; even as he
has abused their patience to propound it.

16. Section. Page 27, 28, 29.
NOw belike as being privy with himself, that he has brought no sufficient
concluding reason to prove such a necessity for every minister to be a
preacher, as that thereof it should follow such to be no ministers at all, who
are no preachers, he seeks by exhortation (though beside the rules of
Rhetorike) when he at the first iumpe calls them Idols, to induce them to
yield up their places, which they unjustly (as he says) do possess. And if
in strict points of divinity, this be thought lawful, and that there might be
found such as he fansieth fit for sufficiency, to supply all their rooms, I
would with he could persuade thus far, not only with those whom he calls
Idols, mumbling, dumb, and unpreaching ministers, but with all such parrat
preachers also, as being destitute of learning, discretion, and humility, have
rather boldened themselves to speak, than learned to speak to purpose. The
canon of Gregory by him cited, touches not those 1. q. 1. c. si quis ne que.
who have entered into the ministry, being not sufficiently qualified with
gifts incident unto it, but such as either indirectlie, corruptly, or upon
sinister and simoniacall respects only, have taken upon them that function.
And of such do the next two allegations also by him brought, only speak.
All the other which he throngeth together, saving the two last, do contain
dangers and vpbraidings of such Bishops, which for their want of government;
or of their ministers, which for their dissolutenes of life, are scandalous and
offensive to others. Whom (how well soever qualified for learning) as it is
meet to remove from their functions, so is there nothing here brought, whereby
it is likely they will be moved willingly to yield of themselves, seeing
every man is too parciall a judge in his own affairs. In the two last, where
that prelate which cannot teach (for the word Doctrina is only used) is
likened to a capon, and said to be no true prelat: We are to remember, that
they are but the words of the gloss upon the provincial constitutions, and
not belonging to any of the places quoted out of the decrees; and if they be
uniformly to be understood with the rest, are meant only of Bishops. Unto
which two glosses, the one upon the constitutions of Otho. and the other upon
the prouincials, he is greatly beholding, for furnishing him with so great and
so gaie a show. Yet they serve him as men are used to be that take of trust:
they are not so peremptory for his purpose, as he would make it. For first
they only speak of the prelates government and conversation, and not of his
doctrine or preaching. That in the 83. did. c. nihil.
first rank calls not the Bishop a woolfe, but says, he is a miserable
Bishop that seeks to please woolues, for he cannot please both them and the
flocks of sheep. The 2. q. 7. c. qui nec regiminis.
next likeneth not a prelat to a shameless dog, only for not correcting the
faults of his children, but also for want of government in himself, and for
not bewailing his own sins. That which follows taken out of Augustine, is
appliable to all men as well as to prelates, and shows how a dove that is a
true believer may be discerned from a raven, that is a filthy liver. c. non
omnis ibid.
Not every one that says, Peace be unto you, must be listened unto as though
he were a dove: the ravens are fed by the death of other things, this quality
the dove has not, which lives of the fruits of the earth, and therefore his
diet is blameless. The next is not found by any direction which he has set
down, but he might have alleged the gospel for it, speaking of salt that
has lost his taste. The c. in mandatis 43. did.
place ensuing next, is by him (following only his gloss) wrong quoted. But
if he think he may gather of that which the last gloss says, of a prelates
dumbness in teaching (which I have showed not to be always coincident with
preaching) that every minister is thereby of necessity to be a preacher: I am
to say, besides that which is spoken to the first section, Gl. in Cle. 2. de
sepulturis verbo praelati.
that Under the name of a prelat, the person of a church is not contained. The
crimination and blame, which he lays upon our chief prelates for admitting
any into orders, not enabled as he fansieth, (if otherwise they have discharged
their duties as I hope) will easily be answered when it shall please him to
charge any in particular, Loco and tempore congruis, whereas being delivered
in this manner, it cannot serve to help the matter, but only to open the
rankenesse of his stomach, and by the contempt and obloquie of them, to wound
the common cause.

17. Section. Page 29, 30, 31.
THe author being now come unto the manner of making deacons and ministers in
this church of England, and pretending so good liking thereof, that he cannot
endure the least wrench aside in any small circumstance of it, seeking also to
move, before he has taught or showed any breach of the said order, and to the
intent he might breed further attention, or else indignation in his readers, he
puts on of a sudden Cothurnos tragicos, and lostilie advancing his speeches,
swells in words like the Ocean, Proijciens ampullas and sesquipedalia verba.
The occasion of all this stir, is breefelie this: because When ministers are
to be made, it is an action whereof deliberate consideration is to be had, and
wherein when all is done (as it is imagined) that can be done, yet in truth
there is (as he says) nothing so nor so done. I do casilie assent unto him,
that a marvelous great care in so weighty an action ought to be had. But that
when all is done, as it is imagined can be done, yet nothing is so nor so done,
is An obscure riddle.
so deep and inextricable a riddle for me to unfold, that I must confess my
self herein Dauus, and not Oedipus: except I should thus guess, considering
the humor of the man elsewhere, that though all prescribed, were as exactlie
observed as might be, according to the order there set down, yet is it not
such a form of ordering ministers as it ought to be. If this be his meaning,
why should he be so incensed against those who break that, which he himself
misliketh? Or why does he thus terriblie exclame, as though he would
Inclamare coelum, terram, and maria Neptuni, against the breakers of an order
either ungodly or inconvenient? By the way it is to be observed, that the
holy days besides the sabbath, he calls Their own festival days,
intending as I gather by this contemptuous speech, The authors nipping at hosie
days.
that the observation of all such days is unlawful, and that they are not
commanded by her Majesty's laws, but established only by the Bishops. That
other days, beside the sabbath may be commanded as festival by the chrstian
magistrate, the practice of the people of God, though straightly bound to the
ceremonial and judicial part of the observation of the sabbath, as well as to
the moral, which alonelie we are tied unto, does sufficiently teach us. For
besides that God, who indeed is a lawgiver to us, and not to himself, did
command beside the sabbath, many festival days and solemn times of holy
assemblies, joy and rest, (to let pass their Number. 28. 2. Paral. 2. 2. Paral.
8. Esdr. 2. Isai. 1.
solemnities in the new moons or kalends, because in them they rested from no
kind of labor) as namely the Exodus 12.
passover, the first and Leuit. 23. Deuteronomy. 16.
seventh day of sweet bread, the feast Leuit. 23.
of first fruits, the Leuit. 23. Number. 18. Deuteronomy. 16. 2. Macca. 12.
feast of pentecost or of weeks, the feast Leuit. 23. Psalm. 80.
of trumpets, the feast Leuit. 23. Leuit. 16. Hier. 36.
of expiation, and the Leuit. 23. Number. 29. Deuteronomy. 16. Neh. 8.
feast of tabernacles; diverse also were instituted and commanded to be kept by
holy men: as the 1. Reg. 8. 2. Paral. 7.
feast of dedication of the temple by Solomon, at the Esdr. 6.
dedication also by Zerobabell, the feast of dedication Macca. 1. John. 10.
of the altar under Judas Macchabeus, which being in winter, is thought to be
the same feast of Encaenia, or dedication which Christ honored with his
presence in the tenth of John's gospel, the Iud. 11.
feast of moorning for the daughter of Ieptha, the 1. Macca.
feast of fire, the Iud. 16.
feast of Iudiths victory over Holophernes, the feast Esther. 9.
of lots, and the feast of victory Iosep. li. 12.
over Nicanor the king of Syrias general captain. And if the lawfulnes to
command such being granted, it shall nevertheless be thought no such thing
amongst us to have force of law, (as I have heard it to have been more
confidentlie than truly avouched by some) such are to know, that both the
statute 1. Eliz. cap. 2. does establish the said days, and that her Majesty
authorized by the said act, has authenticallie ratified long ago by her royal
authority to be showed, both the fasts and festival days set down in the
bulgar calendar prefixed before the book of common prayer. Neither is this
circumstance of a sundaie or holy day spoken of in the body of the book of
The form and manner of making and consecrating Bishops, Corruption of the book.
priests, and deacons, but in the preface only; neither is it there spoken of
other, than of Admitting a deacon: neither yet there, or in him is it
necessarily required, but only it is said, that The Bishop may upon a
sundaie or holy day admit such a man so qualified, as is there prescribed, a
deacon. The other circumstances by the author set down, which he thought he
might carry away in a cloud with a stream of words, as of Churches being
destitute of a pastor, of a solemn assembly, and convocation of the cheifest
of the governors of the church, to be gathered together in the cheifest city
of the diocese, to present, etc: are required without book by our author, and
are belike some Falsificatio^ of the book.
part of another platform, which he mistook in steed of this church of
Englands order. But if he enforce those words of the statute 8. Eliz.
confirming the said book, And shall from hense-foorth be used and observed in
all places within this realm, for the necessary observation of every
circumstance arbitrarie before: then must we desire him to rub over his logike
and his law, and to remember that herein we must Reddere singula singulis, that
such things as were of substance in the book, and such as were of circumstance
or arbitrarie solemnity, are not hereby altered, but are to be taken in that
nature now, as they were before in the book. As concerning the qualities
requisite in one to be admitted a deacon, I marvel he will number Folly in the
author.
that which rests in experience afterward, and which the party is to promise
in time to come to perform; to wit, To be diligent in his calling, as a thing
to be weied before his admission. And if by the circumstance of Calling, he
think may be inferred any (...), or popular election, or any other devise
whatsoever, more than an inward good motion of the party, he may be convinced
sufficiently by those words, Shall present such as come to the Bishop to be
admitted. The circumstance of being presented by the archdeacon, although at
solemn and set ordinations it be most usual; yet is it not of such
necessity, but that it may as well be omitted, as the Bishop may ordeine one
alone, when there is no more, though the words of presenting do run in the
plural number. To which effect it is also said in the preface, that the Bishop
knowing either by himself or by sufficient testimony any person to be a man
of virtuous conversation, etc, may admit him, etc: so that the circumstance of
Presenting is not of any substantial form of the matter. In reckoning the
offices of the deacon, our Falsificatio^.
author omitteth this limitation, In the church where he shall be appointed,
also to baptize and to preach, if he be admitted thereto by the Bishop: and
this likewise to search for the sick, poor, etc: Where provision is so made,
as not serving belike so fitly his turn as he wishes. Whereby we may gather,
what liberty this man (who finds such fault with other, for omitting such
and so many requisites as he fansieth) does yet permit unto himself to leave
out of his own distributions.

18. Section. Page 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
OUt of a part of the form of ordering priests, in this section our author
thinks he has observed two Principal points for his purpose: one, that The
minister charge himself to teach and instruct the people committed to his
charge, with the doctrine of holy scriptures, and this he passes over very
breefelie: The other, which deserved with him a marginall direction, is, that
The Bishop binds him, as well to minister the discipline of Christ within his
cure, as the doctrine and sacraments of Christ, etc. and that therefore [the
minister may as well admonish, denounce, and excommunicate offenders within his
charge, as a Bishop may within his diocese. The first whereof perteining to
teaching, required of the minister, although it prove not a necessary
coherence of preaching with the ministry, seeing many besides preachers, as
the father, the master, and the householder, are to teach and instruct in
godliness, those who are of their charge: yet is it more peculiarly incident
to the treatise here in handling, than the other observation concerning
discipline. But shall we say that this man is well advised, in seeking to
inspire every minister with a power The authors contrariety.
to execute all discipline in the church, and that by law now in force? when as
in a peculiar treatise of this book, he labors to prove that by law
Excommunication by one alone is forbidden; whereby he pulls down with one
hand, that which he built with the other, and shows himself either very
forgetful, or passing inconstant. And hereupon I would be resolved by the
author or some other, whether he think this endowment of every minister, with
the execution of all discipline, admitting but not granting it to be so by law,
to be a convenient policy, for the unity and quiet of the church? And whether
he himself had not rather be under the form now in practice, in regard of his
own contentment, than under the infinite dictatorship of his own minister? Or
else, whether should appellations from the judgment of the minister in this
respect be allowed of, and whether to the Bishop, or to whom? And whether the
Bishop by this interpretation of law, shall not retain his authority of
executing the discipline of the church upon every particular minister, and in
every several parish as aforetime, seeing the author says As well as the
Bishop in his diocese? And if he shall, what if the Bishop upon good cause,
and for abusing of the authority, shall suspend the minister from his
jurisdiction of executing discipline? Is he not at the same point he was at
before? And what if the Bishop himself dwell in the parish, who shall then
have the pre-eminence? And what if the ministers discretion serve him, upon
some small or surmised cause to excommunicate some great peer or noble
counselor of his parish, whose indignation may turn the whole church to great
mischief? Or to proceed against his patron, who peradventure has a bond of
him to resign? As many covetous coruorants and Nimrods have in these days,
whereby the ministry is more enthralled to the corrupt devotion of one man,
than by all the laws that any way may concern them. The author seems to me
to divide the discipline of the church, which he would entitle every minister
unto, into admonition, denuntiation, and excommunication. If by denuntiation,
he mean the publishing of excommunication done by himself, then is it a part
thereof: if (as I rather think) he mean the second degree of proceeding upon
faults not public, specified in the 18. of S. Matthew, then is this common
with the minister unto all other christians, even as admonition is being the
first degree. And where the minister is the party offended, and has not
prevailed neither by his admonition in private, nor his denuntiation before two
or three; to whom shall he tell it in the third place, where he himself has
the authority to excommunicate? But the power of binding and loosing,
according to the word of God, and the censure of reproouing and sharp rebuking
of public offenders, which do contain indeed the whole discipline, meant to
be attributed by this church of England unto private and inferior ministers,
why are they left out in this place? And why did he not also yield unto
every minister, as well as excommunication, the censure also against obstinate
heretics, and of anathematisme, supposed (by the best interpretors) to be a
higher censure than excommunication, and used when all hope of amendment is
gone? And touching his second question, whereof only (as it seems) any
doubt is made, Whether the doctrine, sacraments, and the discipline be to be
ministered simply, as the Lord has commanded, or else whether they be to be
ministered only as this realm has received the same without the commandment
of God? I say, that as this question is contumelious to this whole church, by
insinuating a jar in those points to be established by our laws, with The
commandment of God: so is it a very captious and sophistical question A
diuisione, because he divides those things Inconstant dealing in the author.
that not only the book has joined together, but he himself within ten
lines before, upon the like copulative conjunction, urged the like concurrence
of two other several members in this selfsame sentence. And for answer to
the question, I do affirm that these three are to be ministered, both as the
Lord has commanded, and as this realm according to the commandments of God
has received the same. So that the one of these clauses shall not be
understood, either to [limit or restrain:] the other as he vnskilfullie
thinks may be objected, nor yet Dispositiuelie, as though the law meant by
authority hereof to establish that the order in these things by the realm
received, should be holden as agreeable to the word of God: but must be taken
Enunciatiuelie, to declare and affirm (for the further encouragement and
comfort of those who are to minister these things) that following the order by
law established, they shall do agreeablie to Gods will. Not that it is to be
thought that every ceremony, form, or circumstance about these three things,
are either in particularitie delivered in scripture, (as this man has not
alone absurdlie fansied) or that there in either this church or any other is
or can be tied to any such certain exact form In hypothesi as we term it:
but that certain general rules for Articles of religion. 34. art.
ceremonies and government, being there set down, every church is to follow
the said rules, in such particular manner as they shall judge (all variety of
circumstances weied) to be most fit for the editieng and governing of that
people. For judgment whereof, I think that way surest to follow, which has
had the best proof and experience of profitablenesse, by longest continuance
of time, and purer antiquity, so that it be sure, no commandment in the word
to be to the contrary. And where as he concludes, though without premises,
that A Bishop and a minister ought to minister the discipline of Christ, as the
Lord has commanded, though the laws of the realm should not have received
the same, and afterward in plain terms says, That our discipline used in the
church of England, is not the same which the Lord Christ has commanded: he
does first justify that slander of this church, which his question before The
authors slander of the whole estate.
did insinuate. Secondly, he directly contrarieth both that which the book
by law established, and which he himself had a little before affirmed in these
words, That the discipline is to be executed by the Bishop, as he has
committed unto him by Gods word, and as he is appointed by the ordinance of the
realm to execute. Lastly he hereby both gives liberty to Bishop and
minister, to use what form so ever of discipline shall seem to them grounded
upon Gods word, and does as it were cry an alarm to all men, to oppose A
seditious asseueration of the author.
themselves against the discipline of this church, as wicked and not agreeable
to Christ's institution. But let us a little examine his proofs, whereby he
goes about to infer, that The discipline of the church of England is not
according to the commandment of Christ. The first reason, that It appears by
the word of God: and likewise the second, that it so Appears also by the
discourses written by the learned to and fro, are two childish fallacies, A
petitione principij, proouing a thing in doubt by a matter as much or more
doubtful, for who being of a contrary opinion, will not straight tell him,
that his proof is as evidently false as his conclusion. That which is said of
The discipline of all reformed churches, makes more against him than he is
ware of. First, more reformed churches come nearer unto our outward policy,
discipline and ceremonies, than those are in number who seem to dissent from
us. Again, few or no reformed churches, especially of several nations or
dominions, do iumpe in one external policy of discipline or ceremonies. And
why is it not as lawful for us herein to differ from them, as for them to
differ amongst themselves? And how is it possible if such a set form (as is
pretended) be set down in scripture, that they all differing so much one from
another in external policy, should all be ordered therein according unto the
commandment of Christ? and thus to be brought as a squire to level us by, who
are alonelie belike in his fancy wide from the right discipline: where as I
see no cause in any respect, why they should not rather take light of us, than
we of them. That which he speaks of master Nowels catechism, is very
general, and requires the perusal of the whole book. But I suppose this to
be the place which he means, where toward the latter end of the book he
says: In page 652. graecolat. Catech. 1573.
well ordered churches a certain form and order of government was instituted
and observed, certain elders, that is to say, ecclesiastical magistrates
were chosen, which should retain and practice ecclesiastical discipline. And
does our author think that this man here does mean their lay presbyteries
never heard nor read of from the beginning of the world, till within these
forty years or little more, because he names them ecclesiastical
magistrates? A fool fansieth that bells do ring and almost speak any thing
wherewith he is delighted. Or could he gather, that master Nowell here
condemns our churches discipline, as not agreeable to that which Christ has
commanded, if he had directly said that in some well ordered churches an order
of discipline differing from ours is observed? Does this follow; Some well
ordered churches differ in some points of external discipline from our church,
Ergo ours is not the discipline of Christ? Then by this reason should no
reformed churches be said to retain the discipline of Christ, or to be well
ordered, many of them upon diversity of occasions differing even from
themselves before, and every one in some point or other differing among
themselves. Are all the churches of Denmark, Sweueland, Poland, Germany,
Rhetia, Vallis, Tellina, the nine Cantons of Switzerland reformed, with their
confederates of Geneua, of France, of the low countries, and of Scotland, in
all points either of substance or of circumstance, disciplinated alike? Nay,
they neither are, can be, nor yet need so to be: seeing it cannot be proved,
that any set and exact particular form thereof is recommended unto us by the
word of God.

And therefore master Deane of Paul's, in the said Ibid. page 16.
book says, that one end of so many counsels gathered so often in the
primitive church, was this, to make canons, For the external government of
the church, which had not needed, if such a perfect platform had been
delivered thereof in scripture, as some men vainelie blunder about. And I
verelie do persuade my self, that he being a man yet living, and well known
to be far from any vnreuerent opinion of the state and policy of our
church, whereof he is no inferior member himself, and being best able to
interpret his own meaning, would if he were demanded, quickly convince this
man of factious and slanderous wresting and racking of his words. And seeing
he obiecteth unto us the president of reformed churches in matter of
discipline, let him first by some proof out of scripture, or ancient writers
approve unto us, if he can, the debarring of the civil magistrate from all
government in ecclesiastical causes, and a presbytery or segniorie consisting
most of lay persons; yet both of them practiced by some churches, which he and
his clients most admire: and as he shall deal in these, he shall have more of
our work of like nature, which peradventure will trouble the sconses of all
the new discipline-framers we have, to auow by good and substantial proofs.
Now upon the quite overthrow (as he weeneth) of the discipline of this church
of England, he lays forth in behalf of all inferior ministers, an action
of wrongful detinue (for I think he will not say, it is but novel
disseisine) against Our Bishops and archdeacons, for challenging all punishing
of malefactors within their several jurisdictions. If it be their jurisdiction
by law, why may they not so do? Forsooth because They permit not the minister
to exercise any discipline at all. Yes truly, as was touched before, they do
and may execute the discipline of declaring by doctrine according to the word
of God, men's sins to be bound or loosed, and the censure of rebuking and
reproouing openly those that do freeze in the dregs of their sins, which
are not the least parts of discipline: which is as much (for avoiding of
intolerable inconveniences which otherwise would ensue) as is expedient to be
attributed unto every one, and so is it all which the law does enable them
with: as may be easily gathered out of the very same demand of the Bishop:
for at the latter end thereof it is said; So that you may Teach the people
committed to your care and charge with all diligence to keep and observe the
same; so that the discipline which the minister is to execute, reaches no
further, than to Teach his parish with all diligence to keep and observe so
much of the doctrine, sacraments, and discipline of Christ, as apperteineth to
them. And if no especial pre-eminence might be attributed in matter of
execution of discipline to one minister above other: why is it said by S.
Paul, excommunicating, the incestuous Corinthian, Absens decreui, being absent
I decreed, 1. Cor. 5.
seeing they had ministers of their own, and willed the denuntiation of the
said excommunication afterward to be done openly in the church? And at the
time of his absolution, Paul being absent says, To whom you forgive any
thing, I forgive also. Likewise speaking of the anathematisme of Hymenaeus and
Alexander: I have given 1. Tim. 1.
them up unto satan, not naming either their own minister, or any segniorie.
But we must yet a little follow our author leaping back for Another reason,
to prove that This statute has appointed the discipline of Christ to be
ministered as the Lord commanded only, and none otherwise: which we will
easily grant him, understanding it in a generality, and not as though every
particular ceremony, rite or circumstance of external policy, if they had
been (as they are not) in scripture mentioned (but being not commanded) were
at an inch to be followed. For else how could the primitive church without any
prescript word (I do not only say have brought in a new ceremony) but have
altered the sabbath day by God appointed at the first, and being our
saturdaie, unto the first day of the week in scripture twice or thrice called
the Lords day, and with us sundaie: or yet the time of receiving the sacrament
of the eucharist, being according to the institution usually received after
supper, to have it received as it is in the morning fasting? His reason for the
proof of this conclusion I gather up thus: If this part of the book do not
abrogate all discipline used in time of popery, amongst the idolatrous
priests, as well as their false doctrine and profanation of the sacraments,
then does it ordeine nothing: but it does ordeine something, or else it were
an absurd law: Ergo, it abrogateth discipline used in popery. If this
conclusion were granted, yet his matter he has in hand would not here upon be
proved; to wit, That therefore discipline is no otherwise to be ministered,
than the Lord Christ has commanded. But I have showed before this Minor to be
false, and that those words of the Bishop do not dispositiuelie ordeine or
abrogate any thing for discipline, more than they do for the doctrine or
sacraments which were provided for by other acts, and not by these words, which
were indeed absurd once to be imagined. Also his Mayor follows by no
consecution: for it might have been that those words had ordained something,
and yet not to have abrogated all the discipline used in popery, except it had
by him first been showed, that the same was contrary to the commandment of
the Lord, and otherwise than this realm has received it. Which being not
proved, we may conclude, that he has in all this section played upon the
Petitio principij, a fallacy not fit for his person pretending some learning,
and too plain for a man to be ouerseene in. And therefore in his conclusion
hereof, he might have spared his vehement expostulation of [Open wrong, and
intolerable injury by the chief A proud and insolent term, full of
pharisaicall contempt.
prelates, for denieng to the saints of God, the discipline they call for, etc.]
But if he mean the discipline passiuelie, I think he and his fellow saints
have had some wrong at the chief prelates hands a great while. If actiuelie,
that every minister without check might have the execution of all discipline
in his own parish, I do verelie believe, that this man and others, who so
earnestly call for they know not what, if they might not be themselves also
elders, ancients, or what you will, saving priests of the segniorie, would be
the first weary of it. For if I know their disposition any thing, they are as
impatient as any men, to be at controllement, and most of all by a poor
minister.

19. Section. Page 37, 38, 39.
THe question here asked, whether It was the meaning of the parliament, that
the Bishop should command an apothecarie not exercised at all in the holy
scriptures, and altogether unable to teach, to be notwithstanding a faithful
dispenser of the word of God, and to take authority to preach? has a very
ready answer, that it was not their meaning, that any Not exercised at all,
and altogether unable, should so be commanded or authorized. Neither yet is it
to be gathered hence, that they meant to have none admitted, having otherwise
competent gifts of learning, and reasonably trained in the scriptures, but
such as could discharge the duty of a preacher, as this man elsewhere would
enforce. For to what purpose then should that limitation have served, which the
book adds (but our author passes over as though he saw it not) to wit, To
preach the word of God, and to minister the holy sacraments in the
congregation where thou shall be so appointed? The second question, Whether
their meaning was to bind the minister to perform by himself this duty to
preach, or that it should be done by a third person; I take may truly be
satisfied thus: that neither the minister if he be not able, and therefore not
authorized well to discharge that great work of preaching, should himself
preach: neither yet if he were authorized, and no other impediment hindering,
that he should loiter himself, and post it over to another. And therefore he
might have spared to have alleged his two texts, as one and with one
quotation, being no more to purpose, but that he meant to disport himself a
little with his [Maisters the doctors of the canonlaw,] which elsewhere he
says have by ordinance long since been inhibited from taking any such degree,
and Doctors of the civil law: Burgesses in the house of parliament. Si quis
alium institut. de inutilibus stipulationibus, if he had not taken it out of
some summarie by retaile, as appears both by his receding from the words of
the text, and by iumbling two texts in one, would have put him in mind, how
little it makes for his purpose. If a man (says the law) have solemnlie
promised to procure that Titius shall give so much, he is thereby bound: though
if he promise that Titius shall give so much the stipulation be void. The other
examples brought by him, being so by the first disposition tied to one person,
that it is not sufficient to have them done by another, do not prove
generally, that where any person is appointed for the performance of a
matter, that it must be done by himself personally, no not always where the
industry of the person is especially elected, as appears in our Sherifs
though personally sworn, yet allowed by law their vndersherifs. And the
civil law says: He l. 5. ita autemff. de admin. and pericu. tut.. quod si
quis.
seems to have dealt in a gardianship of a ward or pupil, that has dealt in
it by another man. And l. 22. non solum ff. de liberali causa.
again: We are to take it, that he is said to have bought, which has bought
by another man, as peradventure by his attournie. And therefore though it need
not be so said in this place, yet these his allegations notwithstanding, a
minister might have performed this duty by him undertaken, by a third person
lawfully. But here the minister is only to promise to Preach if he be so
appointed. And the Fourth iniunction adds Reg. iniun. act. 4.
hereunto, that if he be licenced hereunto, he shall preach in his own person
at the least every quarter of a year one sermon, for the which end, the
Ordinaries in most places do require of such as be not fit to be licenced to
preach, that they procure such duty to be done by another, which is able to
perform the same, and is licenced according to order. Where he asks, Whether
the meaning of the parliament were to have the Bishop judge the reading of
homilies to be preaching, it may be said that reading of homilies in a strict
signification cannot be accounted preaching; yet they serve to edifieng, and
are a kind of publishing the Lords will, even as well as a sermon being penned,
is, and uttered forth unto the people: and they were not by the Bishops, but
by her Majesty's own authority and injunctions under the great seal of
England, recommended Iniunct. 27.
unto all Ordinaries to see amongst other things, that all ministers being no
preachers should read them in supply of sermons, for the banishing of
ignorance and blindness. And therefore I do the more marvel why our author
should ask this question, Whether the Bishop may commit the office of reading
homilies to a minister, and so confidentlie to avouch that he may not? One
reason for proof of this he brings; seeing Three kinds of offices are
appointed to be in the church, deacons, ministers and Bishops: every officer
having his several duty expresselie appointed, as reading homilies, to be the
office of a deacon: that therefore One private man and fellowe-seruant may not
transpose from his fellowe-seruant, an office committed unto him by public
authority, which he inforceth by this, that Statute law is Stricti iuris, and
may not be extended. Here I will also ask him a question, seeing his worship
will not permit to His lordship, that which no Bishop never went about to do
of his own head and authority; Whether does he permit unto her Majesty
(notwithstanding this distinction of offices and strictnes of statute law which
full wisely he alleges) any power to take the reading of homilies, which he
will needs appropriate to a deacon, and to lay it also upon every minister?
If he will be so good unto her Highness, as to grant her this liberty, it may
please him besides the fourth iniunction before alleged to peruse the 27. and
53. injunctions, where expresselie all parsons, vicars, and curats, are
inioined to read some homily when there is no sermon, whom I trust he will not
therefore conclude, either to be all deacons, or to transpose without authority
the office of their fellow-seruant unto themselves. But to tie the reading of
homilies unto deacons, is so far from all appearance or color of truth, that
in the selfsame place, where he curtailed rather than abridged the office of
the deacon, the book sets down: that it is a part of the deacons office to
read holy scriptures and homilies in the church, Where he shall be appointed
to assist the priest, not thereby that the priest is excluded from reading
scriptures and homilies, if he so think good, or be commanded, and therefore
much less where no such deacon is appointed to assist the priest. And if this
new topike place were allowable, then hereof we might reason thus: Bishops (as
this man has confessed before) by the ordinance of the realm are to execute
discipline; Ergo, the inferior His argument recorted against himself.
minister being another distinct officer, may not transpose it to himself, as
in the other section he avouched. Also, ministers are to preach; Ergo, Bishops
being of a distinct office may not preach, contrary to all that which before he
has spoken against dumb prelates. Again, Deacons are by their office by law
set down to instruct the youth in the catechism, to baptize and to preach, if
they be admitted thereto by the Bishop; Ergo, ministers being a distinct office
from deacons (and statutes being strictly to be interpreted) are neither to
catechize, baptize nor preach by his own doctrine, and where is then his
learned ministry? And therefore I take it that I may safely conclude without
offense to his wisdom, that either here he doated, or else he hoped his
readers would be such affectionate dotards, as that he might with any show or
vizard of likelihod as here, or by racking, wringing, wresting, and
curtailing, as in diverse places elsewhere, without their further looking unto
him how plainly he dolte, easily abuse them.

20. Section. Page 40, 41, 42, 43.
NOw in this section to make the matter in his behalf seem more probable
against the Bishop, he frames a silie answer (God wot) in his name, that
Seeing by statute he only has authority to make deacons and ministers, and
to govern them, that therefore it beseems a minister no otherwise to preach,
than as he shall be licenced thereunto by him the Bishop. But yet because this
fiction was so apparentlie improbable, he was content also to temper it thus,
Otherwise than according to the form of the book. And indeed I cannot see,
but that this may and ought to stay any from enterprising to preach in a
settled church as this is, saving such fanaticall spirits as will shooue
themselves into the office of preaching, without any external and lawful
calling: seeing that in this church of England, this book is the only
external form we have, of calling men into any function in Gods church. Now
touching the former matter, Whether the Bishop might commit the reading of
homilies to the minister, because our author warily foresaw, that both the
injunctions and aduertisements published by sufficient authority, would to
this purpose be alleged: he seeks to untie that knot thus. Because That (he
says) which was confusedly and indistinctlie appointed in them to be done by
parsons, vicars, and curats, whereof (as it fell out) some were deacons, and
some ministers; is now by this statute made 8. Elizabeth, after both the other
bounded and limited so, that every proper office should be allotted to his
proper officer. But by the way he scatters a riddle as he runs, when he
says; The injunctions, aduertisements, articles, and this statute does bound
and limit the meaning of the injunctions and aduertisements: yet I think he
meant only, that the statute bounded the meaning of the other two: and
therefore she was to blame that taught him so long to go, before he had learned
to speak well. For the untruth of this allotment of every peculiar function
to his proper officer, although some are peculiarly tied unto one, and not
attributed to any other, I refer the reader to the book it self, and to
that which was said in the last section. And so I do this, which a little
after he gathers, Ex vno absurdo quasi concesso: That the office (...).
of the deacon is only to read the scriptures and homilies by that statute.
Now to open more fully the vanity of this surmise, as though the statute 8.
Elizabeth, meant to redress reading of homilies by ministers, thorough making a
more orderly distinction of offices than before: you shall perceive by perusal
of the body of that statute and preamble, that the form and manner of making
and consecrating Bishops, priests, and deacons, was not devised then anew, but
was put in ure and established in the days of king Edward. And though Ad
maiorem cautelam, for the avoiding of cauils, of traitorous and slanderous
papists, the same book was then established by that act of parliament, yet
does it in the preamble thereof, by many reasons prove, that the said book
had the force of law before. And therefore it is very prophetical for that
book, which was penned in king Edwards days to Bound, limit, Articles of
religion. art. 36.
apply, and distinguish offices confusedly delivered by her Majesty's
injunctions and aduertisements, which were long after framed. And where our
author had said, that A minister must minister the doctrine and sacraments, and
discipline of Christ; what needed he to have added And preach only, if (as
before he would have enforced) under Doctrine or teaching, preaching be
necessarily always employed? But afterward, upon better rubbing of his
memory, he tells us, his meaning is not to Exclude the minister from reading
the scriptures, and praieng with the people: duties without which preaching
cannot be done. If by reading the scriptures, he mean the ministers private
study; then he reasons not Ad idem, which is ignorance of the Elench. But if
he understand the reading of scriptures in the church, then I see no cause why
by his own platform, the minister should read any scriptures there, besides
his theme for his sermon: naie, how can he read any scriptures, when the
deacon has read them all Contrariety of the author unto himself.
before? And if he will needs read the scriptures publikelie, why should he be
suffered (by this man's construction) to invade The deacons proper office, and
to transpose it to himself? And therefore the copy of the supplication and
submission of the Bishops, which he has here drawn in their behalf, as
though through their [Abusing of her Highness lawes] no means according to
law could be found, for reading of homilies, where the minister is no preacher,
but by a deacon; he may well spare till they have need of it: at which time
peradventure they will procure a better clearke than he is to pen it. Yet
herein also either he or his printer has used a pretty cunning, by prefixing
there unto a Latin beginning, and using for five or six lines an Italian
letter, differing from the other Roman, beelike to the intent that some simple
credulous creature might believe this to be an allegation out of some law,
which are usually printed in this his book in the same letter. The other
reason which he brings for further proof of this incompatible distinction,
of that part of the deacons office, which is in reading of homilies, from the
ministers office, as I conceive it, is to this effect. All things about the
ordering of the minister, tend to admonish him of his duty in teaching and
instructing the people, and in preaching: But the whole action of ordering
deacons, tends to admonish him of his office in reading: Ergo, a minister may
not be forced to read homilies in the church. First neither part of his
antecedent is true. For the first part is proved false The Abstractor
contrary to himself.
both by the book it self, not naming at any time in the ministers office
Preaching, but with this limitation Where he shall be so appointed: and by the
author himself, Page 33, 34. 35,
laboring in one whole section to prove that the minister has also the
execution of discipline committed unto him. And shall we forget (as he does)
that he is authorized also to minister the sacraments? The second part is even
as true as the former, both as is showed out of the book before, and by the
authors confession within six lines after, where the says, The provision for
the poor is appointed also unto deacons. Besides all this, the argument
follows not, as is evident; because the book it self attributes two or
three several duties or functions to two or three several offices. As to
baptize, to deacon, minister and bishop. To preach, to them all three, so the
two first be licenced, to minister the sacrament of the ^upper, to the minister
and Bishop: and if we may believe our author, the execution of discipline to
them both. And why therefore may not a minister read homilies, as well as read
scripture in the church, though both they be in some sort required of a deacon,
if he be by the like authority of law commanded thereunto, as has been
proved before that he is? And where our author here further says, that The
parliament house had a singular care to have these offices of minister and
deacon, eune as they are distinguished by the law of Christ himself, it is a
testimony, that in those two great offices, the external policy of our
church is according to the commandment of Christ, in this man's opinion.

21. Section. Page 43, 44.
OUr author having laid down before, that the book of ordering priests and
deacons, r^quireth of every minister to be a preacher, and foreseeing a storm
toward him, chooses rather to be convicted of falsifi^ng than of this
falsehood. For where the book prescribes, that it shall be said to every
minister to be ordered, Take thou authority to preach the word of Manifest
fa^sification by the author.
God, etc: in the congregation, when thou shall be so appointed; he leaves out
the most material word, so, of limitation, and falls to descanting upon the
signification of When and where, to divert our eyes from espieng of the other
foul corruption. Although if he were so great a clearke in law as he would
seem, he could not be ignorant that Vbi sometime imports time as well as
place, and also implies a condition with it: as if a man give a legacy to his
daughter by these words; Vbi ea nupsisset, Where she shall be married: it is to
be understood says the Gl. in l. 45. s^ ita sit scriptum. finali de legatis 2.
and Bartolus ibid.
gloss there, That is, after, or when, or if she shall marry. And thereuvpon
Add Bartol. in l. 1. ff. de condit. and demonstr. mi. 19. and. Bald. in l. 3.
C. de probat. ver. sequitur de and Oldrad. cons. 47. consueuit tari.
Bartolus notes, that the aduerbe Vbi, where, does implie a condition. But if
it had not been the mind of the lawmakers by these words So appointed, to
restrain them from preching, without further approbation upon trial of their
ability thereto: then both in vain had the word So been used, and with
better sense might have been least out, which in so short and so principal a
sentence of this action is not to be imagined to be superstuous: and also the
word Appointed without a further word, as To serve or such like, would have
made no perfect sentence: and therefore must needs be understood, like as the
general usage since, Quae est optimus legum interpres, does interpret, that
they have authority given them To preach where they shall be so appointed.
Neither in vain is preaching spoken of at their first ordering, both to put
them in mind what ought to be their principal endeavor, and to give us to
know, that as mere lay men be not enabled to this office, so it is not
convenient that a license to preach be given unto any, but to such as being in
some function ecclesiastical, have addicted themselves to serve the church
according to their abilities, in all the functions incident to that calling.

And whereas he does allege, that if this sense, which he inforceth, Were not
the natural meaning of the statute, then to administer the sacraments might as
well be forbidden without special license in writing. I answer that though at
the ordering, authority to preach and to minister the sacraments be given,
according to the limitations there set down, yet hereby they are not hand over
head, where it pleases them to rush into other men's charges, but are to expect
a license in writing to bound them, where they may lawfully administer the
sacraments, which is done by letters of collation, institution, or donatiue
temporary or perpetual. And thus he sees, there is so much to help our
turns, besides the canon law, that he thought it best to leave some of it out
for his more advantage.

22. Section. Page 44, 45. 46, 47.
YEt, because he sees the coast is not clear, by reason as well the c.
excommunicamus vlt.. quia vero Ext de haereticis.
canon as her Maiesries injunctions before alleged by me, do require a
special license to authorize a minister to preach, yea even in his own cure;
he felleth us a tale (not of a roasted horse) but of his own graie ambling
gelding, which he could give unto me if he would, only by giving me the keie
of his pasture, and bidding me to take him unto mine own use of his gift. But
what if he should ^dde also and say; Soft sir, are you gone so soon? my
meaning is not that you shall take him away, or have any use of him, except
upon your desert I shall think good to ratify this my figt unto you under my
hand and seal hereafter: may I (think you) hereupon be so bold, as of mine
own head before I have his hand and seal, to break open a gap in the hedge,
and ride away with him? Truly how he would take it I know not, but I fear
me my mistress his wife would think me very hasty, upon so slender a
warrant to ride away with his graie ambling gelding, and peradventure I should
fare the worse at his hand also for my snatching. Whereby he may see, that
this is but a Wrest of a gooses quill, indeed not fit to set these Iars and ods
in tune according to his purpose, which differs (...) srom the true meaning
of the canon and iniunction. The reason he brings, if only By the license
to preach, authority thereunto were given, that then the making of a minister
without a congregation, should hereby be committed unto the Bishop, does no
way follow: seeing that preaching is neither the only office of a minister,
neither does the book of ordering, authorize simply every minister as before
has been showed, but such as shall be So appointed, whereof the Art. 8.
iniunct. R^g.
iniunction declares the particularities: for how can it appear to others
that he is licenced, but by writing? And in like sort is that reason out of the
Eight iniunction. Because ministers are inioined to suffer no man to preach
within their cures, but such as shall appear to them to be sufficiently
licenced thereunto; Ergo, special licenses to preach, are only for men to be
admitted to preach in other men's cures. The reason of which consecution must
needs be this: A man may not without license preach in another man's cure; Ergo,
he may without license preach in his own: which is apparentlie grounded of no
reason, A negatione vnius disparatorum ad positionem alterius non valet
argumentatio. As if he should reason thus; None but a freeman of York may use
any trade in that city, therefore without any freedom a man may do it in the
city of London. Or thus; Whosoever denies our author to be a puritan, says
true: but whosoever says he is a foolitane, denies him to be a puritan
(because that he himself has made an antithesis betwixt them) Ergo, whosoever
says he is a foolitane, says true. His other reason out of the iniunction,
which says, No other shall be suffered to preach out of his own cure, than
such as shall be licenced, Ergo, every one in his own cure may preach
vnlicenced, does no way follow by the rules of Logike. For, licenced and
vnlicenced, in his own cure, and not in his own cure, are no contraries, but
contradictories; which beginning with the universal negative, admits no
consecution, but his own contradictorie with a negation: as thus, None
vnlicenced may preach out of his own cure; Ergo, some not vnlicenced (that is
licenced) may preach out of his own cure. Yet I grant the law admits
diverse times such reasonings, and they are called A contrario sensu, and
grounded upon this rule, Quod 32. q. 1. c. dominus.
exceptio firmat regulam in casibus non exceptis, an exception does give
strength to a rule in cases being without the compass of the exception;
whereof there be diverse examples in the civil law: insomuch that it is called
by Papinian, (...) 1. huius rei
Fortissimum argumentum, in one place. Yet notwithstanding it has diverse ff.
de officio eius cui ma^d. est. iurisd. l 20. mulier ff. de testam. l. 8. si
ignorantes ff. mandati. L. 3.. prima verba. ff. de sepulchro vio. l. 26.. cum
inter ff. de pactis dotalibus.
limitations, wherein it does not hold; and namely, l. 2.. fin. ff. de
donationibus. L 6. ff. de condicti. causa dati. L. 1.. quod vulgo ff. de vi and
vi arm. l. vlt.. fin. ff. de iuris and facti igno.
where the mind of the lawmakers is otherwise, as where it is put only by
way of exposition, and not condition: or Instit. de haeredita. qu^ ab
intestato. 1.
where the law does otherwise specially dispose, as in this case it both has
been before showed sufficiently, and appears also by the fourth iniunction;
where it is said they shall preach in their cures, Once at the least in every
quarter of the year, in their own persons being licenced especially
thereunto, as is specified hereafter, that is to say, (as is in the eight
iniunction) either by her Majesty, one of the Archbishops for their provinces,
the Bishop for his diocese, or by the Queens Majesty's visitors, to which we
may add, or by one of the universities of Oxford or Cambridge, their
privileges since that time being by act of parliament confirmed, whereof this is
not one of the least. And lastly it holds when the like reason is in l. 14..
1. ff. de seruo corrupto.
both the contraries: as it is in this point. For there is as good reason that
a minister should be forbidden to preach in his own cure, as in another man's,
if he be not able to deliver sound doctrine in that form, as such high
mysteries ought always and in all places to be handled. The other argument
brought in the last place, Whereas (in king Henry the fourths time) restraints
were made for preaching, and yet none were forbidden to preach in their own
parishes; that therefore in their own cures none now are or ought to be
forbidden: is a very feeble reason. First, there is a great difference betwixt
Not licenced and forbidden. Again, Viueudum est, we must live according to our
own laws now, and not by examples forepast. Further it comes nearest to a
reason A simili, but then it should conclude, that as they ought not, so
neither ought we. And not thus, They did not forbid it, therefore we may not
forbid it. And here also he drives us like water spaniels to seek out once
again, where we may find that, which perhaps he was not willing we should hit
of. But first I would observe, if it were not usual with him Theonino dente
rodere, his disloiall and undutiful carping at her Majesty and her laws,
where he says: The very same laws were established Distoiall speech against
her Majesty.
against Wickliffe and his brethren to stay the course of the gospel: having
spoken before immediately of her Highness injunctions. Secondarilie I find by
the perusal of the Constable. prou. 1. de haereticis verb. si tamen.
constitution it self, that he has cut it off by the waste, in that which
most directly makes against him. For in the next words following his first
allegation, is adioined an exception, whereby (upon occasion) beneficed persons
may by the Bishop be inhibited or suspended from preaching or expounding even
in their own cures. And if it were not so, then this being but a provincial
constitution, which cannot derogate from the canon law, before in this section
alleged by our author, should be meerelie void. Yet to make it more plain,
what great doughtie sermons these were, which beneficed persons in their own
cures were (in this great restraint pretended) suffered to utter: Forsooth they
were nothing but that shallowe paraphrase Constable. prou. ignorantia sacerdotum de
off. Archipresbyteri.
before spoken of, which they might simply conne without book, and preach to
their people, but they might wade no further as appears in this ibid..
sacerdotes.
selfsame constitution. And therefore this is far enough from giving any
authority to all ministers to intermeddle with preaching, without further
license than their ordination to the ministry. The objection, which to this
purpose against the author might be brought out of the aduertisements, he
handles as Alexander did Gordius knot, which because he could not handsomely
untie, he hewed it in sunder with his sword. And so does he, by denieng the
authority of them, because they are not with privilege, nor printed by the
Queens printer, although they were commanded by her Majesty's express
letters. And is any man to surmise, that those reverend and wise Fathers, who
subscribed unto the said book of aduertisements, would or durst publish them
in her Majesty's name, and as by her Highness authority and letters, dafed
such a certain day, if it were not so: or that they would enterprise to
forbid or restrain that which the law had so exactlie charged and commanded,
as this man dreameth? But it is the guise of little children, where they cannot
read, there to skip over. But this matter is clearelie determined by a later
13. Elizab. cap. 12.
statute than all these, which yields a pre-eminence (excluding all others)
unto a preacher lawfully allowed by some Bishop within this realm, or by one
of the universities of Cambridge or Oxenford, to have a benefice of thirty
pounds a year in the Queens books, in like sort as a bacchelor of divinity
by the said statute may have. Now if every one ordained a minister by a
Bishop, were thereby by the secret operation of law, admitted withal a
preacher by the said Bishop, then were this no prerogative to a bacchelor of
divinity or to a preacher, when as every minister should be as capable of a
benefice of that value as they, and so the statute should be absurd and
elusorie.

23. Section. Page 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53
Having had so hard hap with particular proofs, he here comes to a general
reason or presumption. Because Statutes in doubtful points are to be
interpreted by the common law, and so that they may as little prejudice the
same as may be, and for that the calling, trial, examination, and qualities
required, are spoken of about making deacons and ministers without particular
mention of what sort of calling, trial, examination, or qualities, and for
that the makers of the Act were men desirous to promote the glory of God,
therefore such calling, trial, examination and qualities are meant, as are
requisite to be in those two callings by the law of God: which he proves also
to be likely By the prayers and places of scripture used in that action.
Touching his conclusion, I can easily assent unto it. If this withal be
understood, that if either in this form of ordering, or in any other form in
any reformed church, every special circumstance used, be not Modo and forma
found in the word of God, as indeed it is not possible, yet notwithstanding if
nothing therein be repugnant Articles of religion. art. 34.
to the word of God, that it may and ought to be accounted in this action, and
all other of external policy, to be agreeable and according unto it, and to
be that which is required by the law of God: yet the conclusion follows not
of those premises, for he should have inferred, that such calling, trial,
etc: is understood as the common law does set down. Now as touching the
qualities required in a priest or minister by the canon law, which is the
common law ecclesiastical, no such matter of preaching is required of him, nor
no necessary tieng up of the deacon only to reading of homilies. Ad c
perlectis. ad presbyterum did. 25.
presbyterum, To a priest (says the canon) it belongs to perform the
sacrifice of the body and blood of the Lord on the altar of God, to pray, and
to bless the gifts of God. As concerning his allegation out of Panormitane,
there is no such chapter in that title, whereupon he might write: yet I find in
him upon the said title this conclusion, that The Abb. in c. cum dilectus Ext.
de consuetudine.
words of a statute ought to be construed either most largely or most
strictly, to the intent that the correction of the common law may be avoided
by such interpretation. Yet this moderation, as the law elsewhere teaches us,
that Ibid.. in gl. ver. nec iuri. per l. 2. c. de noxal. and per Bart. in l.
omnes populiff. de iustitia and iure.
Where the words are evident, there we ought not to take an improper sense of
them, to the intent to reduce them to the common law, but where they are
doubtful or have a double understanding, whereof the one is proper, and the
other improper, then we ought to take in interpreting even the improper sense,
that by it we may swerve so little as may be from the common law. But in such
manner also, As Abb. in c. cum dilectus Ext. de consuetud.
that we swerve not from that sense which custom yields, although by
something happening afterward, it should appear that such sense were not good:
because custom has a power of interpreting, of derogating and of imitating,
whereby it supplieth where law fails. So that I would gladly learn what
words are so doubtful, or of so diverse significations in any of our statutes
or in^unctions, touching the authorizing of every minister without further
license to preach, and barring him from reading homilies, as that for avoiding
of a contrariety betwixt them and the canon law, and for the reteining of the
usual meaning of them, which the custom of this church has yielded, we
should be forced to follow our authors fancies herein: naie the custom of this
church (I am sure) he will not deny, but that it is against him. Moreover one
of his cheifest assumpts, to wit, That no kind of particular calling, trial or
examination is set down by the said book so by act of parliament confirmed, is
utterly untrue. For the preface of the book says An b^truth.
thus: It is requisite that no man shall execute any of the said offices (not
being at that present time, Bishop, priest, nor deacon) except he be called,
tried, examined, and admitted according to the form hereafter following. And
if so be that none of these be specified or declared in particular Page 7 6.
and sic deincep^
(as he here affirms) why does he keep such hot schools a little after,
seeking to prove that they are no ministers nor deacons indeed by law, which
have not been made according to this exact form of calling, trial,
examination, etc.? But to what purpose does he bring this reason, except he
would have showed us withal, what that Calling, trial, examination and
qualities be, which he supposes to be required by the law of God, and which
They the Bishops, (whom as I take it he means) by way of supposall are by
him indirectlie charged to have broken? Naie, he supposes In them
unfaithfulness to the Lord, accompting his ways not the best ways, nor his
counsels not the wisest counsels, that they have set the consultations of the
grauest senators, and wisest counselors, and cheifest rulers of the land
behind their backs, that they make their will a law, and that they are not
ruled by reason. Truly if these his crooked, virulent, and contemptuous
accusations of such men, reaching so high as to charge them with apostasy, and
these mutinous seeds of dissension sown betwixt them and other great men of
the land, be to be tolerated in a published and printed libell, though they
were true and justifiable; then I do not see, but that every other lewd
disposed person will take the like boldness upon any coffeehouse, to whet
his dog eloquence upon any the best and best deserving within this
commonwealth. For Psalm. 64, 3.
they have whet their tongue like a sword, and shot forth their arrowee bitter
words. Therefore we will pray with the prophet, Let the lieng lips be made
dumb, which cruelly, Psalm. 31, 18.
proudly, and spightefullie speak against the righteous: and deliver our
souls (D Lord) from lieng lips, and from Psalm. 120.
a deceitful tongue, which is as the coals of juniper.

24. Section. Page 53, 54.
OUr author omitting to declare unto us the Manner of calling, etc: of ministers
and deacons, which is required by the law of God, and required also by the law
of this land (as he tells us) and leaving it to the deep considerations of
such as know his meaning, if he do but gape upon them, does in this section
entreat of Another manner of calling and trial by other positive laws
required, charging the Bishops, even by their own records, to have never or
very seldom used any of them. So that seeing he exacteth of them in this
action, first ^bs^^^ditie in the authors platform.
the observation of the book for the form and manner of proceeding therein,
next the calling, trial and examination required by the law of God, and
lastly now another manner of calling required by other positive laws: it had
been meet that either he would have set down all these three forms to be one,
and to agree in every circumstance, or else to have prescribed unto them,
which of the three they should use, that so they might avoid his high
displeasure and indignation against them. And I would he had vouchsafed to let
himself so much down, as to have told us where these positive laws which he
alleges are written, Did. 24. c. quando Ep^^s.
being indeed the canon law contained in the decrees. Wherein I find a
difference from the form by act established, which appointed the Archdeacon to
examine and present those which are to be ordered: Whereas here The elders Vide
sect. 26. and sect. 40.
indeed priests are to present, and certain ministers and others skillful are
to try and examine them. The form of calling, which these positive laws that
he speaks of, do mean, is nothing (as he says) But a process to be fixed
upon the cathedral church doors, or a proclamation by an apparitor the fourth
day before the ordination, signifieng that such a day the Bishop will make
deacons or ministers, warning such to be present as will offer themselves meet
men for that service. If this be true, and also, that Three days together they
are to be examined before the day of ordination, truly they have but
Skarborough warning so suddenly to be called even the first day whereon they
are to be examined. But he says this Manner of calling is also commanded by the
book though briefly, in these words; When the day appointed by the Bishop
is come: certeinlie he had need to have a head full of proclamations, that can
pick out of these words such a solemn calling or proclamation. But why does
he not also tell us whether of the two, or whether both of them be meant by this
law, that is to say, the intimation upon the church door, or the apparitors
proclamation? And where the articles of religion do determine, That none may
take upon him the office of public preaching or ministering the sacraments in
the congregation, before he be lawfully called and sent to execute the same:
understanding hereby the whole action Dotable wresting and falsification.
of external vocation, which he restrains to the letters of intimation, or
to the apparitors proclamation, whereby signification is given of the day of
solemn giving of orders: he does herein notably abuse the patience of his
readers, whom he thinks very sottish, if they can make no difference
betwixt these two kinds of callings. But as no man denies, but that it is
requisite some public notice should be given a convenient time before any
solemn day of general ordination prefixed do come, to the intent (as he
says) men meet for that service may then and there offer themselves: so if
hereby he will suck any matter to object against such Bishops, who upon
especial occasions, and with more due trial and examination than can be had,
where such a confused multitude at once must be run over, do lay their hands
upon one or two well known unto them, without any such solemn notifieng
thereof, he shall rather hereby argue his spiteful stomach against them, than
any care he has of reformation or observation of law, which he does pretend
sometimes, when it seems to accord with his humor. For it is notorious, that
such of the Bishops as have kept that course, have sent abroad more sufficient
preachers, and fewer of mean gifts have escaped their hands, than possibly
can be performed at those general ordinations. And does not our author
himself dissallow in a whole treatise, as Unlawful, Contrariety.
to ordeine a minister without a title? which platform can no way stand with
this general publication of orders, for all comers found meet thereunto,
without respect of having or not having any place void in the diocese
allotted forth unto them? Conueniet nulli, qui secum dissidet ipsi.

25. Section. Page 54, 55, 56, 57.
IN this section, containing the manner of trial and examination of such as are
to be ordered, I do observe (though not so favorably dealt with as to know
by him) what warrant his first allegation c. quando Epu^s dis. 24
has, and whence he borrowed it; that this exact trial which the canon
sets down, does not require in specialtie such perfection of learning,
whereby the party to be ordered must of necessity be thought worthy to
preach, which is the principal issue by the author to be proved, and that it
prescribes saturdaie for ordinations. Also upon the words of the constitution
of Otho. requiring a search and inquisition to be made by the Bishop, our
author has gathered Wresting of law.
a scrutinie to be required, that by taking of voices in allowance or
dissallowance of the parties to be elected, which is the nature of a scrutinie,
he might belike transubstantiate the Bishops inquiry into some popular
election of their ministers. And it seems for that end also he did bring the
comparison of proceedings in the Uniuersities, whereby he might insinuate, that
as the Uicechancelor there does but in the name and behalf of the greater
part of the regents of that faculty which have yielded their suffrages, admit
the graduate presented; so the Bishop should be thought to have no further
authority, but to admit such as the electors and examinors have allowed as fit
men for that calling. For although it was easy for him to epsy many other
differences, yet he observes but this variance only betwixt the trials used
in conferring degrees in the Uniuersities, and in conferring of orders, that
the trial and Examination at giving orders consists in the interrogatories,
between the Bishop demanding and the party answering. But no such matter is
meant, as to prescribe an elective scrutinie, which he would insinuate, but
only a scrutinie or inquisition, which the Gl^bidem in verb. ante.
gloss therefore calls Scrutinium examinatorium, and the text Indagatio
diligens, that is, a diligent inquiry. Which examination both in this
constitution, and in the gloss upon the decretall by him alleged, mentioned:
is not so necessary and substantial a solemnity, but that it may be omitted
upon occasion, even as well as it may be committed unto others besides the
Archdeacon as we see here. Although our author forgetting what here he had
said, does afterward urge such a necessity in the archdeacons presentation
of ministers unto the Bishop, which is grounded upon, and is but the effect of
examination: as though he could be no minister which were not so presented. For
the gloss by warrant of law here teaches (as is by other places also
elsewhere showed upon the like occasion) that Gl. ibidem in verbo indagatio.
per c. constitutus, Ext. de appellationibus.
This examination is not required to be done, but toward them that are
unknown to the examiners. And for his capablenesse in respect of his birth,
good fame, and such like, the same gloss says, the letters testimonial do
suffice. And upon this consideration the preface of the book of ordering,
does speak disiunctiuelie, and not simply as our author untruly here
alleges, that The Bishop knowing either by himself, or by sufficient
testimony, any person to be of virtuous conversation, and without crime, may
admit him, etc. And therefore, whereas thereupon he needleslie speaks to
prove by a similitude, that this must be a further notice than of the outward
feature and lineaments of his body; he does but labor in vain, as the man
who share his hog, and had thereby much cry, but small wool. For although the
book do mention in the Bishop a knowledge of him that is to be ordered to be
of virtuous conversation, and without crime, and that either by himself or
sufficient testimony, which cannot be stretched unto his cunning and meetnes
(as this man does) to execute his ministry: yet is the knowledge of his
ability also required, and is to be known, as in the same place is prescribed
by the trial and examination that is to be made of his learning. And therefore
his similitude to this end, that a man chooses not a schoolemaister for his
honesty only, but for his learning also, as it depends not of his former
speeches, so it serves to no purpose, but to leave an impression of conceit,
that the contrary to this is practiced by the Bishops.

26. Section. Page 57, 58.
THe other circumstance of admitting into orders, In the face of the church,
mentioned in the preface, is sufficiently expounded in other passages within
the body of the said book, by the phrases of the Clearkes and people present:
in the presence of the people, and by the word of Congregation. So that our
author shall hardly be able to Instruct us, as in this section and three other
following he labors to do, that under the generality Page 62.
of this word he may establish An interest to be due to all the faithful
people in the land, for the choice and allowance of their pastors: when as
every nouice can tell him, that though by the law of this land, marriages also
are to be solemnized In the face of the church: yet hereby cannot be inferred
that all the people present have an interest of assent or dissent in every
man's marriage. And as there the presence of the congregation is not material,
otherwise than for the fuller testification of the marriage, for their joint
prayers to God for them, and for to object impediment if they know any: even
so, and for no other end, it will appear to be required, that ordinations of
ministers be made in the face of the church. And although in some but not in
all reformed churches (the precedents whereof he obiecteth unto us elsewhere)
some slender shadow of popular approbation be retained in the ordering of the
ministers; yet I do think verelie, that in no church the whole number of the
people are permitted to have a free election of their pastor, as this man would
feign establish here amongst us. The reasons, whereupon in this section he
groundeth his assertion, are all (saving one out of the civil law in the
Authentikes) taken out of Gratians rapsodies. The two first whereof do speak
not of Any election or approbation of the people, but that which the Council
of the clergy, and the testimony of the people, or in the presence of many
bystanders, ministers were then to be ordained. Neither yet does the first of
them speak simply of Counsel of the clergy or testimony of the people to
be had in ordinations; but only then, when as the examination required in the
said place is omitted. And therefore this abuise of his clearkes, and the good
testimony of the people, the Bishop is but to use in steed of examination, as
appears by that Particula aduersatiua, Otherwise let not a Bishop ordeine
any, etc. And by the gloss upon the same place, which says, Otherwise, that
is to say, If they be not examined by the clearkes attendant about the Bishop,
or else tried by the good testimony of the people. And another Glain conullus
dest. 24.
gloss gathers thus; Here you have a proof that the testimony of the
people is equivalent unto examination, whereupon we may note, that it is
sometimes sufficient for a clearke that is to be ordered, if he be of good
fame. Which may also appear c. de Petro did. 47. page 70. did. 75. c. 2.
ordinati^nes.
hereby, that such as be known, are not to be examined, but those that are
unknown. The second allegation, which only speaks of the presence of many
bystanders, is not aright quoted, for the number of the page (as it is in some
prints) is taken by him for the number of the distinction. The fifth allegation
also left by him without quotation, but taken indeed out of the chapter Vota
63. did. speaks no further than of requests and testimony of the people to
be had in this action, and leaves the election only to the clergy. To
which also agreeeth that c. non lice: did. 63.
canon which says, It is not lawful for the people to make election of such
as are to be promoted to priesthood, but let it be referred to the judgment of
the Bishops that they may try, whether such is taught in word, in faith and
spiritual conversation. And here upon is inferred this; By all these
authorities lay men are excluded from choosing of priests, and a necessity of
obeieng, and not a liberty of commanding is inioined. And the Gl. ibidem ver.
contra c. nosse etc. ^^m nossed.
gloss reconciling other places, which in show seem repugnant to this, says,
It is to be holden that lay men ought to be present, not to elect, but to
yield consent. His third and fourth allegation go something further, and do
require the assent and allowance of the citizens. The former of them is left
without quotation; the second our author has a little helped (as crastie
companions do true dice) by translating Conniuentiam and testimonium ciuium,
The allowance and good liking of the citizens. Whereas in truth Conniuentia is
when a man sees well enough what is done, and is content not to oppose
himself, but to wink at it: and by Testimony, as was before showed forth of
the gloss, is nothing else understood, but a good name and report amongst men.
And where he upon these does strait-waies leap for a conclusion, That these
texts and many other mo, do all affirm that elections and ordinations must
be made by citizens in the first place, And priests or clerks in the plural
number, and wills us to Note it: we must tell him that he leapeth short, and
that we note Quo haec not a non valet. For he manifestly herein falsifieth his
own allegations, which all do refer the ordaining to the Bishop but with
assent, or this or that allowance of some others. And I think in the proper
and most usual signification of ordination and imposition of hands, it is not
to be showed, that any lay man had ever any intermedling therewith, which
some of their cheifest (...) do also grant. And where in the sixth place by
way of preoccupation, he goes about to prove that These are not spoken of
the chief priest of every diocese which is the Bishop, though it be not
denied by any: yet assuredly, the place whereby he would prove it is only
to be understood of the Bishop and the canon, is thus: He shall be no priest
henceforth, whom neither clergy nor the people of his own city does
choose. But he thought to provide saselie for himself herein not to be espied,
and therefore quoteth the 64. distinction c. qui in aliquo. sed nec ille did.
51.
in steed of 51. and the Chapter Si forte, which is not there to be found. The
summarie gathered upon the said chapter, Qui in aliquo, the gloss throughout:
yea, and the whole chapter requiring the age and other qualities, peculiarly
by the canons looked for in Bishops, and the word Episcopus there used, do all
prove a Bishop indeed, and not any inferior minister there to be understood.
And so did the whole parliament of Paris take it in the 31. article of their
defense for the liberty of the church of France. And he himself affirmesh
that there were congregations in the country, where there was by likelihood
none of the clergy, but one minister, and it must needs be, that there were
ministers to be placed in other places belives cities. And it is yet made more
manifest by another disjunctive following, Or else the authority of the
metropolitan, or the assent of the comprouinciall priests have not tried; both
which does make it plain to be understood only of Bishops. Where it is not
also to be omitted, that the election there spoken of in the disiunctive
(wherein if either part be true, the whole proposition is true) does overthrow
the election he speaks of by citizens. For thereby it seems sufficient as
to that point, if either the clergy, or the people of the city do make that
choice. Haloander, or the Greek or Latin set forth up Contius, yet it makes
directly against him: for if he do think this constitution to be law with
us, and convenient to be used, that Where an un worthy minister is chosen by
other, there the most holy Bishop may ordeine whom he shall think best: then
in some case one man alone may ordain and choose a minister without
approbation of the people, and the Bishop shall hereby have as absolute a
stroke to reject or reprove a minister, as he has already. But I would of
all these varieties of judgments in diverse canons, our author would have
signified which of them we must hold for law, for all, being so discrepant,
cannot be. Whether it must be only In the presence of many bystanders, or
at the request of the people, or with the testimony of them, or with their
advise or assent, or else by their election and vaices. But if by way of
admittance it should be said, that these old canons were as direct as he would
have them, yet they cannot any way serve his turn. For he must first prove
that they are not repugnant unto the customs of this realm, and show us how
they have been used and executed here before the making of the statute 25. H.
8. yet he can say they are by law established amongst us. Naie, if even then
they had been in use, yet are they countermanded and reuersed now, by another
course of ordering of ministers set down in the book for that purpose,
wherein no such form is prescribed. And he himself affirms often in this
treatise, that they are no lawful ministers, yea no ministers at all in this
church of England, that are not ordered according to the exact form of that
book. But if he will say that this popular approbation and election, (as he
plainly afterward inforceth) is the form by law Page 62. factious doctrine
delivered by the Abstractor.
required, then have we (by his own do^rine) no ministers at all in this
church, for we have none that have been so chosen. Yea then his o^vne clients,
who to enable themselves to take livings ecclesiastical according to law, will
be contented to be ordered by a Bishop according to the book, which they
nevertheless hold to be a calling against the word of God, shall thus be left
wholly without calling and ministry, and by his and their own judgments are
to be taken for intrudors. And if this plat of popularitie, be not the form of
ordering ministers, which the law and the book does establish, then with
what conscience does he so urge it in this place, who does so rigorously in
other places exact the observation of every tittle in the book? But I will
not run into this common place to show all the absurdities, inconveniences,
and impo^^bilities of it, or the judgment of elder and later Divines, being
without my reach, or the practice of other churches, which all are learnedlie
handled Pro and contra by others purposelie entreating hereof, to which I remit
the reader for further resolution. I will only put this great canonist in mind
of the 13. chapter of the council of c. non. est. 63. did.
Laodicaea, which does forbid these elections by the multitude or people,
which as c. siergo. 8. q. 1.
Origin says oftentimes is pricked forward or carried away with clamours,
favor, or reward.

And here I would be resolved: these canons being (as he says) in force of law
with us, and To be understood not alone of the chief priest of every
diocese, which argues Dangerous innovation urged.
they are to be understood of him: whether this be not wholly to take away
from her Highness the nomination and recommending of Bishops and Deanes to
their places, or else to leave her Haiesties choice to be countermanded by a
beast of many heads? Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus. Also her
Daiesties being the head member of this church, whether the shall be allowed a
voice by her Highness proctor amongst the people of one parish alone, or in
all the parishes in the realm, in choosing their ministers, and what voice,
whether a negative countermanding all others or luxta c. breuiter did. 62.
no? Or else whether her Highness shall have no suffrage therein at all? both
which, if they be not to the great derogation of her Highness prcrogatiue
royal, let indifferent and wise men indge, who may also see a further matter
and a greater debasing shot at by this popularitie, than outwardly is
pretended.

27. Section. Page 59, 60.
That the statute 25. Henry 8. for establishing of such canons and decrees, as
be of nature and quality there specified, does not give life to these canons
and decrees last alleged, because both they are repugnant to the general and
inviolable customs of this realm, and to her Daiesties prerogative royal
also, has been before showed: yea, they are not alone contrary to ours, but
to the general customs of all christen dome by many hundred years continued,
as may appear by that so often repeated distinction of benefices collatiue and
clectiue, mentioned and allowed of, not only by canons and decrees, but by
the municipall ordinances almost of eueric several realm. His second reason
for proof (out of the 21. Hen. 8. Cap. 13.) of an interest of An absurd reason.
All the people in the approbation and election of their minister, because a
Bishop is allowed six chaplines, a number then required to be present at giving
of orders, is not to be counted a Fallax, being too simple to make any show of
deceit, but as a syllogism framed in mood and figure of Quem terra pontus,
without head or tade. His third reason for proof here of is, because the
book in sundry places of it speaks of clarks and people present, and of An
exhortation declaring (for thus be the words of the book, and not as our
author has pared them) the duty and office of such as come to be admitted
ministers, how necessary such orders are in the church of Christ, and also how
the people ought to esteem them in their vocation: which is so strong a
reason, that it cannot be gathered or drawn together into a syllogism with a
cart rope, except we would imagine that wheresoever the law permits men to
be present at any action, that there they are interessed to have a voice to
allow or dissallow that which is to be done. And if the exhortation spoken of,
could give any color that way, it should have been to set out what heed and
vigilant care the people should have, and what especially they should respect
in the choice of their minister, rather than to tell them how they ought te
steeme him when he is once admitted; for if they themselves make choice of
them, there is no cause why of all other they should mislike, or make any
light reckoning of them, otherwise than men commonly do, who think they may
make bold with such as they themselves have advanced. And whereas he would
thereof gather the presence of the people of that parish, where the minister is
to be placed, to be required, for that no profit else for the better estimation
of their minister, can by them be reped of that exhortation: if it should be
granted unto him, can he ground upon their presence an interest also in them of
approbation and election of their minister? But there is profit to be reped by
such an exhortation for any people whosoever that shall be present. For every
man is or ought to be of some parish, and has a minister whom he ought to
esteem and reverence for his calling sake: and therefore such exhortation can
not be said to be in vain, though the people of the parish where he is to
serve, be not then present. And for that these canons by him before alleged
do mention Citizens presence at the ordination of clearks, our author takes
occasion to tell us, that The choristers, singers, organ-plaiers, and other
officers and ministers of cathedral churches, are not comprehended under the
name of Citizens, for that the canons do attribute to these a several name
from citizens, A reason retorted. Page 16.
by calling them Clearks, which as he tru^^e affirms, so this does argue
that the place by him before brought out of the Autentikes, that Clearks unless
they were learned should not be ordained, that thereby he might prove an
ability of preaching to be required in every clearke, did not correspond to
his purpose, seeing that no man will say that any such exquisite learning is
looked for in such inferior clearks and officers of churches as these be. But
where he would conclude a necessary presence of more people than the Bishops
own servants at ordinations of ministers, because by law domestical folk are
no fit witnesses in a matter not domestical: he shows as often before he has
done, rather a desire to seem to have read some law, than a care truclie to
understand, or aright to apply it. For it is notorious that men are not so
fully to be credited, deposing any thing to the benefit of their master or
fellows in household to the prejudice of a third man's interest. And yet this
notwithstanding, where no benefit is to redound to their master hereby, nor
any third man particularly interessed, I do not see why in this matter they
may not be as well credited to testify afterward, if need were, what they did
see to have been done, as any other whosoever. Or must we beeeue that a
Bishop at Lincoln, being to ordeine a minister for the furthest part of his
diocese about Eaton, must suffer the church to lie void, till the Absurdity
in the platform.
husbandman and other of the parish leaving their necessary trades vnfollowed,
will come on their own costs so far, to be Eie-witnesses and eare-witnesses
of the Bishops dealing, and to see whether he observe the mane^ and form
prescribed unto him?

28. Section. Page 60, 61.
Our author having brought such stuff out of the canon and statue law, as he
could hit upon, and you have heard, leapeth here back again to take another
snatch out of the canon law for proof of the peoples interest in the
approbation and election of their ministers. First, because the gloss defines
Consent to be the will of many, unto whom the matter apperteineth, joined in
one together. But this is a fallacy, A petitione principis, to assume as
granted, that any consent (otherwise than before is proved) does or did belong
unto the people, in choice of their minister. And if he will have that rule of
the canon law to help the matter; That which touches all, must be allowed of
all: surely he will hereby overthrow all the ministry, if they must tarry
without rooms to minister in, till every one even the least and woorst in
every parish do agree unto the election of some one. For that rule (as Dynus
and other doctors upon Dynus and al^ in reg. quod omnes.
it do note) cannot be understood of Omnes vt vniuersi, as it is in
corporations, where the greater part of voices are respected, but must be
taken, Omnes us singuli, all and every one in several, that is any way
interessed, and so one lewd disposed person might frustrate the good endeavors
of many thousands.

And does the author think indeed that this course is either expedient to be
used, or agreeable to the laws and customs of this land? Is it meet because
it concerns us Seditious doctrine of the author.
all to have good Princes counselors, officers of the kingdom, judges and
Bishops, that all the people in the land or of one diocese should have a free
election and approbation of them? But this kind of election he says the
Bishops themselves in certain canons, which were set down and published, but
never by her Haiestie ratified, have aimed at, when they say, the Bishop shall
lay his hands on none, nor at any other time, but when it shall chance that
some place of ministration be void in his diocese. This indeed might make some
show against absolute ordinations, but how it can open the peoples mouth to
give voice in election of their ministers, I for my part cannot yet perceive.
And therefore call back again your hasty conclusion, whereby you are not
content only togather An interest in the choice and appointment of their
minister, to rest in the people, but also a special interest, yea and a
prerogative also therein belike above Prince, Bishop, Patron and all.

29. Section. Page 61, 62.
Our author having alleged before, some canons, seeming to make show of a kind
of consent of the people, which he would have to be an election of their
minister: and knowing that Gratian, taking upon him to write Concordiam
discordantium canonum, did bring other canons also more direct on the contrary
part, which yet he afterward reconcileth: thought it best for his purpose to
take exceptions against such as were not for his tooth, under the person of
pope Adrian, whom he calls Proud, foolish, and his canons, excluding lay men
from election of Bishops ridiculous. And yet Adrianus. 63. distin..
consecrationes.
Adrian testifies that here in he decreed nothing which was not done in former
old councels. And the decretall epistle says: The whole c. cum ecclesia Ext.
de causa possess. and propriet.
election of common right belongs to the Chapter. And this is also the same
Adrian, which together with a general council decreed, notwithstanding the
election and consecration of Bishops apperteined to the clergy, that c. 2.
Adrianus did. 63.
yet all Archbishops and Bishops in all provinces should take their inuestiture
of Charles the great then emperor. Which is a further authority attributed to
princes, than usually in most parts of christendom, they do at these vaies
take upon themselves. In like manner Steeuen the Bishop of Rome c. lectis. did.
d,
writes to an earie near unto the emperor: that whereas one was canonicallie
chosen a Bishop, it would please him to procure the emperors royal assent
thereunto, according to the old custom, that upon obteining thereof he might
proceed to the consecration of the new elect. According to which, Gratian also
reconcileth such of these canons, as in appearance seem different, thus: In
that the prince c. cum long. electiones. did. d.
or people is required to be present at elections of Bishops, they are not
therefore to be called thereunto, that they should make the election, but to
yield consent thereunto. So that, if he had weied all things aright, he might
have perceived both that his former allegations were not so forceable, as to
drive us to run for an answer unto pope Adrians decision, nor yet why he
should be so angry with him, who spoke only of elections and consecrations
of Bishops by clergy men, without excluding either the inuestiture or assent
of princes, and without any intermedling with ordination of inferior
ministers, and therefore it was not he that spoke in his cast. But there was
least cause at all, why he should thus shuffle up the canon before c. non est.
did. d.
alleged out of the old famous council of Laodicaea, either with this of pope
Adrians, or to reckon it among such latter canons, as dare not once step forth
to seek Any whit to impeach the truth of his assertions: for it is so old, and
decreed by so good advise, of so many grave and godly fathers, that it will
not be overthrown with such a blast. His first reason, for proof that these
canons by him alleged are not to be impeached, either by that of pope Adrians,
or any other like being taken out of the sixth of the Acts of the apostles, is
utterly besides his own purpose. Which is not to show what is decreed in the
word of God in any of these controuersed points, but what is by canons,
constitutions, and synodals provincial in force amongst us. And therefore if
this of pope Adrians, or any other to like effect were not to the hurt of the
prerogative rosall, nor repugnant to the laws and customs of this realm, but
had been put in ure and practice before the making of that statute: it might
according to our authors foundation, stand for law still in this land, though
it were 25. H. 8. c. 19.
not consonant to the word of God. Which I bring to show the authors wandering
from his issue, and not in any such respect, as though this his allegation
might otherwise have served his turn. For it is manifest, that it cannot:
because that course of election mentioned in the Acts, was not undertaken, for
satisfieng of any express commandment of Christ; but upon an especial
occasion of a mutiny of the Greeks against the Hebrews; for that their
widows (as seeming to be distrusted or contemned) were in the administration
of the common church stock ouer-passed: whereas the canons brought for proof
of excluding the multitude from elections, were not grounded upon any one
particular occasion, but of the nature of the people, and exigence of the cause
it self. That of the Acts speaks of deacons only, and is not read
elsewhere in all points to have been observed either in Act. 5.
choosing of an apostle of Act. 2.
ministers or of Titus. 1.
Bishops. There also the whole multitude of the disciples made choice without
the apostles, who meant thereby to avoid all suspicion of corrupt dealing: which
two circumstances no man will (I hope) require in choosing either of a Bishop,
or minister, especially that the Bishops and other of the clergy, should be
debarred from any stroke in that action; seeing therein, there cannot be the
like cause of suspicion. Where by the way it is not amiss to be observed, how
hard it is to keep a great multitude in the bounds of moderation, seeing the
Holie-ghost in the great sincerity of that church, in comparison of our times,
notes no less, where it is said: In those days, as the Acts. 6. 1.
multitude of the disciples grew, there arose a murmuring, etc. Also that the
apostles called them together, and prescribed unto them what they should do in
that point of external policy, and that according to the present occasion
offered, without any prescript word, but only by the instinct of Gods spirit.
Further, that the apostles set out the qualities of the men to be chosen, but
tied them to no certain form of election to be observed, neither do we read
what form of election they then used. Again, that the disciples were to look
out and choose such, as they thought fit to be trusted with the church stock;
but the apostles reserve to themselves the appointing of them to their offices,
if they should be found to be such as were described. ^oreouer, that the
deacons were appointed for the further case of the apostles, in some part of
their function. Lastly, that the disciples presented them to the apostles
censures, who by imposition of hands did (as it were) consecrate and authorize
them to the function of deaconship. Now, if by this act, our author mind so
hard to curb up all churches, as that he will accuse them to give A
counterbuffe to the Holie-ghost, which in their ordinations do not agree
herewith in all circumstances; or if he will tell us, that something
extraordinary was here in this action, not to be followed of us: then must he
show by direct scripture, what was ordinary, and what extraordinary, least By
his own doctrine he seem to accuse Christ not to have dealt faithfully in
his fathers household, in not giving a perfect law for government of his
church by discipline: and must reconcile other places of scripture concerning
the like action, which do not agree in all points with this. In the first of
the Acts two are presented, one is chosen by lot, and no imposition of hands is
mentioned: here seven are chosen (the manner not set down) by the multitude,
and being presented to the apostles, they all appoint them, and lay their
hands on them. In the 14. of the Acts, Paul and Barnabas are said, (...), and
to have fasted, but no mention is made of the imposition of hands: here is no
mention of fasting, but of imposition of hands. Here all the apostles did
appoint them, (...): in the first to Titus, he only is willed to appoint
priests, (...), according as Paul had prescribed unto him. Naie, let him show
unto me any two reformed churches of diverse nations that iumpe in all
circumstances hereabouts, or any one of them which permits this action
(without intermedling of the chief pastors) unto all the disciples, or
multitude of believers in the said church, which yet have an interest in having
a good minister. But (as I take it) the chief swaie and moderating of such
actions, are in all other reformed churches in such men, to whom this trust is
especially recommended. And has not likewise (for avoiding of sundry
inconveniences) the whole church and realm of England by parliament, whereunto
every man in the eye of the law, is said to have consented, reposed this trust
in a few choice men of the ecclesiastical function? Even master Beza himself
concerning this place of the Acts does say: There is no cause, Lib. confess.
c. 5.
why hereof any man too curiously should prescribe any special rule, but if
the conscience be upright, it will be easy to set down what is expedient,
according to the circumstance of times and places. His second reason as it
seems, is grounded of these words of Adrians canon, Let no lay or secular
prince thrust himself into the election of any Bishop. Which if they be
understood (as before is proved they ought to be) concerning the election and
consecration only, reserving by good reason, and as it has been always at
the common law in this land, the license to elect, nomination, royal assent,
supremacy, and homage unto her Majesty, then is her Highness prerogative no
way touched, nor any thing derived unto other, which her Majesty claims to
be due unto her self. But to let both Adrian and his canon lie in the dust,
how can the canon of the council of Laodicaea, which bebarreth multitudes from
election of those who are to ^e preferred to the ministry, impeach her
Majesty's prerogative? Which if it by no means can do, then is our authors
reason defective, seeking to overthrow all canons to this purpose, because the
canon of pope Adrian seems to him to confront her Highness prerogative
royal. Prerogative? His third reason, for the improouing of all such canons,
as Being against the customs of the realm, seems so strange unto me; that I
am in doubt, whether I have dwelt so long in England, as I did before imagine:
for I never heard of any elections by the whole multitude to have been used.
The statutes which he speaks of, are written In principio libri paulo post
finem capitulo nusquam: and shall be answered when any such be framed. His
reason, to prove them contrary to the customs of the realm, is thus: The
greatest number of voices, of such as have interest, A childish reason and
absurd.
do make choice of certain officers, as of majors, bailiffes, shiriffes of
towns, etc: Ergo, ministers are, or ought so to be chosen, or else it is
contrary to the customs of the realm. Indeed, he might have gathered, Ergo,
our manner of electing ministers now in England, is contrary to the customs of
choosing majors, etc. And might he not as well have gathered, that the Prince,
the Counselors, the greatest Officers of the land, the Bishops, the Judges,
the Sheriffs of shires, the Sergeants at law, the Justices of the peace, the
Custodes Rotuloru^, th Eschetors, the Officers in any court of record, the
Capteines and Constables of any strong pieces or fortresies, the Constables of
hundreds, the Mint-maisters, Comptroller and Auditor of mints, the Customers,
Comptrollers, and Searchers of ports, ought also so to be chosen, and being
otherwise appointed, that the customs of our land (which is our common law) is
thereby transgressed? But every child may see the gross absurdity of this
reason, and he himself if he have not rubbed his forehead exceedingly, will
be ashamed of it. And besides the folly of his argument, his antecedent His
reason retorted upon him.
makes against himself. For it is notorious, that in cities and towns, not
every one that is to be governed, has voice in electing their officers; but
certain which be culled out of the rest, and specially trusted. So is there
none admitted to the election of knights of the shires, but Legales homines,
which may dispend xl. shillings in land of freehold by the year. And yet many
besides are interessed therein, and may be prejudiced thereby, as being to be
governed by the one sort, or to be tied to such statutes, as by the consents of
the other are passed. If therefore in these actions for avoiding of stirs and
confusions, elections were put into a few men's hands; much more reason was it,
that the multitude should not have stroke in election of ministers, being for
the most part utterly unable to judge of their sufficiency in learning, which
is the cheifest thing to be respected, but yet not debarred to object what they
can against their conversation. It makes flatly against himself in this
also: because here he seems to require no other consent for election of
ministers, than is usually in most cities and towns in the choice of their
officers, being done by the greater part of a few, in respect of the Page 60.
Contrariety of the author.
whole multitude besides, contrary to the rule of law by him before brought;
That which touches all, must be allowed of all and every one: and contrary
to that which here he says, that All the faithful of the land have an
interest in choice and allowance of their pastors. So that by this reckoning,
men, women, and children (for all the faithful be interessed) shall have
voices in election of their minister; and if one dissent, all must be dashed,
if we follow that rule.

And that this was the meaning of those that confirmed the book of ordering,
he proves; because they Being men renewed with the spirit of wisdom in the
gospel of Christ, would be as careful, what guides they approved of for
conduction to eternal life, as for discreet dealers for them in matters of
this life, and as provident over their souls as over their goods. Indeed if
all they had been of this man's spirit, who peradventure thinks himself as
wise and learned as any, and nothing any way touching him, to be well done
which he does not himself; this might then carry some show, to have been
respected. But those that be modestly wise, and with humility have learned
Sapere ad sobrietatem, do think, that one learned man, long studied in the
scriptures, and all good learning, is better able to judge of the ability and
sufficiency of any in that study; than ten thousand other, though never so
wise, yet not so deeply studied in those matters. We believe one skillful
lawier in a point of law, and one expert physician for the state of our body;
better than we do all the world besides of such as have not either at all, or
but slenderly waded in those professions. And in truth, if this had been
their meaning, why did they not plainly express it, and why has none of
them, till this Nouus orator peered out, showed what was then done in
parliament, what was meant, and what was said to this purpose? But if any such
thing had been meant, they would either in general words, or especial, have
reuersed that statute which says: The examination of the ability of a person
presented to an ecclesiastical benefice, does perteine to an ecclesiastical
judge. Articuli cleri A. 9. E. 2. 13. To that which might be truly objected
of tumults, stirs, contentions, factions, ambition, and confusion, ordinarily
heretofore accompaning these popular elections, he answers first, that Every
true believer shall have a spirit given unto him to discern, whether a man be
apt to preach or no: Secondarilie, That christians are not to fear such rages
of the people; but such are to be afrighted hereof, that have put away faith
and a good conscience. To the first I answer, that the most in every place, by
whose voices it seems he would have the matter swaied, are not necessarily
True believers, and such as have the spirit of Christ. For his flock is but a
handful in comparison of hypocrites, and many are called but few are chosen.
Neither are all true believers always endowed with such measure of wisdom
and discretion, as that they are able to sound the aptnes of a man in learning,
for the ministry: nor yet have all so profited in true mortification, as that
they can weine themselves from those disordered affections, which cleave fast
unto every one of us, either more or less, so long as we remain in this
world: and therefore in such cases, the mo that do deal in any action, the
more disorderly and troublesome for the most part it falls out to be. To the
second I say, that it contains a promise of such quietness, and peaceable
issues of these popular elections (as if ye turn over ecclesiastical
histories) never or sildome has happened, but the clean contrary; and it
carries an indirect accusation of all churches, both of elder and later times,
to have Put away faith and a good Indirect accusation of other churches.
conscience: which for avoiding of sundry inconveniences and mischeefes, have
abandoned these popular elections, which truly in this form and manner, as
our author sets forth, and would here have established, I persuade my
self, no church reformed or deformed does retain, saving the Anabaptists, if
so be they have any settled church any Bullinger. adver. Anabap. li. 3. cap. 4.
where. Who in that respect were wont to object against the ministers of
sincere churches, called by some magistrates appointed for that end, to have no
calling but from men; whereas they themselves, being chosen by the suffrages of
the whole multitude, thought their calling therefore to be of God. Now it had
been very requisite, that our author for the approouing of these
democraticall elections the better unto us, should (with proof out of
scripture for every particular) have showed; Whether women and children of
some reasonable discretion, should have voices in the election of their
minister? Whether he should be chosen by all, by the greater part, or by the
better part? Whether the wives voice should be accounted several, or but one
with her husbands, or whether she might dissent from her husband, or the son
from his father? Whether the patron not dwelling in the parish shall have a
voice, or dwelling there but a single voice? Whether the greater number of
voices shall be accounted in respect of all the electors, or only in respect
of him which is to be chosen, having more voices for him, than any other has?
Whether all absent shall be accounted to dissent or to assent? Whether sick
men, and other necessarily employed, that would come and cannot, may send
their proctor being no parishioner, or compromit their voice to a parishioner?

30. Section. Page 62, 63.
IN this section treating of the last quality which our author has noted to
be required in a minister, I do observe, that he is contented with a Competent
and sufficient skill in the Latin tongue in a minister, which so earnestly
before would have impugned the distinction of competencie and eminency in
learning requisite for the furnishing of a minister. Although I (for my part)
cannot see, how this high skill in learning can well be settled in any, that is
but slenderly learned in the Latin tongue. And yet the statute here mentioned,
seems to allow, that a special gift and ability to be a preacher, may be in
some that has not the Latin tongue as is required. And therefore it is said in
the disjunctive, Except he be able to give an account of his faith in Latin,
etc: 13. Eliz. c. 12
or have a special gift and ability to be a preacher, he shall not be
admitted to the order of deacon or minister: so that hereof we may gather, that
the law accompteth Ability to be a preacher a special gift, neither incident
nor required to be of necessity in every minister, for that some wanting The
judgment of the statute for a sufficiency to be a minister.
this ability, yet being qualified as is there otherwise prescribed, may
lawfully be admitted by the Bishop. Whereby both the popular election and the
learning and ability of a preacher, by our author of necessity urged to be in
every minister, throughout this whole treatise, yea even by our laws
undoubtedly now in force, is quite overthrown. Further, where our author
alleges, as though it were statute, and notes it with the like asteriske,
that If any shall be ordained contrary to any provision of that Act, then is
he no minister at all, he does very shamefullie falsify the words of the
Act. For the words are these in the Plain falsification by the author.
Act: All admissions to benefices, institutions, and inductions to be made of
any person, contrary to the form or any provision of this Act, and all
tolerations, dispensations, qualifications and licenses whatsoever to be made
to the contrary hereof, shall be meerelie void in law as if they never were.
Wherein there is no one word of ordinations or admitting into orders. At the
shutting up of this matter, he uses indefinitelie, against our Bishops, an
ironicall surmise, as though upon their examinations, it would fall out, that
they had not answered the trust committed unto them in ordering deacons and
ministers, nor that their dealings had been ^herein faithful, just, and
equal. Truly he that has most ouerseene his duty in this respect, if any
such be of them, I dare auow, he shall be better able to approve his doings
by law, and good conscience: than those whom this cauiller most affects,
shall be able to do their words or deeds, or than he himself shall be able to
bear out his slanders, innouations, cankred spite, falfifications, wrestings,
fallacies, and childish reasons, contrarieties, untruths, and paradoxes
scattered in this book.

31. Section. Page 63, 64, 65.
THe Abstractor has not been belike far enough yet distracted from the
purpose which he handles, but for the ease of his stomach, which else for
cursed heart would burst, he must needs tell us, what punishments the canons do
inflict upon such Bishops as promote unworthy men unto orders: assuming
always all such to be unworthy, as are not so qualified as he has scored
out. But he is a very temperate and coolebrained man, for he does it, but
upon supposition, that the Bishops have not answered their trust, and yet in
other places he tells us of Our sir John's, the asses of our schools, of our
dumb, silent, and idol-ministers, so often and so thick together, and what
great masses of money may come by their displacings, to her Majesty's cofers,
as though we had none or very few other besides such. Yet if they were such,
and so soul as his mouth is in this behalf, seeing the canons, whose
observation he urges, do forbid such contemptuous speeches against them, he
shows himself to be too far ouerseene herein. c. cum ex iniuncto. licet
autem Ext. de haereticis.
Although knowledge be very necessary unto priests for teaching, yet we may
not speak ill of simple priests, though they be but scholars, seeing the
priestlie office ought to be honored in them, and Reg. iniunct. art. 28.
her Majesty's injunctions do command men to use even Those priests that have
small learning, and which of long time have favored fond fantasies, rather
than Gods truth, charitablie and reverently for their office and ministration
sake, because their office and function is of God. Also the reformed churches
in France, are far from this immodestie, Art. 22. des aduertisements en la
discipl. de France.
where in their policy and discipline they have thus decreed even for the
immunitie of popish priests and moonks: Toute violence, etc. All violence and
injurious words against those of the church of Rome, and namely against
priests and moonks, shall not only be hindered, but also shall be corrected
and restrained so far forth as possibly may be. The conclusion (for proof
whereof he voucheth viuers laws and canons) is, that Both the man unworthily
promoting, and the man unworthily promoted, is to be deposed. Where if I
should deal strictly with him as a lawyer would, I could tell him that there
is great difference in law betwixt one unworthily promoted, as perhaps some
solemnity required by the canon being omitted, and one promoted being
unworthy. The first case is so far from c. literas Ext. de tempor. ordinand.
gl. in 1. q. 1. c. si qui Epi. ver. ordinationis.
deposition, that it deserves but a temporary suspension from execution of
some part of their offices, at the discretion of their superior. For proof of
his conclusion he brings three allegations, speaking no word of deposition,
but of punishment to be inflicted, which without expressing can never be
extended to deposition; In ambiguis quod minimum est, sequendum; and pro
mitiori poena semper est interpretatio facienda. And yet the first and the
third of them do speak of Bishops and superior prelates, and not of inferior
ministers. The first is c. nihil est. Ext. de elect. and elect. po^est.
not aright quoted nor alleged. For the punishment there set down for
confirming an unworthy prelat, is sequestration of the fruits of his own
benefice, and beereauing him of power to confirm the next successor: and in
the words immediately. episcopi ^bid.
next following by him not alleged, as once before has been showed, a
canonical punishment by reference unto canons to that end in force, is
appointed to the Bishop, which shall prefer an unworthy man to holy orders
or ecclesiastical dignities. In his third allegation by ioining of two
several canons as one, the one of them appointing a milder punishment than the
other, he has disaduantaged his own cause. For where two punishments are laid
down, the less is to be inflicted. But neither of these canons c. ex
panitentibus 50. distinct. etc. aliquantos 51. did.
do speak of a man unworthy in respect of learning, but incapable of orders
in respect of some other canonical impediment, as infamy by law, bigamie,
anddiuerse such like there specified.

But the gloss reconcileth not only that canon, but all other which speak of
disposition of him that ordains one unworthy; with those canons, which do
suspend him only from ordination of others: because the Gl. in c. si qui Epi.
c. q. 1. verb. ordinationis.
first are to be understood, when of contempt and pertinacie the Bishop shall
with pretended purpose against the canons ordeine such: and the other, when he
ordcineth incapable men only of ignorance or negligence. And again, this
doubt in the same place is better resolved; seeing there are diverse penalties
for one offense, and that the c. grave Ext. de praebendis.
latter canons do prefix the milder of both, that therefore the easier
penalty must in both respects be practiced. And therefore I muse at the
boldness of the man, who leaving out the word Alias Otherwise; to wit, when
the Bishop of pertinacie shall ordeine one unworthy, he always deserves to
be deposed, Fa^^^ficatio^.
dare allege the words of the gloss generally, as though in all cases this
decision had place. The Gl. in c. vnicum constable. Othonis de scrut. ordinand.
verb. quare.
next gloss is likewise wrong quoted out of the legatiue constitutions of
Otho. but serves not any whit for proof of his conclusion, because it
mentions no penalty: but onclie ingreiueth the fault of him that does
ordeine any unworthy. His argument of comparison which he borrows of the
gloss of the c^uill law, to prove that the archdeacons fault or oversight
cannot excuse the Bishop, no more than a pilfering sailer shall excuse the
owner of the ship (who takes fare of his passengers) from restitution of that
which is embezeled: though great diversities may be taken betwixt these two
cases, even to this intent, yet I will not greatly gaine-saie: seeing it is
both lawful and expedient, that the Bishop himself should examine them for
their sufficiency in learning; adding this nevertheless, that the author here
has manifestly falfified the gloss, where he simply says the Bishop is to
be punished for the archdeacons fault committed in examination. For the Gl.
ibid. ver. per Episcopum.
gloss says to this purpose; Indeed if the archdcacon do it by the Bishops
commandment, then is the Bishop punishable; but if the archdeacon do it of
his own head as incident to his office, then must he himself abide the
penaltic of law. That which he says of A deed once done, which upon a cause
newly arising sometimes may be altered, cannot be applied to this, that a
Bishop may reexamine those whom the archdeacon has examined, though it be
Arg. c. accepimus Ext. de aetat. and qualit.
otherwise lawful; and in like manner, can I not conie^ure, for what purpose he
brings, though with a wrong quotation, c. eae quae. Ext. offi. de Archid.
concerning the remissenes of an archdeacon in safe keeping certain ornaments
of the church, required to be punished by restitution of such things, as by his
default were perished, except he think here by may be insinuated, either that
the archdeacons office alonclie does consist in such like duties, and not in
examination of ministers to be admitted, or else, that as he is to be punished
for his negligence in these small matters, so Bishops for such offenses as they
shall commit about dealings of greater consequence. Which if it be his meaning,
I must needs judge that he is very mystical that can fetch about so far, to
speak so little to purpose. But all these canons, if they were as pregnant to
prove deposition as he would have them, are wholly ouerturned by his own
platform of popular Contrariety.
election. For I think he would not endow the Bishop with an authority to
ordeine another, when all the people have made choice of their minister, nor
yet punish him for their foolish choice.

32. Section. Page 65, 66, 67.
THis section, with some following, being to show the course of punishment
against ministers being unworthy of that function: in the first place for
proof hereof, is brought the deprivation of a Bishop, against whom many
things were objected, and he himself had confessed that he never learned any
thing De Grammatica, of the Grammar, nor had read any Grammarian, no not Donat:
yea, by the evidence of the fact it self it appeared that he was Illitteratus
and insufficiens, Unlettered and insufficient. All which things joined
together, being the ground of his deprivation, if he will apply to his
purpose; (though I think some ministers in our church unworthy that calling)
yet I believe he shall find very few or none, within the compass of this
decision, which never learned any thing of their Grammar. And yet
nevertheless, his reason being A maiore ad minus affirmative does not follow.
Seeing it is notoricus, that less learning is requisite in an inferior
minister, than ought to be in a Bishop. And it seems, that if this Bishop had
learned but his Gra^mar, by want whereof he was apparentlie insufficient, this
gentle pope, in favor of some not much deeper clearkes sitting in that See, as
the pope that writ Fiatur for Fiat, in despectum omnium Grammaticorum, and he
that to an ambassador did so prettily Italianize in his Latin, Facit magnum
frigum, and being advertised softly by one of his cardinals, that it should be
gus, gus, as scholarlike did amendit, with Facit magnum frigumgus: it is
likely (I say) he would have tolerated it in this Bishop of Calinea. And
therefore it is not very safe, to exact no better measure of learning in a
minister, than this canon seems to do. Here upon our author groundeth a wish
for a general visitation, but very vnperfectlie in my poor conceit, for he
requires neither learning in law, experience, nor discretion in his visitors:
he authoriseth them to deprive only, unjust possessors, which would hardly
be racked unto all, though not so sufficiently qualified as he requires: he
endoweth them with no absolute power to place fit men in their rooms, without
sharing out any thing to the patrones, least he should displease some, that
perhaps with all things reformed saving that; nor yet tells us whence so
many places in short time might be furnished with sufficient preachers. But he
is of a sure ground for the promise of augmentation of her Majesty's treasure:
for he says, that the first fruits upon auoidance of unjust possessors, will
be more Than the best subsidy that her Highness has levied of them. But
says not more than of them, and of all other ministers besides. Which must
needs be true, for the greatest subsidy was but six shillings in the pound,
to be paid in three years, whereas the new incumbents coming in upon
displacing of the old, should pay the whole value of their benefices, in the
space of two years. His first allegation concerning an abbat threatened to be
deposed, if he be negligent in his office, is altogether impertinent to prove,
that a minister unworthy in respect of learning, or because he is not able to
preach, is to be deposed. But I observe that where the law is, Let him as often
as he may be with his brethren in the covent, our author (I know not to what
advantage) does translate thus: How much more Corrupt translation.
ought he to be frequent with his brethren in all things? The second allegation
out of a canon of Triburiense concilium, touches only an abbat that is
criminous in life, and negligent in his government, to be worthy of
deposition, and cannot be extended to unworthiness of a minister, for
insufficiency of learning. Naie, though ministers that be scandalous to their
calling may be deprived or deposed, according to the atrocitie of the fault;
yet the same punishment that is inflicted upon abbats, who are tied to a
straiter rule and observance, cannot always be extended by identitie of reason
for the like offenses upon ministers. For the c. per. tuas 1. in fine Ext. de
simonia and Gl. in verbo cantus 18. q. 2. c. si quis abbas.
law notes, that abbats for causes of lesser importance, yet being against
the rules and customs of their order, may be removed from their
administrations. Yet to the intent it may appear how impertinentlie these
places of an abbat are brought, and how vnskilfullie he reasons, it is to be
remembered; that although an exacter and more strict course of conversation be
required of an abbat, than of an inferior minister, yet less learning will
serve his turn a great deal to retain him in his office: therefore Ab. in c.
vlt. Ext. de aetate and qualitat^.
Panormitane concludes, That an abbat shall not be deposed because he is
ignorant in Grammar, if otherwise he be skillful in the rules of his order, and
discreet, by which rules his function is limited: to which purpose serves,
that in abbats diligent industry rather than learning is required; c. multa,
ne cler. vel mona. Also in old time abbats were lay men. c. a subdiacono.
did. 93. Therefore it is sufficient for him, if he be discreet and vigilant
over his flock. 8. q. 3. c. dilectissimi. Which our author perhaps perceiving,
does show more near to purpose, that an inferior minister may also be
deprived by the Bishop, if he be unprofitable and unworthy. But what the law
will account such unworthiness, unprofitableness, or negligence to be, he has
not yet showed, and therefore is far from proouing his issue, that every one
is an unworthy minister, and to be deprived which is not able to preach. And
seeing he alleges this for law, why shall not the words following, which he
cunningly cropped off with an, etc. be law also? Videlicet, Both Facit. 15. q.
7. cap. 1. and vlt.
institution and destitution of priests does notoriously belong to the office
of the Bishop. Belike he was loath to attribute so much unto them, as must
either cut off his popular election, or improoue that, which he says
afterward, against all absolute ordinations. His next allegation which he left
without c. dictum est did. 81.
quotation, Vagatur extra oleas, and speaks of negligence, which may be such
as deserves deposition. And this may as well happen in a minister worthy and
sufficient, as in one unworthy of such a place in respect of disabilitie. And
yet it is not every negligence, but gross negligence, as the gloss there
tells him, which the law matcheth with Male engine that deserves
deposition. For Magna L. 226. magnaff. de ver. signif.
negligentia culpa est, magna culpadolus est: as if the minister being required
to baptize a child, being very weak, shall upon a 1. q. 1. c. neque, etc. si
quis per ignorantian.
dissolute negligence omit to do it, whereby the child dies without baptism,
he deserves deposition. That which our author alleges as out of the 1. q. 1.
si qui Epi.. ecce.
canon, are indeed the words of Gratian, collected upon the canon, are notably
by our author falsified and wrested. For whereas Gratian says; Behold where
Bishops do escape without danger of their estimation (for ordeining such
ministers as by law they ought not) so that they may as priests administer all
other sacraments: yet from this only, (Videlicet the sacrament of ordering)
not only for heresy, or for any great fault, but even for negligence they
are removed. Our author cutting the sentence off by the waste, and applieng
that which is spoken Falsification manifest.
of the Bishops negligence only, (whereby he suffers some ministers to
escape his hands whom the canons allow not to be ordained) unto every
minister, dealing negligentlie in his function, says in steed of it, thus: He
shall not only be removed for heresy, or other greater offense, but for
negligence also. Which corruption, though it be foul in it self, it does not
yet bear out his issue, that a minister for insufficiency to preach, is to be
accounted unworthy of the calling, and therefore to be removed.

33. Section. Page 67, 68, 69, 70.
He that dare wrest and falsify texts when he quoteth them, whereby others
may examine them, it is to be doubted much more that he will do it, when he
leaves them without quotation, as in this section he has done his two first
allegations out of the civil law. And therefore, as now they make not any
whit to his purpose, so being by me touched with the original, I find they
cannot carry any show or color with them. For what does the Remoouing of
such a clearke that either will not do service at all, or of such as faineth
himself to be one when he is not, or the L. qui sub praetextu C. de sacra
eccles.
inhibition to bankers and exchangers of money, mere lay men, That they leave
not off their trade upon a bare title of collegiat men, make for proof, that a
minister unworthily promoted is to be deposed? Naie, the latter place which he
was unwilling to quote, is by no color appliable to this purpose. Of those
(says the law before the words by him alleged) which under a pretense of
deanes or collegiat men, though they do not execute that office, do yet go
about to withdraw themselves from other functions, we thought good to meet with
such crafty packing; least any should under color of an office which he does
not execute, be disburdened of another duty of him required. Now these deanes
and collegiat men were certain in Constantinople, which Nouel. 43. and 59. and
Alc. c. vlt. lib. 1. (...).
being appointed out of several companies of trades, did partly take care of
burieng dead bodies, and partly were employed in other public and necessary
affairs of that city. The reason of these laws and canons which he brings,
are four in number, the first not alleged but gathered (as it seems) out of
the text quoted, is; That a possession without canonical institution, is no
sufficient establishment in a benefice. And this institution (that c. ex
frequentibus Ext. de instit.
decretall says) must be given by the Bishops diocesan, or by his official,
to whom it apperteineth. I will easily grant unto him, that sole possession
will not relieve any minister, either worthy or unworthy, for reteining of a
benefice without institution. Hereof will follow, that all such as have
canonical institution, are without the compass of deprivation as in this
respect alone. This matter of sole possession without title, he also enlarges
out of a summarie of the civil law; that Sole possession makes not a senator
or captain, but lawful election. For which word Election, as it seems, he
rather chose to use this summarie, than the law it self, which is, that A L.
10. ff. de decurionibus.
man is not made a decurion, only because his name is written in the table,
unless he be also created a decurion according to law. These decurions in the
commonweal of Rome, were in cities and towns corporate, as senators were in
the city of Rome, but not senators in deed, nor enioyeng all privileges as
senators. And in this regard the law says, A L. 33. c. de decur. li. 10.
decurion, or (if I may so term him) a senator of his own court. And therefore
our author descrieth his ignorance in translating him a senator, but most of
all when he englisheth him also a captain. But if so be herein any thing had
sounded to his purpose, yet he could not have reasoned from the function of a
decurion, to the calling of a minister, Et ex aduerso, except the law had made
a paritie betwixt them. Else might I as well reason, because the law will not
have a L. 11. ff. de decurionibus.
decurion chosen, above fifty five years of age, that therefore a minister may
not be ordained above that age. And because a man L. 6. C. de decur.
that cannot read, is not forbidden to exercise the calling of a decurion,
therefore such a man may also be a minister.

The next is, because prescription does not relieve him, that inioieth any
thing without a simple Meaning and upright conscience. Which men so ordained
(he says) do not, but are unjust possessors in their own conscience,
therefore by their own craft and guile, or lewd practice, they are not to
reap benefit. If by his words So ordained, he mean either all made according
to the book by law established, or all such as were made without popular
election: then has he left us, by this collection, no ministry in England,
except perhaps two or three leape-lands, which like neither of order, nor
ordering, on this side of the sea. But if he mean only such, as are not able
to preach, then should he have proved his Minor, that all such are unjust
possessors, even in their own knowledge: which now he takes as granted by his
old woonted fallacy of Petitio principij, which never falls him at such a
pinch as this. And seeing such ministers have at the least, the outward form
of calling by law, and are to be intended to have a persuation that they are
inwardly also called, and (as all other men naturally) are parcialie affected
in matters tending to their own worldly behoof, it can not be doubted, but
that they will deny that that his assertion, that they should be guilty to
their own consciences, of vntusf possessing their places. Furthermore, his
Mayor proposition is (...), a mere stranger to this purpose, seeing no
minister claims the holding of his room by prescription, which requires a
number of years for the fulfilling of it, but by a just and canonical title
at his first entrance. Again if we esteem it by the civil Text. in l. vnica
C. de vsucap. transfor.
law, a prescription of ten years, betwixt those that be present; and of
twenty years betwixt those that be absent, is sufficient, where good faith
was meant at the beginning: that L. qui. scit b^^e fidei. ff. de Osuris.
is, where the prescriber did not know the thing to be another man's, although
perhaps he doubted thereof: notwithstanding that afterward within the process
of that time, he knew it to be another man's: yea, by the law, a man which at
the L. si. quis emptionis.. quod si quis C de prescrip. 30. annorum.
beginning knew it to be another man's, and therefore was Malae fidei possessor,
may in thirty or forty years prescribe against the true owner: both which by
the c. quoniam omne, etc. vigilanti Ext. de praescriptionibus.
canon laware utterly dissallowed with good reason, and according to Gods
word. By which may also appear by the way, that the canon law reformeth to
good purpose, something in the civil law, and therefore is not wholly to be
contemned. Of that rule of law, That no man is to be enriched with another man's
injury or loss, I cannot see how he can gather the deposition of all
ministers, which be no preachers: except he will say, that some preachers
without living, be hereby damnified or iniuried, which would take those
livings, if they were void. To this I say, Dynus in reg. locupletari.
that which is done by disposition of law, is not accounted any man's injury
or loss: as L. in. contractibus c. de non numerata pecunia.
if I give you a bill of my hand for the repaiment of a certain sum, which I
hope to borrowe of you, if you afterward deny to lend it unto me, and yet
keep my bill, and I sit still, and let it alone by the space of two years, it
will be then too late for me, to object in bar of the debt, that I never
received the money: and therefore you shall by law recover the debt of me, to
your enriching, and my great hinderance, notwithstanding this rule of law.
Again, it is not another man's loss or injury, for me to keep that living,
which was never his, nor he had ever any interest unto. And therefore these
reasons are so far from giving strength unto his former allegations out of
the laws and canons, to prove his conclusion, which yet being truly
understood, is to be verified; to wit, that The abbettors and deed-dooers are
to be punished with like punishment, that they help not any thing to prove
the other his more particular conclusion; to wit, That a minister not able to
preach, is unworthy, or being in that respect unworthy, is therefore to be
deposed. Now from his reasons upon general rules of law, he goes back to
talk Once again touching the displacing of ministers that cannot preach, whom
he calls Idol-shepherds and hirelings, unto his reasons of likeliehood taken
out of the civil and canon law. But two of his Auth. de collatoribus iubemus
collati. 9. de poenis in 6. c. degradatio.
places, which by quotations he sends us unto, contain no such matter as he
alleges. And there is no such law as L. carceri. C. de custodia reorum,
neither is there in that whole title any such thing of a gailor as he
alleges. Naie, it hangs not together, that the gailor which wittinglie and
willingly offends, should be punished less greeuouslie, than when he
faulteth unwillingly and of negligence only. Of like sort is that his
quotation of Feline writing upon C. ex literis Ext. de rescriptis: whereas there
is no such chapter whereupon he should write: and it seems he was deceived by
the annotations upon Bartol. In l. 2.. ignominiae ff. de hijs qui notantur
infamia, where this place is indeed so quoted, though falselie. That which he
speaks, and sets in an Italian letter, as though it were some law, but
without quotation touching a souldior, that by breaking the rules of warfare
deserves death, cannot be racked by similitude or comparison any further, than
that a criminous minister may deserve deposition. But what is this to his
sufficiency i^ learning, or his ability to preach? Where sacred Antonine the
great, together with his father, did by their prescript decide as is alleged:
our author translating it, tells us, that he And his father before him have
answered: not much unlike doltish Dorman our countriman, that translated
Diabolus est mendax and pater eius, thus: The devil is a lier, and so was his
father before him. Hereupon he insinuates certain Ministers to be pretensed to
forsake their standing, and only to wear the ensign of the proclaimed
enemy to their Lord and master. If he think all are but pretended, and do
forsake their standing which cannot preach: besides that it is too vehement an
accusation without proof; it is also improperly spoken to say any does
forsake that which he never had, nor took in hand. By the ensign of Gods
proclaimed enemy worn by ministers, it cannot be doubted but he means such
apparel and ornaments of ecclesiastiall persons, as this church by law has
received, and her most excellent Majesty requires. And therefore where this
foul and slanderous mouth Slanderous speeches and factious.
says, they are Only the ensigns of Gods proclaimed enemy, he shows the
poison of his stomach against her sacred Majesty, who has commanded these
ornaments and form of apparel to be used. But if either he or any other hot
brain whosoever, do think that either they are unlawful by christian
magistrate to be urged, or being commanded, that the magistrate herein may or
ought to be disobeied, let them lay forth their reasons in brief
syllogismes, without flaunt or flourish to dazzle the eyes of the simple, and
they shall (God willing) shortly after see their boldness to be greater, than
either their wit or learning. All the other quotations out of the civil and
canon law in this section alleged (saving one which is impertinent) tend to
show either what is required of doctors in philosophy, physicians, orators,
and grammarians about their several professions: or that as well they as
judges, for unprofitableness in their several callings, may be again removed.
And that therefore by the like reason, ministers for their unprofitableness and
unableness to give counsel, which he childishlie and ignorantly terineth [To
consult] may be deprived or deposed: assuming still as granted, all to be
unprofitable that are no preachers. First if this were granted, yet is there
great diversity betwixt readers, school^maisters, and such professors, who are
chosen to be retained so long, and no longer, than they are able and shall
perform the trade of teaching and function, to the which they are allotted:
and ministers beneficed, who have a title for term of life therein, and in
respect of any debilitie or infirmity arising, cannot be by law removed
during their life, but are in this case to have a coadiutor appointed unto them
by the Bishop: Arg. l. 83.. sacramff. de verb. obligatio. and d. l.. si stichum.
and therefore hereby this reason is overthrown. Again Rodol. Agricola Li. 1.
de invent. ca. 25.
says; That of all places, out of which reasons be drawn, none almost is of
less force against an auditor that resists, than the argument taken of
similitude. Furthermore, where Abb. in c. cum dilectus Ext. de consuetu. ver.
prima quod.
the matter is penal (as in those cases alleged) there an inference cannot be
brought from one to another: because in penalties we argue not to the like by
like; for De paenit. did. 1.. paene, and 10. And. super gl. and ita c. si
postquam de elect. in 6.
penalties go not beyond their own proper case. But to put this matter quite
out of doubt, and to show the vanity of this kind of reasoning once for all:
it is well known to those who are but meanly studied in law, that L. non
possunt. 12. cum l. sig. l. 27. and 32. ff. de legibus.
although the rule be, that Where the same reason is, there the law also is
the same, yet even then when a difference can hardly be taken and alleged,
this rule has many limitations; namely where some special law is repugnant
to the argument, drawn from the identitie of reason. For as Aristot. li. 2.
Rhetor. ca. de solutionibus.
Aristotle says; It is no inconvenience for two probable matters, to be
contrary the one to the other. For there is less authority in arguments than
in laws, because right is L1. ff. de reg. iuris, l. 5. ff. de probat.
not to be established out of general rules, but from especial and particular
decisions of law. For if right should not be gathered out of laws, but from
discourse of reasoning, and from general rules which be gathered upon the
laws, then would the law be not only infinite, but also uncertain, yea and
contrary in it self: because the rules of law be almost infinite, and one
reason may easily be insringed by another reason. And in this respect Tullie
Li. 1. de oratore.
says: In the civil law we are taught, not by disputations to and fro, which
be infinite, and full of alteration, but by the authority and direction of
laws. Also this rule holds not; L. 7. si pupillorum. si praetor. ff. de
rebus minorum.
where a man is adjudged or decreed touching some certain persons, for such a
decree is not to be drawn to all cases which be alike. Lastly this reasoning
and interpreting any case by a like law, upon the sims^itude of reason in them
both, is only L. 11. Pomponius ff. de praescriptis verbis. L. 2.. sed quia C.
de vetcri iure enucleando. L. 11.. cum igitur C. de legibus.
permitted to him that has sovereign authority and rule, and not to those
that only have single jurisdiction, but much less to him that has neither
of both. Neither is our authors intent any thing helped by Bartol. upon L2. ff.
de ijs qui notantur infamia, because he having there showed, that there is one
degradation of soldiers or knights, verbal, and another real: and when two
processes, and when but one to that purpose are required, he says: Those
things which I have said of the degradation of soldiers, the same is also to
serve about degradation of doctors and clearkes: not noting that for the like
offenses, they all are to be deposed, but that the like manner of process is
appliable to them all. As for that which is said, that He which usurps the
ensigns or arms of a doctor, being none, is guilty of forgerie: can no way
serve for punishing such, as have the outward calling into the ministry, how
unworthy soever: but such as do usurp that calling, without any external
calling, whom other Ext. de clerico non ordinato ministrante.
Canons more pregnant than this law does sufficiently meet with.

34. Section. Page 71.
NDw at the last our author having quit himself like a man, and proved
sufficiently, at the least in his own conceit, all ministers to be unworthy,
and to deserve in that respect deprivation, which cannot preach: least perhaps
the magistrates (though being by him so fully persuaded) should nevertheless
faint in this action, as not knowing what course to take in the manner of
proceeding against them; he very gently takes the pains to tell them out of
Panormitane, how they may safely proceed to deprive them, for their ignorance
and want of learning. But he makes his process to reach unto those only,
who neither have read any books of learning, nor have been taught by others
reading unto them; though his intended purpose was to disable all,
notwithstanding they had both read priuatlie, and heard others, in diverse
sorts of good learning, if they were no preachers. And therefore he calls all
such, Idols, dumb, bare mumbling ministers, and hirelings. But it is better to
hear the words of Panormitane himself, than his falsified paraphrase Panor.
in c. vlt. de aetate and qualitate.
upon them. Note first (says he) that want of knowledge is a lawful cause to
depose a man from a Bishoprike, and then is it said there is want of knowledge,
when he knows not Grammar. Note also secondly, that knowledge is not gotten
except it be taught by another, or else he himself have read books tending to
knowledge. And so this makes against them that will pretend to learn both
without a teacher and without books: and here of you may gather the practike
of deposing a man in science ignorant: because it is sufficient if the
witnesses depose, that he never read any books, nor ever went to school, or
heard any reader or teacher. So that we may easily perceive Fa^^^fication by
the author.
our authors falsification hereof, when as he by his translation of
Panormitane, omitteth wholly that Want of knowledge is ignorance in Grammar,
and makes both the private study, and the hearing of a teacher, to be
^^intlie requisite for the escaping of this ignorance: where as in truth
Panormicane requires but either the one or the other to this purpos^, and
therefore with the conjunction, and, taken conjunction and non diuisim,
Panormitane says; A man cannot learn without a teacher and without books
both: as plainly appears by the disjunctive following, whereof if any part
be true, all is true. Also Panormitane speaks here, not of every inferior
minister, but of a Bishop: nor of want of any other knowledge, but of Grammar.
And least of all by him is it reguired (as our author seems to do) that a
minister should learn that strange book Of controversies of the gospel.
Whereby may appear that it is but a loose and imperfect rule to mesure out a
ministers learning or ability by, when no greater stuff than Grammar is
necessarily required of a Bishop. And therefore the same author in In. c.
nisi. Ext. de renuntiatione.
another place says: A competent or reasonable knowledge is sufficient in a
prelat, neither is it any lawful cause to resign and give place to another,
if he want an eminent skill. And again; What ibidem.
if a prelat be ignorant, but be such as may easily learn? The gloss says,
he may learn, and then license to resign shall not be granted, and to this he
is bound, although he be an old man. And therefore he in generalitic says;
Only that crime is of sufficient force to depose a man, which ibidem.
hinders the execution of his order, though before he have been solemnly
penitent. And that this skill and knowledge is in no greater matters, than in
Grammar, he declares plainly thus: I Panor in c. vlt. in fine Ext. de eta.
and quaiita.
ask (says he) concerning him that is ignorant in Grammar, and yet by use
does speak perfectly, if such a one be already preferred to a Bishopprike
or other dignity, whether he shall be deposed? 10. de Deo. li. 9. 16. holds,
that if otherwise he be profitable to the church, he shall not be deposed. And
to this (decision against the Bishop of Calinea) he answers, that other
matters (as here appears) were objected against him, and to this purpose
makes this: He that knows the meaning of the law, though he have not the
knowledge of it, is borne with: 38. Distincti. c. sedulo. l. scire leges. ff.
delegibus. and de consecrat. did. 2. c. primus quidem. Also their duty may be
by others supplied, c. inter caetera, Ext. de officio ordinarij. Which place
plainly speaks of want of knowledge, in which regard a coadiutor may be
appointed, 7. 9. 1. c. non autem c. exparte, Ext. de clerico aegrotante. And as
to the laws that may be brought to the contrary, 25. did.. nunc autem. 8. 9.
1. c. qualis. 81. did. c. statuimus, he answers thus, that they are only
to be understood of those that are not yet promoted. So that if our author will
weie our inferior ministers learning, in no other scales but these, there
being (I think) few or none, no not of the meanest sort, which have not been
trained up in Grammar under some schoolemaister, or at least by their own
private industry: he shall be so far from deposing any great number of such
as be already ordered, though their ignorance otherwise were not tolerable,
so that their life be not also scandalous: that it may truly be said, his
devise would not so much enrich her Majesty's tresure, as his book has
bewraied his mean skill in law, and his cankred affection toward the present
state, has standered her Majesty's most renowned government for propagation
of the gospel, and has troubled the quiet repose and unity of this church.

35. Section. Page 71, 72.
IT may appear (I hope) sufficiently by that which has been before
delivered, that there is no cause why we should ^ie to a disjunction of A
simple curat, a rural priest, or a plebeiane prelat, by himself only
surmised, for the avoiding of any of his Rural reasons, too Simple to drive us
to any such poor shifts. For setting aside a flood of words, vainelie now and
then puffed forward by the wind of a discontented mind, and furious affection,
I cannot call to remembrance that I have perused any book less furnished
hitherto with pithie proof, less approaching to the point of the issue
pretended, or more confusedly tossed to and fro by snatches, to resume that,
which once it seemed he had relinquished; than this distracted Abstract does.
And here in this section, for that (as he very generally avouches) All
laws directly do inhibit a man to take upon him an office whereunto he is
unfit and incapable; he infers A monstrous and damnable usage to be
tolerated in this church: for that some ministers are Such as know not for
what, or how to present their supplication to God, neither what kind of diet
they should set before his people. Truly I wish unfeignedly the gift of Gods
spirit were doubled and redoubled upon all of that function, yea that all the
Lords people could prophecy: yet can I not without intolerable
unthankfulness to God, and great touch of her Majesty's gracious care, for
the instructing of her people, so debase all ministers abilities, which be no
preachers: as to say, they know not either for what they ought to pray, or
that the word of God is the only food to the soul of man. Or shall we say,
that none knows any thing, nor is able to catechize, or to exhort or dehort
in any reasonable measure, but he that is a preacher publikelie licenced?
Seeing it is notorious that even in the reformed Art. 8. des marriages en la
discipline du France.
churches of France, according to which our men that have their heads so full
of church-plots, would seem to have squired out all their frame; there be
certain congregations tolerated, where they have no public sermons, but
prayers and certain exhortations. After, by way of ampliation (as lawyers of
later times term it) he proceeds to tell us of others also, in learning
far surmounting those whom he had before so disgraced, which are not fit to
be made strait ways ministers: namely grammarians and poets from Winchester
and Eaton, philosophers and rhetoricians of long continuance in the two
Universities, for that They must before shake off vanities, and forsake their
ungodliness, where with they have infected their minds in those places. So
that now he requires such an exactness in learning and life, far above that
which the Canon law does require, that I fear me he would either leave us
wholly destitute of all ministers, or else he would have them so fined and
refined, that the Quintessence must be in a very few of his select clients.
But the two Universities are as slenderly beholding unto him for his
contumelious report of them, as he was to either of them, which could purchase
there no more sound reasoning nor modesty than in this book is showed. And I
think it may be truly auowed to the glory of God, that the two Universities
are, and for the most part since her Majesty's happy reign have been, as
well stored with sound divines and preachers, as any four Universities
whatsoever in foreign parts. And although some part of the old frugalitie and
discipline is perhaps with the stream of time quailed, which is to be
lamented; yet if the Universities on the other side be laid unto ours, in
respect of order and discipline, they will hardly carry a vizard of orderly
Universities. And what are those Vanities and ungodliness, where with those
places infect the minds not of yoonglings only, but of those Who have spent
many years there? Belike a weauer may come from the shuttle, and a bare
English clearke, or one with a little smacke of French, that never was in
Grammar school, nor took degree but at Botley, or in a scriueners shop, so he
be bold and zealous (as they term it) to gird at his superiors, and the
orders of our church, may be allowed by him for a sufficient and a well
qualified preacher: but if a graduate come from the University, he must be
cast again and new founded, and have some country schooling, and be purified
seven times, yer he can be made to bear this man's touch. So that I cease to
marvel at some, whom I cannot call The asses of our schools, because they
were never able to keep any exercises there, but only at Carefax or
^ulie-locke in Oxenford, and at the Pumpe tavern, or the Howsen in Cambridge:
who being at the Universities, were such droanes, that they were accounted Non
proficientes: yet they afterward coming into some countries, and betaking
themselves to a vein of contempt of all order, and to a strictness in godly
words, as the Phariseis did in external conuerstion, were by a sudden
Metamorphosis transtigured in some singular men's conceits, into great, side,
wide, and deep clearkes, to be woondered at, rather than to be followed.

36. Section. Page 72, 73.
Here have we another ampliation of the rule of unfit and incapable ministers,
excluding all that have been popish priests, quite from the ministry for
ever, with a Non obstante, whatsoever Popish lawyers which surmise
traitorouslie all the professors of the gospel to be heretics and
schismatikes shall say to the contrary. As for popery, I do by the mercy
of God disclaim it with all my heart, and the skill in the Canon law, which I
think he means, I leave to him that gathered these his texts, whether he
were Friar or lier, and to his gentle Glossographer upon them, if they will not
think themselves slandered, to be so burdened. But if any surmise only in
heart, as he writes: I would to God for the safeguard of her Majesty and this
reahne, their hearts were ripped thorough, and such thoughts written in great
letters of either side of them, that all men thereby might see as much, as this
man thinks he does. And if their surmises have also grown to words and open
speeches, I hope our author, for avoiding the danger of abetment unto such,
has revealed unto authority such traitorous surmises, before he published his
priuitie with them, in a printed pamphlet. In the enlarging of his assumpt,
that Papists are heretics, he speaks not like a divine, to say, that any
being baptized (which is to us as the covenant of circumcision was in the old
law) is an alien from the covenant of God. For hereof it would follow, that a
papist once baptized, and forsaking his popery, * De consecra. did. 4. c. non
in vobis ex Aug. ad. Donatistas.
shoudl be baptized again before he could be accounted in the covenant, and of
the true church; which is plain Anabaptisme. That which is said by him, of the
force of the Act of parliament, concerning the submission of the clergy, is
vainelie and impertinentlie alleged, seeing that part of the act might remain
in force: though it had been so, that the other part establishing all Canons,
etc: had been reuersed and repealed. Now, although the act in the 1. year of
her Majesty's reign is thought by many, not to stretch so far as to make
Papisme heresy, to that intent to punish them by the penalties of law
appointed to heretics: yet will I easily grant, that dubbed papists in
terms of true divinity be gross heretics, and some points of their
doctrine to be both heretical to GOD, and traitorous to princes.
Nevertheless, the place quoted in the Decretals by our author, for proof that
therefore such upon abiuration and renouncing of their schisms and heresies,
may not be chosen, admitted or tolerated to bear any ecclesiastical
Corruption of the text.
office, proves no such matter. The words alleged, are his words and
collection, flat contrary to the text it self, which is; Whereas c. quia Ext.
de elect. and elect. potest.
you carefully have required whether you ought to confirm the election of
him, which having abiured schism, is returned to the unity of the church: I
thought good to answer, that if he have received Gl. ibid. in verb. suseeperit.
ex c. 1. inf. de schismat.
no order of a schismatike (so that nothing else do hinder) I do permit him
by way of dispensation to be confirmed. Where it appears, that by
dispensation of the superior, one which has been a schismatike, may be
admitted to a higher promotion. So that this place and the other being not so
much as alleged to any further purpose, than to hinder such as had been
schismatikes and heretics, from being admitted to those ecclesiastical
functions, which before they had not: that part of his Mayor remains yet
naked, that such may not bear an ecclesiastical office, and be tolerated in
that place that they were in before. The second allegation manifestly speaking
of those, that being Heretics, or believers of them, etc: are not to be
admitted to any ecclesiastical benefice, or public office, is notoriously by
him falsified, by a Fallacy ab accentu: where without Falsificatio^.
any interpunction, he translateth, c. 2.. haeretici de haereticis in 6.
Haeretici autem, credentes, receptatores, etc: ad nullum, etc: admittantur,
believing heretics, their receivers, etc: let them not be admitted to any
benefice: because he would have it sound, as though it were spoken of heretics
converted, and now become true believers. The falsehood and vanity whereof
appears, for that it is no reason, such as favor a true believer, though he
have been sometime an heretic, should be debarred from ecclesiastical
living. Also this his sense of this canon, being in force as he says, does
exclude all men in England, and their children and nephews, from bearing any
public office, if ever they were papists in times past. Furthermore, by this
interpretation, the beginning of this Chapter would hinder all that have been
papists from christian burial, and procure such as are already buried to be
dug up again; even the very summarie of that. overthrows this wilful
and childish corruption. The preferment (says Domin.) of heretics, of those
which believe them, or favor them, etc: is of no force or validity. In su^ma
ibid.
In the c. vt commissi. ibid.
same title, those selfsame words are again repeated, sufficiently
conuincing his interpretation. Again the law it self does plainly set
down the true meaning thereof in these words; This c. statutum. hoc sane
ibidem.
truly that is spoken of the children and nephews of heretics, believers of
heretics, and such of like sort, seems to be understood of the children of
those that either be still such, or which may be proved to have departed this
life being such: and not of their children, whom it may appear to have been
reformed, and incorporate again to the unity of the church. And him that
desires futher evidence in this matter, I remit for brevity to the Gl. in c.
1. ver. nota de schism. in 6. c. si aduersus. c. excommunicamus.. credentes. c.
excommun. 2.. si qui autem Ext. de hereticis.
piaces here quoted. The contrary of this doctrine of his, may be proved by
the example of Aaron, who was an idolater or an abbettor of idolatry in the
golden calfe, and yet was not upon his repentance put from his priesthood.
Likewise by Peter, whose revolt and ten^porarie apostasy in denieng his
master Christ, was no less heinous, than the sin of our idolatrous priests,
who for the most part sinned but of ignorance in that general blindness: and
to the like end also c. vt constitueretur 50. did. ex Aug. ad Bonifaciu^.
this example is elsewhere alleged. Likewise Augustine, afterward a famous
Bishop, was by the space of many years a detestable Manichee, as he
witnesses of himself. Also Tharasius the patriarch in the council of Meldis,
being the seventh council, propounded thus to the whole council: Does c.
conuenientibus 1. q. 7. ex concilio Meldensi, sieve septima synodo.
it please you, that those which have returned from heresy, shall retain
their former rooms? The holy moonkes answered; As the six general councels
have received those which have returned from heresy, so do we receive them.
And the whole council answered; It pleases us all. And Basilius the Bishop of
Anchyra, Theodorus the Bishop of Mirea, and Theodosius the Bishop, were willed
to sit according to their degrees in their seats. And a little before the said
Patriarch says; Behold many books of canons, of synodes, and of ancient
fathers have been read, and they have taught us to receive those which return
from heresy, if there be no other cause in them to the contrary. And the
gloss Gl. 1. ibidem.
there gathers the whole sum of that action thus: They decreed, that they
who returned from heresy, were to be restored to their former estate, so that
in writing they do renounce the heresy, and make proprofession of the
catholic faith. But those are not so to be received, which of purpose procured
themselves for the subversion of our faith to be ordained by heretics. Again
says c. quod pro remedio. similiter. ibid.
the canon: Likewise by dispensation, in the very council of Nice, it was
decreed concerning the Nouatians: that upon their return again to the church,
they might be received to orders. There is also c. quotien^ ibidem.
set down the form of an abiuration for a Bishop, returning from schism.
Further Leo c. maximum ibidem.
says concerning a Donatist: Although Maximus was unlawfully of a mere lay
man ordained (suddenly) to be a Bishop, yet if he now be no Donatist, and be
free from a schismatic spirit, we do not think good to put him from that
Bishoplie dignity, which but so so he has attained. Mention Daibertu^ ibidem.
also is made of one Daibertus, which having taken order of deaconshop of one
Nezelon an heretic, which also had none other ordination but of an heretic,
was a fresh made a deacon; not that the order was reiterated, but because he
could not be said to receive that at another hands, which the party himself
had not. Augustine c. ipsa pieta^ in fine 23. q. 4. ex August. ad Bonifaciu^.
speaking of the repentant Donatists says; Let them have a bitter sorrow of
their former detestable error, as Peter had upon fear of his lie, and let
them come to the true church of Christ, the catholic church their mother: and
let them be clearkes and Bishops in that church profitablie, which before
carried hostile minds against it; we do not envy them, but we embrace them,
exhort them, and wish it of them, and whom we find in the hedges and high
ways we urge to come in. And the Decretall epistle does no otherwise debar
heretics being ecclesiastical men from continuing their function, but c. ad
abolendam.
when upon the finding out of their error, they shall refuse presently and
willingly, to return to the unity of the catholic faith. And touching such
c. omn. 1. q. 1. c. si qui presbyteri. 1. q. 7.
canons as in apperance at the first seem contrary: the c. nos consuetudinem,
did. 12.
gloss very truly reconcileth them together saying; By common right none
that returns from heresy may be ordained; but such are dispensed with, as
when they are suffered to be preferred to the lower orders. 1. q. 1. c. si quis
haereticae. The dispensation is full when he may be made priest, but no
further, 1. q. 7. c. conuenientibus. It is more full, when he may be made a
Bishop, but not a Primate, as in this place: it is most plentiful, when he may
be promoted to all other dignities, 23. q. 4. c. ipsa pietas.

Yea besides the continual practice and custom of this realm, even in her
Majesty's injunctions, made the first year of her blessed reign, of Priests
then, which had but small learning, and had of long time favored fond
fantasies, rather than Gods truth (which must, considering the time then, needs
he understood of massing priests) it is affirmed, that Their office and
function is of God, and therefore that they are to be reverenced. And the 13.
Elza. cap. 12.
statute cleerlie decideth the tollerating of all priests in their functions,
ordered neither in the time of king Edward, nor in her Majesty's reign, so
they publikelie did testify, before a time there prefixed, their uniformity
with this church in matters of religion. By the practice of our church (after
God had opened their eyes to see the truth) they were not only tolerated, but
some of them advanced by our godly Princess to the highest dignities in it.
And God did not only singularly bless their ministry toward others, but
vouchsafed the persons of some of them the crown of martyrdom. Even in the
reformed churches of France, thought of all other by our men most strict, and
woorthiest of imitation, such as had been popish priests (as may appear) were
tolerated to continue their function, and to retain their benefices being
converted to the gospel. Come Pierre Viret in Decalog.
ie ne veux, etc. As I will not (says Viret) at all condemn the tolleration
used toward such, for christian charity sake, and because they should not be
driven to despair: so would I also desire they should understand, that they
may not hold those goods with a good conscience, except they labor to the
uttermost of their power, according to the estate whereto God has called them,
to the edification of the church, and the relief of the poor, whose goods
they enjoy. And to this effect he also speaks more at large in an epistle
written to the faithful. And it is contained in the La discipline eccles. des
esglises reformes duroyaulme de France, art 2 and 3.
discipline set down by all the reformed churches of France, that Bishops,
priests, and monks, converted to the gospel from Popery, might be assumed to
the ministry of the gospel, after the confession of their faults and errors,
and good experience had of their conversation and doctrine. The like may be
said of other churches abroad, which for their first planting used the
ministry of notable men, which before had been Massing priests. Naie, it
were a manifest abridging of her Majesty's prerogative royal, to bind her
Highness hands by such Canons, if there were any, from advancing men in all
other respects fit for the use of the church, being against both her Majesty's
own practice, and her most excellent brothers the virtuous K. Edward. So that
we may conclude, the truth of his Mayor proposition is as good and no better,
than his dealing in the allegations for the proof of it was plain and upright.

37. Section. Page 74, 75, 76.
THose things which I have before alleged, containing particular decisions of
law, contrary to his absurd and uncharitable assertion against penitent
sinners; I trust may satisfy our author: seeing for fear of a rule not
general, and with more limitations against it, than with it, he is content to
let go his former hold. For he says, though Many things are not to be done
of us, which being once done must stand; yet the Massing priests might
nevertheless and ought to have been secluded From the ministry at the
entry of her Majesty's reign. So that it seems he allows of their
tolleration now to remain in their rooms: though by the way he accuse both
her Majesty and the whole state then, Accusation of her Majesty and the
state, for want of discretion.
as not performing their duties herein, and of unadvised translating of the
canon laws unto us. And here again he shows his great skill in Law and
Logike, when he would both have had the canon law then wholly abrogated: and
yet by that law, he would have had such as had sometimes been Massing priests,
and converted to the gospel, debarred from the ministry. The c.
sollicitudinem Ext. de appellat. and ibi. gl. ver. tanquam aduersa remissi^e.
law says, He that alleges contraries, is not to be heard. Therefore to
help up the matter fully on his side, he surmiseth by way of admittance,
that They are idolators still, or that they do keep back from the people the
word of God: and therefore are to be removed. And it is a marvel, that his
skill in law was not such as to have alleged for proof hereof full wisely,
Semel malus semper praesumitur malus. But who art thou that thus iudgest
another man's servant, who either stands or falls to his own lord? And who,
if either Their insufficiency, negligence, contempt, oridolatrous hearts may
be duly found out, wherewith he charge them, are not to be tolerated any
more Railing against orders of the church.
in respect of their conformity to wear cap and surplesse, by law prescribed,
which (I doubt not) but under their persons be here meant to make absolutely
odious: than his clients are to be borne with, who in contempt of law do
swing up and down at communion and elsewhere, only in their side cloakes,
more like ruffians and drouers, than sage and stayed ministers, in a settled
church. And where he goes about to heal that which belike he feared would be
objected, concerning the 2. Kings. ca. 23. ver. 8, 9.
priests of the high places, whom Josias brought out of all the cities of
Judah, and suffered them to eat of the unleavened bread among their brethren,
he is but afraid herein of his own shadow: for he sees there are other more
pregnant places a great deal Falu^ficatio^.
to this purpose. But here he has also falsified the text, in making these
Priests of the high places, the Priests of Baal, (whose priests are indeed
spoken of in the fist verse) and by calling the Unleavened bread by the name of
Tithes and offerings. And here also, by way of recapitulation of that which had
been spoken four or five pages before, he flingeth back again, to enforce
the remoouing of a minister for insufficiency or negligence, as well as men in
diverse other functions are for the like to be removed: which his reason is
answered before. And at the closing up hereof (as Orators do, when at the first
and in the end, they set their most forceable persuasions, to leave the deeper
impression) he allegeth three laws belike as the very cutthrotes of all. A
permission was L. 12. si quis cterialis C. de Epi. and Cleric.
given unto Decurions by Theodosius the emperor, upon relinquishment of their
goods to become clearkes. Which the emperors following thought good to
abrogate, by calling back public officers and ministers, which either in
regard of the troubles of such functions, of superstition and admiration of
that kind of life, or for the enioyeng of the immunities of clearkes, would
leave their former rooms destitute, and procure themselves to be ordained
clearkes, in some great church amongst other. But I see not what this may
prove, saving that princes heretofore have made laws, to bring back
ecclesiastical persons from the service of the church, which vnduelie and with
for saking of their former vocation they undertook. As for bond men, which by
their masters consent first taking upon them to be Moonkes (all which were in
those c. a subdiac^^ no 93. did.
days lay men) did relinquish their solitary life afterward, and therefore
were brought back to their old slavery, least they should reap benefit, and
their masters by such collusion be damnified: I cannot see to what end it is
brought, but to make up a number, and to range in a rank with the rest. His
last allegation here is his own collection, and not the law it self in either
of the places quoted, which prove only that infamy, which is Infamia iuris,
is sufficient cause of remoouing a man from an office of credit, and say
nothing of hindering him to aspire to such a place as is here alleged:
although the law be elsewhere as pregnant for the one as for the other. And
though this be true, and to be applied also to ministers, yet is it not by
force of these laws only, but by virtue of other Canons, especially
provided for that end and purpose.

38. Section. Page 76, 77.
HEre he rangeth still further and further from his issue, which is, that such
a learning as enableth a man to preach, and none other is, allowed of by law
in a minister: and would now forsooth prove our ministers to be no ministers
at all, for that they are not made according to the form and manner which the
law prescribes. That they are not so made, he leaves as yet unproven, and
takes it of the readers liberality as granted unto him, which never meant to
ease him of that pains. The reason of the consecution, if they be not in that
manner and form made and ordered as is appointed, that then They are no
ministers in deed and truth, but only in show and appeerance; hereof he
thinks may be established, because the statute says: Those which be or shall
be made deacons or ministers after the form and order prescribed, shall be by
authority thereof declared and enacted to be, and shall be priests,
ministers and deacons, and rightly made and ordered, etc. And if hereof may be
gathered, that therefore none shall be accounted deacons, priests, or
ministers, but which be ordered in that precise and exact form: then will it
follow that no Deacons and Priests ordered in the times of king Henry, and
Queen Marie, are to be so accounted with us for Priests, whereof the contrary
before is showed. Then also none made and ordered by a Bishop consecrated in
those times, as the most ministers were at her Majesty's first entrance, shall
be true Deacons or Ministers, though in other points the form of the book be
observed wholly, because by that reckoning, the Bishops that ordered them,
being also consecrate after another form, were no Bishops, and so those which
have been consecrated of them since, no Bishops likewise, being not consecrate
by very Bishops: and consequently neither the Priests ordered after the
popish manner, nor any of our Deacons and Ministers now are by this man's
collection True deacons or ministers, but only in show and apperance. En quo
discordia ciues perduxit miseros. Naie then are all the ministers of other
reformed churches, being not ordered according to this form, to be accounted
as no true ministers; but especially some of our own country men (who yet
think themselves more lawfully called than any of ours besides, because they
were ordered beyond sea after another manner) shall be in the same Predicament
with others; seeing our author has taught us to reason out of this statute,
both affirmatiuelie and negatiuelie. But I have somewhat aforeshewed, how far
an argument A contrario sensu does hold, and the common lawyers can tell him,
that this statute being in the affirmative only, may well establish those as
true ministers which be ordered according to that form, but cannot seclude all
others, though they be not so ordered. But his dealing Malice palpable.
is worth the marking, whose proof being general against all, not ordered in
manner and form as is required, yet he concludes only against Unlearned
ministers, that by law they are no ministers at all; when as the want of
observation of that form, will disable by his construction even the best
learned, as fully as the unlearned.

39. Section. Page 77, 78, 79, 80.
THat the not observance of the manner and form in any point (for so must his
indefinite speech hereof needs be construed) about ordering of Deacons and
Ministers, does infect the whole action, and makes it of no validity in law;
he here labors to infer upon diverse places out of the law Civil, Canon,
and Common, which to diverse purposes do seem necessarily to require a set
and an exact form for accomplishment of them. In his first allegation to this
purpose, I note his want of judgment. For that L. si is qui. quaedam ff. ad
(...). Falcidiam.
law compels an heir or executor to perfect and finish such works as the
testator has willed to be made, yea though the fourth part of the whole goods
otherwise by Lex Falcidia due unto him, be there upon also spent, because it is
a legacy that cannot be divided: and therefore it is not sufficient for the
heir to lay only so much cost upon it, as that he may retain his fourth
part due unto him by law: but he must make up the work perfectly. So that the
reason of this decision is not any form required thereto, as he would gather,
but only the nature of the legacy, which otherwise were to no use, if it
might receive such an apportionment. The c. caussam Ext. de iudicijs.
chapter it self out of which Panormitane gathered that which here in the
second place is alleged, does sufficiently show, that even those forms and
solemnities, which be of the substance of the act, may be countermanded by
custom. For though neither the prior and covent of a cathedral church without
the Bishop, nor the Bishop without the chapter, could then sue or be sued, as
partly by this canon, and partly by the laws alleged by the Gl. in ver.
assensu ibid.
gloss here appears: yet we see that the uniform custom of this land, has
since that time otherwise prevailed against these laws and canons. And I
cannot conjecture why our author thought good to explane this, being of it
self very manifest by an example of evangelical denuntiation: except he
would have us to gather hereof, even contrary to the practice of all reformed
churches, that in no case excommunication is to be inflicted, but upon the
proceeding by these degrees mentioned. But then would it be very hard, as it
is still by this means, to have any use of excommunication at all, seeing he
requires the private monition given only in ^he hearing of the two parties
themselves to be first Proved, which must necessarily be by witnesses. And by
the way I cannot see, if this place of the 18. of Matthew be a perfect
platform of excommunication, as some do affirm, how excommunication can be
otherwise laid upon any man, but when the original did begin upon a private
offense, betwixt some particular parties, and where all the circumstances there
touched be observed.

The c. 1.. quia vero de rebus ecclesiae alien. in. 6.
canon which (without all quotation) he alleges to the like end as before,
does not ground the inualiditie of the alienation of those church goods,
only upon want of a solemn and diligent discussing of the matter before: but
first and principally, because the tithes were allotted unto the Archdeacon of
Duresme, from a church being void, and wanting a defendor. And again, because
there was no evident necessity or profit of that alienation. And by his Auth.
ho^ ius, and Auth. praeterea Cod. de sacros. eccl.
alleging of two Authentikes inserted into the body of the Code of Justinian,
by the name of two laws, he argues either his great have, or his small skill
and practice in law. The two decisions, which likewise he alleges without any
direction of proof, as being according to the common law of this land, I
think he will not compare and say that they contain no more exact a form,
than is the form prescribed in making of ministers. For then like as he
tells us, the statute speaking of pledges, cannot be satisfied with one
pledge alone; so the book mentioning always deacons and priests in the
plural number to be ordered, shall by this comparison exclude the Bishop from
making but one minister at once, though there be no more places but one in his
diocese void at that time. The other places of this section, which he partly
quoteth out of Panormitane, and partly as being weary, leaves without
quotation, it were but lost labor to search into, seeing they have their
truth, if they have been truly understood: and one answer may serve both to
them, and all other of like nature. For if he will intend any to be no
ministers in this church, in this respect, that they were not ordered according
unto that form, which he imagines of necessity is so required, that without
it the whole action is made void: then must he prove, such necessary form to
have been omitted at their making: which else by the instrument and
testimonials thereof made, will be otherwise presumed: and also, that it is not
only an accidental form or solemnity, but of that substance and weight in
that action, that the neglecting thereof shall ouerturne that which is done,
even as though it never had been. As touching the first, where it appears a
fact to be done (as that a minister has been ordered, is proved by the
Autentike seal of the Bishop) that there the law will also intend and presume
till the contrary can be showed, all things thereabouts to have been
lawfully, orderly, and solemnly done, is by law very evident. Generally
L. 30. sciendum ff. de verb. oblig.
is to be understood, that if a man write that he has become surety for one,
all things thereto incident are intended b to have been solemnly done.
Likewise, L. 5. ff. de proba.
Paul did answer for law, that if any man deny an emancipation or
infranchising from the fathers power, to have been rightly made, there he
must undertake to prove it, because the presumption of law is to the
contrary. Also In the Instit. defideiuss.. finali.
bonds and stipulations of sureties, we are to understand, that it is
generally to be holden, that whatsoever is set down in writing as done, that
is intended accordingly to have been done. And thereupon is gathered again as
I have alleged before in the first place, and as may be gathered out of very
many other L. 19.. sed ^tsi ff. de probat. l. 134. Titia.. penult. ff. de verb.
obligat. Instit. de inutil. stipulat.. si scriptum. l. 1. C. de contrahenda
stipulat. l. 51. merito. ff. prosodo.
laws too long to be particularly rehearsed. Moreover, Arg. l. 6. qui in.. 1.
ff. de acquir. vel ^mit. haered.
the very continuance of time, and possession of their places by their
ordering, does breed a presumption in law, that those things which were
thereto necessarily required, were therein used. And as to the second point,
in case it should be proved that diverse points of manner and form, by the
book of ordring prescribed, have been in ordring of some omitted, yet the
want thereof can no way impeach the truth of their ministry, or lawfulnes of
their calling: except they were at the least proved to be of the necessary
substance and form of that action. And in the mean time, what shall we think
of this man, who under this pretense of skirmishing only with unlearned
ministers, does leave (as much as in him lies) a scruple in the minds of all
our ministers, least peradventure upon occasion of some part of the form and
manner prescribed, being by the Bishop omitted, they might hereby by law be
adjudged unjust possessors of their places, and consequently, with an evil
conscience to have received the revenues of their benefices? But The L. 1..
fin. ff. de ventre inspi. and ibid. Bart. and in l. 1. de edicto aedilitio. and
in l. Diuus ff. de restitutione in integrum.
not using of any form or solemnity being not of the substance of the matter
does not make void the action. Now, The Bald. in l. penult. C. de cond. insert.
form which is of substance, is nothing else but the very perfect state of
any matter or disposition. And If l. 6. vniuersis C. de precibus imperas.
offerend.
any solemnity be required in the manner of doing any act, though the same
were not used therein, yet the act may be made good and ratified, so the said
form were not of substance. Again, The Bald. in rubr. C. de success. aedi.
leaving out of an accidental or small solemnity, makes not the action
wherein it was required to be called back again. And beside the place here
quoted, the said Baldus is of the same judgment In l. fin. C. de iure
deliberandi: and not only he, but (as I have read) all other doctors writing,
In l. 1.. 1. C. d. saving only Fulgosius, which in that place, and in the
preface of the Code, is of another conceit, and is therefore justly reprehended
by Jason Cons. 26. vol. 1. In which respect Baldus says, that A Bald. and
Alex. in l. 1. in fine ff. de liberis and posthumis. and Bald. in Ant. matri C.
quando mulier tut. off.
slender or light solemnity is not to be constructed as a condition set down
by law. So that upon failing thereof, the disposition of law shall not thereby
fail and be avoided. And it is then said to be but an accidental and light
solemnity, Bald. and Ang. in l. fin.. si vero C. de iure delibe.
when it brings either small or no prejudice at all: or is such as Bald. in
l. hac consultissima. C. de testamentis.
was not established upon any urgent reason or utility; or that Which if Bart.
in l. 1.. plures. ff. de exercitoria, and Jason Cons. 26. vol. 1.
it be omitted, cannot change and alter the substance of the fact. Naie the law
teaches us, that if i a certain form be set down by man (as by the prince
in ^^ Pisanis and ibi Johannes Andr. and Abb. Ext. de restitu. spoliatorum Car.
in Clem. 1. 30. q. de decimis. Innoc. in c. cu^ dilect. Ext. de rescriptis.
Alex. in l. cum lex. ff. de fideiiuss.
a commission) then the action that is done without that solemnity, shall of
it self fall to the ground: but it is otherwise, when the form is appointed
out by law, for then such an act (without that form) may well enough be
auailable: yet always with this limitation, so that the law or statute
commanding or prescribing an act to be done in such or such manner and form,
do Bald. Imola and Alex. in l. 1. ff. de liberis and posth. Bald. in l. non
possunt ff. de legibus, and in l. si quis mihi. coram ff. de acquir. hered.
proceed no further: as in express words to adnull that which shall be done
otherwise: or else do Alex. in l. 1. ff. de liberis and posthu. and cons. 23.
and 3 5. in. 4. part.
not prohibit such an act to be done, otherwise than in the said certain manner
and form: for if it do prohibit, though mention be not made of annihilating,
yet by very force of law, the act being done without such a necessary form
as the prohibition imports, does become void.

40. Section. Page 80, 81, 82.
Because our author foresaw what might be truly answered to his thick mist
of allegations, for making void of all ordinations of deacons and ministers,
wherein any point of the prescribed form or manner was omitted: which may
appear by the conclusion of this section, in which he gathers certain
points To be essential and not accidental: he therefore thought good here,
for the better winding of all, whom he imagines unlearned ministers, into the
danger of usurpation, to note certain particular solemnities, concerning the
examination, time, and presenting of clearkes to be ordained: hoping belike,
that upon his poor credit we would accept them, without proof to be
essential points of this action. Whereupon he promises to himself a triumph
of his own decreeing, as not doubting but that all or some of these have been
omitted, at the ordinations of unlearned ministers. But what spirit shall we
say this man to be lead by, which upon his own only uncharitable surmise,
of such omissions (even contrary to that which the law presumes) dare so
confidentlie and publikelie call in question, not only the lawfulness of
calling, and stay of living, of all unlearned ministers (against whom
principally he seems to bend his forces) but of all other, even the best and
most learned in the land? Seeing it is as likely, that some, or all of these
solemnities were omitted and let slip at their ordinations, as at any others.
But thanked be God, there is no cause for them to dismay themselves: all this
wind is but a painted blast, like that which blows at the end of a map, and
will shake neither corn nor chafe. The Gl. in ver. inuestigent, c. quan.
did. 24.
gloss alleged, that He that is not examined before his ordering, is to be
deposed, cannot well and simply be understood of the minister ordained. First,
because it is not gathered of the text whereon he gloseth, nor upon that c.
nihil est. Epi. Ext. de elect. and electi.
which he brings for proof of it. For that text only punishes the Bishop
that ordeineth unworthy men (not mentioning any examination of inferior
ministers) which the penalty elsewhere by canons provided, which is, c. cu^
in cunctis.. fin. d.
to be bereaved of conferring of orders and benefices. And what reason indeed
was there to depose the minister, because the Bishop did not examine him?
Again by this interpretation the gloss should be contrary to it self (as in
another place to another purpose is showed) where Gl. vnica in c. nullus ordi
ne tur did. 24
is said, Here you have to mark, that the testimony of the people is
equivalent to examination, whereupon it is sufficient that a clearke to be
ordained have a good fame of his side. And this also c. de Petro. did. 47. c.
valde, di. 94. etc. mandata Ext. de praesumptionib.
appears, because those which are known, are not to be examined, but only
strangers. And again the same gloss upon the selfsame chapter Gl. in c.
qua^do ver. alias did. 24.
speaking of Examination and that otherwise the Bishop without advise of other
clearkes, and the good testimony of the people may not presume to ordeine:
says; Alias, etc: Otherwise, that is to say, if they be not examined by those
who are about the Bishop, or tried by the testimony of the people. So that we
see, it is so far off from deposing a minister, because at his ordering he
was not examined, that it is not necessary always, that he be examined, and
the very words of the gloss alleged, are doubtful and indifferent to be
applied, as well to the deposition of the Bishop, which does not cause the
clearks to be examined, as of any other; so that if there were law to warrant
it, I should think it meant of the Bishops only deposing. These Gl. d. in
ver. inuestigent.
three (says that gloss) lawful age, sufficient learning, and honest
conversation are especially to be required, and if he be not examined in these
three, Deponendus est. Which our author meaning to put out of all doubt, to be
meant of the party so ordained, has either foisted in this whole sentence, If
any be made an elder or deacon, without examination, let him be cast out from
the clergy; or else I must say, he has a larger book to serve his turn
than ordinary: yea though it were so to be understood, whereof I have proved
the contrary, yet it makes not such Ipso facto to be intrudors, and no
ministers at all: but leaves them to be deposed by sentence of their
Ordinary, which with no reason can depose them, only because he himself
neglected to have them examined. That which he brings here out of the canon
law, concerning the time of ordinations, if it be alleged, as being in force
with us; I answer, that he must first tell us, which of the canons varieng
amongst themselves hereabouts, we must retain for law amongst us. Some of the
oldest appoint c. quod a patribus, etc. quod die. 75. did.
only the Lords day, other some c. vlt. ibid.
appoint for this purpose the four solemn feasts which we call imberdaies, and
the saturdaie before the passion sundaie only; his text Sane super eo, Ext.
de temp. ordinat.
mentions only the four solemn feasts, and the c. De eo autem ibidem.
next chapter following adds the saturdaie next before Caster day, and the
saturdaie before passion sundaie. Again, our general costome uniformly
observed, which cannot by reason of the multitude so ordained, without Sane
extra. de tempori. ordinat.
great offense and confusion be now (as a corruption) with all acts there upon
depending, disannulled: does by law sufficiently establish, all ministers
ordained at other times, than the canons do prefix. Lastly and cheefclie, the
act of parliament, which declares all such to be rightly made and ordered,
that be made according to the book for that purpose provided, does strongly
confute this assertion. For the book says; The Bishop may upon a sundaie or
holiedaie admit, etc: which being a statute neither prohibitiue nor
annullatiue, giving liberty to the Bishop to make deacons and ministers on
sundaies or holiedaies, as it does sufficiently repeal the strictness of
the canons herein, so does it by no construction make void the ordination of
such as be ordained on other days. But if he will enforce, that as the time of
ordinations with them, was an essential form and solemnity; so the sundaie
and holiedaie must be with us: I say the difference betwixt them is great. For
the c. de eo autem. d.
canon law says; It shall not be lawful for any Bishop to ordeine at any
other time: but the book only says, The Bishop may upon a sundaie or
holiedaie admit. And the canon it self does not so make the time to be of the
substance of that action, that those who are ordained at other times, shall
thereby be accounted as not ordained. For where the place by our author
alleged, uses the word of Deposing, there the Gl. in ver. deponerentur c.
sane d.
gloss expounds it Deposed from execution, and to be suspended only. Which
agrees c. cum quidam. d.
to the text afterward, that suspendeth those which be ordained at undue times,
till they receive favor for their restitution. Again, the c. penult. d.
canon says: It is not to be doubted, but such as have taken orders, at other
times than are appointed, have received the character (that is, are indeed
priests:) and after inflicting upon them due penance for their transgression
herein, you may tolerate them to minister, according to the orders that they
have taken. Now he comes to another quidditie, and as he would have us
believe a substantial solemnity, which is the presentation of ministers to
the Bishop by the Archdeacon, without naming of his deputy, as is done in
deacons ordinations. Which point, if it were of substance, might no doubt in
many places reach as well unto the prejudice of good and learned ministers, as
of unlearned. But what reason were there, that the minister should be punished
for the archdeacons neglect of his duty? Or of whom should he inquire, if he
knew him not, whether he were the very archdeacon, or but his deputy? Or why
should we think that the deputy may not be as sufficient to present them to
the Bishop, as the archdeacon himself? Or why are we to imagine, seeing the
book presumes for the most part, both the order of deacon to some, and of
priesthood to other some, to be given in one day, that the archdeacon being
present, would depute one to present deacons, and he himself in person present
the priests? And what if the cathedral church have no archdeacon established
there, or the archdeaconrie be void, or he himself bedridden; shall the Bishop
(diverse places of ministration being vold in the diocese) stay the ordering
of ministers for those void rooms, till there be a new archdeacon? And what if
the Bishop do so sufficiently know them, or do examine them himself, that
the archdeacon does not examine them, what need is there then for him to
present them? Or why is this more of substance than the Bishops Sitting in a
chair, when the oath of supremacy is ministered, which the Book mentions; or
to order at the least three at a tune: seeing the book says; The archdeacon
shall present unto the Bishop all them that shall receive the order of
priesthood that day, which cannot be spoken of fewer than of three? Or if none
but the archdeacon might present ministers, without overthrow of the whole
action, why did not the book say; The archdeacon himself, and none other
shall present. And seeing it is said otherwise, the act in law shall be good
enough, as has been showed before. And the rule of law is; Reg. qui per
alium, and ibi Dynus.
That which is done by another, seems in the eye of the law to be done by
himself. But he says, the archdeacons industry is herein especially chosen:
and therefore this duty cannot be committed over again to any other. For
proof of this consequence, he alleges two places, one of them thrice, and
the other twice over, for fear he should seem to lack law in this point.
That, c. sicui de preb. and digin. in 6.
out of the text (which yet gave him light to flourish and brave a little with
the Bishop of London, and his Archdeacon, about the Treasureship of Powles)
speaks not a word of inhibiting a delegate, to substitute another for him:
but decideth, that if the prince commit authority to a man to furnish certain
benefices with fit men, and die before the trust be accomplished, yet the
commission does not determine: but if it be to place some certain person
therein, and before he be placed, the prince dies; then the commission hereby
does cease. The other canon out of the Decretals makes directly against him,
saving in certain cases there expressed: Because c. quoniam Ext. de officio
delegati.
(says that canon) the apostolic See intends to provide for matters, and
not for persons to whom they are committed; if the judge either of mere office
by us assigned unto him, or by the parties consent agreed upon, do depute
another in his steed (considering the princes delegate may by law do so) this
deputation shall be of force. The like is to be said of a Bishop, who has a
commission to execute together with the one of his colleagues, for he may
substitute another, and then the other two colleagues cannot proceed without
him, whom the Bishop did subdelegate. c. d.. is antem.
when a man is inioined to execute a matter personally, except the parties do
consent. Also c. d.. d. ver. praeter quam.
when an inquisition or provision for apt prelates or ministers is committed to
be done, because in such, the industry and credit of the party is intended,
especially to have been regarded. Lastly it fails c. d.. caeterum.
when not a jurisdiction, but a bare ministry and execution of some matter is
recommended. None of which three limitations can any way be applied to the
presentation of ministers by the archdeacon only. For if he had been so
strictly tied, then should this word Personally, or some equivalent have
been used. Neither is the provision for apt ministers, or the blame for
default thereof (as our Page 64. and 65. vide gl. in c. ad h^c ver. examinentur
Ext. de officio Archidiaconi etc. Episco. Ext. de preb.
author himself before has proved) incident to the archdeacon, but to the
Bishop, and the law chooses not the industry of him to this effect: but the
Bishop in all places chooses his archdeacon, upon whom this jurisdiction, in
right of his office, is thereupon cast. And therefore this is not as a bare
ministry committed unto him by any man, but cast upon him by reason of his
office, through the disposition of the law; yet not so necessarily or
especially as our author urges, but that by law the presentation by the
archdeacon may be omitted: That Gl. in c. qua^do, ver. sacerdotes. did. 24.
is (says the gloss) when the Bishop ordeineth without any presenting by the
archdeacon.

And Gl. in ca. ad haec ver. examinentur, Ext. de officio Archid. etc. vt
nostrum. d.
another gloss says; That of common right it is the archdeacons office, to
examine and present clearks to be ordained: yet this is not general, if either
there be no archdeacon, as in many churches, or if the Bishop think good to
c. quando did. 24.
choose especially other priests for this purpose. And if it were of
substance, yet in the answer to the former section it is sufficiently showed,
that the leaving of it out, cannot make void the ordination. So that his first
conclusion, that these three, The examination, the time for ordering, and the
presenting by the archdeacon, and also The calling, whereof he has before not
spoken one word, are points Essential, and causes formal, does fall flat to
the ground; and much more his other conclusion depending thereof: that none
being no preachers (whom he therefore called Toong-tied) are to be accounted
ministers, because they are Not made according to the order and form of the
statute. Whereby he would beat not unlearned ministers alone; but withal,
like one blindfolded with malice, he lasheth out at all ministers, in whose
ordination some such slender circumstance has not been perhaps used.

41. Section. Page 83, 84.
ID his question here, seeing All solemnities in the making of ministers (as
he thinks) are by the lawmakers appointment essential or substantial, in
case some not of the least moment only and which might otherwise well enough
have been reputed accidental, be omitted; but other of greater weight which
he reckons: whether then men so ordained By our statute law be ministers at
all or no? I do answer, that except he can both prove all such (whose
omission he would enforce to overthrow the whole action) to be essential; and
also those other circumstances to concur, which in the end of the next section
saving one before, I have showed to be required to the adnulling of an act for
want of form, we must still account them for lawful ministers in the church.
For although the Bishop, who omitteth any of those which be of moment, may be
punished: yet I for my part cannot account any point of the ordination to be
the formal cause of the external calling into the ministry, besides the
words, giving the authority to execute that function, and the two necessary
solemnities of prayer, and the imposition of hands. I do observe in this
section, that he or his printer to gratify him, has twice changed the form
of the letter from Roman unto Italian, as though they were not the authors
only words, but some allegation. Also, that among those things which he would
necessarily have the Bishop to have regard unto, and not to omit at
ordinations, he reckons this: that the minister be moved by the Holie-ghost,
and be persuaded of the sufficiency of scripture to salvation, and surmiseth
(very uncharitably) these to be wanting in Too too many of our ministers,
which no man, but the spirit of the man himself, which is within him, can
judge: so soon is he lept into Gods own throne; and faketh upon him, to set
down what lies hid in a man's own conscience. Likewise is that of his
ridiculous, where he blames the Bishop for ordering him, that is not example
to his flock, or will not teach, etc: considering it is not possible for the
Bishop to prophecy, how the minister will behave himself in his function
afterward. And the book prescribes not these as qualities to be attended
before the ordination: but as solemn vows and promises before God and his
congregation: the more strictly to tie the minister unto the fulfilling of his
duty. And so is this as foolish and wandering, where he says, The unlearned
ministers, the complaints to the Council, and the Bishops own records, are
glasses, where in we may see these omissions of form and manner at ordinations
not to be feigned. I do think very few complaints have been made for not
observing the form of the book, and fewer circumstances omitted (I am sure)
are recorded. Touching his Daior proposition of his syllogism, That the form
not observed by him, which had no authority before that book of ordering was
by law confirmed, except he mean it, that they had no authority before to
make them according to that form, is most apparentlie false, and to be
controlled by infinite laws and canons, which endow them with this authority,
as incident unto their dignity, even from the apostles times downward. Now
the law is berie evident, that Gloss. singul. and Caerd. in Clem. 1. in princ.
de iure patronatus. and Phil. in c. qua front Ext. de appel.
If a form be by law set down to be done by an Ordinary, in that point
wherein he had jurisdiction before, though the form be not observed, yet the
act done is of force, and shall stand. Therefore the vanity of all that has
to this purpose hitherto by him been said, is hereby detected. But admitting
the conclusion were true, That process not made according to the order and
form of the statute were void: how can he infer hereof, that all not being
preachers (whom therefore he calls Dumb and idoll-ministers) are no
ministers at all? Dust we think that such, as at their making ministers are
able to preach, have this privilege peculiar only to them, that no part of
the form can possibly be omitted at their ordination; and that other that be
not able, are all so unhappy, that the Bishop possibly cannot at their
ordination hit upon it? But what shall we say then, if one able to preach, and
another not able, be at one time and in one manner ordained together: shall the
one, shall both, or shall neither, for want only of some form, be ministers
Indeed, and by law, according to this man's supposition?

42. Section. Page 85.
THaue showed before what force these reasons of similitude or comparison are
of, in all disputation; but especially in matter of law. His L 10. ff. de
decuri.
first, That the inserting of a man's name in the register of decurions, will
not make him a decurion without a due election, being set by him vnquoted, has
not so much as a color or show to prove any thing else, but that every one
is not straight (without the outward calling of the church) to be reputed a
minister, though he by some means have gotten letters of orders. The l. 30.
ff. qua^do dies, lega. cedat.
reason of the other law by him alleged, why the Iegacie given to an infant
the day of her marriage, shall not be due before the be married and have
atteined twelve years of age, is: because before that time it is but a mock
marriage, and may be dissolved at such age, neither is reputed a just and
lawful matrimony before that time, according to that, Institut de nup^^s in
initio.
Iustas nuptias inter se contrahunt ciues Romani, viri quidem puberes, foeminae
autem viripotentes. If he will apply this to his purpose, then must he prove,
that an ordination into the ministry of any not able to preach, is by law as
no ordination: the contrary where of I Sect. 30.
have before showed, even out of that statute, which here he alleges: where it
was also said, that the statute has no one word, to make void admissions to
orders, in respect of any default there touched, as may appear to those who
will peruse it.

43. Section. Page 85, 86, 87, 88, 89.
Because our author will make sure work, he is now come to A principal reason
by an action of guile and deceit, against the Bishop or the minister (I know
not whether) which is so sure an hold, that Cicero li. 2. de natura deorum.
one calls it, Euerriculum maliciarum omnium, A very drag-net to catch in
all ill dealings whatsoever. He reasons thus (as I gather it:) No solemn
contract or stipulation, in which there is no good faith and plain dealing
used, but guile, does by law bind, but is meerelie void: But there is a
solemn contractor stipulation used betwixt the Bishop and the party to be
made a minister, which is unlearned, wherein good faith is wanting, and guile
is used: Therefore the said contract or stipulation does not bind, but is
meerelie void: and consequently such are intrudors, and ought not to have the
name or title of ministers. Here I must put the reader in mind again, that the
author still takes as granted, and as by his own right, that which is
principally in controversy, that is, every one to be an Idol-minister, and
utterly Unlearned, that cannot preach. In the discourse for proof of his
Mayor, there is great boast and small roast; diverse unneedful examples and
places are brought, whereof some twice quoted over (for failing) are used very
far off from the purpose: which argues his skill to be small, where his
choice for proof of a truth is so slender. For none of his three first
allegations do so much as once mention good faith wanting, or guile used:
although truth it is, the faults there spoken of, arising if not of
wilfulness, yet at the least of ignorance of the law, which is to excuse no
man, neither can be intended and presumed, do emploie good faith to be
wanting, in such breaches of law. The place quoted, L. venditione C. de vsuris
comes in as a mute in a show, to make up a number, seeing no such law is yet
framed, that I can find. In his Mayor I do also observe gross ignorance in
law showed two ways. First, where he confounds Priuationem bonae fidei cum
dolo, making it necessarily guile, wheresoever good faith is not, by a
fallacy a Consequenti: and secondly where he makes the want of good faith or
guile, to work the same effect by law in contracts which be called Bonaefidei,
as in those stipulations which be Stricti iudicij. Touching the first, though
L. si cum fundum ff. de contra. empt. l. bonae fidei ff. de verb. significat l.
res bonaff. de co^tra^. empt. and l. vbi ff. de rebus dubijs.
sometime in law by Good faith be signified whatsoever is free from guile,
fraud, and craft, yet L. bona fides ff. depositi. l. quero. ff. locati. l. ex
maleficio. ff. de act. and obligat. l. 1.. hanc actionem ff. depositi. and l.
si manda^ero.. Iulianus. ff. mandati.
sometime is it also used for that which the Graecians call (...), and the
Latins Bonum and aequum, the common lawyers equity, which is opposite to
rigor. Concerning the second: L. and elega^ter. ff. de dolo. l. in causae. ff.
de minoribus.
that contract which the law calls Bonaefidei, if guile and deceit did
occasion it, is by the very operation of the law no contract, and void
altogether. But that which is called Stricti iudicij, such as stipulations are,
is not by L. dolo C. de inutil. stipula.
law void, but according to the pretoriall law to be avoided by action or
exception of guile: which besides the law it self Tullie in Cic. lib. 3. de
natura deor. and 1. offic.
diverse places witnesses, that at the first such guile for along time passed
without any controllement: Cic. li. 3. offi.
namely, where having said that in contracts Bonaefidei, even without any set
law, guile was punished: but (says he) in other judgments or actions guile
was altogether unpunished, till the lawyer Aquilius L. vl^.. si and stipulator
ff. de eo per quem factum erit. and l. domum ff. de cont^^. ^mpt.
had set out certain observations, which the pretors in framing of processes
and actions against such guilefull persons, should follow. As for his Minor
proposition, it is in two respects untrue, and to be denied. First there is no
such solemn contract or stipulation concluded betwixt the Bishop and the
party to be ordered: for those demands and answers prescribed are not for any
such purpose, as to bind the minister unto the Bishop upon any pain to
perform that, which he there promises: but is a solemn promise before God
and his congregation, of a settled and advised purpose, that he has to perform
his duty in the ministry, according to that his public testification and
vow. Which plainly may appear, by the purport immediately following,
directed unto that end wholly, that it would please GOD to strengthen him in
that good purpose whereunto he has entered.

If it were any otherwise, I pray you what action for the prosecution of any
private interest, does lie for the Bishop against such a minister as keeps
not such his promises, whereby the stipulation surmised should be committed or
forfeited? Furthermore, the other part of his Minor, which surmiseth guile and
deceit to be both on the part and behalf of The minister, as knowing him self
void of those gifts which ought to be in him, whereby he cannot believe
himself to be truly called or moved by the Holieghost: and also on the part
of The Bishop, as knowing the party to be a man altogether unfit for the
ministry is likewise to be denied. And if (as he says) guile and deceit be on
both parts, then does he strive against himself, because then the action
shall stand good, Quia dolus dolo compensatur, one guile must be set against
another, and neither on the one part, or the other shall the contract be
overthrown. But how is it possible for our author, or any man else (besides
the parties themselves) so confidentlie to pronounce of other men's thoughts,
and to ransacke up their consciences in this sort? Seeing the law says; We are
not to presume that they know any such defect, till it may be by us otherwise
plainly proved. For this thought of theirs by him surmised, is a matter not
consisting in law, but in fact, Et Din. in reg. presumitur.
praesumitur ignorantia facti, vbinon probatur scientia, A man is then intended
to be ignorant of a fact, where it is not proved that he knows it. And where
ignorance of a fact and not of law is alleged, there Semper praesumitur
bonafides, L. penult. C. de prescrip. longi temporis, and Din. in reg. contra.
siabesse non probetur, Always good faith and upright dealing is to be
presumed, if the contrary be not proved. And therefore this rash judgment of
his before the time, that all they whom he imagines, and by his own only
balance tries to be unlearned, Are not truly called, nor moved by the
Holie-ghost, as it is uncharitable in terms of christianity, so is it not
warrantable by law. Naie if we should admit such a contract and stipulation to
be concluded betwixt the Bishop and the minister, and that guile and deceit had
therein such a stroke, that by no compensation it could be saved, but that the
action were voidable: yet nevertheless, seeing he makes it A stipulation and
sure bond by words, by mere law the action and contract shall stand good, till
it be reuersed, as he himself His own reason recor^ed against him.
confesses: till when, both in name and deed, they may in law be truly
called ministers. Yea, and further, if that whole contract and stipulation were
Ipso iure, even by common right meerelie void: yet hereof cannot be inferred
(as he does) that such Are intrudors, yea and not so much as in name,
ministers. Seeing these demands and answers are but solemnities about that
action, yet not the sole and only solemnities thereof: but least of all are
they of the substantial form of ordination, which reaches no further than to
the authority of ministration given, when the Bishop having prayed, does with
the ministers present, lay on their hands upon him, that is ordained. And
therefore that which as a corollarie he builds here upon, that seeing this
contract fraudulently contrived, cannot bind either of the parties, Much less
can it tie the common wealth or church of Christ, does all under one receive
an answer. But that which he says of wicked promises and oaths against
honesty, which bind no man to keep them; does argue, that he cares not what
he say, so he say any thing. Is there any thing (I pray you) in those
demands and answers (which he, as it seems, means) by An oath against good
manners, and by wicked promises, which is not most godly and fit to be used in
such an action; yea and is such, as whereof diverse times in this book he has
urged a strict observation? Of like skill and discretion is that, which he
brings out of the impossibility of performance of such conditions by the
minister, to prove the contract betwixt the minister and him void: Because no
man can be tied to impossibilities. For if those promises there to be made, are
such impossible Dynus in reg. impossibilium.
things as the law means: that is either by nature impossible, as to be in
two places at once; or in fact, as to go from hence to Rome in a day; or by
law, being forbidden, as to sell mine hand unto you for a yeerelie annuitie:
then has he by his own construction shut out of doors, not only unlearned,
but all other ministers, ordained according to the order of this church of
England, from being true ministers. But thanks be to God, his malice and his
might in reasoning are not alike, and neither are those interrogatories and
answers any contract, nor the chief part of that action, nor yet do contain
any such impossibility. But perhaps he meant, that they which were utterly
unlearned, could not possible fully perform all which they there promised,
and so thinking also that all impossibility was simple and absolute, as never
dreaming of an impossibility Ex hypothesi, which (it may be) he never heard of
or understood: he did therefore belike imagine, that this reason also might go
for good payment amongst the rest.

44. Section. Page 89, 90, 91.
HIS former reason of guile and deceit, though it have but a leaden point, yet
it serves him to as many uses, as though it were Delphicus gladius. For he
thereby first concludes, The contract betwixt the Bishop and the minister to
be void; next, that Such ministers are intrudors; then, that They deferue not
the title and name of ministers; and now, That the Bishop by law ought to cite
such a minister Ex officio, and to proceed to his deposing. Truly we are
greatly beholden unto him, as for his art herein, so in that he will leave
this liberty to the Bishop to depose ministers upon just occasion, and that
proceeding Ex mero officio against them. But how agrees this with his popular
election of ministers? For I hope if the people with the Bishop have the
placing, naie if he must but admit like a Vicechancelour whom they present
unto him; then must they have authority also to displace their minister, for
c. 1. and 2. Ext. de Capellis Monachorum c. cum and plantare. in eccles^s. Ext.
de priuilegijs.
Cuius est instituere, eius est destituere, He that has authority to place in
a benefice, he has also to displace. And as before he was content to frame a
part of submission for the Bishops, so here (in great kindship for sooth) he
draws in their behalf a process against such a minister, arguing
sufficiently his deep insight in law, being such a piece of work, as for
which all the advocates in Spire, Paris, Bolonia, and Civil, may wonder on
him, and cast their caps at it, for ever making such another infamous libell,
rather than legal syllogism. I will trusse up this his solemn process as
short as I can, in this manner: You person A. B. deceived me when I made you a
minister, you made an open lie, you have not kept promise, either by preaching,
or exercising discipline in your parish, you sue your neighbors for trifles,
and you have not since repented you of these, with diverse others; therefore I
have summoned you to depose you. And by the way I will advise you not to
think me unconstant, doing nothing herein, but what an emperor in a less
matter did before me, and that which is for your own benefit. In his process,
set out at large in his book, I observe that he lays a great number of
faults (as I take it) jointly, whereof if any one be not proved, the
defendant must be absolved. For otherwise he must tell us, whether every of
these which be objected, do severally deserve deposition by law, Inconstancy.
which I think no man will affirm. Also that which before he called A solemn
stipulation, betwixt the Bishop and the party ordained, he now terms a Vow
to GOD. Further he deduceth in his process many faults against the minister,
as Dishonouring and profaning GOD, quarelling, and such like: so Spec. de
posi^i.. 5. 1. ver. item ad.
generally and vncerteinlie, that by law they are to be rejected, being not
otherwise by the defendant to be answered. And he which before had accused Both
Bishop and minister of guile and collusion between them, does here seem to
clear the Bishop, as being by Guile of the other party circumuented. As for
the ministers Not preaching being vnlicenced, and Not exercising of discipline,
is but friuolouslie alleged; seeing no laws do warrant them, but such as the
author has framed in his own forge. Here is also laid down contrary to
rules of law, and objected against the minister, a negative improbable; as that
he Never instructed any of his parish, that salvation was by Christ alone.
Moreover, he makes the Bishop to take upon him to know the very cogitations
of the heart, as that Good faith was not meant by the minister, that he did
contrary to his own conscience, that his prayer was hypocritical, and that
he has at no time since repented. So that I, for my part, am so far from
thinking such proceeding (as is here set down) to be A noble and famous
practice of a good and godly Bishop: as that he were rather to be judged a
mad, passionate, and a furious man, which would in this sort, contrary to all
man's law, deuest a man of his living and function; and to be possessed with a
Luciferian spirit, which so confidentlie would, contrary to Gods law, condemn
another man's inward cogitations, unknown to the angels in heaven, and to all
the devils in hell. But I beseech you how does this solemn sentence of
deposition and degradation agree with his purpose in this place, and in some
sections before: where he thought he had proved, that such as he here deposes
for sundry Hypocrisies, public falsifications, sacrileges, mockings of God,
and delusions of laws, were not so much as in name any ministers at all? So
that this so solemn proceeding here, does nothing else but kill him out
right, by cutting off his head, that was dead two days before. This part of a
Bishops duty, which he so extolleth, he further does enforce by way of two
comparisons to be incident unto him to see it put in practice. For the first,
when he or any other has proved, every minister which is not qualified
sufficiently to preach, of necessity to be an Hypocrite, a falsifier of his
word, an impious and sacrilegious person, an open mocker and deluder both of
the law of God, and of her Majesty's laws; then will that Bishop he means,
be as ready to depose such a one; as he was dutiful to see the obstinate
contempt and breach of her Majesty's laws punished by imprisonment in him,
whom this man calls Honest, poor, faithful watchman of the Lord, and
painful teacher: who nevertheless perhaps was as far from desert of any of
these commendations, as the most of them, at whom he so viperouslie hisseth;
and as worthy for any stuff or learning, to be sent again to the plough
handle, or weauers loome, as any of those, whom he with such gall and
bitterness does prosecute. But is it credible that this man both here and
elsewhere, would inueigh against the Impugners or deluders of her Majesty's
laws, and call for their deposing, that is not content only to traduce his
superiors, for executing their duty in points incident to their charge: but
also odiouslie and maliciously, thus to tawnt and to hale into hatred,
reverend Fathers, even for the execution of her Majesty's laws, which are with
a most strict charge by the whole realm in parliament, to them earnestly
recommended? Yea not only to condemn them in this respect, but to commend
others for Honest men, painful teachers, etc: which purposelie oppose
themselves against laws established: approaching herein to a kind of papalitie,
whereby they would judge all other men, but none must judge them: Quia quod nos
volumus, sanctum est. Naie in his second comparison, he plainly and in flat
terms justifies such impugners of law, as men only Making conscience
Impugners of law maintained.
not to offend God in any small thing, and debaseth those, that punish them for
such breaches of law, when he says, They are whipped and excommunicated for
their conscience sake: and by way of a most spiteful and Cynicall antithesis
would dub all to be Foolitanes, and to make no conscience to offend God in all
things, who have not aspired to that sublimitie of perfection, as to stumble at
a straw, and leap over a block; to strain at a gnat, and swallow up a
camel. So that we see he allows their doings as proceeding of a good
Conscience, and of fear To offend God in any small thing: he indirectlie
accuses Seditious doctrine.
her Majesty's laws with the whole realms to be such in some parts, as not
only we need not to obeie for conscience sake; but for reteining of a good
Conscience, and fear of offending God, we ought not to observe; and also
charge those (who indeed for conscience sake, obeieng the magistrate in these
mere indifferent things, least by their contempt they do also hereby offend
God) to make no conscience to offend God in all things: and yet this man
forsooth may not be accounted A lawles and rebellious Puritan, that thus
breaks thorough the lines, and cracketh the ioints of all our obedience to
magistrates: whose power to command consists in nothing, if not in the use of
mere indifferent matters.

45. Section. Page 91, 92.
HEre, by a preoccupation, meaning to leave all sure behind him, he makes in
the person of An old canonist, an objection against deposing a man once
ordained, in respect of unworthiness: seeing the Bishops sentence and judgment
whereby he once approved him, being not appealed from within ten days (as the
text, which he quoteth, distinguishes) does pass into terms of a matter
decided and adjudged, and becomes an ouerruled case. He says to this, that
he will Answer law with law, but tells us not where we may find his law. In
which answer he greatly bewraieth his own oversight: for if the law where
with he confronteth the objection, be directly contrary to it, then has he
not resolved the doubt, but made it stronger, seeing the law admits no
Antinomies: and it is against rules of reasoning, to answer one doubtful
matter or objection by another. If it be but diverse, then should he prove,
that his second laws decision is to be referred unto, and to distingush the
former, which he cannot in this answer. For where he should show (the Bishops
definitive sentence, for the fitness of the minister, notwithstanding) that
yet he may be looked into, and tried, not to have been so fit at that time, as
he ought, and there upon be deposed; which should be as an exception to the
former law: In steed hereof he tells us, that For some cause afterward
arising, inquisition may be made, whereby one being once allowed, may again be
allowed and dissallowed. By the first part of which answer we may gather, that
he answers not Adidem; for he should show, not that for a new matter,
inquisition may be had of him; but upon his former sufficiency or
insufficiency, though more than ten days be past after his ordering. But as
it is no doubt, but for some faults found in the minister after his ordering,
he may by law be even degraded: so it is as notorious, if he were sufficient
at his ordering, and by old age or the visitation of God, do fall afterward to
great imperfections and disabilities in wit, memory, and understanding; he may
not against his will be removed, but is to have a Coadiutor assigned unto him,
at his costs and charges. Which thing, even the reformed churches of France, in
their discipline and policy do retain, where they have thus decreed, La
discipline de France. art. 31.
Mais ceulx ne seront, etc: But such shall not be deposed, which through age,
infirmity, or other like impediment shall become unfit to execute their
functions. In which case their former estate shall be reserved, and they shall
be recommended to their own churches to be maintained, and another shall be
provided which shall execute their charge. The second part of his answer
contains one of our authors riddles. For what end (I beseech you) should a
man Once allowed, be allowed again, and yet disallowed? Well, the truth is,
that he was deceived, when he translated Probatus, tried, as though it had
been Approbatus, allowed. For c. cum secundu^ ampl. ver. liceat. Extra. de
pro. and dign. Salsification detected.
the gloss, which detecteth his crafty packing in his answer, for which end
also he was unwilling to quote it at all, is in this passage thus: If the
superior should write to the ordeinour, he might not object any thing, except
that were expresselie set down in the letters, because he ought to hold them
fit for a benefice, whom he esteemed fit for orders. c. accepimus, Ext. de
aetat. and qual. But the successor may object: And so he that was once
Approbatus, iterum probatur and reprobatur: allowed, is again tried and
disallowed, as the physician is, Lvt gradatim. reprobari. ff. de muneribus and
honoribus, etc. And a little after says the gloss, But all this is but of
favor, because we ought not to inquire often of one man's fact. L. licet in
fine ff. nautae, caupones. But are we not to presume for the sufficiency of
him that is ordained? An argument that we are, is in C. post cessionem Ext. de
probat. Except the contrary be proved. But why should we take knowledge
afterward of the ministers fitnes, seeing the sentence of the Bishop, wherein he
pronounced him fit, is already passed into the force of a matter adjudged and
ouer-ruled, being not appealed from c. cum dilecti. Ext. de elect. We must
answer, either that all this reexamining is but of special favor, or else
that this inquiry is only made, upon some new cause afterward arising. c. 1.
Ext. de aetat, etc. Where we see both the objection he brings, and his answer
in part touched, but not rested upon. For the gloss here plainly decideth,
that a ministers former fitness is not after his ordeining, no not by the
successor of the Bishop that made him, to be scanned upon, but either upon some
occasion afterward newly happening, or by special grace or direction to the
Bishop from the superior. We see also hereby, his wrong translation, his
leaving out of some part, and foisting in of other some, and his wilful
falsification of the gloss to serve his turn and humor. And to this decision
of the gloss, that a Bishop may not deuest one of his living in regard of
insufficiency, that is once allowed, agrees Bartol. as he is alleged by
Panor. in c. vlt. infine Ext. de aetat. and qualit. facit ad hoc c. accepimus
Ext. d.
Panormitane. If (says Panormitane) it be afterward spied out, that the
minister is very ignorant, may the Bishop take away his prebend? Bartolus
says he may not, Modo sciat officium, so that he can say mass: and alleges
to this end, c. quando. c. qui ipsis, etc. sequens 38. distinct. And therefore
to conclude, as the author does, but yet to another end: it behooves all that
be in authority, in many respects to see her Majesty's laws strictly
executed against such yokelesse and fanaticall spirits as this, who under
color and pretense of laws in force, which he cannot prove, otherwise than
you have heard: does enforce most dangerous innouations in this church, and
most dishonorable to her Majesty's renowned government hitherto, as well for
matters as persons ecclesiastical: who debaseth with might and maine, and
whetteth men's toongs at the least, against all that execute or conform
themselves to her Majesty's godly proceedings, in church government and
external policy: who magnifieth and extolleth the contrary faction, and who
not obscurelie, Slilie or covertly, but even plainly (notwithstanding his
apology now ensuing) bereaueth us as much as his poor spite will serve him,
almost wholly of a lawful ministry in England. And I pray God, that by
better weights than these which he brings, and by a more exact touch, both
the sufficiency of our ministers may be tried, and also for the better
encouragement of more able men for that function hereafter, the livings
allotted to the ecclesiastical state, may rather be increased, than by
corruption and sinister devises gelded and shredded, by foxes and wild bores
out of the wood that destroy the vineyard, and by Nimrods and mighty hunters
of Gods people. For it has been, and always will be true, Honos alit arts.
And where rewards of learning do in number or quantity decaie, there learning
it self will not with like alacrity to any ripenes be pursued. The want of
which rewards of learning in that respect, with lamentable experience, and too
late repentance, some countries already do taste, and are like more and more
to feel hereafter.

46. Section. Page 92, 93, 94, 95.
NDw, as though some other better stayed man, pitieng the former follies and
undutiful lavish speeches of our anthor, and seeking to qualify them in part,
as not so hardly meant as the words do import, had stepped here into plaic,
and taken the matter in hand; are we come to a more calm and temperate
apology: not so much of any good love, as for fear it Might otherwise be unto
him dangerous, as well as it is offensive to others. Whereby for the wounding
of many weak consciences, ready to take offense upon lighter occasions than
these, for the calling of the whole state ecclesiastical into hazard of their
ministry and livings, we shall have of him only a plaster of a few glosing
words, to make amends for all. Nothing else but protesting in effect, that he
is not so far gone in these conceits, as some of the same hair are; who do
run so far, that except they quickly stay, they may perhaps with good desert
run themselves of a sudden out of breath. I will therefore breeflie examine how
he auoideth that, which has been so necessarily gathered of his former
speeches; which is, that according to his construction, it may happen even the
best men we have, to be destitute of any lawful calling into the ministry.
But in this section before he come so far, he makes a kind of confession,
whereby he seems fit to be taken at his word, as being presently in a
reasonable good mind. First, He confesses we have a true church in England,
whereby it appears he takes such for no Honest poor men, nor the Lords
watchmen, which say we have scarce the face of a true church in England. Next,
he acknowledges Her Majesty's lawful and sole sovereign government, over
all causes and persons: whereupon may be gathered, he was not well advised
before, in seeking The authors inconstancy.
to establish popular elections of ministers, where upon of consequence would
follow, as also no less is included in the generality of his proofs, that
Bishops and Deanes nominations shall be attributed also (from her Daiestie)
unto the people; nor yet when he made the contempt of obeieng her Daiesties
laws concerning indifferent rites and ceremonies, a commendable thing in them,
as proceeding Of conscience and of fear to offend GOD in any small thing. For
in what causes ecclesiastical, can her Highness lawful government be
exercised and bestowed, if with a good conscience, and without offense of God,
she may be disobeied in matters meerelie indifferent? He goes on, and
confesses, That her Majesty ought to put in execution, according to the
prescript rule of Gods word, the doctrines delivered by the ministers, for
abolishing of all and all manner superstitions and abuses, retained in the
church, and for the establishing of a perfect government of it. Whereby we may
see, how hard it is for a cat of mountain to change his spots, or a Morian his
tanned hue, or for him to play a little upon his old by-asse. For does he not
here in a manner plainly condemn her Haiestie, Factious speeches.
not to have done as the Ought, nor according to the prescript rule of Gods
word? Does he not insinuate the perfect government of the church, not to be
yet established? And does he not expresselie say; that Superstitions and
abuses are retained in the church? D wicked and ungrateful wretches to the
Daiestie of God, and to his lieutenant the Dueenes Highness! which in regard
of so many and so manifold blessings by her ministry bestowed, do
recompense and requite them with repining, and with slander in this manner. Non
sic fecit Deus omni nationi, who make us all thankful for them.

The other three members of his speech and confession in this place, touching
the ministers duty toward magistrate and people, of the peoples obedience to
the magistrates and ministers, and of the concurrence of the ministers
instruction with the magistrates authority in the government of the church,
though no more than of the rest I can see how they are incident to this
treatise; yet I do not perceive any cause why they should be rejected.
Nevertheless, if the minister as doubting of the lawfulness of his own
external calling; and the magistrate and people as surmising him to have run
before he was sent, should beeeue our author in his former nice points about
ordinations: I cannot conjecture, that either the minister with any courageous
spirit can discharge this duty, or that the magistrate and people can or will
regard that which he speaks, as they ought to do, from the mouth of him that
is Gods true ambassador unto them: or yield unto their maintenance their tithes
and other duties truly and faithfully as they ought. The examples which he
here brings, though some of them sound suspiciouslie, considering from whom
they proceed, are mere apologeticall, tending to prove, that the ministers
and people may not of their own head, without the princes authority, seek to
execute any reformation, and thereby to purge our author from the suspicion of
the traitorous heresy of certain late pestilent Sectaries. But his repining
and mutinous doubting with his Ifs and Ands, which he casts in the neck of
his former apology, whereby, like Scyria capra, he ouerturneth the milk with
his heel, that before he yeelved; does be wraie his discontented mind, and
slender estimation he carries of the godly reformation established by her
Majesty. For what else do these voices yield, [If her Majesty's eyes be not
Seditious speeches and undutiful.
yet opened, if some blemishes and blots remain in her government, if
counselors be hired to trouble the building all the days of Cyrus, if the
walls must be reedified by Eliashib, if the church must tarry Gods leisure, if
any other glorious purpose be to work in our days by her. Highness:] but to
fill unstable heads of the people, to whom this book was especially
addressed, with buzzing of dislike to things present, and hope of alterations,
and new fangled innouations hereafter? Which conceits cannot tend any ways to
her Daiesties honor, nor work to the security and quiet of the realm. And
those which have so quezie and squemish stomachs at the state present, joined
with such an esseminate longing, and Absurd appetite of restless and endless
alternations in church matters: I pray God they have not cause, with the
first, never to have wished change, nor that they ever see the time wherein
they would with all their hearts desire, with favor and liberty of
conscience, to enioie that form of liturgy, ecclesiastical policy, and
church government, which by the mercies of God, and her Daiesties ministry,
are now planted in this church, if they might hope to atteine it! Bonum non
fruendo, sed carendo redditur charius.

47. Section. Page 95, 96, 97.
THus having showed some part of his former Apology and protestation to be
very doubtfullie delivered, and both that and other his speeches before to be
very Offensive unto many, and therefore that (which his guilty conscience
tells him) Might have been dangerous to his person, is not yet ouerblowne or
avoided: we are now come to his purgation of that which might and has been
objected, that he Insinuates indeed no lawful ministry to be in England.
But he confesses now, That every one meet and apt to teach, that every one
qualified as is requisite, that every one moved inwardly by the Holie-ghost,
and outwardly called and appointed by the Bishop, having authority by the
order of this church of England, is indeed, and by law a minister. If these be
spoken distributiuelie, as the word Every, and the Intersections by (...) do
import; then has he established some a minister without Outward calling, so he
be otherwise qualified as is requisite; then may a man be qualified as is
requisite thereto, being not apt to teach, nor inwardly moved unto it by the
Holie-ghost, or outwardly called and appointed by the Bishop. And what if he
(after this man's construction) have not Authority by the order of this church
of England; as not having been consecrated by such a B. as was consecrated
according to the order of the book established? Which our author makes so
necessary, as that he reasons before out of the words of the statute
negatiuelie; to wit, none to be a Bishop, priest or deacon, but such as Page 77.
were consecrated and ordered according to the form and manner of that book;
but admitting them to be taken jointly, yet his reasons to prove such to be
Ministers indeed and by law, are so childish beggings of that which may be
controuersed, that (I assure you) a man might justly doubt, that he did but
dally and Praeuaricari herein. First (he says) they are so, because They are
indeed and truth messengers A childish fallacy.
sent by God. Secondly, because they Are ministers by the law of this land.
Truly, this man that was so strict before, is soon woone, which is overcome
with these doughtie reasons, which no man, but he may with as great
probability deny, as he may do the conclusion to be proved, being the very
selfsame with the premises, consisting in these two reasons. Touching the
matter it self, law teaches us, that A protestation with a contrary act
works nothing. Therefore how can this protestation relieve our author any Page
77.
thing, who has before plainly refused all for ministers, in whose
ordinations the manner and form of the book is not exactlie observed? And
which makes All solemnities therein Page 83.
even of the least moment to be substantial and not accidental, by the
lawmakers appointment? Therefore out of his own words and reasons to prove
this his protestation vain and elusorie, I reason thus.

1 Wheresoever the first branch of the statute, for the Page 77.
observing of a form and order in the ordinations of ministers, is broken,
there the second branch authorizing them to be in very deed ministers can take
no place: But some Page 92.
of the points required, have been, and are perhaps daily omitted in making
even the best men that are in the ministry at this day, and so the form and
order of the book not observed: Therefore the best men that are in the
ministry at this day, perhaps are not in very deed ministers.

2 Wheresoever the form of an act is not specially, Page 78, 80. and deinceps.
and at an inch, and not by any thing equivalent observed, there the act by
mere law is no act at all: But some points Page 92.
of the form required are perhaps daily unobserved in making the best men
ministers, that are in the ministry at this day: Therefore, etc.

3 Wheresoever a certain form and order of proceeding Page 84.
is appointed, to those that had no authority before such commission; there if
the form be not observed, the process by law is meerelie void: But the
Bishops before Page 84, 92.
the statute, having no authority to make deacons or ministers, do omit the
form perhaps daily in making the best men ministers: Therefore their
proceeding herein is by law meerelie void: and so the best men we have in the
ministry, perhaps not in very deed ministers: and therefore (as our author
often collecteth) are Intrudors.

But he, which to the intent he might have some show to serve his humor, and to
wrap in either one way or other those whom he foreiudgeth to be unlearned, to
the danger of usurpation and intrusion, did tell us in great earnest, Page 83.
that all the solemnities about ordeining of ministers, how Small of moment
soever they seemed to be by the lawmakers appointment, were substantial, and
not accidental: does now in another tune say, that Learned, qualified, and
inwardly called; and unlearned, vnqualified, and not inwardly moved, does
differ as much as light and darkness: meaning and insinuating hereby (as I do
gather) that whatsoever he has aforesaid concerning Form, solemnities,
commission, statute, or good faith, they were not so much to the matter, or
greatly to be stood upon: but that these are Differentiae specificae and
constitutiuae, of a minister indeed, which makes him so to be, and thereby
only does also differ from such as be not. Quo teneam vultum mutantem Protea
nodo? And if so be these three be the only necessary points, concurring to
the making of a minister indeed, and distinguishing a true minister from an
usurped, then may we have a minister in this church, without the external
calling by the Bishop, which is not here spoken of. If by Learned, he mean
only such as are apt to teach, and by teaching mean only preaching; why
did he not ad also that which S. Paul ioineth with aptness to teach, to be
able also to confute errors and heresies? But the book requires as of
necessity no other learning, but that he be Sufficiently instructed in holy
scriptures: which that it reaches not always so high, as that he must be able
to be a preacher, is showed in diverse places before. The qualities Preface to
the book.
which the book speaks of, are only that He be by sufficient testimony
commended, or else known to the Bishop to be of virtuous conversation and
without crime; and also that he be found learned in the Latin tongue. But that
he be inwardly moved by the Holie-ghost, to the work of the ministry: is a
thing left to his own conscience, and not to be discussed by the Bishop, or
any man else; but in charity, which hops all things, to be intended and
presumed.

And seeing it is possible for a man very unfit at the beginning, by study,
practice, and the blessing of God, to become sufficient: and for him that is
now well and honestly disposed, afterward to relapse into looseness of life;
and for him also that is skilled in the Latin tongue, and sufficiently
instructed in holy scripture; either by disuse, or by the visitation or
judgment of God, to become very ignorant and sottish in both: therefore I do
not see (if we know not the contrary) but both by the rules of charity and
law, we are bound to think, that yet at the ordination of such a one, he was
so qualified in all these points as was requisite. That Bart. in l. cum quid.
ff. si certum petatur.
which is agreeable to the nature of any contract, is presumed to have been
performed. Again, A c. in praesentia de renuntiat. c. cum inter. de re
iudicata. c. bone. de elect. gl in c. quoniam Ext. de probat.
judge is presumed to have rightly executed that, which is incident to his
office. Further, That L. quoti^s ff. de rebus dubijs. c. Abbate sane. Ext. de
verb sign.
which confirms, and not that which adnulleth any act, is intended to have
been done. And lastly; Every L. ab ea part ff. de probat spec. de proba..
1. verb sequitur videre.
one is presumed fit and capable, till the contrary be proved. But our
author clean contrary to this, even (...), will presume all requisites to
have been observed by that which appears in his conversation and learning
afterward. So that by this reckoning, a man never so orderly at the first
called both inwardly and outwardly, upon defects afterward arising in him,
shall be shut out for an intrudor, usurper, or one which by wrong suggestion,
and fraudulent means, has attained the ministry; and he that has indeed
intruded, and without all outward calling thrust himself into the Lords
harvest, so that he have some commendable gifts of learning, and demean, and
bear himself without public stain or blot, shall be intended and presumed
to have been inwardly moved by the Holie-ghost, and be in very deed a true
and lawful minister. Yea so strongly (if we may believe him) shall this be
intended, that it shall be accounted Praesumptio iuris and de iure. So that we
are come to that issue which before I touched, that the Bishop, when he has an
unlearned minister under hand, such as this man surmiseth all to be which are
not able to be preachers, cannot though he would, observe the solemnities,
form and order of the book of ordinations. But when a learned man is under
his hand to be ordained, then he cannot but stumble (whether he will or no) of
all such matters of form as are appointed. And that Sect. 45.
this is such a presumption, he brings for proof a gloss, which if he had
meant plainly, he would have quoted in a more fit place than this; but he was
then loath his crafty conueiance should be espied. Which gloss, as may there
be perceived, says not so much as colourablie any thing tending to this
purpose, but the quite contrary. But (says it) shall we presume for the
parties sufficiency that is ordained? C. post cessionem Ext. de probationibus,
is an argument, that we must so presume except the contrary be proved. And
again, that we must thus strongly presume and intend, he exemplifieth (for I
may not say proves) by rescripts Autenticallie sealed, yet procured by
untrue and colorable suggestion: and by a definitive sentence, wherein is a
Nullitie. For the first proof whereof, that the rescript was obtained (Bona
fide) and that the sentence was a just judgment, we must (he says) presume,
till the contrary of the one be proved; and for the Injury and iniquity of
it, the other be reuersed. Where, by the way, ye may see this man's great skill,
which presumes for the validity of a sentence, in which is a nullitie,
prefixeth the ordinary course of appeal for reuersing of it, and confounds
it with a reuersible sentence, in respect of the injustice and iniquity of it.
Inst. de perpet. and temp. in princ. l. omnes. l. sicuti. C. de praescript. 30.
vel. gl. in l. querelam. C. de falls.
Whereas a nullitie may be proposed against a sentence at any time within
thirty years at the least. And Bald. in l. 1. C. de rebus alien. and l. 2. C.
fi ex falls. instrum.
if it be in regard of want of jurisdiction or commission, in C. vigilanti etc.
fin. Ext. de praes.
causes wherein by law no prescription runs, or be L. pure in fine ff. de
dol. except. l. si pactus C. de exceptionib.
proposed by way of exception, the action of nullitie never cease, but at
any time may be opposed. So that (to return to the principal purpose) that
the event ensuing must teach, who were with all due circumstances ordained
ministers, and who failed therein, and that such judgment is grounded on a
presumption of law and by law, we may perceive is utterly left unproven.
Naie, if he had understood what he writ, he would either never have so rashly
and untruely affirmed, that course of judging to be Praesumptio iuris and de
iure, or else would have spared his examples, which make directly against him
in this behalf. L. si tutor. cum gl. and ibi. Bald. C. de peric. tut. and
Bald. in l. ita demum C. de procurat.
For a presumption of law, is a most clear kind of proof, and is so full,
that it L. 3. C. de apochis publ. li. 10. Bald. in l. 1. C. de fidei com.
does of it self sufficiently prove, and is most pithie evidence. Yea the
Auth. sed iam necesse. C. de donat. ante nupt. Alex. in l. non est verisimile.
ff. quod metus causa.
presumption of law and by law, as some do term it, will not admit any
proofs to the contrary, otherwise than by the confession of the party
himself: and is equivalent with any such Bart. in co^s. a Dom. Cyno.
matter, as by the disposition of any statute law, may not be refelled. So that
our author matching this presumption with presumption for rescripts and
sentences, which by contrary proofs are indeed overthrown, does give
sentence against himself, that concerning ministers sufficiency by the event
ensuing, there is no such presumption as he does vainelie iangle on. And
therefore he is more strictly, than an eele is with a fig leaf, holden up to
his former assertions, which do plainly impugn almost all the ministers in
England, partly for want of weight, and partly for fashion, notwithstanding
his frivolous elusorie apology, and his absurd protestation, implieng a
contradiction in it self.

48. Section. Page 97, 98, 99.
IN this section is handled that, which might be objected, that is to say,
whether the sacraments administered, and other parts of execution of the offices
incident to that function, shall be accounted rightly and duly done by such
as our author makes no ministers at all? To which in effect he answers, that
the actions and public execution of their functions by them done hereafter,
shall be of none effect: but both because till this time No controversy has
been moved touching the validity of their calling, state, and condition and
also for common utility, and a general errors sake, the things done
heretofore by them, are rightly and duly done. But since controversy now is
moved, if the acts Doctrine dangerous to the whole state.
done by such ministers after this time shall not be available and of force,
what confusion and danger this doctrine might bring into this commonwealth
about the marriages and baptizings of infinite numbers by such ministers;
whereupon, by the laws of this land the inheritances, dowers, and tenancies by
courtesy do greatly depend: I leave to be weied by deep states men, and
wise counselors. Naie, if it be sufficient for every libeller to bring such
matters of consequence into hazard, by waking us (as he pretends) out of a
general error, whereof ^e only dreameth: why may we not as well say, that
all which have been married or baptized these many years past, shall be
brought within the like compass of danger; seeing both the traitorous papist,
and the dangerous Innouator has trodden the same steps, and skirmished as
hoatlie as this man does a long time, against the lawfulness of our Bishops,
priests, and ministers, and with their calling into that function? But (thanked
be God) all their complots, though they be like to Samsons fores distinguished
by heads, but linked together by the tails, and tend all to a perilous
trouble and combustion in this state; yet there is small weight in any of their
words, and all their forces are but wast wind, and papershot. The first reason
he uses for proof, that The administration of sacraments and execution of
their offices hitherto, is rightly done by such as he judges to be no
ministers; is taken from the uncertainty of their lawfulness, and quoted
very strangely Cod. de test. li. 1. which would require a longer time to
seek it out, where it cannot be found, than I may afford him. Yet I think he
meant L. 1. C. de testamentis, which decideth in another cause something to the
like purpose; that It is not to be discussed, whether the witnesses were bond
or free, which in opinion of all men were holden as freemen at that time, when
the testament was consigned, and such as against whom, none to that day had
moved any controversy of their condition. So that the reason of the decision
of this law is not the uncertainty of their state, which could not be called
uncertain, being not so much as doubted of; but the general error, which is
his second reason in this behalf.

And where ^e says (I know not upon what warrant) Contrariety.
That the thing which is uncertain, is as though it were not at all, he
overthrows his own purpose in this place: for if such ministers State before
controversy thereof moved, were uncertain, then are they hereby even at that
time, to be reputed as no ministers at all. In the first place brought for
proof that a general error makes law, and that therefore the general error
conceived hitherto of such ministers lawfulness, shall uphold all public
functions of the ministry by them till this time performed: no direct mention
of any common error is made, but that the award of a compromittee shall stand,
which is given by a bondsman in truth, yet being in possession of his freedom.
His second place is false quoted. Ad Maced. in stead of De S. C. Macedoniano.
In his third place, both in his original and in his translation, by following
the corruption of the old text yielding no perfect sense, and contrary to the
credit of the Florentine or Pisane Pandects he takes Propter Mistaking.
vsum imperatorum, because of the use of emperors, in sted of Propter vsum
imperitorum, by reason it is so used by rude and ignorant. His fourth place L.
1. C. de lestamentis.
to this purpose, which is the place he quoted wrong before: in this section, is
here left quotelesse. Out of which places, together with the law Barbarius
Philip. he concludes, that in those several cases, so in the matters done by
these only pretended ministers, the common error shall make them available,
and to be reputed Rightly and duly done: where upon I do further ask; as
Barbarius Philip. though a bondu^aue indeed, being duly chosen praetor in Rome,
was reputed a lust possessor of his office, though he himself knew, that he
was of servile condition, and L. quod attinet ff. de reg. luris.
therefore not capable: In mala fide, than he was in at the first, by our
authors supposall? But he is afraid of another doubt, least as the said
Barbarius, being once chosen praetor, though the people who elected him knew not
so much, and therefore could not have any such intention, was by the very
operation of law thereby infranchised: so our ministers, though indeed
incapable, yet by the ordination of the Bishop being a public person, and
trusted by the whole realm, in this action, should be likewise reputed in the
eye of the law, thereby enabled against any incapacitie. This knot he
wrestleth with, to untie thus: that as the award of an Vmpier reputed
generally a freeman, shall therefore be in force, though he remain a bondsman
(as before) to his former master: and as the son being once commonly reputed
otherwise, but afterward indeed detected to be under his fathers power and
tuition, cannot become a debtor unto me upon borrowing of money (which our
author contrary to law extends generally to any contract:) and as bondmen
upon common reputation Ignorance in law.
for freemen, having profitablie been used for witnesses, being known as they
are, may be rejected from bearing witness: even so, though Barbarius were
Childish babbling.
made free by the people, yet the master was by law to have the price of his
servant at their hands. Which being thus anatomized, we may well perceive, are
so far from all consecution, that they have not so much as any similitude
together. But what if the people must pay the price of the servant, may he not
be free as the law appointesh? And may not (any thing here notwithstanding) the
minister duly ordained for outward form, retain in like manner his
ministry, as Barbarius did his freedom? But I cannot conjecture either why
he says that Common error cannot take a way private interest, which no man
affirms: or how he can conclude, with any color upon these unlikely
comparisons, That much less can common error of a few, bar the whole church
from a public benefit due unto them. And I pray you, if this be the error but
Contrariety.
Of a few in authority, how can it be common, and thereby uphold the functions
of the ministry executed by no ministers? In mala fide, and to Know at the
time of ordination that such cannot be qualified accordingly as is required
for the ministry? But to cut off all at once, and to show plainly, that if
such as be no preachers, or any other, be indeed and truth no ministers at all,
as our author has labored to prove, then Common error, though in some cases
it be L. 1. and ibi. DD. C. de testamentis, and l. 2. C. de sentent. ex
pericrecitandis, and in l. Barbarius ff. de officio Praetoris.
holden for truth, and do 3. q. 7.. tri. ver. verum.
make law, yet in this point it shall not make good those pretended functions
of the ministry, which erroniouslie such men have executed and performed. It
is to be understood, that among many exceptions and limitations of that rule,
this is one: First if the party, upon whom the common error runs, be not
Bart. in. l. actuariorum C. de nummularijs. li. 12. and in. l. de qui. ff. de
legibus and Bald. in l. 2. C. de manumiss. vind.
solemnly and duly elected to his place, then does it make no law, nor
make the acts of force that is done by him. But our author himself says,
that all our ministers ought to be elected by the people, which yet is not
performed, that in the ordinations of the best men we have, some solemnities
are daily omitted, and that it is so sure, that solemnities and other matters
of form are omitted at the ordinations of unlearned ministers, that it is
Praesumptio iuris and de iure, that they were not rightly and formallie
ordained. Also this rule fails, L. 2. C. de sentent. and interlo. 3. q. 7..
tria ver. verum. c. ad probandum, Ext. de re iudicata. Abb. in c. sciscitatus
de resc.
when at the very beginning, the impediment was apparent. Now, if we may
believe our author, the impediments hindering these unlearned men to be
ministers, are so evident, that every man being present may see the Bishops
Proceedings herein to be contrary to law, and being absent may have By
experience such certain knowledge of his misdemeanors and ignorance, that by
the most full and plain proof that may be, not admitting any proof to the
contrary, even By presumption of law, and by law, it may be intended he was
incapable at the time of his ordination. And moreover he surmiseth certain
impediments, whereby such a man is hindered from being in deed and truth a
minister, to be known both to the Bishop, and to the party ordained. And Abb.
in c. Apostolic. Ext. de praesb. non ordin. gl. in c. dudum c. nihil, etc. quod
sicut. Cl. 2. de electio.
again, this rule indeed holds, and error makes law, in matters depending
of jurisdiction; but not in matters grounded upon orders, nor in sacrementals,
in which, rather truth, than common opinion is weighed. And therefore it is
Archid. 11. q. 3. c. 1. and Bald. in l. 2. C. de sent. and interl. omnium
iudicum.
said, General and common error in spiritual matters does work and enure
to nothing. Where upon it rests still firm and inviolable, that if we have
so many (as he inforceth) only pretended ministers in this church of
England, not being so in deed and truth: then shall the acts and functions of
the ministry executed by them, be of no other force (notwithstanding the
common error) than if they had been done by mere lay men both in deed and
common reputation. Naie by this man's platform, the priests made in time of
popery, being not so much as capable of the ministry, and the ministers
ordered in the time of king Edward, and her Daiesties reign that now is, being
no ministers indeed, because they were not chosen by the people, which the
book and law requires: it will follow, that we have no ministers indeed, and
by law in this church of England. Now it is a piece of our new church-modell
also to T. C. Reply. page 518.
affirm, that Not only the dignity, but also the being of the sacrament of
baptism depends upon this, whether he be a minister or no that does
minister it. To which also the opinions of the ministers of the reformed
churches in France seem to be conformable, where they Art. 4. du Baptism, en
la discipline eccl. de France.
say: Le baptism, etc: The baptism administered by him, which has not
commission or any vocation, is wholly void. But the common law of the land
makes espousals void to the intent of legitimation or inheritance of the
children, where the matrimony was not celebrated by a priest or minister: and
suffers none to be capable of any benefit of a subject in this land, which is
not baptized. So The authors most pestilent assertion, and the consequence.
that we see, a more pestilent plat, than this man has laid against the
particular interest of every subject in this church and commonweal, cannot
be devised by the most seditious traitor in Rome or in Rhemes, nor by the most
stirring and tumultuous devil in all hell: if all that were true, which he and
his accomplices do deliver unto us as undoubted truths, here and elsewhere, in
their peremptory and perilous assertions.

49. Section. Page 99, 100, 101.
IN this place our author goes about to confute those that take upon them to
exempt Bishops from blame For placing unlearned men in benefices, by reason of
the corruption, covetousness, and simoniacall compacts of sundry patrones. But
what color of excuse can this yeed to Bishops in any man's imagination, why
they should call insufficient men into the ministry? For I hope his malice is
not so great, as to charge them, that they make insufficient men ministers,
only to serve the turn of Covetous patrones, whereby they may make their
markets more gainefull; and upon refusal of their cleackes, that they may have
advantage in law peradventure against the Bishop himself that ordained them.

Yet to follow him a little in this matter of bestowing benifices: with what
forehead can any man but a little experienced in the world say, that the
greediness and corruptions of patrons is but a Feigned cause of placing
unlearned men in benefices, except he will deny the sun to be up at midday,
or such a one, as the god of this world having blinded, does think the smell
of gain to be good out of any thing, as Vespasian did Ex lotio? And can he
faie this is but Feigned, who talks so much of a presumption by law, when as
the law it self (though there were not too lamentable experience of it in this
common wealth) does tell us, Because patrones leave so small a portion in some
places c. extirpand^ Ext. de pr^bendis.
to the ministers, so that they cannot competentlie thereby be maintained: here
upon it comes, that in such countries, scarce one minister of a parish church
can be found, which has even but a little skill in learning? But If it were
true, he says he will nevertheless Let pass diverse answers, which aptly
might (as he thinks) be used in this matter. One is, because the Bishops
office is More painful than gainefull, and he that tastes the sweet, ought
also to taste of the sour. Therefore he should refuse to admit any not so
qualified, as our author means, unto a benefice: yea though he were sure that
after all his trouble and expenses, such a clearke should be placed by the
course of the common law, maugre his beard. So that by this man's account, it is
better purposelie without cause or hope of prevailing for a man to trouble
himself and spend his money, than to be quiet: and better to rise up and fall,
than to sit still. Naie, with what credit can the Bishop reject a man as
unable, whom he is sure the law of the land will repute sufficient? Therefore
it is marvel that our author, upon this color, did not here run into a
common place, against the common law, which is more loose in allowance of
clearkes unto benefices, than he would bear us in hand the canon law is. But
Latet anguis in herba, There is a pad in the straw. The next answer, that if
the Bishop sustain any hurt by refusing to admit to a benefice an insufficient
man, the blame is to be imputed unto no man but himself, which ordained him:
is the same with that answer, whereupon he afterward relieth, though here he
says; He will let it pass. Lastly, he tells us he will also let passes
exhortation, which the Bishops canons do prescribe to be used unto patrones to
persuade them to bestow their benefices sincerely, and upon sufficient men:
which indeed he might with better discretion never have named. For alas! is the
Bishop giving a good and wholesome exhortation to the patron, to be found
fault with, because the patron having his hand on his halfepenie, will not
suffer himself to be persuaded by him, to do as he ought? But he alleges in
defense and favor of a Patron presenting an unlearned man to a benefice, that
he is not to be blamed by the Bishop, but himself is to be chieslie burdened
and blamed, who ordained such a one minister: and the rather because The
benefice is due by reason of the office. Yet the Bishops blame and reprehension
clears not the patrones covetousness, his want of zeal, to have the people
as well taught as he might, his theft, his sacrilege, his simonie, his
abbetting and procuring of another man to be perjured for his own lucre. For
there is none of them so simple, but they well know, that these are thus by law
condemned. And what by themselves, and what by others (at least when the Bishop
upon examination does find it so) they might take knowledge that a more
learned and sufficient man might be easily procured, who would accept it
thankfully: which because the patron cannot break his fast with, he
therefore will not be removed from him that has most slender gifts of mind,
because such a man having little else to commend him, will be content to depart
with the greatest gifts to the patrons pursse and kitchen. And yet may it not
fall out, that the Bishop upon good consideration may refuse to admit him to a
benefice, whom he has before received into the ministry? For perhaps he may
be fit for some small charge and living (which a man of greater gifts will not
accept of though he be not fit for a more populous parish, being a sufficient
maintenance for a more excellent man. Or else it may be he has not from the
time of his ordering been so painful in his vocation, or so wary in his
conversation as were requisite, whereby he might deserve a better place. So
that this is not so generally to be verified as he here does, that Whom a
Bishop has reputed meet unto orders, him he ought also to think meet unto
any benefice. For what if a Bishop of another diocese did ordeine him for
some meaner place of charge, which else might have been wholly destitute of
administration of any sacraments: or else his predecessor in that place? ^ay
not he nevertheless upon Glo. c. cum secundum Apostolum. ver. liceat. Ext. de
preb. and dign.
examination finding his weakness, for the place which he is presented unto,
with good reason and by law reject him? Yes verelie. And what Gl. d. etc. 1.
aetat. and qualitate. and gl. in c. accepimus ver. examinari. d.
if some new matter have fallen out since his ordering, worthy to be looked
into? Truly the like judgment is to be given as before. Likewise a minister
may be newly examined, and upon cause sufficient also rejected, from obteining
a benefice, even by him that did ordeine him, if he were Gl. d. per c. ad haec,
Ext. de offic. Archid.
examined but by his archdeacon before, to the which Gl. d. per c. nihil est,
etc. venerabilem. Ext. de election.
examination the Bishop is also bound. Again, Gl. in c. accepimus, ver.
reputare Ext. de aetat. and qualit.
they that have tolerated in an inferior office a man criminous, may
nevertheless take exceptions against him, when he is to be higher preferred.
And laftlie it is no strange matter to affirm, L. relegatorum. vlt. ff. de
interd. and relegatis. c. nos consuetndinem did. 12. c. scrip^um est. Ext. de
elect.
that a man may lawfully retain a place of less estimation, which yet ought
not to be preferred to a higher. By all which may appear, by how many means
the Bishop by law may be exempted from just reprehension, though a clearke
being made a minister by some Bishop, and peradventure by himself, be rejected
from obteining some benefice. And hereby also the final relief appears,
which covetous patrones are like to catch by this his cold apology for them.
Yet we may to good purpose observe our authors endeavor, who when ignorant
ministers are once ordained (whom he thinks no ministers at all) yet in
favor of simonie, for gratification of corrupt patrones, and to load Bishops
with all the blame, can be content to plead thus for their placing in
Benefices, whom a little before he would not have entitled to the Office of
the ministry, in which only respect (here he says) The benefice is due.

50. Section. Page 101, 102, 103.
BUt he tells us in very pitiful sort, as sorrowing that they should be so
misiudged, that These covetous patrones are great beams in the eyes of
Bishops, plurality men, and non residents, for fear that by simoniacall
compounding with poor simple men, the fat should be wiped from their beards,
which otherwise they would have expected for themselves. And if they be indeed
so great beams in Bishops eyes, which yet they wish to be cast out as
principal means for the fostering of an ignorant ministry, even in those
livings which being entirely employed, were sufficient to maintain men of
good and commendable gifts: then are not Bishops so great mainteiners and
cherishers of ignorance in ministers, as he would in this treatise so often
insinuate. But why they should malign covetous patrones, for fear any living
by simoniacall compacts should be drawn from them, I cannot for my part
conjecture; seeing they are not capable by ordinary course of law, of any
such inferior livings. And (I pray you) does the corruption of covetous
patrones reach no further to the damage or hinderance of any, but only of
pluralists, and non residents? But he takes that as granted, and will prove
by the answer of a covetous patron to This plurality man and non resident, as
it seems (...): That the people have no greater hindrance by an unlearned man
not preaching, and hiring out his benefice under foot unto his patron, than
by a learned man not resident, and not preaching, hiring it out to his curate
after a rounder rate. The patrones demand to the learned pluralist is to this
effect: Whether it is not as lawful for him to bestow a benefice of his
patronage, upon one not able to preach, reteining by covenants all saving a
little, and procuring quarter sermons to be preached for him: as to bestow it
freely upon a great learned man, that either will not, or does not preach,
but hireth one as ignorant as the patrones clearke to serve it? Truly, if he
that can, either do not preach at all, or not so diligently as were
convenient, though the difference be a great deal less than all good and
careful men could wish: yet is there other so great differences, that he
needed not to have been (...), or to have been stricken so dumb, as our
author (like a merry man) does fancy. First the one has positive law of the
land to warrant it, the other has none. In the one, the patron discharges
the part of an honest man, and according to the trust reposed, and the person
that might perform duty and will not, is only to be blamed: but in the
other, the patron for his own filthy lucre is content, both that the people
do remain during the persons life without all hope of feeding, and that the
person by wilful perjury which he procures and abetteth, do become (...).
q. 1. c. si quis and quinque ca. seq.
not only irregular ever after, but also to hazard without Gods wonderful
mercy, c. presbyter ^i. 1. q. 1.
eternal damnation. Again in the one the Person only bereaueth the people
of their spiritual comfort: in the other, they are not only bereaved of
this, but the patron robs both them and the person of their goods,
whereunto neither by Gods law, Civil, Canon nor Common, he has or can have
any interest; and in the mean time the person is his abbettor in this
robbery. Lastly, in the one there may be hope, that he may do good
hereafter, (seeing he is able) either by constraint, or for conscience: and yet
in the mean time he is considered with that as with an exhibition for his
pains and travel, before sustained in study: but in the other, as there is
no cause to recompense his former travels; so is there small hope of his
atteining to that sufficiency, which is supposed to be in the former. But in
case he should atteine to such ability, and accordingly put the same in ure:
then should he have a double injury: both to have made shipwreck of his
conscience, and after to be deprived by the patron of the deserved fruit of
his labors. But our author clean contrary, as not so greatly misliking
covetous patrones, and such of them as are come to that impudency, as to make
unto their wives assurances of a certain annuitie after their deaths, to be
leauied out of a presentatiue benefice, least perhaps he should pull some of
his own dearlings by the nose; avouches the corrupt dealing betwixt the
greedy coruorant patron, and the needy simple snake, To be less hurtful to
the commonweal, and less sinful to the Lord, than the other. Wherein he
deals like himself, thus to extenuate the most present poison, and most
dangerous canker, that sretteth away the number of students of divinity from
the church in these days, of any other pestilent practice whatsoever: and
thereby to so we cusshions under their elbowes, and to lull asleep in the bed
of security, those his clients; who under an hypocritical pretense, of
disburdening themselves of the cares and troubles in gathering up their duties,
are as ready (rather than fail of living) corruptly to share with their
patrones, as their patrones are precise and exact in omitting nothing that may
fill their pouches, though it be with the spoil of the church, and the steine
of their ministers conscience. Less hurtful (he says) it is to the
commonweal, because of the patrones hospitality, and relief of the poor of
the parish by this means. And is indeed the patrones liberality so strait
laced up, that his house shall hold of our lady, and that he will give nothing
for Gods sake, except he may have the personage barn to make the dog in his
mill to bark, and the tieth wood of the parish to make The poor a fire once a
year in his hall? Truly this is nothing else but to bring the price of a dog
into the Lords sanctuary. But what if the patron dwell far off? Or the
parish where he dwells be almost dispeopled? Or what if it may be truly
answered, that the most Non residents kitchins be oftentimes in the year not
cold as his dogs nose is, but as hot as his own; shall not his dog-bolt
reason, taken from a dogs snowt, be laid asleep, till some body help it up?
As for his other inuectiue, for carrieng the revenues arising in one place unto
another, I hope he will no more urge it in them, as hurtful to the
commonweal, than he may do in temporal men's livings, or in the livings and
exhibitions of some ecclesiastical men his favorites. And why not (I pray
you) without damage to the commonweal, out of Ireland to Cambridge, as well
as from London to Germany? Out of Wales into Oxenford, as out of Wales into
Warwikeshire? From beyond Lincoln to Salisburie, as from besides London to
Gernsey? And from besides Leycester to Carlil in Cumberland, as from Kent or
Northfolke into Northamptonshire? Less sinful (he says also) it is to the
Lord, because the patron enioieth his right by covenants and good will of the
in cumbent, and oftentimes with the consent of the people, whose clearke they
willingly receive to be placed among them. But admit these reasons were true,
yet hereof it does not follow, that It is less sinful than non residence is:
for the non resident takes no oath by the Ordinary for his residence, as he
falsely (yet boldly) avouches; but all that be instituted, either take, or
ought to take the oath, for not committing simonie, by themselves, or others by
their priuitie, either directly or indirectlie. As for the promise of
residence to the patron, it is a thing in fact, and presumed not lightly
only, but also vainclie by the author, being more probable that the patron,
if he were so desirous of the persons continual company, would bind him sure
enough from starting; yet if it were made and broken, the foulness of this
sin will not counteruaile heinousness either of perjury in the person, or
of theft and pilfring by the patron. For how can he before God be exempted
from the guilt of theft, which enioieth ecclesiastical living without warrant,
either of Gods law or man's law? That which he says of non residence simply to
be both against the law of man and ordinance of God, remains more aptly to
be discussed in another place. But as touching the consent of the people, who
no doubt give a very free consent to allow well of him, whom their patron
likes for his gains sake, and whom they dare not mislike for fear of the
patrones displeasure: as it is neither required by Gods nor man's law, so does
it make nothing at all to the qualifieng or rebating of the edge of Gods wrath,
against this detestable sin of Simonie, and church-robbing. His other excuse
or eleuating of the sin of simonie by the good will of the person, may be
Aristot. 3. Ethic.
compared to the good will of him, that to unlade the ship in a tempest
departs (in a sort willingly) with his precious treasure, which with his
own hands he casts over ship-bord, to save his own life. But the patron
(he says) enioieth a Right in the church-liuing by covenants. Right he can not
have to that, which both Gods law and man's law does detest; and the covenants
are dishonest, being by law condemned, and therefore by no law do bind either
of the parties, but are meerelie void.

51. Section. Page 103, 104, 105.
HEre he resumeth again the objection made in favor of the Bishops: who are
supposed to admit insufficient men sometimes to benefices, least by a writ of
Quare non admisit brought at the common law, the clearke rejected, to the great
vexation and charge of the Bishop, should notwithstanding be admitted to the
benefice. And says, It is an objection not to be objected. Truth it is, that
this objection is not worth the obiecting, and therefore he that took upon him
in behalf of others, thus to frame it, if his skill had been any greater in
the common laws, than it is in the civil; he would sure have framed it
better, and with some more likelihood of probability. For the Br. de quare non
admisit. Natura breuium vetus and noua.
writ of Quare non admisit does not lie upon the reiection of a clearke by the
Ordinary for insufficiency only, but where the Ordinary refuses to admit
his clearke, he having by action at the common law recovered the aduowson of
the church, against some that likewise pretended right unto it. And by the
Nature. breuium ibid^m. and noua natura breuiu^. fol. 47. g.
writ of Quare non admisit brought, if the plaintiff prevail against the
Bishop, he shall not thereby recover his presentment against him, but damages
for not admitting. And Ibidem, liger. f.
therefore it is to be brought in that county only where the refusal was
made, and not in the county where the church stands, as in Quare impedit is
required, where the presentment is also recovered. Yet this (if I do not
mistake it) may contrary to our authors intention be hereof gathered: that the
Bishop which shall refuse to admit such a patrones clearke (for insufficiency
peradventure) as has recovered against another man the aduowson and right of
patronage of a church, may upon this writ of Quare non admisit, be cast in
irrecouerable damages, though the clearke do not thereby procure his
institution. So that we see the Bishop which shall reject an insufficient
clearke, besides the charges and trouble he may be put unto, upon a Quare
impedit yer it come to trial before the Archbishop, is not otherwise clear
from all danger in this behalf: though both by civil, canon, and common law
(as he says) the examination and judgment of a clearkes sufficiency, do
apperteine to the clergy. Yet the first place, which for proof hereof he
brings out of the Autentikes Col. 9. has no such matter, but only shows
in some part, what kind of men such must be, as are to be assumed for clearkes.
Likewise the last place out of the common law alleged, speaks of a clearke
rejected, not as insufficient, but as criminous, not mentioning at Impertinent
allegations.
all to whom the examination and inquiry of his sufficiency does
apperteine: but says only, that a spiritual man may know his own clearke.
But as not being sure of his grounds out of the common law, which he stands
upon; and yet minding to be sure to derive and convey all the hatred and envy
of planting insufficient ministers upon the Bishops, he teaches the Bishop to
depose such a clearke for inability, whom the common law has thrust into a
benefice, against his will. But does he think the reach of reason of so many
notable men in the common laws to be so short, as that they will be to seek
to find an Oliver for this Rowland? Or whom they have by a judgment at their
law found to be sufficient, shall they not be able to maintain him in his
living once gotten, being called again into question, but upon the same cause
only? But how can this devise stand, if our authors reason Inconstancy. Page
101.
before brought were good and general, that Whom the Bishop has reputed meet
unto orders, them he ought to repute also fit for a benefice? Or with that
other paradoxe, of his, which gives To all the people an interest in the
election of their minister? Shall not they have also, according to the rule of
law, an interest in his reiection and deposing? And what if his insufficiency
be not so great, as that the law will allow his deposition in that respect
only, according to that which to this purpose has been already spoken,
although the Bishop might have good reason to induce him to think him unfit
for the benefice, which he was presented unto: shall he nevertheless,
otherwise than law will warrant, proceed to his deposing? Naie, if this were
tolerable, the Bishop might with better pretense and less danger or trouble,
upon finding him unfit, give presently Definitive sentence against him, that
he is no minister at all, as our author has learnedlie taught him, and then
would the matter be speedily dispatched. But yet further, what if the party
appeal and prosecute even till it come to her Naiestie, and make the Bishop
the party appealed in every instance, as having done him the injury? Nust
not the Bishop be forced either to sit down and yield, or else to his
intolerable charges to prosecute, and perhaps in the end be over thrown, and
so pay charges also which the appellant has defraied? Iruelie, if every
Bishop should follow this plat, and should seek to depose from the ministry,
whom our author judges no minister for insufficiency, he had need to be
either endued with a Dictators power without all appeal; or else to have as
much living as half the Bishops in England, only to be expended in following
these suits in his own only Diocese.

Confess. Ecclesi. Helueti.
We condemn all unmeet ministers not endued with gifts necessary for a
shepherd that should feed his flock. Howbeit, we acknowledge that the
harmless sim plicitie of some shepherds in the old church, did sometimes more
profit the church, than the great, exquisite, and fine (but something too
hawtie) knowledge of some others. Wherefore we do not reject now adays the
good simplicity of certain, so that they be not altogether vnskil full of God
and of his word.

A necessary Appendix concerning certain points of external policy and
government in the church, occasioned upon the authors speeches.
OUr author has told us in his book, Page 19.
that Our chief prelates have not yet abandoned the policy of the traitorous
lawmakers, that it is perilous for the government of the state of the Lords
household, and not meet for the Lords servants to be guided by, that they use
wilful disloyalty to the Lord, that the procurations, dispensations,
ceremonies, non residence, excommunications, visitations, paiments of
oblations, courts offaculties and licenses are maintained only by the popes
laws, and are all popish: Page 19, 20.
that the applieng of that to good uses, which has been abused, does accuse
the son of the most highest, that he has not dealt faithfully in his
fathers household (by) giving them as perfect a law for the government of his
household, by discipline, as by doctrine: Page 20.
that for their fellowe-seruants sakes, they ought to be more favorable to
their Lord and masters cause: Page 30.
that they do execrablie mock and delude the Lord to his face: Page 35.
that a Bishop and minister ought so to minister the discipline of Christ, as
the Lord has commanded, though the laws of the realm should not have
received the same: Page 36.
that no discipline in truth can be said to be the discipline of Christ,
unless it be indeed ministered, as the Lord Christ hach commanded the same
should be ministered: that Page 36.
it is utterly untrue to say, that our discipline used in the church of
England, is in very deed the very same discipline, which the Lord Christ has
commanded: Page 37.
that the saints of God, and loyal subjects to her Majesty, calling for
discipline commanded by the Lord, and in truth established by the laws of her
Highness empire, have open wrong and intolerable injury offered at the chief
prelates hands: Page 20.
that the law does indeed for them authorize that, which the same law in
appearance only approoueth for the other: Page 53.
that the chief prelates are not so faithful to the Lord as were expedient for
them, that they account not the Lords ways to be the best ways, his counsels
not to be the wisest counsels to interpret the meaning of the statute; because
they are such ways, as wherein the Lords servants apply themselves preciselie
to walk, and therefore ignominiouslie are termed Praecisians: Page 62.
that the statutes of the realm give to all the faithful of the land an
interest in choice and allowance of their pastors: Page 74.
that at the entry of her Majesty's reign, the whole manner of the government
of the synagog should have been altered: Page 74.
that at that time their laws were unadvisedly translated from them unto us:
Page 91.
that they which be called [Puritanes] make conscience not to offend God in any
small thing: Page 91.
that for their conscience sake they are thought worthy to be whipped and
excommunicated: Page 263.
that it is a matter worthy inquiry, whether the pastor of every
congregation be suffered to execute the discipline of Christ authorized by Act
of parliament: Page 264.
that those who have spoken touching matters only of discipline and
ceremonies, whereupon before Bishops they are sifted with oaths, have spoken or
preached out of the word of GOD, the truth of God touching the same: Page 227.
that the friends of reformation are greater friends and mainteiners of her
Highness prerogative, than the other be: Page 231.
that the enemies of reformation, are enemies to her Majesty's prerogative:
Page 228.
that they only execute such jurisdiction as by popish constitutions, or
popish customs has been heretofore annexed unto their dignities, and that
by an utter enemy to her royal person, state, and government: Page 238.
that the popish ecclesiastical law ought to be abandoned, and as a froth or
filth to be spewed out of the commonweal: Page 238.
that her Majesty can by no means more honor the Lord, than utterly to
abandon all semblance of any government, proceeding from an enemy and traitor
to his Majesty: Page 239.
that for the government of the church we have the perfect and altogether
righteous law of God, to rule the same by. Also Page 95.
by way of supposall, he seems to doubt, that the Lord has not yet
graciously opened her Majesty's eyes, to understand all and singular mysteries
of his testament, that blemishes and blots remain, that adversaries to the
people of God do hire councillors to trouble their building and devise; all
the days of Cyrus, that the walls are to be reedified by some Eliashib, that
the church must yet tarry some leisure, and that it may be some other glorious
work is to be done in our days by her Highness: with infinite such like
saiengs, proceeding from the said puddle of pride, faction, rancor, and
disloialtie. Whereupon we may gather, besides his unthankfulness to God, and
undutifulness to her Majesty, by whose ministry God has singularly
blessed us, besides his boiling malice against the state ecclesiastical, his
factious greediness of innovation, and his schismatic titles of glory,
laid with a kind of peculiar prerogative, upon those who impugn laws under
color of their wished reformation: that he is persuaded, and so would have
others to be, both that diverse points of their new church-plot, are by laws
of this land established, which yet are kept from them by strong hand: and also
that there is some perfect, exact, and set order, of all external policy,
concerning ceremonies and discipline in all church matters prescribed by the
commandment of Christ, which is not yet by law established, as it ought to be,
and from which in the mean time this church of England wholly does vary.
That he thinks they are debarred of some thing, which they wish and ought by
law to enjoy, it may appear partly by some of his speeches above mentioned,
but more plainly Page 92.
where he calls for certain Orders and laws to be put in practice, which
the magistrates have made, that such as speak for them, preach for them, call
for them, and write for them, may be no more controlled, etc: and that they may
either be maintained as laws, or else he and others be delivered from their
duties, in desiring their execution and obeieng them, which they could hitherto
never be brought to obeie, or like of. And Page 105.
likewise, where in the very end of his first treatise he praises certain
Laws as wholsomelie provided against wilful law-breakers. Which laws by him
meant, if they be declared in particular, I hope they have been sufficiently
spoken unto already. But if any of them (which he so commends) be parts of
the Canon law: then he is to be praised for a man of a good nature, which after
his fury being ouerpast (which belike has Dilueida interualla) will be so
soon reconciled again with his enemy, whom sometimes he wished to be
broiled like S. Laurence, or to be burnt (like an heretic) in Smithfeeld. The
other and more principal point concerning the declining of the church of
England, in ceremonies, government, and discipline from the commandment of
Christ, by him and such like surmised; because it contains a very grievous
accusation, of so famous and great a part of the universal church; and is
therefore a matter of great consequence, to have this church cleared of that
slander, which this infamous libeller obiecteth: I have thought good (for a
taste) to trouble the readers a little, with some few and brief collections
(gathered for the most part) by certain painful and godly learned men; yet
in some small portion, upon mine own slender wading concerning these matters
of external church-policie; not to any intent (as I may safely before God
protest) to derogate from any tolerable order established in these external
matters, by any reformed church, as a thing unlawful of to be condemned;
howsoever peradventure some of them may be inconvenient to be used: but only
to show the vanity of this and other like affected men's assertions, which By
the exact description of the temple, and other things about the service of God
in the old law, and because Christ was faithful in all his fathers household,
would carry away in a generality; that therefore, there is one certain,
perfect, and settled form of discipline, government, and of external
church-policie recommended, and also commanded in scripture unto us. For if,
upon examination hereof in specialties, it may appear that the ringleaders of
this band do not only differ; but also be contrary one to another in many
material points of this their platform, which they nevertheless would mingle
heaven and earth together for, by their The soldior of Barwike. page 3.
speeches and writings: then (I hope) all godly wise men will easily see,
that it is but a strong fancy which either all or at the least some of them in
this behalf be led by: and that without reason they do exact of us to yield
unto them, which are not at any accord or resolution among themselves, nor yet
with other learned men. Whereupon this will ensue, and profitablie may be
gathered: that as it is lawful for any particular church by the word of God,
to retain what form and circumstances of discipline and government in the
church, not contrary to the word of God, which (weieng all things therein
considerable) shall be thought most to tend, then and there, to the building up
of the lively stones in deed, into one accouplement in Christ Jesus his
mystical body: so that form will fall out to be most safe, which has been
most generally received, and profitable practiced, and has for it, the
approbation of the purest antiquity in the primitive church. For it is a very
nice and a dangerous scrupulositie, rather than to use that aright, which has
been once abused; that a man should go about to devise, and to lay out new
platformes in church matters, in which of necessity such difficulties will
daily arise, that can not by any reach of man's wit be forecast, and which will
breed not only a continual toil, but also infinite dangerous innouations,
both in the church and commonweal. Now, as concerning the inward government
of the church of Christ by the spirit of God working in his children, by the
ministry of the written and revealed word: and also touching the essential
points of the outward policy and government of the church, consisting in the
true teaching of the word of God, in the due administration of sacraments
according to Christ's holic institution, in the advancement and furtherance of
virtue, with the beating down and suppressing of sin and impiety, and in
keeping the church in a quiet unity and good order; there is no difference or
variety of opinion amongst us. Which wholly therefore does rest in this
point, touching the form and manner of putting this external church
government in ure and practice. For they affirm, that Page 19, 20, 239.
Christ has left, and Commanded as perfect a rule and law for the government
of the church (his fathers household) by discipline, as he has done by
doctrine, which is say they, by their consistories and presbyteries: and also
that the same is perpetual, and ought so to continue unto the worlds end, in
every particular church. Both which we deny, and with all affirm; that no
such precise and exact form of external government of the church by
discipline, as they depaint out, is so much as by any example recommended unto
us in scripture: but much less commanded, as a continual platform for ever
to be followed. To their first asseueration belong those their speeches, where
they call it The presbytery which God has appointed: the ark of God: the
Lords house, a royal throne for Christ to sit and rule in. And where other of
T. C. in epist. ante lib. 2.
them tell us, that The order which they contend for, is that which God has
left, Admon. 2. page 5.
and that The matters they deal in, are according to the very will of
almighty God. Insomuch that A libell printed in form of a table.
they make him Antichrist, and one who refuses to have Christ to rule over
him, which rejects their Presbytery government. To their second paradox
belong these and such like magnificall elne-long terms: T. C. in epist. ante.
2. lib.
that It is the everlasting truth of God, that it is the kingdom of God in
this world, which only has the promise of blessing and life for evermore:
Admon. 2. page 61.
that this is only Gods order, which in conscience they are forced to speak
for, and to use: and T. C. in 1. lib. page 141.
that we are expreslie charged to retain this Segniorie till the coming of
Christ to judgment, by the words of S. Paul in the sixth chapter of the first
to Timothy, notwithstanding Calvin does wholly refer it to the ministry of
Timothy. And although our men, who belike see further in a millstone, and can
find more knots in a rush than other men, do tell us of such a necessary
perpetuity and continuance of their presbyteriall government: yet Art. 23.
tit. aduertissement. en la discipline du France.
the French churches reformed, could not find any such settled form of
discipline, so by scripture established, but that it might upon occasion be
altered. And therefore in the shutting up of their book, hereof they say
thus: Ces articles qui sont, etc: These articles which are here contained
touching the discipline, are not so settled amongst us, but that (the unity of
the church so requiring) they may be changed. And it is a world to see and
consider, though not only in this point but in many other material points
about this government, our church-wrights differ both from other men abroad,
and amongst themselves at home: how yet notwithstanding, they do all in
general importune us to believe them, that there is a precise form, order,
rule and law of this external government in the church commanded by Christ,
which no church may swerve from, or ever transform and alter. Yet Tertullian
(as he is alleged by others) says thus: Truly the rule of faith is wholly
one, and is wholly immovable, and not to be reformed, namely to believe in
God, etc: this law of faith remaining, now the other matters of discipline and
course of life, do admit alteration and correction, the grace of God always
working and going forward unto the end. And first, as touching variety of
judgments about the means to establish this government, and their
presbyteries, we see that our Page 93.
Abstractor says: The ministers without due authority from the magistrate
(whereby I hope he understands the chief magistrate of every commonwealth,
and not inferior officers, whom, in this case, certain firebrands of treson,
by De iure magistrate. de iure regni. vindict. con. tyrannos.
their books would arm against their souereigns) ought not to wrest any thing
into the government of the church. But T. C. page 141.
another says, that among other things this government by presbyteries Is
such, as for the keeping of them, if we have them; and forth obteining of them,
if we have them not; he will not say Our honors, or our commodities and wealth,
but our lives ought not to be dear unto us. Another Admon. 2. page 61.
says, they are forced to speak for it, and to use it. And Br.
a fourth no less peremptory than traitorous (whom I hope they will not allow
of) says: If the prince will not establish this government, that her subjects
need not to tarry for her, but ought t'innouate the government themselves.
Diverse of the French reformers are also too violently affected that way. One
of them has delivered, Fran. Iun. page 28.
that If the prince do hinder the building of the church, Page 3.
or do affect the seat of God: that is (in their sense and meaning) deal in
ecclesiastical causes, and hinder the presbytery: the Page 28.
people may by force of arms resist him. To which end also Admon. 2. page 29.
that seems to be spoken, where it is said, that many a thousand in England
desire that platform: and that great troubles will come of it, if they be
still with-stood in their devises. And if none of those dis^ciall practices can
be put in ure, which some of that disposition and affection to those
presbyteries have devised, by arming inferior officers and magistrates against
their souereignes; then they would Of obedi^nce, pa. 59.
have The ministry to excommunicate the king. Whereby they would falsely
gather by the Feudall law, or of tenures (as we call it) De iure magistr. page
66.
that the vassal is delivered from his allegiance and oath, of fealty or
homage, which he has taken to his sovereign lord, if he be once
excommunicate. In which respect also Of obedience, page 52. 53.
some of them do affirm, that though popes taking upon them to depose princes
for sundry enormities, did usurp unto themselves an unlawful authority: yet
the reason that moved them so to do, was honest and just, and meet to be
executed by the body or state of every commonweal; and yet forsooth these
be especial friends and favorers of the Queens prerogative. But touching
that place there alleged, out of the second book Feudorum, tit. 28.. 1: it
can no way be understood of an absolute and sovereign prince, that holds
not his kingdom over, of any mortal man, but of God alone, no not in those
countries and territories, where otherwise the Feudall law in mean lords has
place. First, because the Vassal or tenant (as we call him) being delivered of
his fealty, services and tenancie, and the said services being not to be
extinguished in the Vassal, but for the lords default to be forfeited to
another: it cannot be understood of a sovereign lord, who has no superior
but God, to take the forfeiture that is grown against him. Secondarilie, the
circumstances of the law do declare this to be understood of a mean lord, and
not of the king himself: The vassal (says that law) is not bound to help or
to do service to his lord, being excommunicate, or banished by the king, but
is in the mean time loosed from his oath offealtie, till he be restored by the
church or the king. Again, all this Feudall law, being a customarie and
unwritten law, and by the tolerance of kings, and other sovereign lords over
warlike nations, suffered to grow in use, for the reward and encouragement of
those that had valiantly demeaned themselves in their wars: it cannot be
credible, that the king would permit such a custom to prevail even against
himself, whereby he should retain his own subjects no longer in their
allegiance, than it should please another man. Moreover this law had his
beginning and special increase amongst the Longobards, and other such Martial
people, before they were converted to Christianity from their Gentilisme:
which makes me to think, that this point of excommunication was added
afterward by the compilers of the Feudall law, according to the use of their
times for the paritie and equality of reason, that seemed to be in Banishing
with Excommunication. But most strongly is this sense, which I have given,
confirmed by the testimony of very good historiographers. Ottho. Erisingen.
lib. 6. cap. 35. chro.
I do read and read over again (says one) the acts of Roman kings and
emperors, and I can no where find that any of them was ever excommunicated by
the Bishop of Rome, till this William king of England was excommunicated by
Alexander the second, about the year of our Lord, 1066. And Johannes Tritenius
Chron. Hirsaug. ca. 14.
writing of the emperor Henry the fourth, says thus; For which pertinacie he
was excommunicated by Gregory the seventh, and by a synodall decree of Bishops
was deposed from the empire, although he cared not for it. And he is the first
of all emperors, that was deposed by the pope. And another in his chronicles of
the year 1088. calls it in a manner an heresy, then scarce sproong up, that
Presbyteri, priests or elders if you will, should take upon them to release the
subjects of a king from their oath and allegiance. Odo Sigebertus monachus
Gemblacen.
(says he) being first a Cluniake moonke, and after Bishop of Hostia, was made
pope against the emperor and Guibertus. Heerevpon offenses in the church, and
turmoiles of dissension in the commonweal did increase, whiles one disagreed
from another, that is, the kingdom from the priesthood. Truly (if I may
speak with good leave of those, who be good men) this plain novelty, I had
almost said heresy, was not yet come abroad into the world: that his priests,
which said thus by a king, Apostare and regnare facit hypocritam, propter
peccata populi, that they I say, should teach the people that they owe no
service to evil kings: and that although they had yielded unto them the oath of
fealty, yet they did not owe unto them any allegiance: and that those should
not be accounted perjured, which stood evil affected toward their king; yea,
that those which should obey the king, should be reputed excommunicate, and
that he which attempted any thing against him, should be absolved from the
guilt of impiety and perjury: Haec Sigebertus. Which notable testimony
proceeding even from a moonke devoted to that See, and in the great ignorance
of those times, which otherwise did possess them: I could not but oppose to
the fanaticall spirits and traitorous allegations, both of these dangerous
innouators, and of the rabious papists: which in this point has borrowed
weapons of them, and do bark in the same key, daily from beyond the seas,
against their Sovereign, whose kingdom they would inthrall to be holden but
at the popes, as the other would have it at the chief inferior magistrates,
the peoples or presbyteries devotion. As touching secondarie means for the
better establishing and furnishing of their presbyteriall government, there is
likewise variety of opinion. For our lay reformers for the most part do wish
all ecclesiastical persons to be deuested of their lands and other
hereditaments, and like cast and forworne servants, to be put to their pension:
that upon such alteration, the offalls, downefalls, and windfalls, may fall to
their share, or at least, be a musse for them to scamble for. Which devise
seems to have been pointed at, by the discipline of France, Art. 35. de la
discipline de France.
where they say: No minister shall possess any hereditament by title of his
ministry: but if a pension or some parcel thereof be assigned out of any
possession, rent, or revenue, it shall be wholly in the administration of the
deacons, or of other persons thereunto deputed by the church, at whose hands
the ministers shall receive their pension. But the chief of our
ecclesiastical innouators, would on the contrary side, have the prince to
relinquish her first fruits, tenths, and impropriations: and all Noble men and
gentlemen, their impropriations and patronages: and the Bishops with all
cathedral and collegiate churches, to be be reaued of all their temporal and
ecciesiasticall possessions whatsoever, to supply the wants that may happen at
the erecting of their petit Parlements and Presbyteries. To which devise,
because they foresee such of the laity will as hardly as any other be
induced to agree, being deaf of that side the head, howsoever they seemed to
like the plat, so long as it reached no further than to Bishops and cathedral
churches: they do therefore as bitterly bite at them as at others, for their
Disciplina ecclesi. fol. 94.
backwardness in this pretended necessary service. Whiles they hear us
speak (says no little one of them in reputation) against Bishops and
cathedral churches, it tickleth their ears, looking for the like prey that
they had before of monasteries: yea they have in their hearts devoured already
their churches inheritance. Ibidem.
And again, They could be content to crucify Christ, so they might have his
garments. And Ibidem.
further, They care not for religion, so they may get the spoil. And yet Ibid.
fol. 97.
again, The revenues of the church are wasted in courtly wantonness and
bravery, bestowed upon noblemens servants, and so consumed with most
sacrilegious impudency and boldness. Further Ibid. fol. 87.
yet, They do not only give nothing to the church, but such livings, as
others have godly bestowed, most wickedlie they deteine and withold from
her. To this Ibid. fol. 95.
he adds: That our age is full of spoiling soldiers, and of wicked
Dionysians, who will rob Christ of his golden coat, as neither fit for him in
winter, nor in summer. And another chief man among them T. C. 75.
says of such: They are coruorants, and seek to fill the bottomless sackes
of their greedy appetites. And again, They do yall after a prey, and would
thereby to their perpetual shame purchase a feeld of blood. Yea Admon. 2. page
13.
a third also of them says; It is no better than sacrilege and spoiling of
God, to keep back any way the provision that has been made for the
ministry: and the curse of God threatened by Malachie to those that spoiled
the Levites then, belongs and will light upon our spoilers now, and upon them
in whose hands it is to redress it, if they do it not. Whereby we may see
that our ecclesiastical innouators are not so scrupulous as they in France, or
as our lay reformers seem to be: but that they could be content to take
pains with those lands, tieths, and other hereditaments, and to adventure on
them, though they have been so abused to the maintenance of supersiition and
idolatry in the church: yea, and to retain them in title, to the better
support of their Septemuirall or decemuirall senate in every parish, scarcely
counting the other men's offer of a pension, worth a single gramercie. Now let
us come to some of their resolutions, wherein they deliver to us their minds,
when and by whom this their presbyteriall church government by Seniors, as
here they are called, or by Anciens (as they call them in France) was commanded
or practiced. For seeing they do both allege such a necessity thereof, that
some of them have not doubted to make it a third essential point of a true
church, whereby they must flatly confess to follow, that in or since Christ's
and the apostles times, even till their own age, there has been no true
church, seeing it is assured, that neither they nor any man in the world is
able either by scripture or testimony of antiquity to show forth such their
lay presbytery, priests, elders, seniors, or anciens as they speak of: and
also do beautify and advance it up to heaven, with glorious titles. Surely
their endeavor will not be worth a single baubie or dodkin, if they cannot
bring the devise and erection of it, as high as Christ's time at the least.
Therefore one T. C. pa. 187.
of the cheifest of them, does fetch it from the Jewish (...), and out of the
Talmud. But if this senate and set council among the Jews, be a type unto
their presbyteries: then must they handle both the swords, which they would
seem to mislike in others. For one Bonauentura de politia Judah. ca. 13. and
Daneus ca. 10. lib. 2. Isag. 2. par.
of Geneua lately writing De politia Iudaica (agreeablie herein with the most
both old and new writers) affirms, that they had the hearing and decision
as well of civil as of ecclessasticall causes. Then shall their new church
platform be also convinced not to be from heaven, but of men: for Calvin
affirms, that the Jewish senate was but a politic constitution ordained by
them after their return from Babylon. But our men do tell us that Christ did
establish and command the like senate in his church, when in the 18. of Marth.
he said, Dic ecclesiae, Tell the church, that is (say they) the presbytery.
But Musculus is of another mind, who thinks all the congregation thereby to
be understood, according to that time wherein Christ speak it, when as the
church wanted a godly and faithful magistrate. And of the same opinion, that
the whole congregation as well people as ministers or elders ought there to be
understood, are De Polit. eccl. and reip.
certain reformers in France. And if Christ did by those words establish and
command their presbyteries, then were the apostles very slow and negligent in
putting them in practice: for Calui. Harmonia in 18. Matthew.
Calvin testifies, that neither in Christ's time, nor in two and twenty
years after, these presbyteries were exected. And if Christ did speak in that
manner to the Apostles and disciples, as of a thing well known unto them, by
reason of the Jewish (...) in use amongst them: then will it follow, that as
they had but one such for the whole nation, settled at Jerusalem: so one
presbytery will suffice for a whole realm. Also if Christ had then exected
that their presbytery and church government, which they fancy: assuredly
the apostles would not, nor should not, both all Christ's time and a year
after, have usurped the office of deacons, being thought by our men to be not
only a necessary, but a distinct office from the pastors and preachers in
their presbyteriall government: yea, they would not have relied upon that
reason only, for creating of deacons (because thereby they were drawn from a
more necessary function of preaching:) but would have also avouched that
commandment of Christ, for such several offices in the government of the
church, if he had given out any such direction, as is now imagined. And
surely, it cannot be that either Christ or his apostles did command any such
consistory, and presbyteriall government as they talk of; because, if it be
a matter of such perpetuity or importance, and of that sort as they would
enforce; then could it not have had so obscure and base a birth, that neither
scripture, father, nor council should leave in memory, by whom, where, or
when it was first exected, and put in practice. Or else we must yield, that all
the martyrs and holy fathers in the time of the apostles, and so downwards,
were palpablie ignorant of such a perfect, precise, and necessary point of a
true church: or at the lest were very negligent and envious to posterity,
that would not so much as vouchsafe to deliver it down from hand to hand by
practice, as the traditions and unwritten verities are pretended by the papists
to have been. In so much that if you ask Ecclesiast. discip. page 121.
some of them, in what part of scripture these their lay elders and seniors be
commanded, they can answer redilie, That all things are not expressed in
scripture: yet our admonitors think they can prove all these matters
directly by the word of God. The like variety is amongst them, in what part
of scripture their Lay seniors are spoken of. For some of our men think, they
have found them in the 14. of the Acts, ver. 23. But Caluinus.
other better learned than they, do contend, that by the word, Presbyteri
there used, ministers and preachers be understood. Likewise our men say, that
the first to Timothy, cap. 5. ver. 17. where it is said: The presbyters or
elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor, does sufficiently prove
the office of their seniors only to consist in ruling, and not in preaching.
But a Beza.
great learned man (yet a sauourer of that platform) says: These elders did
both rule and preach. In like manner Discip. ecclesi. fol. 217.
some of our reformers do send us for the description of the qualities of
these seniors which they dream of, unto the 1. of Timothy, cap. 3. from the
8. ver. unto the 14. where in deed the qualities required in deacons are
described: yet T. C. page 51.
other of our own also, do refer us for the properties required in them, to
the first verse thereof, and so to the eight, where the properties of a Bishop
are described. And where S. Paul says, Aduer sus presbyterum, etc: Againsta
priest or elder receive no accusation but upon two or three witnesses: that
Admon. 2. page 46.
is (says the admonitioner) against lay seniors or governors: yet Caluinus.
others of the chief favorers of them, do confess the place is meant of the
ministers of the word. Eglise des estrangers a Londres. An. 1150.
And others do fetch them from the word Gouernements, 1. Cor. 14. And as they
differ amongst themselves, in what part of scriptures to find their seniors or
elders: so they can not agree of the immediate Genus, or general word, which
contains them. For some use this division: Of deacons, some are elders or
governors, and some are such as provide for the poor. Other say: Of Bishops,
some are ministers, and some are seniors. And again: Of elders, some must
teach, and some must only rule, and others both rule and teach. Some Discipl.
eccles. fol. 123.
of them also do assure themselves, that the name of elders is never imparted
to deacons in the scripture: A written book not published. ^ol. 79.
yet others are bold to give this rule, that all ecclesiastical officers, of
what calling soever, are called in the new testament Elders or Seniors. Of
which judgment also In 14. Act.
Beza seems to be. So that we see, if lay seniors be any where to be found
in scripture, some of them will start them up in one place or other: either by
the name of Presbyteri, Diaconi, Episcopi, or (...). These their seniors also,
as well as the rest of ecclesiastical officers by their platform and devise,
must be found of the goods and revenues of the church: for the which purpose,
and for better supply of them, is that their intention of dividing the whole
realm afresh into parishes, by uniting two, three, or more together, and the
laieng down of all patronages, and adioining of all Bishops and cathedral
churches revenues, and of all impropriations unto them. And to that end also
they do allege, that he which serves at the altar, must live of the alter.
But how can this stand with Beza in praefat confess. Heluet.
that advise which is given, for the choosing of Princes and Noble men into the
seniorie, or with the practice thereof in some churches, where Noble men did
undertake that office? Shall we think it meet, that the renenues of the church
should be alloted out to their maintenance according to their degrees? Truly,
either they must have short commons, or else their churches and several
parishes must content themselves without many such Semors. Now let us also
briefly consider, what they teach concerning the persons, that are to serve
and to belong to this presbyteriall government. Our men in their books do
attribute the chiefest degree of dignity in their ecclesiastical kingdom, to
the pastor; the next to the doctor: the elders, whether knights, lords, earls,
dukes, or princes, must content themselves to be reckoned in the third place;
and the deacons in the fourth. Yea, the discipline of France suffers the
matter of pre-eminence betwixt deacons and anciens, to be whelie vndercided;
where Art. 6. de^ Anciens and Diacres en la discipline de France.
they say: The deacons and anciens may not pretend any pre-eminence or
superiority, the one above the other. Now it must needs be intended, that the
pastor is above the deacon: whereby it will follow, seeing they do wey the
deacons and anciens alike, that the pastor is to be preferred before them both:
which will no doubt be a very seemly matter, where he is preferred in
commission above his sovereign Lord. Yet Simlerus de repub. Heluet. fol. 172.
at Saint Galls in Switzerland, where ministers have an ordinary authority
with the rest in the Presbytery, it is thought more agreeable with scripture,
that a mere lay man should be chief, and so do they use it. Again, the
consistories of Zurike and Basil do wholly consist of lay men, yet certain
Divines and Ministers are ^oined as assistants to them. But at Simlerus ibid.
fol. 148.
Schaphausen, ministers are not so much as called to be assistants. But the
reformed churches in France do clearelie determine, that the ministers are,
and ought to be Praesidents and chief in their Art. 4. du Consistoire, en la
discipl. de France. and Daneus 2. part. Isago. li. 2. cap. 20.
consistories. For they say: The ministers of the word of God, and the anciens
make the consistory of the church, over which the said ministers ought to be
praesidents. Howbeit in the very next article they set down: Art. 5. en la
discipl. de France.
that A civil magistrate may be called to the charge of an ancien in the
consistory, so that the exercise of the one shall not hinder the exercise of
the other, nor shall be prejudicial to the church. Whereby may necessarily be
concluded, that they think it requisite, the pastor in the consistory to take
place before the prince, if he be vouchsafed that worship, as to be called
amongst them. Yet by their leaves, they provide not herein so fully for the
pastors souereigntie in that government as they ween, if matters come to be
decided by most voices. For it can not be credible, but that the prince or any
Nobleman, or great Gentleman shall easily be able, to win his
fellow-assistants in consistory, being in all other respects far his
inferiors, and many ways by all likelihood devoted unto him, to be of his
judgment, whenever it shall happen that the Pastor and he do vary in
opinion. For I have not red that they mind in all matters to make the Pastor
only of the Quorum. And no marvel though they thus debase Princes, by making
them range with the rest of their Seniors and Church-gouernors: considering how
much soever they sarre in other points, yet they iump in this: to debar princes
of that right of government in matters and over persons ecclesiastical, which
the word of God, and all the examples of godly kings in Judah does afford unto
them. Therefore one of them as in great scorn most slanderouslie, and untruly
Soldior of Barwike. page 8.
says: That for the princes pleasure, popery is turned into policy. And
afterward Ibidem.
more traitorouslie, If the prince with Gedeon, Nadab, Abihu, Vzza, Vzziah, and
Saul, will intermedle without Gods warrant, as she has done, page 152, lin.
20. with matters of religion. page 157, lin. 4. with Gods matters, page 141,
lin. 21. she must think it no injury to be disobeied. page 143, line. 13.
Agreeablie to which, though not so round and peremptory, is that mislike which
another of them has hereof: T. C. page 157, 161.
that her Paiestie has pre-eminence and chief authority in determining of
church causes, and making ecclesiastical orders and ceremonies: and likewise
T. C. pa. 161
that her Majesty in councels for church matters, is the cheese, who should be
only there an assistant. A third of them also thinks it inconvenient, Admo.
2.
that without her Majesty's assent, ecclesiastical persons cannot make orders
or ceremonies. In which respect the T. C.
other before alleged, thinks it expedient, that her Majesty should be of
some particular parish, and so in subjection to the censures of a presbytery,
either to be suspended or excommunicated, as occasion shall require.

Therefore a fourth of them prescribes generally to princes, and all other
whomesoeuer, if they be not of their presbytery, Ecclesiast. discipl. page 142.
thus: Of all these in a manner this is the only duty, that they suffer
themselves easily and willingly to be ruled and governed by others, whom God
has set over them. But more particularly Ibi. pa. 285.
elsewhere speaking of kings and magistrates, he says: These no less than the
rest must obey and yield to the just authority of the ecclesiastical
magistrates. Therefore another besides all these says, that not only Daneus.
par. 2. Isag. li. 2. cap. 62.
The consistory may and ought to admonish the magistrate, which is negligent
in punishing vice: but Ibid. ca. 67.
also may upon knowledge of the cause taken, excommunicate even the chief
magistrate, unto the which he ought to submit himself. And therefore he says,
that which is brought as out of Augustine, that a prince may not be
excommunicated: In additio. ad. 3. 2. Thomae, does not hinder this, because it
is false. And least this duty, though it be very rigorously exacted, should
but slenderly be performed, one of them T. C. pa. 645
also says: Princes must remember to subject themselves to the church, and to
submit their scepters, to throw down their crowns before the church, yea, to
lick the dust of the feet of the church. Meaning (as appears) by the name of
the Church, their presbytery. And Br.
another (whom I would not deigne to speak of, but that he agrees with them
herein) says: Kings must be bound with chains, and the nobles with fetters of
iron: meaning by the authority of the eldership or presbytery. And again,
They must obeie the scepter (that is to say the government of Christ in their
elderships) if they be christians, which scepter subdueth people unto us, and
the nations under our feet. Moreover, speaking of her Majesty's souereigntie in
causes ecclesiastical he says: The head Christ is pulled down, and the hand
of the magistrate is set up. But as we have now seen their joint accord, in
taking from princes, and throwing them down from that power in ecclesiastical
government, where with all God has adorned them: so let us consider how much,
naie hold little some of them do attribute unto princes in this behalf. For
although our Abstractor, who can temporise and play the part of a politic
proctor of Presbytery patrones, Page 92.
does say, That her Majesty is a sovereign, a sole, and a lawful
gouernesse in all causes, and over all persons ecclesiastical: yet other of
them (whom he loves and likes full well I dare say) do T. C.
give authority unto princes, to make ecclesiastical decrees, only when
there is no lawful ministry. Notwithstanding others of them Admo. 2. page 8.
57.
think, they may yield no further power unto princes, than to bind them to the
restoring of their ecclesiastical presbyteries: that after that once
performed, they themselves may make up their church-orders; according unto
which the reformed churches in France do attribute no more to the civil
magistrate here in, but Art. 24. de la discipline du France.
that Where the ministers do sail in duty, there he must endeavor to cause
them to be admonished according to the order of the discipline: that is, by the
Consistories, the Conferences and Synods, either Provincial or National.
Therefore Danaeus par. 2. Isag. li. 2. cap. 17.
one of them says, that This is the interest which good and faithful
magistrates have, that if they be present at the first nomination and election
of ecclesiastical persons, yet they ought not to rule there. For they may not
nominate to the people or senate ecclesiastical, the persons to be chosen. But
Ibid. ca. 19.
in another place he confesses, that in old time the kings consent was
required to be had unto the Bishop which was chosen, Bernard. epist. 170. etc.
Reatina. did. 63. before he was presented to the people. And in the same place
he adds: That when the Bishops See is void, the prince ought not to enjoy the
fruits of the Bishoprike. Which (says he) though by the royal prerogative it
be observed in France. Yet Bernard. epist. 224. does justly find fault with
it, because the said fruits might better be disposed of, to the nourishment of
the poor. Yet one of our Disciplina ecclesiast.
own men deals a little more liberally, and says: Herein there is
something proper and peculiar to the magistrates, that they by their authority
may order the state of the church at first, and so preserve it being once
ordered, according to Gods will. So that their meaning seems to be this, that
the prince must lend her authority, for the establishing of these their
devises, and see that no man interrupt them in their government from time to
time, and so surcease, and submit her own Highness and her scepter, in all
church mattes to be ruled by the substantial honest men, and the minister of
the parish, where it shall happen her Majesty for the time to remain. For
otherwise T. C. 2. repl. page 165.
one of the chief of them is peremptory and resolute, that the prince has
not, nor ought to have any ordinary authority, for the making, appointing, or
determining of any ecclesiastical causes, orders, or ceremonies. Whereby it
may appear, that this whole suit of them do agree herein just with the
Papists: who do attribute unto christian princes Power of fact, but not of
law: and authority to Promote and set forward, but not To appoint or
intermedle with making of ecclesiastical orders. And yet forsooth, they do
tell us in great earness, Admon. 2. page 2.
that There is nothing in their books (written of this matter) that should
offend any, which either be, or would seem to be godly. Now, about those that
are to be implosed in this new kind of church government, there are diverse
opinions: for the Discipline of France does Des professeurs en la discipl. de
France.
mention certain Regents and also Professors in divinity, which may be
called, when a question about decision of any point of doctrine does arise:
neither of which persons or offices, are mentioned in any of our platformes,
that I remember. Again, our Admon. 1. page 9.
men do make ministers to be of two sorts, the one pastors, and the other
doctors; so that both these two must concur, as necessary members, whereupon
with the elders and deacons, their presbytery must be raised: but Du Baptesine
art. 3. La discipl. de France.
the Discipline of France makes not a distinct person of the pastor from the
doctor, but notes them as two several properties incident according to the
doctrine of S. Paul, to be in a minister and preacher of the word. And that is
also the judgment of Bullinger upon the 4. to the Ephesians. Also our
reformers make the doctor to be the second man in their presbytery: yet De
eccles. cap. 14.
Bertrand affirms, he ought to have no place there, except he be called by
the rest as an Assistant. Admon. 1. page 9. and 11.
Likewise our men with us do hold, that deacons are to be placed in their
consistories and presbyteries: but the Ibidem.
said Bertrand assures himself, they have no place of duty in that
assembly. And such also is the practice of the church of France, Du
consistoire art. 4. le discipl. d^ France.
where they decree thus: The ministers of the word of God, and the anciens do
make the consistory of the church, over which the said ministers ought to be
praesidents: and yet nevertheless the deacons may give assistance to the
consistory, for advise unto it: so that they allow them a voice consultatiue,
but not decisiue, in their church government. Furthermore, our innouators will
needs have the deacons tied to the provision for the poor, so that without
great impiety such a function in them may not by any other devise whatsoever,
be altered: yet Simlerus. fol. 752.
in the reformed church of Zurike, certain late men, without any imposition of
hands, are monethlie chosen for that purpose, and have the managing of the
church stock. T. C. pa. 192
Some of the principal inforcers of this new government, will needs have an
order of widows in their church plat. And Dane. part. 2. Isagog. lib. 2. ca.
11.
another of their favorers though he sets down no necessity thereof, yet
he thinks it very commodious to be retained: yet Eccles. discipl. page 219
other of them not meanclie accounted of, would persuade us (as he may herein
easily do) that they neither are necessary now, nor convenient. Likewise our
men do tell us, that their elders or seniors once chosen, are not (but upon
some urgent occasion) to be removed out of the presbytery: yet Simlerus. fol.
157.
the church at Berna holds it expedient, that none do continue in that
function above half a year, except he be newly elected. And the discipline
set forth by the church of France does Des anciens and diacres art 7. la
discipl. de France.
testify, that The office of anciens and deacons (as they use it) at this
present is not perpetual: nevertheless they may not depart from their
charges, without leave of their churches. And Danae. part. 2. Isag. lib. 2.
cap. 22.
another of them says, that Although it does not appear what was done in this
behalf in the church, when the apostles lived, and albeit it be evident, that
in the church next to the apostles times presbyteri and deacons were chosen
during life: yet in their church, pastors only are chosen for the most part
for the term of their life; but deacons and presbyteri or seniors, after a
certain time expired, do go forth of their office, and are honestly
dismissed. Furthermore T. C.
our men do constantly affirm, that this their devised presbytery ought to
be exected in every parish: but another that did Bucer.
partly like of such a reformation, thinks it sufficient to have one such
consistory established in every shire or diocese. And Danae. part. 2. Isag.
lib. 2. ca. 10.
Danaeus says, that in old time such presbyteries were not exected in every
several parish, but in great and populous cities. Which like course also
somewhere to have been practiced, many do know, and can testify. Yea, and
of the other side we do read, that in some one particular Du consistoire. art.
8. lae discipl. de France.
church, two several consistories or councels have been established, till
upon inconveniences arising, that devise was countermanded, and both reduced
into one presbytery: those councels which were dissolved, being permitted
(upon request made) to come and consult with the consistory. But now I will
pass on, to touch as brieslie as I can, some of their judgments, touching
such matters as are to be handled in their presbyteries, consisting in election
and abdication of church officers: in execution of the censures of the church,
and in decision of matters touching manners or doctrine, and making of laws,
orders, and ceremonies. Now Admon. 2. pa. 14. and 31.
by the platform set down by our reformers, if any party stand discontented
with a matter passed in the presbytery, then there lies an appellation to the
next Conference (which La discip. France, art. 15.
consists, as the French discipline describes, of six ministers at the
least:) from thence to a Provincial council, and then to a National; and if
it can not be so finished, and be also of great importance, it may be again
removed to a General council. But the discipline of France does not think
it meet that any cause should be brought so far: and therefore Des Synodes
nationaulx art. 5. la discipl. de France.
decideth that the National Synod may decide definitiuelie, all
ecclesiastical matters whatsoever. And as concerning the first point, although
it be most evident, that no one uniform manner of electing of ecclesiastical
officers was used by the Apostles, nor commanded to the church afterward, so
that the church is left at liberty to practice that form herein, which shall
seem most convenient, considering the circumstances of time, persons, and
place: yet Admon. 2. page 14.
our Innouators do appoint necessarily, the choice and providing of a pastor
or doctor, to rest in the next Conference, whom (being presented unto them) the
people are of necessity to like and allow of, except there may be sufficient
matter objected against them. But the discipline of France, though La discipl.
de France, art. 5.
it allow even of such ministers (so they will subscribe to the articles of
faith and the book of discipline) as have been chosen by the whole multitude,
and Ibid. art. 4.
of those ministers also that were before that time chosen by the consistory,
and by one only minister: yet they Ibidem.
set down three other ordinary forms to be observed of choosing their
ministers, all differing from our men's platform. One is, by two or three
ministers, and the consistory: another is by the whole Conference where any
such is established with the Consistory or Presbytery of the place: and the
third (as most to be wished where it may be had) is by a provincial council.
But our Abstractor varieth in conceit from all these, and pricketh nearest to
the platform of The Anabaptists, who think no calling into the ministry to
be according to the will of God, but that which is done by the whole multitude
of that congregation, where he is to serve. And therefore he Abstract. pa. 60.
61. 62.
says, that By the statute law of this land, by canon law, yea and by Gods
ordinance in the apostles, when the deacons were chosen; the people of the
place destitute of a pastor, must be present, and give their consent at the
choice of their minister: that they must give their consents as having a
principal interests in the action, and must not only be eie-witnesses and
eare-witnesses to the Bishops upright dealing, but also must be agents and
cohelpers themselves: that they have in the choice, allowance, and appointment
of their minister, a special interest and prerogative, in so much that he
which thinks this may receive by any a counterbuffe, he (for his part)
holds him accursed, and so utterly unworthy the name of a disciple: By
which peremptory and definitive doom, he has given a buffe and acounterbuffe
indeed, not only to this church of England, but to all our new reformers
here, to the French church, and almost to all the reformed churches in
christendom: whereof very few or none (that and can read of) do permit
(after they be once established) the election of the minister unto the whole
multitude; for the which cause they must remain under his curse, till it
shall please him of his own mere motion, without any suit of theirs, to
release them again. For some Danae. par. 2 Isag. li. ca. 17.
other of the best learned of that sort, will not have the magistrate or people
to have any thing to do in the election, till it come to the second election
or d^^udication by the magistrate and the people, wherein, Ibid. cap. 20.
their silence (he says) without any other sign or token, shall be holden
for a sufficient approbation: Ibid. cap. 19.
and although he thinks it in some respects not to be used, that two or three
should be propounded to the church for the void place, but rather one alone,
contrary indeed to the true nature of an election, as he himself observes: *
yet because Ibid. cap. 20.
some was of opinion, that in all elections, we were to use lots, he refuses
their judgment, and says, that this is never to be used, but when there is
such an equality of all sides, that otherwise it cannot be judged, which of
many ought to be preferred. Furthermore, our reformers by the drift of their
speeches delivered in their books, do seem for the most part to attribute
the remoouing of the pastor, or of any other church officer to the presbytery:
but La discipl. de France. art. 34.
the Discipline of France adioineth to the Consistory in this action, the next
Conference; or upon want thereof, two other pastors not suspected. Naie
themselves do establish a difference according to the diversity of times, in
their own elections. For they say, that In those places where Des anciens and
diacres (...) 1. la disci. de France.
their order is not yet established, both the deacons and anciens shall be
chosen by the common voices of the people, together with their pastor: but
where the order is established, there they are to be chosen by the Consistory
together with their minister. By which words also it seems to me, that in
elections of ecclesiastical officers, they do yield to their ministers a
negative voice against all the rest. Again, Our reformers do earnestly tell
us, that the people are to give their consent in all their elections and
censures: but L^ confuta^ion de la dis. ecclesiast.
some in France, that like of that government, do hold that it is not
requisite. Again it is an usual practice among some of our mislikers, upon any
coffeehouse, or peradventure upon delight in some other trade of secular
life, to pick a quarrel to give over their calling: insomuch that some of them
have delivered it as sound doctrine, that they might as lawfully as any other
merchants, change their copy, and betake themselves to a secular function. But
this is utterly condemned by the discipline of France, where they say La
discipl. de France. ar. 10.
that Those which be once chosen to the ministry of the word, ought to
understand, that they are chosen to be ministers their whole life through, if
they be not thereof discharged lawfully, upon good reasons and considerations;
yea, and that by a provincial council. And as touching such as forsake their
ministry, they shall be finally excommunicate by the provincial synod, if
they repent not. Now, touching the inflicting of ecclesiastical censures,
there is also some variety of judgment. Our men (as you have heard) require a
consent or approbation of the people to such censures Ecclesiastical, as are
to be imposed; whereas the discipline of France Des delinquans, etc. art. 1. la
disci. de France.
requires no such matter, but appoints three public denuntiations by
authority of the presbytery to be made concerning obstinate offenders, in the
face of the church, to see whether thereby they may be called back to
repentance, before excommunication: which at the last, if the parties do not
submit themselves, is to be pronounced by the minister, after the said three
public intimations. Likewise, where upon special occasion some minister is to
be declared a Schismatike, by that discipline, none other are to Art. 5. la
dis. de France.
intermeddle therein, but either the Conference, or for want thereof, three or
four other ministers of the next churches, together with the Anciens or
Seniors of the said churches. Nevertheless, it is very evident by 1. ad Cor. ^
scripture, that S. Paul being absent did decree, that the incestuous person
should be excommunicate, having there to neither public denuntiation before,
nor yet consent of any other minister, senior, or deacon. In 1. ad Tim. 1
like manner did he alone excommunicate Alexander and Hymenaeus. But the
Abstractor both utterly against our own Reformers, and the discipline of the
French church says, that * there is a Page 4, 37.
Discipline commanded by the Lord, and in truth established by the laws of her
Highness empire: which * is, That every minister may as well admonish,
denounce, and excommunicate offenders within his charge, as a Bishop may within
his diocese. So that he attributes the whole authority of the presbytery in
matters of censure to the minister of every parish: and the power given by
others unto the Conferences and Synods provincial, he yields (as it seems)
unto the Bishop of the Diocese. There remains yet a little to be touched
concerning as well the decision of all doubts, which may arise touching
doctrine or manners: as also the making and establishing of laws, orders, and
ceremonies. For doubts arising upon matter of doctrine, some of our plat-laiers
do make it, as a thing incident to every presbytery: yet Ad. 2. pa. 10
other of them do re^raine it unto the decision of a Conference consisting of
Ministers. And Du consistoire art. 10. la discipl. de France.
the discipline of France does refer it both to the Conferences, and the
Synods determination, yet so that the Ministers and Professors in divinity
must only have voices decisiue, though the Anciens or Seniors may have voices
consultatiue, and of advise. Neither is their agreement any better, touching
particular decisions of some points of doctrine. For some of them do mislike
the orders of our church so far, that they think they may not lawfully come
to our ordinary service, nor communicate with us, for want of their (dreamed
of) reformation: but others, though very well disposed, yet scrupulouslie
affected in matters of no moment, do * plainly testify under Certain
godly ministers.
their hands, that this is schismatic, and that no man ought to sequester
himself from the public assemblies, in respect of any surmised
inconveniences, in our public liturgy prescribed. Again, some are of opinion
(as elsewhere before is alleged) that Baptism ministered by any not lawfully
called thereunto, is wholly void: but our Abstractor thinks, though many of
such as are commonly reputed ministers, are none indeed nor in law, yet * that
a Pa. 97. 98. 9^
common error conceived otherwise of them, shall make good and forceable the
administration of sacraments, and of other functions of the ministry,
executed by them. Also some of our Hot spurs cannot abide the having of
godfathers and godmothers, because they are not mentioned in scripture: but the
Discipline of France, though it cannot Du baptism art. 6. la dis^. de Fran^^.
exact them as of any necessity, being not commanded in the scripture: yet
does it very well allow of them, and establish their continuance. Likewise T.
C. page 14^
some of our chief Reformers do wholly mislike, that baptism upon any
occasion is ministered in a private place out of the church: but the discipline
of France thinks this no unlawful thing, and therefore advises the minister,
not Du baptis. art. 7. da disci. de France.
to doubt to baptize a child privately, and without any assembly, when as for
fear of persecution or such like, they dare not meet together. Again, some of
T. C. p^g. 152. 153.
ours do think it simply unlawful, to have any holiedaies, as the feasts
of the Nativity, Easter, and Pentecost, besides the Sabbath day, because they
think it an absolute precept, Six days shall thou labor. But the church
reformed at Ca. 8. de Ferijs, in libro de ritibus eccle. Tigurin^.
Zurike, yea and most of the reformed churches in the world do observe some
such feasts, besides the Lords day. Furthermore, our Abstractor (as you have
heard) does condemn it as unlawful to have those retained to be ministers of
the gospel, that have been Popish priests, and the like is the opinion of the
Admon. 1.
Admonitors. But La discipl. de France. art. 3.
the discipline of France does permit both Bishops and Priests to aspire to
the ministry of the gospel, after renouncing of their former faults: yet so
as Dan^us part. 2. Isoq^ li. 2. cap. ^2.
another of them does teach, that they may not aspire to any higher
ecclesiastical office, than they had before, but retain the old, and that also
with a new creation: because the old character (he says) is by the heresy
worn out. Again, it is very usual with many of reforming humors, to take
no benefice or set pas^orall charge, but to preach there, where they either
have a sufficient preacher already: or in great towns, where least need is of
their help, and they are in that respect with many better accounted of. But
our Abstractor condemns all such absolute ordinations without any certain
title, and this vagarant kind of ministry, and so does another great T. C.
page 63.
man amongst them: which misliketh wholly, that any are suffered to preach
which has no pastoral charge. Whereby he withal does covertly condemn all
such, as under the name of doctors, as an office, not as a degree of schools,
having no title, but being set up and hired to discountenance the pastors, do
invade their cures and charges oftentimes even against their mind and good
liking. Also the same man condemns as unlawful, and thinks it is T. C.
(...), for one minister to preach in another cure. Yet those amongst us, that
otherwise stand like affected with him, do as much use and practice this as
any other. And Des minist. art. 18. la dis. de France.
the discipline of France sets down a form, in what manner one church may
lend a minister unto another: and Ibid. ar. 17.
decideth likewise, that with license of two or three other ministers, such as
have departed from a church upon occasion, may preach, before the matter (for
their placing again) be ordered by the Conference or Synod. It has likewise
been holden and defended publikelie, that it is sincerely unlawful to shift
from any congregation to another: but Ibid. art. 10. 12, 13, 16, 27
the reformed churches of France do in many cases permit it. Now as
concerning the establishing of laws, orders, and ceremonies, and in the things
themselves, there is like variety of judgment among them. For some Admo. 2.
page 46.
of them do yield authority to every consistory to make and abolish such
orders and ceremonies, as they shall think convenient for the rest of the
congregation; and in this respect Ibid. pa. 11.
they hold, that every presbytery may differ from another in orders and
ceremonies: but Eccles. disci. 726.
other of them would have no such thing ordered, but either by a Provincial or
National synod. And the discipline of France does think it most expedient,
that all the churches of one nation, retain an uniformity of orders and
ceremonies, to the which they Du consistoire art. 2. la discipl.
do earnestly exhort those churches amongst them, which at the first had
received some other form: for which purpose they do also require a
subscription, unto the form of their discipline, and do Du consistoire art.
19. en la discipl. de France.
prescribe it to be read in their consistories at the least at the times of
Communions. Our Reformers do plainly tell us that the duty of the Seniors
does only consist in ruling, and the deacons in providing for the poor: but
till it was otherwise ordered in diverse Des anciens and diacres, art. 3. and
4. ibidem.
reformed churches in France, the deacons did publikelie catechize, and yet
still for the necessity of the times, they and the seniors are permitted
(being thereunto chosen by the consistory) to catechize in private families.
Likewise Admo. 1. page 6. 16.
at the first our Reformers did wholly reject a prescript form of prayer and
divine service in the church, upon occasion peradventure that the French
churches upon certain Du consistoire. art. 2.
considerations to themselves best known, had refused the having of ordinary
prayers every day, morning and evening, in the church, when they had no
sermon. But now (I take it) having heard that in Videritus ecclesi. Tigutinae.
most reformed churches, yea even in Geneua and in Scotland, they retain a
prescript form of liturgy, they are content to let that conceit vanish.
Again, it has been thought and is yet by some a very heinous superstition
to communicate in unleavened bread: but it is notorious that yet this kind of
bread is used, and has been long in the church of Geneua; neither could they
ever be induced to change it, because of the great inconveniences of all
innouations, where the thing is not in it self wicked. Morouer our Innouators
do constantly hold, that causes of matrimony, incest, adultery, divorces,
and such like handled in courts ecclesiastical with us, are mere civil
causes, and not to apperteine to their reformed Consistories: Simlerus fol.
148. 157.
yet the churches of Heluetia do still enterteine the knowledge and punishment
of such causes and offenses. Yea, and the Consistories of France do
intermeddle with causes matrimonial, as where they permit Des marriages, art.
1. la discipl. de France.
authority to the Consistory to license such (if they see cause) to
entermarrie, whose parents frowardlie do refuse to yield consent unto them.
Likewise Ibid. art. 4.
where they have decreed that it is lawful for a man to marry the sister of
her, unto whom he was only espoused and betrothed. And Ibid. art. 17
where they permit him to use his liberty to retain or leave his wife, which
has been convicted of adultery. Moreover, diverse of our Reformers do
think it unlawful, as the Abstractor in this book, for an acclesiasticall
person to have any civil function: Du consistoire art. 5. ibidem.
yet the discipline of France, and their own whole platform do permit a
civil Magistrate reteining his former office to be chosen a Senior in their
ecclesiastical Presbytery, and so to become an ecclesiastical person: yea
they do Ibid. art. 3.
prescribe to their Ministers to make pasports for passengers from one church
to another, which is a civil duty, as may appear by the like practice by
Justices of the peace with us. And (I pray you) is not this a good conversion,
and a sound reason: Some civil magistrate lawfully is an ecclesiastical
person and governor, Ergo some ecclesiastical person and governor lawfully is
a civil magistrate? And if some may be so, what prerogative may be alleged
for any one, which may not be showed for others? Again, it is thought by our
Innouators to be a great inconvenience to be barred from publishing what books
(concerning religion) they shall think good, which appears by their late
practices and disobedience to laws in this behalf: yet it was thought most
expedient in the reformed churches of France, to Advertisement, art. 11. la
discipl. de France.
forbid, that Neither ministers nor any other should cause to be printed or any
otherwise published any books compiled by themselves, or by others touching
religion, without imparting the said books first to the Conference, and if
need were to the Provincial synod. Also in the reformed churches there, it Des
Ministres, art. 11. la discipl. de France.
was thought most meet that Noble men and great Lords, to the intent all
occasion of division might be rebated, should be requested, that in those
places of their abode, where there was a church reformed, although their own
family were so large, that it might make a sufficient Congregation, yet it
would please them to join their family with the Congregation of that place,
where they did remain. And amongst us many be so scrupulous, that they
think those words used in the ordering of ministers, which Christ did use in
the like action, to wit, Receive the Holie-ghost, to be very fowlie abused and
profaned: yet in the La maniere de la imposition.
manner of Imposition of hands ordinarily observed in the churches of France,
in the election of their ministers, it is set down that the said place of S.
John should be amongst other places, at the said time and action repeated and
treated of, with that also which is annexed, to wit, Whose sins ye remit,
etc. Likewise our Reformers of others, are so unwilling to be reformed,
conformed, or vniformed themselves, that they think they are wonderful
hardly dealt with, and beyond all example of other churches, to be urged to
subscribe to the articles and confession of religion, and to the manner and
form of external discipline and government used in this church of England,
whereof they are ministers: yet the church of France, which is so admired by
them, and set as a samplar by them to be imitated, and according to which for
the most part they have drawn out their platformes, exacteth Des Ministres,
art. 5. la discipl. de France.
of every one That has been chosen a minister by the people, to subscribe
unto the articles of faith, and to all the order of discipline agreed upon
amongst them, which if he refuse to do, he is by the Conference, or by three
or four ministers of the next churches, together with their Anciens, to be
declared a schismatike, and the people is thereof to be advertised, to the
intent they may avoid such a man. Also Ibid. art. 9.
those which be chosen ministers must subscribe to them, both in the churches
where they are chosen, and also in the churches whither they are to be sent.
Likewise Ibid. art. 11.
ministers in Noble men's houses, though they have none other care, are tied to
this subscription. Again, Des anciens and diacres. art. 1. la discipl. de
France.
their Seniors and Deacons are also before their admission to their offices, to
subscribe unto them both. And Des professe^^s. ibid.
further, even their Regents and Professors in divinity are by them required
to subscribe, as well as the rest. And the like order is observed (as is
notorious) in the most, or in all the reformed churches in Germany. In all
which places (as we may see) it is thought a great absurdity, for a man to
retain any ecclesiastical function in that church, unto the orders of which
by law duly established, he can not find in his heart to subscribe and
condescend. There is yet also another material difference amongst them to be
touched. For De Polit. eccle. and Reipub.
some of them do attribute equal authority unto all the people in this their
Regiment with the Presbytery, clean contrary to the most platformes set
down hitherto thereof. And although (as we have now heard) their varieties in
judgment be so many and so manifold: yet our men are so insolent against all
other orders and forms of church-gouernement, and so besotted in the love and
admiration of their own impe, which they have begotten, but not as yet licked
into any perfect form; that they dare condemn all churches, which are not
squared in external government, according to their Lesbiall leaden rule,
which every one of them will wrest and bend, as his fancy will feed him on.
So that one of them is not ashamed to say, Admon. 1. page 2.
that As the estate is now of the church, there can be no right religion. Also,
Admon. 2. page 6.
that The truth in a manner does but peep out as it were behind a skreene.
And Admon. 1. page 2.
again, We want in England a right ministry of God. Wherein he differs
from our Abstractor, as much as the Abstractor in another place differs from
himself, who is content to allow unto us, some to be right ministers in deed.
Therefore considering the great benefits of almighty God, of the true
preaching of his word, and due administration of sacraments, which by her
Majesty's ministry he has in mercy far above descrt powered upon us, which
these unthankful wretches do thus abuse and extenuat, in respect that they
can not obtain their own wills; we may of them truly verify that saying of
Gualter, which he spoke Gualter. in 1. Cor. 11.
against such like men: All these things they esteem as nothing, except a new
magistracy may be erected, unto whom it may apperteine, not only to
control even princes themselves, but also to excommunicate them. Now all these
contrarieties and differences in judgment, concerning their devised
church-gouernement, being well weied and considered: I would ask of our
Abstractor, or any other affected that way, which do imagine as perfect a
law, for the government of the church, by discipline, as by doctrine to have
been delivered by Christ unto his church: Where and in whose books that

Whether by these men's platformes, which I have mentioned,

Whether it be good and sound divinity, that has been

Where any pregnant and concluding proof may be Presbyteri, being otherwise
mere lay men, and of no ecclesiastical function?

Whether if the general conceived error, be not by law Abstractor reputeth not
to be ministers: would he wish them to be remarried over again, and baptized
afresh by such as he takes to be ministers indeed, as having been hither to
not baptized: and so make void all benefits of subjects by purchase or descent
hitherto grown unto them and to their children, according to the course of the
common laws of this land, or no? And in case that either he, or any other be
of judgment, that the baptism conferred with water and the words of
institution seriously pronounced, by him that is no lawful minister, neither
in fact nor reputation; or by him that is in reputation only one, and not in
deed nor in law, be so utterly void, that the party ought to be baptized or
dipped again: Then I do

Further I demand hereof, why all those in like sort Popish priests, whom our
Abstractor holds neither for lawful ministers indeed nor in law, and who
were but admitted at taking order of preesthood, Ad sacrificandumpro viuis and
defunctis, ought not as well as the former, to be baptized again?

Again, why the sacrament of the supper should be to

Whether the inequality of Gods gifts for the building and territories, which
our reformers think to be without spot or wrinkle in their external
government?

Whether such a minister that is of reasonable knowledge There is a sin unto
death, for the which I say not that you shall pray: Whether (I say) were it
more expedient to permit him to preach and to expound publikelie, or but to
read godly and learned homilies, and to exhort and dehort his parishoners
only, as present occasion should be offered?

Whether in any other reformed church beyond the seas,

Whether a minister in the like foreign church, after

The end of the Appendix to the former Treatise.

QVIA NONNVLLI, etc. Forasmuch as some, putting no measure to their
covetousness, Extra de ele. non residen. c. qui^ nonnulli, etc. 1. de consuet.
lib. 6.
endeavor to take many Ecclesiastical dignities and many Parish Churches,
against the ordinances of holy Canons, and being scarce able to discharge one
office, yet notvvithstanding challenge unto themselves stipends due unto many:
we straightly command, that henceforth this abuse be not any more
permitted: And that whensoever any Church or Ecclesiastical ministry ought
to be committed. we will such a parso^ to be sought, that may be resident in
the same place, and discharge the cure by himself. And if any thing shall be
done otherwise, let both the receiver loose that that he has so received, and
let the giver be deprived of power to give again. Out of which prohibition
these conclusions may be made.

1 Whatsoever tends to the maintenance of covetousness is unlawful: 2 But
to suffer one man to enjoy many benefices tends to the maintenance of
covetousness: 3 Therefore for one man to have many benefices is unlawful.
1 Whatsoever is contrary to the holy Canons, is not to be tolerated: 2 But
for one man to have many Churches with cure of souls, is contrary to the
holy Canons: 3 Therefore, for one man to have many Churches with cure Page
108.
of souls, is not to be tolerated.
1 Whosoever takes unto himself the stipend due unto many, the same does
commit an unlawful act: 2 But he that takes unto himself many benefices,
takes the stipends due unto many: 3 Therefore he that takes unto himself
many benefices, does commit an unlawful act.
1 Whosouer is scarce able to discharge his office in one place, is not to have
the office of many committed unto him in many places: 2 But he that has the
cure of souls committed unto him in one place, is scarce able to discharge his
duty in yt one place: 3 Therefore he is not to have the offices of many
committed unto him in many places.
1 Whatsoever is an hinderance to him that has cure of souls to be resident,
and to discharge his c^re, by himself, the same is not to be suffered: 2 But
for one man to have many benefices, is an hinderance for him to be resident,
and to discharge his cure by himself: 3 Therefore it is not to be admitted,
that one should have many benefices. Again:
QVIAINTANTVM, etc. Because the ambition of some Extrauag. de pre^end. quia in
tantum.
has spread it self fo far, as that they are said to have, not only two
or three, but many Churches, being not able duly to serve two: we with the
consent of our brethren and fellow Bishops, command that this be reformed. And
because the multitude of prebends, eue^ an enemy to the Canons, is an occasion
of a dissolute and gadding ministry, and contains a manifest peril of
souls, we vvil therefore provide to supply the vva^t of such as are able to do
service in the Church. The reasons of which decree may thus be framed.

1 Whatsoever is or may be a mean to maintain ambition, is Page 109.
not to be tolerated, 2 But for one man to have many benefices, is a mean to
maintain ambition: 3 Therefore for one man to have many benefices is not to be
tolerated.
1 Whatsoever ministereth matter for a gadding, roaging, and dissolute
ministry, is not to be tolerated: 2 But for one man to have many benefices
ministers matter for a gadding, a roaging, and a dissolute ministry: 3
Therefore for one man to have many benefices is not to be tolerated.
1 Whatsoever contains peril of souls is not to be tolerated: 2 But for
one man to have many benefices contains peril of souls: 3 Therefore for one
man to have many benefices is not to be tolerated.
1 Whatsoever is cause, that such as are able to do service in the Church, do
want, and so are kept back from doing the Church good, is not to be
tolerated: 2 But for one man to have many benefices, is a cause, that diverse
able to do service in the Church, do want, and so are kept from doing good: 3
Therefore for one man to have many benefices is not to be tolerated. Again.
VNDE CVM IN EODEM, etc. Sithence therefore it Extrauag. de elestio. ca. dudum.
2. vnde, etc. Ex trauag. de prebe^d. ca. de multa.
is ordained in the same counsel, that whosoever shall receive any benefice
with cure of soul aunexed, if before he obtained the like benefice, should by
law it self be deprived of the same, and should also be spoiled of the second,
(...) case he contended Page 110.
to hold the first, the foresaid elected notvvithstanding breaking these
ordinances by the plurality of benefices, does incur himself these vices,
which he should improve in others, even covetousness and breach of law. And
by retaining benefices, which belong not unto him, for so much, as upon the
receipt of a second benefice, the former by law is merely void, he has by
consequence contracted another man's goods, and so committed theft, or rauine,
he retains moreover the said Parish churches, both to the detriment of his
own salvation, and the health of other men's souls, for so much as he being by
law it self deprived from these benefices, the cure of their souls did no
more belong unto him, and so were they damnably deceived. Out of which
constitution one other conclusion may thus be gathered.

1 Uniustly to take that which belongs to another man, and so after a sort to
commit theft or rauine, is unlawful and not to be tolerated: 2 But he that
has many benefices, does by unjust means take to himself that which
belongs unto another, and therefore after a sort commits theft or
rauine: 3 Therefore, etc.
ECCLESIASTICI IVRIS officia singulis quibusque personis 89. Distinc. c.
singula.
sigillatim committi iubemus, etc. We command, says he, that singular offices
belonging to the right of the Church, be committed severally to singular
persons. For, as in one body we have many members, and all members have not
one office, so in the body of the Church, there are many members, according
to the true saying of S. Paul, in one and the same spiritual body, this
office is to be committed to one, and that office to another, neither is the
charge of two things to be committed at one time to any one person, be the
said person never so cunning or expert. For if all were the eye, where were
then the hearing. For as the variety of the members, having diverse offices,
both keeps the strength of the body, and preserves the beauty thereof: Even
so diverse persons having diverse fu^ctions, distributed unto them, make manifest
the strength and comeliness of the whole Church. And, as it is an uncomely
thing in the body of man, that one member should do his fellovv members
office: Even so is it hurtful and most wicked, where the ministry and
fu^ction of several things shall not be distributed to so many several
persons. And in another Chapter. L^^^o elder have two Churches, both because
it is 16. q. 7. c. per Laicos in fi.
a proper kind of merchandise, and filthy gain, and also altogether contrary
to the custom of the Church. From whence I conclude thus:

1 whatsoever is contrary to a good custom of the Church, is not to be
tolerated: 2 But for one Clarke, to be placed in two benefices, is contrary
to the good custom of the Church: 3 Therefore for one Clarke to be placed,
etc.
1 whatsoever is a proper kind of merchaundise, and filthy gain, is to be
avoided in the Church: 2 But for one man to have many benefices, is a proper
kind of merchandise, and filthy gain: 3 Therefore, etc.
1 Whatsoever is indecent and uncomely in the Church, is unlawful: 2 But for
one man to be placed in two benefices, is indecent and uncomely: 3 Therefore
for one man to be placed in two benefices, is unlawful.
BEside these Canons, there are many mo, establishing the not having of many
benefices for one men: but to recite all, were a labor superfluous,
considering ye effect of al is contained in these. And yet Octobones
provincial constitution, wherein diverse other absurdities, then whereof
mention has been yet made against the unlawful retinue of many benefices, are
expreslie alleged, is not amiss to be repeated, who says as follows.

EX HIS AVTEM, etc. We suffice not to speak, how October. de inst. seu collat.
ca, ^
great evils proceed out of these pluralities unto the Church: For by the^ the
honesty of the church is defiled: Authority is naught set by: the faith of
Christ is trodden under foot: love is banished, the hope of the poor expecting
any void benefice is frustrate: The miserable and blind sinner boasting
himself as a guide, does not so much receive, as steal that that belongs
not unto him. Among the rich themselves also strises and contentions arise,
braules and enuies are nourished. And for this cause we chiefly fear the fire
of God his wrath, to have been kindled against men of such rule, and for the
offenses of some to have sent a fear or revenge against all: and vvhilest we
see nothing so perilous, we fear such or grieuouser things in time to come,
unless God by his mercy respecting us, shall lay to some wholesome remedy.
If the disease and malady of pluralites, in time of ignorance and superstition
was such, that the blind leaders of the blind, 5. P. 2.
had their eyes in their heads to see the infection thereof to be most
perilous, as well to their synagogue, as to their common weal: how is it
possible, that plurified men in the time of ye knowledge and truth of the
Gospel, should find any means to escape the fire and revenge which the
idolators feared. And not only these Canons and prouincials, but the statute
laws of England also made against these excesses, prohibit likewise the
having of ^^ benefices, as appears by an act of Parliament, made the 21.
year of Henry the 8. the tenor whereof ensues. And be it enacted that if
any person or persons, having one benefice with cure of souls, being of the
yeerelie value of 8. pounds or above, accept and take any other with cure of
soul, and be instituted and inducted in possession of the same, that then and
immediately after such possession had thereof, the first benefice shall be
adjudged in the law to be void. And that it shall be lawful to every
patron, having the aduouson thereof to present another, and the presented to
have the benefit of the same in such like manner and form, as though the
incumbent had died or resigned: Any lisence, union, or other dispensation, to
the contrary hereof obtained notwithstanding: And that every such license,
union. or dispensation had, or hereafter to be had, contrary to this present
act, of what name or names, quality or qualities, so ever they be, shall be
utterly void and of none effect. As touching any other Canons made and in
force, before 25. Henry 8. allowing certain immunities, privileges, and
dispensations to be granted, for the possessing of many benesices and Parish
Churches rightly understood, are no way prejudicial unto these former
ordinances. For in things depending upon the mere disposition of man, though
the magistrate have authority, as well generally to forbid and prohibit,
as also in some cases besides the said law, to license and dispense: yet
concerning the matter of pluralities, it will not be found. Pluralists (I
confess) and their abettours, ground their assertions upon these and such like
rules following: viz. Eius est destruere, cuius est construere: eius est
interpretari, cuius est condere. Papa qut ius condidit, est supra ius, matorem
enim retinu^t potestatem, etc. That is, To him it belongs to pull down, to
whom it belongs to set up: and the interpretation of the law belongs to
the law maker: the Pope that made the law, is above the law, because he has
retained a greater power to himself, then he has given to the law: The Pope
has a fullness of power to dispose of benefices at his pleasure. And therefore
say they, As Churches were at the first by Law positive, both founded and
distinguished: so may they again by the same Law positive, either be clean
taken away, or united. Which unnecessary and sophistical consequence, is
simply to be denied. First, for those former rules, generally understood
without limitation and distinction, be either utterly false, or else
contrary and repugnaunt to other principles of Law. Eius est destruere cuius
est construere, etc. He may break a Law, that may make a Law, the same is
not always true. It takes no place, Vbt causa prohibitionis est perpetua,
where there is a perpetual cause of a prohibition: For then the cause being
perpetual, the prohibition ought to be perpetual. Quta perpetuam habet
causam prohibitionis, nulla est obligatio. Because Fi. de verb. oblig. l si
slipuler in id. and glos. extra. de simo. c. si quis. ver. iuramentum.
it has a perpetual cause of prohibition, there is no obligation, As for
example: the reason and cause of prohibition against murder, theft, rauine,
blasphemic, is perpetual, and therefore the Law against murder, theft,
rauine and blasphemy, ought to be perpetual: And therefore men having once
made Laws against these vices, it is not lawful for man afterward to
dispense with these vices, or by license to warrant any man to steal, to
kill, to spoil, or to blaspheme. For whosoever shall in this sort dispense
with a Law, the same also may dispense with the reason of the Law, and so
with the soul and life of the Law, and so make the Law a vain and dead
Law. Ratio legis est anima legis. Institutio. de iure. not genesis and ci. sed
naturalis. Iam.
alter, or impugn, or dispense with the reasons of either of them. For as the
law of Nature is immutable: so is the reason of the Law of Nature immutable:
and as the will of GOD is unchangeable, so is the equity of his Law
unchangeable to. If then natural reason be the cause and soul and life of a
natural Law, and the will of God the only cause of the Law of God, and his
only will the rule of all justice vuchaungeablie, none can challenge
authority to change or dispense with the Law of Nature or with the Law of
God, but he must foorth-with challenge authority to dispense both with the
reason of the Law of Nature, and with the pleasure and will of GOD. And
therefore out of the premises I conclude thus.

1 Wheresoever the cause of a prohibition is perpetual, there the prohibition
ought to be perpetual: 2 But the cause of the prohibition against pluralities
is perpetual: 3 Therefore the prohibition ought to be perpetual.
1 Every law grounded upon the reason of nature and the Page 116.
equity of the law of God is immutable: 2 But the laws prohibiting
pluralities, are grounded either upon the reasons of nature, or upon the
equity of the law of God: 3 Therefore all the laws prohibiting pluralities
are immutable.
THE first proposition of the first syllogisine has been proved Institut. de
iure natu. gent. and ciui. sed na^uralia. James.
already: the first proposition of the 2. syllogism is manifest, Omnia
naturalia sunt immutabilia: All natural things are immutable, and there is no
altering or shadowing by turning with the almighty. The second proposition of
either syllogism shall be manifested by that that follows. But first to
answer the falacies before spoken of, because pluralities are not forbidden
by law positive of man alone, but prohibited also by the law of nature, and
by the law of God: therefore it follows, that they may not be tolerated by
law positive of man alone. And therefore if plurality men would fitly argue to
conclude their purpose, they should frame the same after this sort.

1 Whatsoever is prohibited by the law of man alone, the same by the law of
man alone, may be licensed again: 2 But pluralities are forbidden by the law
of man alone: 3 Therefore they may be licensed by the law of man again.
THE second proposition of which syllogism being utterly false, you see
evidently wherein the conclusion halteth, and the falacie consists, and
therefore I conclude against them thus. 1 Whatsoever is forbidden by the law
of nature, and by the law Page 117.
of God, ye same cannot be licensed by the law of man alone: 2 But pluralities
are forbidden by the law of nature, and by the law of God: 3 Therefore they
cannot be licensed by the law of man alone. And again.
1 Whatsoever ratifieth a thing monstrous and against nature, ye same may not
be privileged by the law of man: 2 But dispensatio^s for pluralities ratify
monstrous things, and things against nature. 3 Therefore dispensations for
pluralities may not be privileged by the law of man.


THe second proposition of the first syllogism, shall be proved in this place.
The second proposition of the last sillogisme, I prove from the etymology or
description of a privilege or dispensation: for a privilege, and a
dispensation, in effect signify both one thing. Priuilegium dicitur, quod
emanat contra ius Glos. lib. 6. de rescript. c. versan principio. Extra. d^
iudic. c. At si clerici. de adulterijs.
^ommune in fauorem aliquarum personarum: super prohibit^s despensatur, quia
permissa, iure communi expediuntur, prohibita vero dispensatione egent. A
privilege is said to be that, that for the favor of certain private
persons, comes forth against common right: things prohibited are dispensed
with, because things permitted are dispatched by common right, but things
forbidden require dispensation. By which discriptions of a privilege and
dispensation, it is apparent, that a privilege and dispensation for
pluralities, must license and authorize that, that the law against plurality
does infringe, and disalowe, and so be a law contrariant, and repugnant to
the Law against Pluralities: but the Law against Pluralities, is the law of
nature and the law of God: Therefore a privilege or dispensation for
Pluralities is against the law of Nature, and against the law of God: a more
monstrous law was never established. Now Page 118.
that Pluralities are forbidden by the law of Nature, and by the law of God,
which was the second proposition of my first Syllogism, I prove thus. All the
reasons whereupon the positive Law of man against Pluralities was first
established, are taken and drawn from the Law of Nature, and from the Law of
God: The reasons and causes of the prohibition are these: First, the avoiding
of Covetousness, of Ambition, of Theft, of murder of Souls, of a dissolute,
a roaging, and a gadding Ministry, the necessity of comeliness and decency
in the Church, are special and primarie causes for the prohibiting
Pluralities: but all these are forbidden or commanded by the law of God:
therefore the causes of the prohibition of Pluralities are grounded upon the
will of God, and therefore immutable, and therefore not to be dispensed with.
Again, for one man to have the stipends of many men: for one man, not able to
discharge his duty in one place, and yet to have many charges in many places
committed unto him: for one man to hinder another man from ordinary means to
do good to the Church: all these causes I say are second causes for the
prohibition of Pluralities: but all these causes are causes of reason and
nature, therefore by the Laws of reason and nature, Pluralities are forbidden:
and therefore not to be dispensed with, no more then theft or murder or
blasphenne may be dispensed with. And if Antichrist think it Theft, Rauine,
Covetousness, Ambition, Pride, murder of Souls, for one man to have many
Benefices without dispensation: if Antichrist account the having of many
benefices without dispensation, to be a meet mean to maintain a roauing, a
gadding, and a dissolute Ministry: to foster extortion and unlawful gain:
what shall the servants of the Lord Christ, the son of the most highest,
Whom he has commanded to be holy and Page 119.
perfect, as his heavenly father is perfect, defend all these horrible sins
and impieties tolerable by dispensation? Can a dispensation from a Pope or an
Archbishop make Theft no Theft? Rauine no Rauine? Covetousness and Ambition,
no Covetousness and no ambition? I speak herein to Christians, which ought
to maintain the Law of Christ against the law of Antichrist. For I know
some of the Popes Chaplains, grounding themselves upon these rules of law,
whereof mention has been made before, and giving unto the Pope Merum
imperium, ^n absolute power on earth, will affirm, that the Pope Vid gloss.
Extra de confess. prebend. c. proposiut. verse. si. pra. ius.. Apostol.
dispensat. 34. distinct. c. lector. Glos. inc. non est extra. de voto verse.
authoritate.
can make Nihil ex aliquo, and Aliquid ex nihilo, Nothing of somewhat, and
somewhat of nothing. Sin to be no sin, and no sin to be sin. These
blasphemies they spue out, and these blasphemies they maintain, that think
they may be thieves and murderers, and extortioners by dispensation. And such
are plurified men by their own plurality Laws, as shall further be
manifested. For as to the making of every general and public ordinance and
constitution, it is necessarily required, that the same tend, first to the
aduauncing of the honor, praise and glory of God: secondly, that it be
pro^itable and expedient for the peace and safety of the weal public: even
so, every superior and Potentate, to whom authority by Law is given (in
some cases) to grant Privileges, ought in the same cases to observe the like
conditions and circumstances, to the end their said Privileges may be
auailable and take effect, without the dishonouring of God and prejudice to
their Country and people. For, though a dispensation be but a fiction in Law:
yet is that fiction indeed, of as great force and efficacy in that fained
case, and works as great effect, as the truth of the Law Cod. de coll. dec.
l liberos.
it self in a case of truth: And by Law it is all one in effect, whether I
inioye any benefit by Privilege or by common right. And therefore as a Law
public, must be equal, honest, just, possible, agreeable to the Country,
place and time, necessary, Page 120.
Distinct. 4 c. crit.
profitable, not written for any private commodity, but for the common
profit of the people: so likewise must a Privilege have all these conditions
and qualities. Otherwise as a general and public Law, loses the name of a
public Law, unless it be such as has the foresaid coherences: even so a
Privilege loses the name of a private Law, unless it have the like
adjuncts.

The second fallacy wherein plurality men beguile themselves, is as evident
and palpable as the first. They reason thus: Churches were established and
Parishes distinguished by man: therefore Churches and Parishes may be united
by man: and if Churches may be united by man, then one man may have many
Benefices. The antecedent of which Enthimeme is sophistical, because of the
double and treble signification of the word Churches, and therefore the
argument lu^peth after the same manner, as the former did, attributing the
establishing of Churches to man only: for if they should mean by this word
(Churches) frames of Churches, fashioned of Timber, Wood, Stone, Mortar, and
such like, then say they truly, that Churches were builded and founded by
man: as to say, by Masons, Carpenters, Tylars, etc. But they will not have the
name of (Churches) in their Argument to be taken in this sense. Their meaning
(I am sure) is not so, they have no such intent: for so might they rather
burden themselves with the reparations of many churches, then profit
themselves, with the revenues of many Churches: And by being Lords of many
Steeples after that sort, they might gape long enough upon them, before they
gained ought by them. If they mean by this word (Churches) congregations and
assemblies of people, then is their assertion absolute^e false, because the
Lord has willed all his people to gather and assemble themselves together, to
the intent they should call upon his name: And then in this sense their
conclusion must needs fail also, because Page 121.
it is both impossible for all the people to be assembled together into one
place, and also impossible to hear one man's voice. But Churches again taken
and understood in this sense, as they make not for their purpose ^ne way: so
are they not curraunt to themselves and their senses another way. They would
teach and preach little enough, and be weary of well doing soon enough, had
they not respect to grease themselves, rather with the fat of the labor of the
people, then diligently to govern and instruct the people: And therefore I
guess their meaning to be, that Churches in their former proposition, should
signify the livings of Churches, and therefore their argument to be thus in
effect. Liuinges of Churches are established and distinguished by man:
therefore liuinges of Churches may be taken away, or united by man, wherein
they attribute still to man alone, that that in no wise appertains to man
alone: for as Congregations are appointed by the Lord himself, so are
pastors over Congregations, and livings for pastors likewise appointed by
him: And therefore as congregations of the Lords people cannot be altogether
dissolved by man alone, so ought not the liuinges appointed for the pastors of
the same people to be taken away by man alone. Do ye not know (says the
Apostle) that they which minister ^or. 1. 9. 13
about the holy things, eat of the things of the Temple: and they which
wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? So also has the Lord
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. And
therefore, in saying that liuinges of Churches and Parishes are distinguished,
by man, therefore they may be united by man, though in some sense the same
may be true, yet thereby it follows not, that many liuinges appointed by
the Lord himself for many pastors over many Congregations, should be
taken from many and be given to one. They might as well conclude, that Page
122.
whereas the Lord had commanded the land of Canaan to be divided amongst
the children of Israel by the hand of Moses: and whereas Moses had given unto
some one family, a greater portion, and to some other family a lesser
portion: that therefore Joshua, Moses successor, might have taken both the
greater and the lesser, and given it to one alone, or to have taken all the
portions and inheritaunces allotted unto diverse and sundry of a family, and
to have given them to one of one family alone: or whereas Moses according to
his commission, had distributed the land into twleue parts, according to the
twelve principal and chief families: Joshua might have made but two or three,
or four Captains over all the whole twelve Tribes. As our auncesters in times
past, bounding and limitting Parishes, have enlarged some with wider borders,
and straightned some with narrower passages then was meet and convenient: So
were it very good and commendable for men of wisdom in our days, to yield
to have a better equality, then that some should have all, and some never a
whit: some two or three thousand pounds by the year, and some scarcely 20.
Nobles: so that the pastor that now has too little, might by some means have
sufficient: and that he that has now too much, might have a convenient
competencie. If Sempronius the tailor should make Titius his garment too short
wasted, and Seius his garment too long wasted, it follows not therefore, that
Caius the pilferer, to make himself a garment, should by stealth convey both
garments away. By the unfolding of these fallacies, you may judge, that if
plurality men, to serve their turn indeed, could have framed their argument
skilfullie, they would then have fashioned the same after this sort. 1
Whatsoever is established, and distinguished by man alone, the same may be
taken away and united by man alone. Page 123.
2 But Churches, that is to say: Congregations of ye Lords people: pastors of
these assemblies, and the livings for the pastors of these assemblies, were
established and distingushed by man alone: 3 Therefore Churches, pastors, and
livings for pastors, may be taken away and united by man alone.


Now because the Minor proposition of this Sillogisme is utterly false,
therefore I conclude against plurality men thus 1 Whatsoever is established
and distinguished by the Lord himself, the same may not be taken away or
united by man: 2 But Churches, that is to say, assemblies and societies of the
Lords people, pastors of these assemblies, and livings for the pastors of
these assemblies, are established and distinguished by the Lord himself: 3
Therefore Churches, that is to say, assemblies of people: pastors, and
livings for pastors, may not be taken away, or united by man.


THe Minor proposition of which Syllogism, to every man, not minded to cavil
at these words, (Established and Distinguished) is infallible, and not to be
denied: for though bounds and limits of certain Parishes are bordered out by
man: and that a certain number of people, called to make one congregation, and
to hear at one time, in one place, one certain pastor, be at the rule and
disposition of man: yet that these things should be thus done is the special
commandment of the Lord. Moreover, when as this thing shall be once thus
performed by man, (according to the Lords commandment) it shall be, and is
lawful for man again, where the congregation is too great, to make Page 124.
the same less, and where it is to little, to make the same greater: and in
this sense I grant, that as it is lawful for man to establish, and
distinguish: so it is lawful for man to take away and to unite Churches and
liuinges. But because this is not the meaning of pluralists, for that they will
have one pastor to be placed over many Congregations, and many Congregations
to find one pastor: many bodies to have one head: and one head to have many
bodies: many flocks to have one shepherd, and one shepherd to have many
flocks: Therefore mine argument without any cauili remains firm against
them. And for these considerations, as before, so again I deny the
consequence made by plurified men, for the possessing of many benefices by one
man. For, though by color of law, they pretend right unto them: yet the law
indeed yields them no such advantage, because dispensations for many
benefices and Parish Churches, with cure of souls generally granted, are,
and ought by law to be utterly volde and of none effect, as partly has been
proved, and more at large appears by that that follows. Dispensatio Glos.
1. q. 7 c. requiritis.
est iur^s commun^s relaxat to, facta cum causae cognitione, ab eo qui ius
habet dispensandi. A dispensation is a relaxation or release of common right,
granted by him that has power to dispense, having first taken knowledge of
the cause thereof: that is, having considered, whether there be just cause to
move him to grant a privilege or dispensation against common right or no. By
which definition it is evident, that Dispensare, is diuersa pensare: nam omnia
quae ad caus^ cognitionem pertinent, pensare debet, qui dispensari vult. To
Dispense, is to ponder diverse things: for he that will Dispense, ought to
weigh and to consider all those things which pertain to the knowledge of the
cause. In which descriptions, three things are principally requisite and
necessary. First, the person or judge that has authority to dispense.
Secondly, the causes for the which dispensations may be granted: And lastly,
an examination or discussion of those causes: Page 125.
So that if any dispensation or faculty whatsoever shall be granted, either
A non Iudice, by one that is no Judge, either without a lawful cause: or
lastly, without a special trial and sifting of that same lawefull cause,
before it pass: every such despensation by a necessary consequence, is
meerelie void, because every such dispensation agrees not to the definition
of a Glos. extrauagant de prebe^d.
dispensation, and therefore cannot be the thing defined. Concerning the
party that has power and authority to grant and dignit. c. execrabilis ver.
vltima. H. 8.
dispensations, and to take knowledge of the lawfulness of the causes
requisite to make dispensations good and available, the same in this Realm,
is the Archbishop of Canterbur^e: and upon his refusal then, such as her
highness shall appoint to that office, according to the form of a Statute
provided in that behalf. And therefore touching his person thus appointed to
be Judge, I conclude from the general to the special, as before: that
because the positive laws of man against pluralities, are all grounded either
upon the law of Nature, or upon the law of God: And because, as the laws
of Nature and the laws of God are immutable, so should the same positive
laws remain stable and unchangeable: that therefore the Archbishop of
Canterbury, being a man, has no more right to give a dispensation against
the positive laws of man, made against pluralities, then he has to give a
dispensation against Glos. extra. de vot. c. non est ver. authoritate. Extra.
d^ conces. preb. pro. posuit versupra etc. cum ad monasterium: ex d^ statu
monacho.
the law of Nature, or against the law of God. For says the Gloss in one
place: No dispensation against the law of Nature, or against the law of God
is tolerable, no not by the Pope himself. As touching the causes whereupon
the said Archbishop, or other officers, should, and ought be moved, by
remitting the rigor of common right, to grant immunities and dispensations,
they are two fold^: One consists Page 126.
in the dignity and worthiness of the persons, the other in the waightinesse
of certain special causes. For in truth, either the defect of the quality of
the person, or the want of a just cause in Law, does frustrate and make void
cuerie dispensation. For neither can a man qualified, and in all respects
capable of a Dispensation, inioye the benefit thereof, unless he may also
inioye the same upon a good ground, and a just cause warranted by Law:
Neither can a just cause and good ground approved by Law, be sufficient
matter to Unto what manner of persons dispensatio^s ought to be granted.
induce a Judge to grant a Dispensation to him that is unable and unapt to
receive the same. A man well lettered, singularly qualified, and endued with
virtue and godliness, or of some noble house and parentage, is by Law a fit
and meet man to inioye ^^o benefices by Dispensation then one: Neither is it a
sufficient qualification for one destitute of learning to become a Chaplain
only to some Noble man: For the Statute providing, that some Noble men's
Chaplains should be made capable by dispensation to retain ^^o Benefices,
does not thereby take away the qualyties required to be in such persons by
common right, but adds a new quality, requisite to be had of every one,
and so makes the law stronger and of more efficacy against pluralities.
Statuta debent Panor in c. ex part. l. (...). de verb. signifi. fo. 189. nu.
intellig^, quod aliquid addant iuri communi: Statutes ought so to be
understood, that they may add somewhat to common right. Circa sublimes and
literatas personas, quae maioribus beneficijs sunt honorandae (cum ratio
postulauerit) per sedem apostolicam poterit dispensari. Conceruing men of
Nobility and learning, who with greater 3. Extr. de prebend c. fi. de multa
benefices are to be honored, the Apostolic sea (if reason shall require) may
dispense with such. And in another Chapter the same is confirmed.

MVLTA ENIM in hoc casu dispensationem inducere videbantur: literarum scientia,
morum honestas, vitae virtus, and fama personae multiplieiter a quibusdem etiam
ex fratribus nostris, qui eumin Extr. de elec. c. innotuit.
scholis cognouerant approbatae. Many things in this case seemed to lead to
the granting of a dispensation, his learning, his honest conversation, his
upright life, and the good report of the person diversely commended, even by
some of our brethren which knevv him at school. These gifts and graces, these
qualities, and these conditions, are incident, and appertain by common right
to these men, that by way of dispensation, may possess many benefices.
Whosoever then is not commendable for his learning, for his honesty, for his
sincere life, or not of some ancient and noble family, the same man by law
is utterly barred and secluded from this benefit. The second quality required
to the validity of every dispensation, is the waightinesse of some special
cause, as appears in the Chapter before recited in these words, Cum ratio
postulauerit, when reason requires. And again we answer, says Alexander
the third, in a decretall Epistle written to the Bishop of Exceter, that it
belongs to the judgment of Extr. de voto. c. 1.
him that is President, that he consider diligently the cause of
communication, and so accordingly to dispense. And by the Chapter, Magnae,
Extra. de voto, It is plain and evident, that there must be some special
cause known, for the which every dispensation is to be granted. For as I
said before, to the end that every dispensation be good and available by
Law, there is required necessarily, both the ability of the person to whom,
and the justice of the cause for which the same ought to be given. For neither
may an able man, without a just cause, neither a just cause without an able
man, move the Judge in any wise to dispense. And to tell you what these
special causes are, in few words they Page 12l.
are these, urgent necessity and evident utility of the Church. Extra. de
ele. c. cum nobis.
Propter vrgentem necessitatem, and euidentem vtilitatem ecclesiae Capuanae,
quam in hac part potius approbamus, volumus ipsum firmiter perdurare. For the
urgent necessity and evident utility of the Necessity and utility of the
Church only just causes of a dispensation. 1. q. 7. requiritis. (...) nisi.
Church of Capua, which on this behalf we rather have respect unto, our
pleasure and will is, that he continue. It is unlawful by common right for a
Monk or lay man to be admitted to the government of any Church with cure of
soul: yet notwithstanding. if by reason of war, famine, persecution, or
other extraordinary cause, the office of pastoral teaching did cease, so that
the people had none to instruct them in the way of salvation: now in this case
it is lawful for him that has authority to dispense with a Monk or lay
man, endued with learning, to the end he might by instruction bring the people
to knowledge. It is unlawful that children borne of a Run, violently taken
aware and married, should be admitted to any Ecclesiastical orders.
Notwithstanding, if the great profit or necessity of the Church require, they
may by dispensation be admitted. Suppose there were a custom of long
continuance and time out of mind in the Church of Paul's, contrary to the
first foundation of the Church, that not only the Prebendaries daily present
at divine service, but also others absenting themselves should receive every
one a like some daily pention, either in money or some kind of victual: this
custom by law is void, because it is unreasonable. And yet notwithstanding
any just and necessary infirmity of the body of any Prebendarie or evident
utility of the same Church, may be a lawful and sufficient inducement for
the Ordinary to dispense with the not restoring of that which was unlawfully
taken, under pretense of the former custom. Paul's, tweine Prebendaries were
appointed to be maintained by the revenues of the Church, and the said
revenues were not sufficient for the mainteinance of these twelve, the Bishop
then in this case, if the necessity and utility of the Church so require, may
annect certain other Chappelles for the mainteinance of the said
Prebendaries. These examples do sufficiently prove that every dispensation,
privilege, or immunitie, ought to be grounded upon some just and reasonable
cause: and that the said just and reasonable cause, ought evermore to be the
urgent necessity and evident profit and commodity of the Church. And that the
said urgent necessity and evident commodity of the Church, ought evermore to
be understood, the well governing of the souls of the people. If therefore
neither urgent necessity or evident utility of the Church require that any
one should have many Benefices, yea rather, if it be most profitable and
necessary for the Chruch, that one man should have but a living appointed for
one man, and that by joining benefice to benefice, and Church to Church, the
Church indeed is meruailously wounded, grieved and molested: and that the
souls of the people, are thereby not governed at all, but left at randon to
their own direction, having no guide to conduct them: every one may
evidently discern, dispensations in that behalf, to be altogether
intolerable, having no ground nor foundation of reason, equity, or law, but
only granted for the private gain and iucre of some covetous and vain
glorious persons. Whereas it may be answered, that the statutes of ye realm,
licensing diverse Ecclesiastical persons, qualified either by degree of
school, or by service unto nobility, ought more to be respected in this
behalf, then the reasons of the Canon law. Hereunto I answer, that for my
part, I heartelie desire and pray unto God, that these laws might be
respected, and that the law of England might rule an English man in this case.
But alsse, our laws are bells without clappers; they are founded, but they
found not, they are bands, but they bind not. Be it enacted that neither the
king, his heirs and successors, Kings of this Realm, nor any of their
subjects of this Realm, nor of the Kings dominions, shall from thence forth
sue to the sea of Rome, or unto any person or persons, having or pretending
any authority by the same for licenses, dispensations, impositions,
faculties, graunies, rescriptes, delegacies, instruments, or other writings,
of what kind, name, etc for the which any license, dispensation, composition,
faculty, grant, rescript, delegacie, instrument or other writing, heretofore
has been used and accustomed to be had and obtained at the sea of Rome, or by
authority thereof, or of any Prelate of this Realm, nor of any manner of
other licenses, dispensations, compositions, faculties, grauntes^, rescripts,
delegacies, or any other instruments or writings, that in cases of necessity
may lawfully be granted, without offending holy Scriptures and laws of God:
This act is renewed 1. Elizab. Provided always, that this act, nor any thing
or things therein contained, shall be hereafter interpreted or expounded, that
your grace, your nobles and subjects intend by the same to decline or vary
from the congregation of Christ his Chruch in any thing concerning the very
articles of the catholic faith of Christendom. or in any other things
declared by holy Scripture, and the word of God, necessary for your and
their saluations, but only to make an ordinance by policy, necessary and
convenient to repress vice, and for good conservation of this Realm in peace,
unity, and tranquillity from rauine and spoil. or obtained, but in cases of
necessity, in cases not contrary or re^ugnant to the laws of God: in cases
wherein the wealth, profit, peace, and conservation of the Realm requires: in
cases convenient for the honor and safety of the kings person: with a du^
consideration always of the causes and qualities for the which, and of the
persons to whom any license or immunitie should be granted. And therefore
out of this statute first I conclude thus against plurified men.

1 Whatsoever cause or matter is repugnant to the law of God, the Archbishop
may not dispense with the same: 2 But the matter of having many benefices, or
being Non residents, is repugnant to the laws of God: 3 Therefore the Archb,
may not dispense with the same. Again.
1 Whatsoever is not necessary for the wealth, peace, profit, and conservation
of the realm, and same by this statute is forbidden: 2 But y^ one man should
enjoy by way of dispensation from and Archb. livings appointed for many men,
is not necessary for the wealth, peace, profit, and conservation of and
Realm. 3 Therefore the same is forbidden by this statute. Lastly.
1 Whatsoever is not convenient for the honor and safety of her highness
person, and same by this statute is forbidden: 3 Therefore by this statute the
Archbishop is forbidden to dispense, etc.
THE Minor proposition of the first Syllogism has been already sufficiently
proved by many infallible conclusions of Law, and undoubted truths of the
word of God, and therefore it is needless to make any repetition thereof.
Only I would have the reader diligently to mark the words of the Statute,
forbidding all manner of Dispensations, in any matter or cause repugnant to
the word of God. For though the adversary cauil, that we find not in the
Scriptures these tearines: viz. Licenses, Tollerations, Dispensations, etc.
preciselie specified in any commandment, prohibitorie in the Scriptures: yet
in as much as the matter or cause of dispensations sor many benefices is there
generally forbidden: as ambition, pride, covetousness, ^^rill of selves, etc.
Therefore it follows, that by It is against the profit of the common weal,
that the Archb. should dispense.
this (...) Dispensations in this case are absolutely inhibited. The Minor
proposition of the second Sill^gisme may be confirmed by three evident reasons.
First from the event, which by our own common and bailie experience, we too
too well know to be true. For by the same we see a few wealthy and rich
Prelates, in pride and ioilitie to be maintained, and a great number of needy
Stipendarie Curates, and poor Ministers to be vtteriie desi^ute of meet and
convenient allowancco: so that sometimes after their decease, their distressed
wives and children are forced either to be ^el^^ued by the several Parishes or
their abo^des, to the impouerishing of the same Parishes, or else consirained
to b^^ from place to place and so be chas^^^ed as roges: Page 134.
or pilier and steal, and so be punished as selons. Secondly, by a
comparison drawn from the other Statutes of the Realm, providing that one
rich and mighty man should not exercise many seuarall mysteries, trabes, and
faculties, and so rob the poorer sort from the ordinary means, whereby they
might live well and honestly in the common wealth. The third reason is taken
from an adiun^t or common accident to every common weal, rightly governed:
that is, that the last Wills and Testaments of all and singular testators be
duly executed: especially such, as whereby the honor of God is promoted, the
Church and common weal manifeselie regarded: but unto the performance of the
last wills and Testaments of many patrons, endowing mame Churches with large
and ample possessions, to the intent convenient living might be always
provided for pasrours to be resiant, and to feeve their posterity wi^h the
food of life, the word of God, there can be nothing more premdiciall, or more
deregatorie, then that these several patrimonies and inheritances, appointed
by several patrons, for several pastors, to such several and good uses,
should by the dispensation of one man, be transformed and given to another
use. contrary to the testator his intent and purpose. And therefore I confirm
my Minor proposition by these three conclusions.

1 Whatsoever is an occasion that poor and needy Ministers, their wives and
children, do want a competent and convenient mainteinance, the same is not
necessary, for the profit, peace, wealth, and conservation of the common
weal: 2 But that one man should by dispensation enjoy many benefices, is an
occasion that poor and needy Ministers, their wives and children do want a
competent and convenient maintenance: 3 Therefore that one man should by
dispensation enjoy many benefices, is not necessary, for the profit, peace,
wealth, and conservation of the common weal.
1 Whatsoever is an occasion and one man should enjoy the offices and livings
of many men, the same is not necessary for the peace, profit, wealth, and
conservation of the common weal. 2 But that one man should by dispensation
enjoy many benefices, is an occasion that one man should enjoy the offices and
livings of many men: 3 Therefore that one man should enjoy by dispensation
many benefices, is not necessary for the peace, profit, wealth, and
conservation of the common wealth.
1 Whatsoever is prejudicial and ^erogatorie to the last Wills and testainents
of testators, disposing their patrimony to lawful and holy uses, the same is
not necessary for the peace, profit, wealth and conservation of the Realm. 2
But that one man by dispensation should inioye many benefices, is
prejudicial and derogatorie to such last Wills and Testaments. 3 Therefore that
one man by dispensation should inioye many benefices, is not necessary for
the peace, profit, wealth and conservation of the Realm.
COncerning the validity of the Minor proposition of my It is inco^uenient for
the honor and safety of her highness person, for y^ Archb. to dispe^ce
third syllogism, drawn from the conueniencie of her highness honor
(namely, that it is not convenient for the honor and surety of her Highness
person, to leave any manner of authority, for the Archbishop to dispense)
none may well doubt thereof, but only such as respect more the pomp and
glory of an Archbishop, then the dignity and pre-eminence of a christian
king. For in good sooth, this statute made principally to abolish all usurped
power, challenged by a foreign and Ro^^sh ^ope, over Page 136.
the king and his subjects, and yet to authorize a vomesticall and English
Archb. in his room, contains in it such a contrariety, and such an
absurdity, as it is wonder how either any Archb. durst challenge ye execution
thereof, or else how her highness must noble father, and brother, and her
Highness own person, could endure the same so long uncancelled and
unrepealed, especially the same being most presudiciall to their regal
crowns and dignities. For, first by the virtue of this statute, it is enjoined
the Archbishop and his successors in no manner wise, to grant any
dispensation, license, rescript, or any other writing for any cause or matter,
repugnant to the law of almighty God. Secondly, it is permitted unto the said
Archbishop, and his successors, by their discretions, to grant unto the
kings Majesty, and to his heirs and successors, Kings of this Realm, all
manner such licenses, etc. as heretofore have been accustomed to be had and
obtained by his Highness, or any his noble progenitors, or any his subjects
at the sea of Rome. Which two clauses, without dishonor to the Majesty of
God, or prejudice to her highnesie prerogative, cannot possible establish a
sound and perfect law. For, first in as much as the Popes person was never
duly qualified to be a lawful dispensor, or any lawful Magistrate in the
Church of God, it is manifest that every dispensation granted at that time at
the sea of Rome, was directly against the law of GOD, as granted by one that
was no member of the Church of God. Again: In as much as the truth of the
Gospel warraunteth us, that symony, ^sury, Perjury, Adultery, Incest,
Nonresidency, many benefices. Marriages against the Leuiticall Law,
observations of superstitious days and times, not eating of flesh in Lent, and
such like, are against the Law of God: it is evident that dispensations
granted at that time, for these and such like things, at the Sea of Rome,
were granted in causes and matters repugnant to the law of God, and so by the
former branch of this statute being precisely dissalowed, cannot by the Page 1
37.
second branch of the same be generally approved. For how can one and the
self samelawe forbid and command, things so contrary and repugnant in
themselves? Or how can the Archbishop safely ground his jurisdiction upon a law
so contrary and repugnant unto it self? If the Archbishop shall think that
these two branches may be reconciled, and that the meaning of the former may
and ought simply to be understood, as the words them selves import: and that
the second branch, may and ought to be understood, to bound and limite such
an authority to him self, as whereby he might grant such licenses as were
had and obtained at that time, at the sea of Rome, for matters not contrary or
repugnant to the law of God: yet neither by this interpretation, is y^
Archbishop truly entitled unto any authority, thereby to dispe^ce for symony,
nonresidence, many benefices, marriages in Lent, etc. in as much, as such manner
of licenses, obtained at y^ time at the sea of Rome, were obtained for matters
repugnant unto the law of God, and contrary to the truth of the doctrine of the
Gospel: and so by this starute fla^^^ forbidden. which things our ancestors,
not thoroughly foreseeing, neither only examining for what manner of causes or
matters licenses were at that time obtained at the sea of Rome: but only in a
generanti^ inhibiting things repugnant unto the law of God, and never
particularly describing what those things were: but leaving the same wholly to
the judgment and discretion of one man, the Archbishop alone, have fallen into
two paipable absurdities: the one, that one man alone, has from time to time
authority by his discrerion, to determine what causes are repugnant to the
holy scriptures and laws of God: England, and what are necessary to be had for
the wealth and profit of the Realm, three things of such weight and
importance, as the whole body of the realm, at that time, was scarce able to
conceive, much less shall ever any one Archbishop be able to practice. The
other absurdity is this, viz, that by this statute, soueraignitie is given to
the Archbishop and his successors, to dispense with the king, and his
successors, kings and Queens of England. The words of the statute are plain
and evident. But what reason is there for kings and Queens of England, to
become wards and pupils unto an Archbishop of England? Or how agrees it
with the word of God, that a Christian King should in any sort be in
subjection unto his own vassal? Or what Christian subject dares attempt to
offer unto his Christian sovereign a tolleration^ For, in case the matter of
the said tolleration be pretended to concern the conscience, then if the
matter be free and lawful by the law of God, a Christian king may as well and
as freely use the liberty of his conscience, with out license from his
subject, as his subject may use his freedom, without dispensation from the
king. If it be contrary to the law of God, then may neither a Christian king,
neither a Christian subject be dispensed with. For what man can dispense with
the law of God^ And in case the matter of dispensation concern any thing
appertaining unto this life, how then should the king receive a dispensation
from the Archbishop, without impeaching his kingly dignity and prerogatine?
For either he must be dispensed with, for breach of the positine law of this
land, and have the pain of law, remitied him by y^ Archbishop, which were to
set the Archbishoppes keys above the kings arms: Or else he must purchase a
dispensatio^, that he may break his law, which were against his honor and
safety. For says y^ Emperor. Digna vox est maiestate regnantis, legib^^^
alligaium se principem prositeri. It is a word worthy c. De le. and constable it.
princ. l. digna.
the m^i^s^ie of a ruler, to acknowledge himself as chiese tied unto the laws.

Moreover, this case between the king and the Archbishop, is far different
from the case between the king and his Justices at law, determining matters
according to the common laws and customs of the Realm, between the king and
his subjects. For they remain still the kings underlings, and in deed give but
the kings judgment: they judge not the kings person, neither comes any
thing touching his person before them. But dispensations from the Archbishop to
the king, concern the kings own person. The king in his royal person, or by
his proctor, must appear in the Archbishops Consistory: he must allege
before the Archbishop sufficient matter, whereupon the Archbishop (but a
subject) may be mou^d to dispense with the king his soneraigne: and finally,
the kings wisdo^^^ must be subjected to the Archbishops discretion, And
therefore to confirm the Minor proposition of my third syllogism, I conclude.
1 whatsoever is dishouourable and dangercus for her highness person, the same
cannot be convenient for her honor and safety: 2 But it is dishonorable and
dangerous, to have the Archbishop to dispense with her highness: 3 Therefore
the same is not convenient, etc.


to the holy Scriptures, which causes the name of God to be evil spoken of,
and is a dishonor unto God, and therefore no honor nor safety unto her
highness person. And therefore her highness is humbly to be entreated, to
take the entire dominion, and whole sovereignty due unto her by the word of
God, into her own hands, and not any longer to suffer such a blemish to
remain in her gonernment. Had her Highness most noble Father understood, his
kingly person to have vnder-gone the Censorship of his subject, no doubt he
would as courageously have fought against an Archbishop, as he did against an
Abbot. As concerning the poverty of certain persons, pretended and Poverty
of the person no cause for a dispensation. Rebuff. de dispen. ad plu. benefi.
alleged in defense of dispensations for many benefices, that because the
revenues and profits of one benefice is now a days not a competent and
sufficient mainteinance for a Minister, his wife and family: that therefore,
in respect of such poverty, they are necessary and to be borne withal. I
answer herein first with Rebuffus the Lawyer, yt Licet quis sit pauper, etc.
Though one be poor, and suppose two benefices to be very necessary and
profitable for him, yet for this cause the Pope may not dispense. But if it be
necessary or profitable for the Church to have a teacher, to instruct,
maintain, and defend the same, then shall a dispensation be lawful. Qui
modicum recepit beneficium, 32. q. 5. c. horrendus.
etc. He that has received a small Benefice, has prejudiced himself,
therefore let him secke his living by his own craft, because whatsoever has
once pleased him, ought not any more to displease him. And let every one
walk in that vocation 70. distinct. sanstorum. 21. q. 1. c. primo. glos.
extra. de rescrip. c. si proponente. ver. minus. ff 91. distinct. quiautem.
whereunto he is called, and let him do according to the example of the
Apostle, saying: These hands have ministered unto me all things that were
wanting. And let him that is forbidden to get his living by filthy lucre and
dishonest merchandise, have a stipend of the oblations and offeringes of the
Church: but in case the Church be not sufficient, let him after the example of
the Apostle, who lived by the work of his hands, get by his own industry or
husbandry those things that are necessary. Out of these laws against
dispensations granted unto private persons in respect of private necessity, I
conclude thus: 1. If private necessity and poverty were a suffcient cause, to
enjoy a dispensation for many benefices, then should private necessity have
been warranted by Laws hereunto 2. But private necessity or poverty is not
warranted by Law, to be any sufficient cause for a dispensation: 3.
Therefore the necessity or poverty of a private person is not a sufficient
cause for a dispensation.


Quod in quibusdam permittitur, in caeteris prohibetur: That which is permitted
in some certain things, the same in other things is forbidden. And therefore
the Law, allowing either urgent necessity and evident utility of the Church,
or some excellent qualities of the mind, or descent from some ancient
parentage, to be only causes of dispensation, excludes all other causes
whatsoever. And as touching necessity and poverty of private persons, the
Law absolutely appoints other means to relieve the same, then by way of
dispensation: Neither can it be found in the whole body of Law, that
poverty alone is any sufficient cause to procure a dispensation for many
Benefices. For the Law accounts him always to have a competencie and
sufficiency, which has Victum and vestitum, meat drink, and apparel, which
is proved thus: luxta sanctum Apostolum, 12. 9. 1. E. Episcopies ver. 9. 2. c.
Episcopu^.
sic dicentem, habentes victum and vestitum, hijs contenti simus: according to
the saying of the Apostle, having food and apparel, let us content our selves
with that. And here we learn both what he that has taken unto himself a
charge, having but a small stipend annected thereunto, ought to do, in case it
be not sufficient: that is, that he ought to labor and travail with his own
hands, in some honest handie craft: and also what by law is reputed and taken
to be a competent and sufficient maintenance, even food and apparel.
Moreover, if a man willingly and without compulsion enter into a charge,
knowing before hand the stipend due unto him for his travail to be small, he
may not lawfully afterward complain, but if is wholly to be imputed to his
own negligence and f^llie, that he was no more circumspect better to provide
for himself at the first. If a man knowing a woman to have lead a loose and
dissolute li^e, take her to his wife, he cannot for her former mis demeanor
give her afterward a Bill of Deuorcement. Quod semel approbaui, iterum
reprobare non possum: That which once I have approved and allowed, I cannot
afterward disprove and bi^allowe. Neither in truth, for ought that ever I
perceived, by the want of any plurality man, if he rightly examine his own
conscience, can he pretend any necessity and want of living for himself, to
be any just cause of his foul disorder herein. May Caietane Cardinal of
Brygit, whose annual revenues by his Cardinalship amount to the sum of two
hundred pounds: may the same Cardinal, whose annual revenues of his Prebend
in another Church amount to the sum of two hundred marks: May the same
Cardinal, whose annual revenues of his Archdeaconrie in another Church amount
to the sum of forty pounds: May the same Cardinal, whose annual revenues
of his own and his wives patrimony, amount to the sum of fifty pounds,
complain justly that he stands in need of sufficient living to maintain
himself, his wife, and two or three children, and thereupon purchase to
himself a license to retain a benefice, from the which he receives peerelie
one hundredth marks? May a Cardinal, I say, thus furnished with so many
Ecclesiastical dignities, affirm safely with a good conscience, that he
wants and stands in need of a convenient living? Sed ettam habentes plures
ecclesias, etc. But they that have many Churches, one not depending on the
other, it is lawful for thee, notvvithstanding any appeal to the contrary,
to constrain them at their choice, to leave one of them, unless they shall
be so poor, that they cannot conueniem lie have their proper and peculiar
Priests: I say this (...) (Nisi ita fuerint teaues) cannot excuse master
Cardinal or ^^ster Provost, to retain his Abbey or Frierie, and by
dispensation a benefice or two besides. For that, as I said before, this
Privilege has no place, when as a man voluntarilic has taken upon him a
small charge, and so contented himself with a small portion at the first: but
only it has then place, and then takes effect, when as Ex post facto, by
some after deed his Church is imponerished. Moreover, those Churches are
counted Tennes in substantia, Churches small in revenue, which have not a
storke of ten persons, families or householdes, able to contribute to the
mainteinance of a pastor, as appears by the Canon following.

HOC NECESSARIVM, etc. This we have thought necessary 2. 9. 3. ^. unto.
to be ordained, that many Churches be not at all committed to one elder,
because he alone can neither perform his office in them al, neither yet
imploie any necessary care for the administration of the goods thereof: For
this consideration therefore we command that every Church which has had ten
households, have also a pastor over the same: and if any have had fewer then
ten, let then that Church be joined to some other Churches. By which
constitution our pluralists, if they were not wilfully blind, might easily
understand that the law does not permit one man, by reason of poverty to
have many Churches, that are able of themselves to maintain many pastors: but
that many poor Churches, unable to maintain many pastors, should be
consolidated and united to one, and being so joined together and made one,
then to have one pastor over them all, that might have of them all a competent
falarie for his sustenaunce. For says Rebuff. Papa in dispensatione, maxim
respicere debet vtilitatem Ecclesiae, non personae: sed hodie ventum est, v^
personae vtilitas consideratur, potius quam Ecclesiae, and potius dispensatur
cum diuite, qui totam vorabit ecclesiam, quam eum asio bono, qui eam tueri
possit. The Pope in a dispensation ought chiefly to respect the profit of the
Church, not of the party: but it comes to pass now a daied, that the profit
of the person is rather considered, then of the Church: and a dispensation is
rather given to a rich man, which will devour the whole Church, then to another
good man which might maintain the Church. If therefore it might stand with the
good pleasure of her highness godly Comissioners, in causes ecclesiastical
within their several charges, not only to examine the laws precedent, but
also to put in execution ye laws following, they should by this their
industry, speedily and plentifully provide, many good competent livings, for
many good men, to become good pastors in the same: I mean not Ecclesiastical
men, placed Ecclesiastical Commissioners, for they for the most part are the
greatest offenders in this behalf: but I mean those of her most honorable
Council, of her Nobility, and of her worshipful subjects, having granted
unto them from her highness, as great authority as any of the Ecclesiastical
state have.

IS ETIAM, etc. The party also which is taken to such a Regiment, to the end
he may more diligently care for the Lib. 6. de elect. licet canon is autem.
flock committed unto his charge, let him be personally resident in the
Church, whereof he is person. And as touching his residence, the ordinary for
a time may dispense if any reasonable cause so require. He says well (says
the Gloss) that the ordinary may dispense for a time, because the Pope
himself Glos. verb. ad te^pus.
cannot give perpetual indulgences for residence, and such as were given
before by Popes, he has revoked, as appears by ye constitution following.

QVIA PER AMBITIOSVM, etc. Because of the ambitious importunity of suitors, as
well we as some of our Lib. 6. de. reser. c. vlt.
predecessors, Bishops of Rome, have given unto many, perpetual indulgences,
for the receiving of the fruits of their benefices (daily distributions
excepted) whether they were at study, or whether they were resident in
either of their benefices, or had their abode in the Court at Rome, or in any
other certain place, or wheresoever else, by means whereof insolences of
gadding do spring forth, and a matter of dissoluteness is prepared, the
service or worship of God, (which we desire should be increased) is
diminished, and the office of Ministry, in respect whereof an
Ecclesiastical benefice is due, for the most part is omitted: we vvilling to
amend things passed, and as much as lies in us to provide against things to
come, do utterly revoke all such, and the like personal and not real
indulgences: and that which we suffer not lavvfull in our selves, we
forevvarne the same unto our successors. By which Canons it Glos. verb.
perpetuas ibidem.
is plain, that every dispensation should have a certain time limited,
beyond the which, it ought not to be extended, for by this perpetual
indulgencie, is understood an indulgencie for term of life. An indulgencie
therefore for term of life may not be granted. for then it is perpetual,
and so contrary to the meaning of this last constitution. Wherefore the time
of necessilie must be limited, which time the Law following has limited and
appointed to be seven years only.

PRESENTI CONSTITVTIONE sancimus, vt Episcopi, Lib. 6. de elect. cum ex eo.
eorumque supertores cum hijs qui huiusmodi subiectas sibi Ecclesias obtinent,
vel obtinuerint in futurum, dispensare possint libere quod vsque ad septennium
literarum, etc. By this present decree we ordain, that the Bishops and their
superiors may freely dispense with those that either now do obtain, or
hereafter shall obtain under thee, such Churches, that they continuting at
study for learning, be not compelled to be promoted unto orders, until the
end of seven years. And though this law seem specially to have respect
unto such, as for studies sake are dispensed with, for not entering into the
Ministry, before the end of seven years: yet the reason of the law
abridging the time of continual absence, and appointing that the flock be not
left without one able to govern and teach, the same is to be extended to all
manner of dispensations whatsoever, where the like absence may breed the like
danger. Vbi eadem ratio, idem ius slatuendum est. ff. De vi. and vi. a^m. l.
1. quod vulgo. ff. De legib. l. non possunt.
Where one and the self same reason is, there one and the self same law is
to be ordained. De similibus simile debet esse iudicium. In cases a like, a
like judgment ought to be had. And it is expreslie forbidden in the Chapter
(QVIA) before mentioned, that no perpetual dispensation for receiving of
Ecclesiastical fruits be granted, no not by the Pope himself. And there is
express mention made of him that shall not be resident upon one of his
Churches: that shall be student in any schools of learning: that shall be
absent from his benefice, either at the court of Rome, or at any other place
whatsoever, that even such a one shall not have any perpetuity by
Dispensation, thereby to receive the fruits and profits of the Church, from
the which for any of those foresaid respects, he may be absent. Therefore
against perpetuities of Piuralities, out of the Chapter (Is etiam) and out of
the Chapter (Quia) before rehearsed, I conclude thus. 1. Every Dispensation
granted for the enjoying of the fruits of any parish Church, without
limitation of a certain time, is a void Dispensation. 2 But every
Dispensation granted for the perpetual receiving of the fruits of any Parish
Church, is a Dispensation without limitation of a certain time. 3 Therefore
every such perpetual Dispensation, is a void Dispensation.


Ne statutum ipsum fiat ludibrio, debitoque frustretur effectu, and non rebus,
sed verbis, cum sit potius contrarlum faciendum) lex imposit a De diuor. c
qua^to. fi. and de elec. comiss. l. 6. Extr. de regni, iur^c cum quod. ff. de
ver. ad civilly. perti. l. li. 1.
videatur nullatenus ea vice poterit iterato conferri. Quod direct prohibetur,
indirecte non conceditur: cum quod vna via prohibetur alicui, ad id alia via
non debet admitti: and quod quis in persona sua facero prohibeltur, id per
subsectam personam exercere non debet. That the statute it self may not be
deluded and frustrated of her due effect, and that the law may seem to be made
not for things, but for words (when the contrary is rather to be done) it may
not by any means, be again the second time conferred. And that which is
directly prohibited, is not by an other way indirectly to be suffered:
whenever a thing is forbidden any man one way, the same man ought not to be
admitted to the same thing an other way: And that which a man is forbidden to
doc in his own person, he ought not to exercise by a substituted person. So
that once again I say, if it might please God, to stir up the hearts of her
Highness Commissioners, to have a mature and deliberate consideration of the
statute before mentioned, they shall find matter sufficient, to pronounce a
great number of licenses, faculties, and dispensations by law, to be merely
void and of none effect. Rome, or by authority thereof. But no license,
faculty, tolleration, or dispensation, before that time was had or obtained at
the sea of Rome, or by authority thereof, for the Fruits of any Parish
church, by way of any kind or manner of any perpetual dispensation, or for
any longer time than for seven years only, as appears by the former
Canons, and constitutions, therefore none other ought heretofore to have been
granted, neither though they have been granted, are they effectual or
available, being granted, A non iudice, and contra formam iuris scripti, ff.
quod vi. aut clam. l. prohiberi plane. Extra. de reb. eccle. non alienam. c.
by one that is no Judge, and against the form of law written. Iudex non
potest vltra facere, quam ei concessum est a lege vel consuetudine. A Judge may
not do beyond that, that is granted him by law or custom. It is forbidden
that Church goods should be alienated without a cause, or without authority
of the superior. If therefore any alienation be made of Church goods without
a cause, and not by authority of the superior, the alienation is void, Quae
contra ius fiunt, debent pro infectis haberi. Things done contrary to law,
ought to be Cod de leg. l. non dubium. Cod de pre. cib. imper. offerrend. l. 1.
accounted as things undone. And again, Sufficit legislatorem aliquid
prohibuisse, licet non adiecerit, si contra factum fuerit, non valere. It is
sufficient that the law maker forbid, though he shall not add, that the
thing done contrary to his prohibition shall be void. And again. Imperiali
constitutum est sanctione aperte vt ea quae co^tra lege^ fiunt, non solu^
inutilia, sed etiam pro infectis habenda sint. It is plainly decreed by an
imperial constitution, that the things done against the laws, are not only
unprofitable, but also are to be accounted for things undone. And thus much
concerning the causes and circumstances of dispensations for many benefices.
It follows then in the description of a dispensation, Glos. Extra uagan. de
pre bend. and dig. c. ^^^erabilis ver. vltimae
as you have seen that the same ought to be granted, cum causae cognitione,
with knowledge of ye cause: the reason is this. Duo sunt in dispensatione
necessaria, authoritas dispensantis, and fastum per quod dispensatur. Nam in
quolibet actu considerari debent duo, factum and modus. Two things are
necessary in a dispensation, authority of the dispenser, and the fact whereby
he shall dispeace. For in every act two things are to be considered, the
fact, and the manner of the fact. And therefore a Magistrate, having authority
to dispense, ought not upon the bare affection, and simple allegation of any
person ^esirons to be privileged, and to have the Magistrate, to mittigate the
rigor and extremity of common right, grant any such mittigation, unless
the party first allege, and by some lawful proof, make manifest unto (...),
that both teuching the ability of his person, and the necessirie of his cause,
the^ ought in equity an exemption and (...) be granted unto him. For,
Priuilegia, says the Law, are pretudici al^^, and magnum ff. de minori. l. de
etate. d. ex de priuil. c. sane. 7. q. 1 potuisti. bast. l. 1. de ^^l. l. ver.
pariunt preiudicium, and ideo sunt cum ple^^ cause cognit^one tractanda, and
priuilegium non est dandum, nisi certa ratione inspecta, and non subito, sed
cum magna deliberatione. Pri^^^^ges are pr^iudiciall, and breed great
prejudice, and are for this cause to be handled with a plenarie decision of the
cause: And a Privilege is not to be given unless the certain reason thereof
be fores^eue and not suddenly, but with great deliberation and advise. In
which deliberation and aduisement taken by the judge: first the aliegation or
petition of the party agent or suppliant: secondly, the proof and
manifestation of the same his petition, is to be considered. For no
dispensation ought to be granted at the proper motion and pleasure of the judge
alone: but every dispensation ought to be granted at the instance and petition
of the party alone. Quia laxari ius non debet, nec solui, nisi part
postulante: and inuito non debet beneficium co^ferr^: Hoc aute^ iudicium. ff.
De dam. infect. ff. De regni iur. l. inuito. and extra de Symo. Licet. heli
Cod. de fidei com. libent. l. fi.
Et sententia debet esse conformis petition^: Et iudex semper debet iudicare
secundum allegata and probata Because the law ought not to be released, or
remitted, but at the petition of the party: and a sentence ought to be
conformable to the demand: and a Judge ought evermore to give sentence,
according to things alleged, and things proved. And therefore sithence no
other cause by Law, may be aleaged in the court of faculties, for the granting
of any dispensation, for many benefices, then the very apparent utility, and
urgent necessity of the Church: I conclude, that the judge his duty and
office is, in any wife not to admit any other manner of allegation, but to
pronounce the same altogether frivolous and to be of no value in law The
Doctorship, the Chapplainship, the worship of any Eccles^astical person, are
not sufficient causes in this behalf alone, unless also together with the
same, meet and concur the profit and necessitic of the Church. And if the said
allegation, as vain and frivolous, be to be rejected, then no dispensation
thereupon ought to be granted: for otherwise the judge should of necessity,
either allow other causes, then the law boo^h allow, or eise pronounce
judgment otherwise, the^ according to the demand, both which were to to great
absurdities. And therefore out of the former rules and principles of Law, I
argue thus. 1 Whatsoever is burtfull and pre^ud^^^al, the same ought advisedly
and upon consult^^^^ to be granted: 2 But dispensations are hurtful and
preindiciall: Extra. de priuilig. c. sanc. Extra. de simo. c. licet beit.
be granted: And if every dispe^sation ought to be granted by sentence upon
some consultation ha^, y^ then every sentence upon some consultation had,
ought to be given according to things alleged, and things demanded.


Ea dicitur legitima dispensatio, in qua nihil tacetur, vel nihil exprimitur,
Glos in ext^ auag. execrabilie de prebend ver. ex dispens^tione.
quo expresso vel tacito, princeps verisimiliter duci potest ad dispensationem
denegandam. That dispensation is reputed lawful, wherein nothing is concealed,
or nothing is expressed, that being concealed or expressed, the Prince may by
likelihood, be induced to venie the said dispensation. If then every sentence
must be conformable to the allegation, and every judgment agreeable to y^
demand, and that neither out of ye sentence for a dispensation any known
truth, or manifest equity ought to be co^cealed, neither in y^ same any false
or erroneous cause ought to be expressed, it follows of necessity, ye every
allegation, ma^e for a dispensation, ought to be of ye same nature, and of ye
s^^e condition: and y^ every allegation, not of the same nature and (...) is
an unlawful allegation, and an unequal petition. Moreover, every one y^ has
authority to dispe^ce, ought to keep th^^ rule. Vt statuat, vel dispenset Glos.
in extrauag. co^t. col. 3. ver.
contra ius, aut contra scriptum, si aequ^^ as qu^ mouet ipsum, mouisset
legislatore^, si casus nunc emergens esset sibiexpositus, That they ordain or
dispe^ce against law, or against w^it, if such equity as ^^^ueth him, might
have moved ye lawmakers himself, to have gr^nted a dispensatio^, had ye case
now growing, b^n proposed at y^ time of the law making, to the lawmakers: It
follows then again, yt equity being ye cause of ye sentence for a
dispensatio^, ye same equity, must also be the cause of the allegation for a
dispensation. For if the judge must give a dispensation, where equity
requires, the vartie must then demand a dispensation where equity requires.
For equity is always the foundation and groundwork of a dispensation. And
what equity? even such equity, as mighe justly have moved the Lawe-maker, to
have granted a dispensation. Now then, because the Law maker, authorizing y^
Archbish. of Cant. to give dispensations, has been the high court of
Parliament: It follows that the Archbishop may dispense only in such
cases, as wherein the high Court of Parliament would have dispensed, had those
cases been alleged before the high Court of Parliament, which are alleged
before the Archbishop. Iudex non aliter iudicare debet, pro sapientia and luce
dignitatis suae, quam princeps esset iudicaturus. A Judge, for the wisdom, ff.
De offic. prefect. preter. l. 1. in fi.
and excellency of his worthy calling, ought no otherwise to judge, then ye
Prince himself would have judged. Suppose then, that such a Cardinal as of
whom mention has been made, or such an Abbot, whose Abbacie, is a Nemo scit:
whose two Ecclesiastical promotions besides, are at the least worth five
hundred marks by the year: suppose (I say) that such a Cardinal, should
come into the Parliament house, and after low obeysaunce made, prefer this
or the like Bill to the speaker, beseeching the whole house, upon the reading
thereof, and the equity of his cause, to grant his suit. I A. B. Clarke,
say, allege, and show, before pour excellent wisdoms, that the Church of
S. S. by the natural death of D. H. late incumbent, is become vacant: Non
potest dispensatio super pluralitate beneficiorum concessu impetranci prodesse,
qui aliquod qua^tumcuque modicum beneficium conticuit in eadem.
of the same Benefice, has presented inee thereunto: and that I am possessed
aireadie of such and such a spiritual promotion: and that I am bound by the
Statutes of my house, to be resiant in the same, three months in the year:
and that I am bound by the Statutes of the Church of one of my promotions, to
be present in the same Church two months in the year: and that I am bound by
the Statutes of the Church of my other promotion, to be present there three
months in the year: and that I am bound by my alleagiance to her highness,
to be present else where some whole quarter of the year. And that the souls
of the people of the foresaid Parish, are in danger of the woife, not having
a Pastor to feed them: and that yt evident utility and urgent necessity of
the same Church. requires a governor, may it therefore now please your
wisdoms to award me a dispensation, to inioye the fruits of the same
Church, to tolerate mine absence, and to be Nonresident, etc. Suppose (I
say) that this or the like supplication were made by a plurified Priest in the
Parliament house, would the house, trow you, be moved presently to yield to
so unjust a petition? I trow nay. For the party should express in his
petition, all things to be expressed, and conceal nothing to be concealed, as
by the first rule before repeated is required: yet the house would no doubt,
mindful of the second rule, and dispute the equity of his cause, and so award
judgment accordingly: they would not upon so bare and naked assertion,
decline from justice and equity: And no doubt the speaker himself would^
blush to peruse such a bill, much less would he present such a bill to the
house to be discussed, though for his fee (being a private bill) he might be
very liberally rewarded. An Archb. then ought to be tight well advised, and
take heed how, for a trifle he either adinit any such bill or allegation, or
having once adinitted it. 1 whatsoever allegation, or dispensation the
Lawe-maker, viz. the high court of Parliament, would not admit or pass unto a
plurified man, the same allegation or dispensation the Archbishop ought not to
admit or oasse: 2 But the Law maker, viz. the high court of Parliament, would
not admit or pass any allegation or dispensation, to such plurified Priests,
making such a petition, as has been mentioned: 3 Cherfore the Archbishop ought
not to admit or pass any such.


THE Mayor proposition is a rule of Law: the Minor proposition is cuident unto
every one, that duetifullie considers, with what wisdom, justice, and
equity the high court of Parliament determines matters amongst them
discussed. They are not contented to have a Bill barelie read unto them, but
they thoroughly examine the reasons and proofs of him that prefers the
same. For as I said before, truth, equity, and diverse circumstances, must not
only be alleged, but the law requires, Bart. and aly doctores, in l. 1.
Cod. de prob,
the same to be proved also He that has right and interest to an inheritance,
oftentimes loeseth it for want of proof. He that alieageth himself to be
borne of some noble parentage, and he that alleges himself to remain at
study, must prove the same. Authent. Colla teneantar. Glos and doc^n prohe. l.
6. Glos extra. de restitu spoli. at. c. olim. ver. restitutione. Extra offic.
de leg. c. consultats. enem.
of the contract, and also that he has sustained detriment by the same
contract. Otherwise the (...) ought not to gi^e restit^tion, where one by force
is spoiled of his (...), and requierth ta be restored thereunto, he must not
only allege, but also proous force and (...). The Church that by negligence
of any Proctor or Dollycitor shall allege her self, by his negligence to be
hurt, and to su^^er (...) in her substance, and for that cause seeks help: at
the hands of her superior, to be restored to her former estate, must prove as
well the negligeace committed, as the damage sustained in that behalf.
Thelyke is verified of one that is dispossessed of his goods, in ye time of his
absence beyond the Deas. And so it is reqaired in granting any privilege
immunitie or dispensation for many benefices. The party desirous to have a
mittigation of the rigor of common Law, ought to prove, that as well in
consideration of his perion, as for the reasonableness of his cause, the Judge
in equity and conscience, ought to grant an immunitie. And this proof that
it be substanciall and good in Law, must be made cither by the consession of
the party, cither by witnesses, either by some Authentike and public
instrument, either by the eusoence and noioriousnesse of the fact it self.
Touching which prooses, how fubstantially they Eutra de restitu. spol. c. cum
^d sedem.
have been made, I refer the Reader to the records of the prerogative Court,
where, no doubt for the Judges own credit, they are sasely kept: and as
public Records, to be seen of any man, desirous to hnow Antiquities.
Netghbour should be taught, and no man will desire to be untaught: therefore as
concerning these proofs, I cannot imagine (I say) how they should be made. It
rests then, that the evidence of the fact, must be the proof, whereon
plarlfied men rely, that the brgent necessity, and evident utility of the
Church, for the having of many benefices, is a thing so notorious and euibent
to all the world, that none may deny the same. Wherein how gross and palpable
their error is, I lenue to the consideration of indisierent men, through out
the whole world. Now, if you ad this last part of the definition of a
Dispensation, and suppose that it must be granted, Cum causae cognitione, with
knowledge of the cause, that is by alleging and prooning things inste and
equal in the sight and indgement of the Parliament house, you shall find
cither all, or the most part of Dispensations granted in the Court of
Faculties for many Benefices, not to be the things defined, and so to be
nothing in c^^ect at all, and therefore though they as yet seem to stand good
by Law, yet to be such as ought to be rcuoked and made vopde by Law.
Quicquid contra leges accipitur, per Distinct. 10. c. vides Extra. de priueg.
c. porro. etc. pe. Extra. de priuileg. cod de leg. and co^stetu. l. 2.
leges dissolus meretur. Et sic eos voiumus priuilegiorum suorum seruare
tenorem, quod eorum metas transgredi minime vide. antur. And we will them so to
heepe the tencr of their Privileges, that they seem not in any cause to pass
their bounds. Nam qui permissa sibi abutitur potest ate, priuilegium meritur
amittere: Et qui malitiose priuilegium, princepis interpretatur, infamis
efficitur. For he that abuses power granted unto him, deserves to loase his
Privilege: and he that malftioustie interprets the Privilege of a Prince,
is made infamous. Besides these there are diverse and sundry other causes, for
the which also, a privilege as vnlawsull is reuocable. Priuatur 3. 9. b. c.
haec quippe 1. 1. 93. priuilegiu^. Extra. de De cret. Suggestum 25. q. 1. c. de
ecclesiassicis. ff. de vulg. and pupil. Substit^s. l. ex pacto. and glos. c.
imperator. ver. quod non. 25. 9. 2. xcix. distinct, ecclesie. ff. de constitu.
princ. l. penult. De. glos. in c. quid pernouale. Extra. de ver. 6. signifi. c.
magis. lib. 6. De rescrip. statutum.
quis priuilegio propter scandalum: and qui non exercet ad subditorum
vtilitatem, sed ad suam voluntatem, etc. A man loses his Privilege, if an
oftence grow by means of his Privilege: and he that does not exercise his
Privilege to the prosit of such as are under him, but at his own pleasure,
such a man loofeth his privilege: And a reseript ought to be such, that it
hurt none: and at what time so ever a privilege ^urneth to (...), it forth
with preu^^leth not: neither ought the Poye for the increase of his own
honor, diminish the right of the Church, or of any other. And the reason is
this. Prepter euidentem ^tilitatem and enorme, damna^i (...) ab eo quod di^.
vs^ and obtentum est. For some common profie and some inordineie hurt, we for
go that, that a long time has been used and observed. Now, whether the lawful
bounds of dispensations be passed, whether they be abused or inaliciouslie
used? whether anic offense grow by them: whether they be used rather to ye
profit of the people, then to the pleasure of the person: whether any
injustice be committed, and the right or title of any other be impeached: or
any great damage ensue by them. I refer it to the judgment of men of
experience in our time. Sure I am that the Lords servants speak against them,
preach against them, and write against them: Cessante ciusa, cessare debet
effectus, the cause ceasing, the effect ought to cease. The assumption is
manifest. For equity grounded upon utility and necessity of the Church, was
the cause of Dispensations: but the equity cease, therefore the other
should cease. What is more contrary to natural reason (says a Lawyer of
singular judgment) then that one and the self same man should take unto
himself diverse stipends of the Church in diverse and far disraunt places?
What common weaith of man (says he;) suffers her Judges, her Rulers, her
Notaries, and other officers to gadde abroad, and in their absence to inioye
their stipendes? What man though his House be ample and very rich, does vaie
to his servant absenting himself the wages due to many servants: or
adinitteth to serve in his room whom so eure the same his servant shall
appoint him in his room: only the house of God, the holy Church, is by such
inordinarie dealing deprived of her Ministry, and defrauded of her lawful
duetics. what: shall the Church of God, the best beloved spouse of Jesus
Christ, which he has redeemed by whippinges, by buffets, and by the shedding
of his blood, feed hawks, bring up dogs, pamper horses, nourish whoores,
flatterers, and seditious men, which trouble the common wealth, and in the end
concludes thus, Effect us dispensation is est, vt siperperam concesse sit, tam
animam concedentis, Rebuff. de dispensatione ad plura, been. fic. fo. 149 64.
quam dispensantis, ad infernum deducat. increase of her Nighnesse treasure,
and an augmentation of her teuenues. I answer, that dispensations for
Syinonie, Nonresidencie, and many benefices, are so far from becing any
increase of her Majesty's treasures, as yt they are indeed a great diminishing
of the same. For first, as touching dispensations for Syinonie, whereas by
cuery dispensation granted unto a Symoniacall person, her Nighnesse receives
into her hanaper at the most shillings: the greatest ordinary fee limited by
the said statute, for any dispensation to be granted her Majesty for the
same, loses 10. 20. 30. 40. or 50. pounds, to be paid into the court of
Tenths and First Fruits. For, were the party committing Symonie, for the same
offense by law deprived from his benefice, her Nighnesse were then to have of
the next incumbent, the whole First Fruits of the said benefice, even ten times
so much at the least, as is paid into her hanaper: or were the Symoniacall
person a plurality man, and so deprived from all his benefices and
Ecclesiastical promotions, her Nighnesse were then to have, the whole first
fruits of all his benefices and promotions forty times so much as she enioieth
by granting his dispensation. And as touching the fees due for dispensations,
granted for many benefices, though the same fees may happily amount in some
one year, to many hundreeds: yet by means of the said dispensations, her
Nighnesse is empouerished yearly by mante thousands. The oftener cuerie
benefice or promotion is void, by resignation or deprivation, the oftener to an
other admitted unto the same, and the oftener does her Nighnesse receive the
First fruits of any such benefice. beuefice so often as otherwise the might
have, whereby her reave mues are lessened. Since therefore for one man to enjoy
many benefices by dispensatio^, maintains covetousness, and is contrary to
ye ancient Canons: maintains ambition, and ministers matter for a roaging, a
gadding, and a dissolute ministry, since it conueieth stipe^ds due unto many
from many unto one: since it is an hinder ance of residence, and contains
peril of souls: Since it is a kind of theft, rauine and spoil: Since it is
indecent and uncomely: Since it is contrary to the good customs of the
Church: Since the honesty of the church thereby is defiled, ye authority
thereof con^emned, the truth of Christ trodden under foot, and love banished:
Since among the rich Prelates and plurified men themselves, strifes,
contentions, ^raules and enuies arise, and are nourished: Since the fire of God
his wrath is kindled against us by them: since it is against the law of
nature, and repugnant to the law of God, and therefore nourishes a monster in
nature:

An answer to the second Treatise of the Abstract: That dispensations for many
benefices are unlawful.
1. Section. Page 107, 108.
IF this conclusion, for proof whereof in this whole treatise he pretends to
labor, were granted unto him, as in part it ought to be, though that be untrue
which he means thereby: might it not be said, that either he knows not what
he writes, or else willingly spoke improperly, to make the matter seem more
odious; as though it were hoiden to be lawful, to dispense with a man for as
many benefices as he could procure? For seeing in our common speech (howsoever
the law more generally does construe it) a benefice is taken for a pastoral
cure of souls, over the people of some parish: it is evident by the statute in
that 21. H. 8. c. 13 The Abstractors discourse wholly inpertinent.
behalf provided, saving those that be of her Majesty's council, which may
keep three benefices with cure of soul, and her Nighnesse chapleines upon
whom the may bestow what number of benefices the will: that no man can be
dispensed with to retain Multa huiusmodi beneficia, many such benefices,
according to the true propriety of speech: yet some being so qualified as is
required, may be dispensed with to receive and keep Plura mo than one, even
but two in all, which cannot properly be called Many, except the matter were
of great raritie. Unto all which dispensations so by statute law and act of
parliament warranted, both he and all the subjects in the land, in 4. H. 7. 10.
the eye and construction of law, are deemed to have consented. And therefore
that he or any other should call them Unlawful, or presume to inueigh
publikelie against them (as he Page 159.
tells by some to their great commendation both by speech, writing, and
preaching to be practiced, whom therefore he calls The Lords servants) I for
my part can not see how it can be excused from faction and great contempt
Factious dealing against law.
of her Majesty, and her laws, Or else, why may not I, or any other private
man whosoever, in like manner, with as good toleration as he (perhaps upon my
particular conceit againsst some other of the laws of this land) take pen in
hand, and tell all the subjects in it, that they are no laws in deed, as being
against the word of God, the law of nature, of reason, and of nations? And
thereby to give a dangerous ouuerture and open window to the loofing of the
ioints of all obedience to laws: and to turn over those matters, which are to
be debated with great moderation to and fro, only in the most honorable and
high court of parliament, to the dispute and grave censure, naie to be a theme
for every flieng pamphlet to iangle, and every alebench to ring upon. It is
good and sound counsel that one gives about the rules of oratorie, that he
which is to treat or to wrife of any matter, shall deal advisedly, if he
prefir before him continually the very point of the issue whereunto he is to
speak; least by the course and stream of matter upon matter, he be carried
from the purpose. Which advise, if our author had followed, he would not in
this and diverse sections followed, he would not in this and diverse sections
following, have ginen us (...), quid proquo, one thing for another, as
apothecaries are burdened Wand ring from the ifsue,
sam^times to do. For how does this follow? It is against the law for a man
to have many benesices, Ergo it is against the law to dispense with a man to
have many benefices, or for the reteining of two benefices. Naie the contrary
is true and follows well. The law in some cases does permit a dispensation
for reteining of mo benefices, considering a dispensation needs not, but
where the rigor or generality of law, is upon some occasion to be declared,
mitigated, or released. And it can not be called a dispensation or immunitie,
but where the law is or appears to be in general terms otherwise to the
contrary. And it is incident to the liberty and freedom wherein we are
borne, that we may without further license do that which law does not forbid
us: in which respect Priuilegium is called Quasi priuata lex, a private or
particular law, touching but a few in comparison of those that be within the
general disposition of that law, which seems to be contrary. And therefore
by as good pretext and color of probability, he might have reasoned thus: By
common right in this land, a fellon or traitor condemned is to be executed;
Ergo it is unlawful for the prince to pardon him. Or thus: By common right,
all wrecks, dedans, fellons and outlawes goods, leets and views of frank
pledge do belong unto the crown: Ergo the special grants of these and such
like from her Majesty and her noble progenitors, to sundry persons and
corporations in this realm, are unlawful, and the patentees can not with a
good conscience enjoy them. And again: It is not permitted simply to every
man in the land to wear cloth of gold, cloth of silver, luzernes, sables,
veluets and silks; Ergo the immunitie granted to great personages to wear
these or some of them, is unlawful. So that till our author shall take upon
him to prove, that either the law does not permit any dispensations at all
for mo benefices than one, upon any circumstance or occasion whatsoever: or
else that the law ought not and can not grant any such immunitie or
privilege: we must follow him up and down at rouers, speaking to no purpose,
and in the mean time (as the proverb is) wash an asses head. Therefore let us
briefly look into his proofs, against one man's reteining of mo benefices,
and into his apodesticall syllogismes, collected upon them as he imagines. His
first allegation c. quia nonnulli, Ext. de clericis non resid.
taken out of the decretals (though both it and all other sounding to that
purpose be to be understood, as shall appear after, of such persons only as
be not qualified as they ought, nor dispensed with as they might) does yet
simply, in it self considered, make nothing against the practice of our
church herein: for it provides against the covetousness of such only, as
Being scarce able to discharge one office, do not only seek, being
vnqualified and vndispensed with, to Procure unto themselves diverse
ecclesiastical dignities, but also Diverse parish churches. So that it might
very well be applied against such a man, being privy to himself how
unworthy he is for the enioieng of any such extraordinary favor, and
therefore out of hope ever to procure dispensation: would De facto, for the
satisfieng of his greedy gain, invade as many dignities and inferior
benefices ecclesiastical, as by hook or crook he could any way come by.
For the other c. 1. de consuetudine in 6.
place here quoted, cleerelie decideth: both that with dispensation, a man may
retain lawfully two personages, two dignities, prouostships, or offices,
together with a prebend (though all three belong to one church) so the same be
expreslie contained in such dispensation: and also that if the custom of the
said church be so, he may retain one personage, dignity, prouosiship, or
office ecclesiastical together with a prebend, without dispensation. And
therefore his second or Minor proposition of his first syllogism, where he
simply assumeth, that the enioieng of many benefices, howsoever, or by
whomsoever, to be a maintenance of covetousness, is not true, nor out of this
place confirmed. For if it were Causa per se, and non per accidens tantum of
covetousness, then should the having of so much yeerelie living, as such
benefices joined together amount unto, be unlawful, and condemned as a
necessary root of covetousness, in any man whatsoever. And if his first
proposition or Mayor be understood of a Fallacies for reasons.
cause or maintenance of covetousness Perse, then has he made a fallacy Ab.
accidente, to condemn in his Minor, that, as simply mainteining of
covetousness, which only by accident and casualtie falls out to give an
occasion for a covetous mind to work on. But if he mean, that every thing is
unlawful, which accidentally may occasion covetousness, then is his Mayor
untrue: for then, gold, silver, possessions, children, and all such external
goods, whereby (not by any fault in themselves, but as by an occasion) men be
diuerssie drawn into covetousness, should be condemned and abandoned as simply
unlawful. His second syllogism is a fallacy Ab eo quod est secundum quid vt
simpliciter. For his Minor is false, if it be understood of those that be both
qualified and dispensed with, as law prescribes: which he sets down as
simply true, because the canons forbid generally men not dispensed with
thereunto, to retain mo benefices. The like is to be said of the third
syllogism, whose Minor being propounded simply, as though every one (though
he be dispensed with) taking the stipend of mo benefices, did take that which
is due unto many: is utterly to be denied. Except he will say, that as the
said stipends have been heretofore severed unto mo: so they may be again,
and therefore are due to many. But then, seeing he disputes not according to
the same time, his argument is faulty upon the Ignorance of the elench. And if
his Minor of his fourth syllogism be universally taken, which it must needs
be, or else his conclusion will be particular, and carry no show to his
purpose; then is the same also as untrue as the former, and to be denied. For I
do not doubt but there be very many in this church of England (though not so
many as were to be wished in respect of the parishes) which by the mercy of
God are as well able in all respects, considering the frailty of man, to
discharge that duty, which is incident to a pastoral charge; as in any age
heretofore has been found, either here, or in any other like particular
church or nation elsewheresoeuer: which thing also he himself sets down as
a truth, and as a duty that may be discharged, so the party be resident, even
in the Minor of his last syllogism in this section. The Mayor proposition of
which his last syllogism, except it be meant of a perpetual and a continual
hinderance, which yet the party himself might avoid, or of such as otherwise
does not bring some greater or as great a benefit to the whole church some
other way, is utterly also untrue. For besides the grievous visitation of God
by sickness, which is no sufficient cause (as has been before showed) to
remove a man from his benefice, who therefore may have a coadiutor assigned
unto him: there may be many other causes laid down, for the which a man may
justly sometimes be away from his pastoral charge, and discharge it by
another: as namely if he be abroad for recovery of his health: if he be
called by his superiors authority to answer matter in law objected against
him: if he be forced for the repulsing of grievous and in tolerable injuries,
to prosecute another in law, or for the reteining of his own right: if he be
sent of embassage by his prince, or otherwise necessarily employed and
commanded attendance: if his help be required in other places for the
pacifieng of schisms and disorders, and for confutation of heresies: if his
pains and travel be required for the confirmation of true doctrine, taught by
another: if his presence be desired as needful or expedient at some
consultation about church matters, as at some synod particular, provincial,
national, or general: and lastly, if some other parts of the said nation and
church should otherwise be wholly destitute of a pastor to feed and instruct
them. For if upon these and many other like occasions, of no less importance,
it were simply unlawful for a minister to be absent sometimes from his
pastoral cure, and to substitute another to supply his room: why (I pray
you) may diverse of your Saints of God, and servants of the Lord, which by a
pharisaicall (...) you oppose against all other not so fantasticallie affected
as they: why (I say) may they gad abroad from their cure, having no cure
elsewhere to look unto, by the space of five or six months sometimes in a
year hither and thither at pleasure, and lie from their cures by the space of
three or four months by troops together in London, or at the least a whole
parliament time, being not called to counsel in the convocation? Is there by
their absence some public commodity coming or growing toward the church;
and may not another learned pastor, having diligently fed his flock by a good
part of the year in one place, yet not neglecting the other people in the
mean time, bestow to the profit of the church, the rest of the year in
painful preaching and teaching to the people of another parish? Both which
peradventure might else be either wholly destitute of preaching, as being
severally no sufficient maintenance for a man of study and quality, or else
have but such a one, which being as bold as ignorance may make a man (which is
the greatest boldness that may be) would adventure to speak, (...)
not knowing at the first what or how to speak, and yet being once set of
talking, could not tell how or when to make an end.

2. Section. Page 108, 109.
THis chapter like as the former speaks against such as retain many
prebends, yea more than two, and that without dispensation. Which may appear
both by the gloss, and also because it is called ambition in them, which
Panormi^ in c. de multa Ext. de praeb. infine.
is not appliable unto those, whom the party authorized thereunto, finding
sufficiently qualified, shall for good cause according to law dispense with
for reteining of such benefices. For ambition rests, either when a man
utterly unworthy will set himself forward arrogantlie to that which he is
unfit for; or being worthy, shall seek it by undue means, and contrary to
law. And therefore, as it looks not toward his purpose, to prove
dispensations for mo benefices unlawful; so can it not be applied against the
practice of this church wherein none be allowed to retain mo pastoral
charges, or other promotions ecclesiastical, in law termed benefices, without
dispensation: though in truth it reach a blow His reason retorted against his
own adherents.
unto diverse of his clients, who can be contented (notwithstanding in law a
prebend be accounted a benefice, and in some cases also have cure of souls) to
retain one, two or three, yea four prebends sometimes; only because they
do not pass in common speeches under the names of benefices, and to the
intent of residence and incompatibilitie by statute law, are not accounted
cures of souls: yea, and that without all dispensation, according as is
required. Which therefore can not in them be cleared from the stain of
ambition, howsoever they bear it out with a stearne look, and a clowd in
their forehead amongst those which admire their great sincerity, and which do
verelie believe, that their feed is so pure, that they would rather live by
air alone, than be sustained by church livings, even as the Chamaeleon is
supposed by some to do, with as great truth, as that such have no prebends to
maintain them.

His first reason here, touching the maintenance of ambition (by plurality of
benefices) is sick even unto death, of the same disease that his first
syllogism of his other section A fallacy ab accidents.
was, and is a fallacy Ab accidente: because though some may be led thereunto
by ambition, yet is it not any necessary efficient cause thereof. Yea, in his
Minor of this syllogism lurketh a fallacy (...), because though it be
ambition in such as seek to aspire to preferments, which the law will not
entitle them unto: yet is it not ambition in those, which being qualified
according to law, do seek it only by ordinary means. That which he
speaks in his second syllogism of Roging, is his own proper goods, and not
borrowed out of this canon. The Dissolution and often going to and fro, which
the canon speaks of, and he translateth as it likes him, a Dissolute and
gadding ministry, whereas yet no mention is made of ministry, is (as I take
it) set down, to show a difficulty of reteining such within the bounds of
ecclesiastical rules and offices, which by occasion of their several prebends
situate in diverse churches, are often called to and fro about the affairs
incident to their several livings. Yet neither does this Decretall simply
condemn, as a thing intolerable, all such Going to and fro, but where it
contains peril of souls withal: neither can it be with any reason found
fault with, where otherwise upon some weightier occasion, it tends to a
greater benefit toward the church, than this can any ways be offensive:
which offense, is the only ground almost, why this often going to and fro,
can with any color be reprehended. And therefore his Mayor must be better
vnderlaid with reason, before we may absolutely admit of it, as true. The
Medium or reason of his third syllogism, which he makes several by it self,
is joined with a copulative to the reason of the former syllogism, and so both
they should make but one reason. Now, to have diverse benefices, does not
necessarily contain (as he assumeth indistinalie in his Minor thereof) any
peril of souls: but only then, when the party is not dispensed with to
retain them, as the Gl. in c. quia in tantum Extr. de prebendis in verbo
animarum per text. c. dudum. 2. Ext. c. de elect.
gloss in the same place does teach us. And therefore his reason is a
paralogisme (...). The cause of which peril of souls, over and above the
parties own danger, because he can not with a good conscience retain unto
himself any thing against law, is assigned to be this: that Gl. ver.
deceptae, c. disdum.
he being not dispensed with, and therefore his benefice, though in fact by him
retained, yet by law in deed meerelie void: ail his exercise of the keys for
binding and loosing of the parishioners of his first benefice, shall thereby,
as being done A non iudice, become void also, and so those shall forsooth
dangerously remain in their sins, which thought they had been by him in
shrift cleerelie absolved. Which reason being by the light of Gods gospel
discovered to be but vain, that which is built thereupon must needs topple
down to the ground withal. For we know that no c. si quis etc. cum aliquis.
24. q. 3.
sentence of any mortal man can either bind or loase a man's sins, otherwise
than the word of God does warrant and declare: according to which if it be
pronounced by whomsoever, the sentence is good, and ratified by God himself,
as he has promised. In which respect also some canons, and some of the sounder
schoolmen have taught, that the sentence of the priest does only bind
declaratiuelie, and not dispositiuelie. The Mayor proposition of his last
syllogism here, does by no coherence of reason hang together: for both in the
church and commonwealth many occasions may be assigned, that do in some sort
indirectlie Hinder other from doing fruitful service in either of them, which
yet may and ought to be tolerated. For what if some notable man by due desert
have atteined diverse high offices, which by reason of the many old reverend
years wherewith God does bless him far beyond all expectation, in which
time nevertheless many other excellent men perhaps are bred up, by all
likelihood able in very good sort to serve in those several rooms of the
church or commonwealth which he enioieth: shall such a man in this regard be
stripped forth of most of his livings, least others should want in the mean
time, and be hindered from imploiment according to their sufficiency? Or shall
we therefore accuse old age, and the blessing of many years as a thing
intolerable? So that we see it is a Fallacy ab accidente, like diverse of the
rest which are branded with the same stamp. The Minor also of the said
syllogism has as slender color of truth as the former. For as one of the ends
(as I conceive of the statute) was to have such as were intended to be of
greater gifts, to have larger rewards: so was it another end, rather to have
two diverse parishes allotted to one man able to instruct them, and they to
maintain him: than to have them served by two several men not sufficient to
instruct either of them. So that it may truly be verified, very few
sufficient preachers, by this only means of one man's inioieng two benefices,
to want maintenance, or to be hindered from doing service in the church: which
may appear by taking an estimate in every country of such livings, which be
of as sufficient liueliehood as the most several livings of any pluralists,
which are not yet bestowed so well as were to be wished.

3. Section. Page 109, 110.
IN the text here alleged, whence the reason of this Syllogism is gathered,
it is said, that After a sort, he that usurps unlawfully two benefices,
does commit theft: which word of Quodammodo was necessarily and warily
added, because Theft is defined to be Contrectation or handling of another man's
goods, without the good will of the owner: which cannot be applied properly to
a void benefice, whose propriety is indeed and in strict terms of law in no
man, during that time, but (as the common lawyers also do teach us) In
nubibus, in the clouds and in suspense. Which necessary limitation, though our
author has inserted in his syllogism, yet has he omitted to translate it
with the rest of the text. Corrupt translation.
But it is answered in the next section before, both by the text here alleged,
and by the gloss upon the other decretall there handled, that there is neither
danger of souls, neither any manner of theft committed, but where a man
usurps mo benefices than one, being not by law thereunto authorized or
dispensed with. For the c. dudum. 2.. nosigitur. Ext. de electi
text it self thus distinguishes: If it appear, that after the enioieng of
the archdeaconrie, having cure of souls annexed, he retained the said
parochial churches also at the time of his election, neither did show forth
that he was dispensed with by the apostolic See, then his election shall by
authority thereof be frustrated. And the like distinaction also is found in
the other chapter c. de multa. finali. Ext. de pr^bendis.
here quoted in these words: But concerning great personages and learned men,
which are to be honorably respected with greater benefices (as reason shall
require) the apostolic See may dispense. Therefore it is evident, that his
Minor proposition is in two respects false: first where he assumeth, that the
Pluralist takes that which belongs to another: and again, in that he
affirms simply and absolutely, without the former distinction of law, that
he commits theft. And likewise it appears that he crusheth himself
against the said rock of Paralogisme, (...), whereat he has so often made
shipwreck of reason.

4. Section. Page 110, 111.
TO his first place here alleged out of the Distinctions in the Decrees, the
Glos. in versingulis c. sing u. did. 89.
Gloss. truly does answer, that it is to be understood to be indeed The
general law, yet limited and restrained upon diverse occasions of Special
privilege, even by other parts of the same law, as shall (God willing) be made
manifest hereafter. The other place in this section alleged, is shamefullie by
him falsified: for he has Falsificatio^.
put in (more than any book, that I can find, speaks of in that place) all
these words, whereupon his three syllogismes ensuing are grounded, to wit: Both
because it is a proper kind of merchandise and filthy gain, and also
altogether contrary to the custom of the church: where in truth, that c. per
laico^ (...) fine. 16. q. ^^bigl^in ^^^r. Duas.
canon says nothing else but this; Let no priest have two churches. Which the
gloss, for avoiding of contrariety with other laws, does thus interpret,
that is, Not two churches with title, except they be poor churches, as is to
be found, c. eam te: Ext. de aetat. and qualit. and. c. vnio, 10. q. e.
Nevertheless the truth is, that these things may be verified of such men, as
wholly contrary to the canons do usurp mo benefices, then they are dispensed
with by law to receive. And therefore the like words are used in another c. 1.
21. q. 1. in fine.
canon, yet not simply, (as our author without any simple meaning or plain
dealing has alleged) but with distinction, that it is meant, That none shall
hold by way of title two benefices in two several cities, or in that city
where the seventh council was assembled, though in villages abroad, by reason
c. priscis. 56. did.
of scarsitie of such men, it be permitted: because it was then intended, that
in cities all things necessary being more plentiful than in the country,
they might by one benefice be sufficiently maintained. Therefore his three
several assumpts or Minor propositions, wherein he assumeth without proof,
that absolutely, It is against the good custom of the church, a proper kind of
merchandise and filthy gain, and uncomely, in any respect, for one man to
have mo benefices; are all to be denied as untrue. Yet I must put him in mind,
that the Mayor of his last syllogism is also untrue; because, if he
understand, In the church, that is, amongst christians (as he must needs do,
or else taking it for the public assembly about the exercises of our
religion, he shall speak besides his purpose) many things are lawful, which
are not expedient, and therefore not comely.

5. Section. Page 111, 112.
IF his store to this purpose were either so great, or so good as he makes
boast of, then was he greatly ouerseene in his choice, to cull out this
constitution of the Legate Octobone in steed of all the rest. For the words
which he has alleged, as is evident to him, which will peruse the former part
of that Constable. Othoboni de institut. seu collationibus.. 1.
constitution, (which yet our author of his own absolute authority has
transformed and divided into two chapters, as though the one did not depend
upon the other) are spoken against such, as Are not able to take charge over
themselves, which do not reside upon their cures, which are not in any sacred
orders requisite to the reteining of such a benefice, which do not only
usurp many, but infinite such benefices, which though they would, yet by no
possibility are able to satisfy their charge, which violently intrude
themselves into such benefices, which by subtle devises and colorable shifts
do seek to retain them, and lastly which have no dispensation thereunto
obtained from the apostolic See, as the canons in this behalf do prescribe.
Therefore it is no marvel, those so many blemishes, or diverse of them
concurring, that these blind leaders (except they had been as blind as mowles
or beetles) did perceive such great inconveniences therein, as that they could
not but thus greeuoustie exclaim against them. Which before it can be applied
to our plurified men, as this foolified phrasefiner terms them, he must first
prove, that the cases of both are alike.

6. Section. Page 112, 113.
IT could never have come to pass, but that the Abstractor is Gnauiter
impudens, that he should object the same statute for the absolute prohibiting
of the reteining of mo benefices, which does alonelie establish all
dispensations for Pluralists (saving for the Chaplens of some few qualified
persons, by other statutes afterward provided for) that be or can be put in
practice in this church of England. Wherein yet we may observe even in the very
words by himself alleged, though we go no further, that the having of mo
benefices is not so generally prohibited, but that in respect of the poverty
of the first benefice, as being under eight pounds yearly value, agreeable
partly to the canons in this behalf, a man may without further qualification
or dispensation by that statute exacted, retain also a second of what value
soever, without avoiding himself from his first benefice. And because our
author has here made a gallant show of certain general laws, prohibiting
(though not simply) the reteining of mo benefices: and is now ready pressed to
improve with all his might, that which may be objected to the contrary,
touching such laws, as do permit by dispensation to some persons and upon
some occasions, the inioieng of mo than one: it shall not be amiss breeflie to
point out such laws and canons (besides those few, which hitherto have been
here and there aforetouched) which do directly prove, that by dispensation
it is lawful, to be possessed of mo benefices than one at once, upon some
reasonable occasions.

It appears by a c. de multa. Extra execrabilis de prebendis.
whole Decretall set down of purpose concerning plurality of benefices, that
dispensations may be granted for reteining of mo benefices by one man. It is
likewise in another place c. ordinarij,. 1. and. caeterum de off. ordinarij in.
6
decreed, that as those which can not show forth sufficient dispensation,
shall be deuested of those benefices, Which in that respect they do unjustly
hold, so if they can show a sufficient dispensation, they shall not be molested
for them, because they do hold them canonicallie. Many examples hereof might
be alleged here and there dispersed: as c. cum Capell. Extr. de priuileg.
where certain praebendaries are mentioned to have claimed an exemption in the
parish churches, which they inioyed; because the place whereof they were
praebendaries, was exempted. And c. relatum. 2. fin. Extr. de testam.
again, where it is decided, concerning the distribution of his goods, which
had diverse benefices. Another example hereof may be taken out of Concilium c.
vnum.. pont. 2^. q. 1.
Agathense, where it is decreed, that An abbat may have two monasteries, and
both of them as in title, but by special privilege, and not of common right.
And it is decreed in the c. Clericum etc. sequente ib idem.
Council of Chalcedon, that a man may be a Bishop of one place, and an
Archbishop of another all at one time, yet the one by title, the other by way
of Commendam: like as we read of Oswald, who in the days of king Edgar before
the conquest retained both the Archbishoprike of York, and the bishoprike of
Worcester together. An example also here of more ancient does appear in the
c. relatio. etc. vl. ibidem.
days of Gregory the Great, where by his appointment one was both Bishop of
Terracon, and Bishop of Funda at one time; yet the one by title, and the other
Commended unto him by way of trust for tuition. And the gloss has very well
gathered out of Hostiensis five other causes, wherein two benefices may be
committed unto one man to be holden in title. c. vnio. 10. q. 3. c. eam te Ext.
de aetat. and qual.
First, when the churches be of poor and mean revenue. c. vli.. sique did.
70.
Next by the dispensation of the Bishop, so that it be in his own diocese,
and in simple benefices, for Add. ad gl. ver. in duabus, ibidem.
otherwise it belongs (says he) to the Pope to dispense. c. 1. in fine 21.
q. 1.
Thirdly for scarsitie of sufficient men to serve in that function: upon which
consideration, the canon allows in villages in the country one man to have
two benefices. c. relatio. d. c. de multa, etc. ordinar^.
Fourthlie, by dispensation of him that has authority, which in those times
they attributed to the Pope. Gl. in ver. pendeant. c. eam te Ext. de aetat. and
qual. c. super co etc. cum singula in pri. ver. nisi vnus de prebendis. in 6.
Fistlie and lastly, if one benefice be annexed or do depend upon another.

7. Section. Page 113, 114, 115, 116.
THe Abstractor seems in this section so big with matter, that he confusedly
shuffleth together the confutation of his adversaries (supposed) objections,
with the proofs, which he brings to overthrow dispensations, as not knowing
whether of them he had best to be first delivered of: and yet it will prove
but a timpanie, which in this manner does no less trouble him, than if it were
an arrow sticking in a dogs leg. First of all he here tells us, that Although
the magistrate in some cases besides the law, may license and dispense, yet in
the matter of pluralities it will not be found: being as much in effect, as if
he had said; None authority whatsoever can lawfully warrant a man to retain
two benefices. This nevertheless he leaves unproven wholly, and passes on,
by way of objection upon ground of certain general rules, to frame for those
which are Abbettours of pluralists a reason, which I will breefelie gather into
a syllogism, though he have only framed an enthymeme thereof, and in steed
of the antecedent, to wit: Churches were founded and distinguished by law
positive, which afterward he affirms to be vnture, he here denies not that,
but the Consequence, as unnecessary and sophistical. The argument may be thus
gathered. The same authority, which has first distinguished churches, may
unite them again. For the reason and ground whereof, he brings these
general rules, He may pull down, who has set up: and the interpretation of
the law belongs to the lawmakers. But the authority of positive law has
first distinguished churches: Ergo the authority of Positive law may unite
them again. To those general rules in the first place he answers, that If
they be generally understood without limitation and distinction, they be
either utterly false, or else contrary and repugnant to other principles of
law. Truly this is very strange law unto me, to hear that one principle of
law is contrary to another. If he had said repugnant alone, it had been
tolerable: but he speaks with a copulative, and says, they are both
contrary and repugnant. Wherein also he ouerleapt his Logike a little, for
there can be no doubt but that every Contrariety is a Repugnancie, though not
contrariwise. And I always was charged to believe, that there were no
Antinomies in law: though yet this be true, that mere contrarieties, yea and
contradictions also (as before has been touched) may be collected, and will
follow upon those reasons, which may be gathered upon general rules. And
therefore the safest and most sound reasoning is drawn from the particular
decisions of law, and not by the in^nit disputes and altercations (as Tullie
calls them) arising of general rules. And where he says, that If they be
generally understood without limitation, they be false, how can he apply this
any way to his purpose? Except happislie he will reason in this sort: There
are some cases wherein they fail, Therefore they fail in this point also, which
we now speak of: and then this is a Fallacy (...). Also where he secondarilie
answers, that No Maxim in law is so infallible, but that it receives
limitations and restrictions, he says truly, though to his purpose very
impertinentlie: except he could show, that in this case, which we now have in
hand, it is so limited and restrained, as he would enforce. And yet by the way
it may please him to call to mind, that now he Inconstant dealing.
condemns that reasoning upon general rules As weak and without any sure
settling, which so often he himself in the first treatise has used. Also in
this place we may observe a contradiction by him delivered: where he says, No
rule A plain contradiction.
can be so generally given, that receives not some limitations: which is (as
he affirms) an infallible Maxim in law. For either this Maxim and general
rule must not be so infallible, but that it shall receive some limitations, or
else that other must be untrue, that there is no general rule, but it has his
limitations.

But he leaves at the last these reasons of randon, for proof only that
general rules may receive limitations, and takes now upon him to prove, that
these two rules then do fail in deed and receive limitation, when the cause
of the prohibition is perpetual. But his proof hereof is nothing else but his
own assertion, without either law or interpre^or of law, which so does limit
it. For in deed the law, which he here quoteth, and the gloss which alleges
that law, says nothing else but L. 35. si stipulor. ff. de verb. obliga.
this, that If I take stipulation or bond of a man, to do that which either
nature forbids to be done, or which the laws do forbid, so that there
shall be a perpetual cause of the said prohibition, the bond is void. But how
does this prove, that the general rules before touched be limited and
distinguished by this law, whereof it makes no mention? Yet if we should admit
it, can it be truly said, that the laws do so forbid reteining upon any
occasion or by any means two benefices, that the cause of that prohibition
shall be deemed to be perpetual? Seeing the laws themselves do directly (as
you have heard) upon sundry occasions determine the contrary. Neither yet
does it follow, because a bond is void, which is taken against such a law
which has perpetual cause of prohibition, that therefore an indulgence and
dispensation of like sort should be also void. For he will not deny (I hope)
but that the reason, why malefactors ought to be punished is perpetual, as not
being of that nature which may be wholly abrogated: and yet in some special
respects it is lawful, even In foro conscientiae for the prince to pardon
their faults, and to release their punishment. For (I trust) our Abstractor is
not of T. C. page 98.
his opinion, which thinks both that the law of Moses for capital
punishments ought exactlie even among us to be observed, and also T. C. pa. 100.
that her Majesty ought not to pardon the life of any, which God by the
Judicial law given to the Jews, did punish by death.

Now having by the examples of Murder, theft, and blasphemy, which have a
perpetual cause of prohibition, showed his meaning herein: he arises from
these particulars to collect a general Ab hypothesi ad thesin: that seeing
None may take away or dispense with the reason of a law, being the life and
soul of the law, therefore no man can dispense with the law, or take away the
law. Which being spoken indefinitelie of a law, must needs be equivalent (as
law does teach us) unto an universal: and then both he shall be found to be
contrary to himself, having before Contrariety. Page 113.
delivered, that In things depending upon the mere disposition of man, the
magistrate may dispense: and also very absurd, in taking away all privileges
and exemptions from the general rigor of sundry laws. Moreover we are taught
by law, that of L. non omnium. ff. de legib. Abb. in c. si quando. Extr. de
rescriptis.
many laws a reason can not be rendered, neither ought we too curiously to
search after the reason of them. Whereby will follow upon this man's words, that
many good and wholesome laws do want their life and soul. But if he will
say, he only meant such like laws as he brought his examples of, which do
seem immediately to flow from the law of nature: besides that it had baene
meet, he should have expressed herein his meaning plainly, yet is the
co^secution of his argument faltie: for that it is not necessary, whersoeuer
any of these laws, which are derived immediately from the law of nature, are
upon any circumstances dispensed withal, or taken away, that it should be
concluded thereupon, that The reason, the life, the soul of the law, which is
the law of nature, is taken away. For though God, whose will is perfect
justice, and who prescribes laws to other and not to himself, did appoint
the children of Israel to rob the Egyptians: yet this notwithstanding, the
general law against theft grounded upon this reason and law of nature, That
one man may not hurt or do injury to another, was not after this time hereby
taken away, or out of this case dispensed withal. Likewise, though Moses for
the hardness of their hearts did permit the children of Israel to put away
their wives upon any mistike, and to marie else where: yet was not the reason
of the law of matrimony, being reckoned by civil law to be the first law of
nature, clean taken away by this indulgence and dispensation given unto them.
Yet the Abstractor upon this false position, that None can dispense for
plurality of benefices, but he that may dispense with the reasons, whereupon
plurality of benefices is forbidden, does ground as absurd a reason to
prove, that none can dispense with the reasons of such prohibition, as that is
an untrue assertion; in this manner: None can alter or dispense with the reasons
forbidding pluralities, but he that can alter or dispense with the law of
nature, and the law of God: But no man can alter or dispense An absurd reason.
with the law of nature or with the law of God: Therefore none can alter or
dispense with the reasons forbidding pluralities. Which argument I was content
a little to help, and to frame in this form, though he had made it much
worse, and in diverse respects contrary to rules of Logike. For he did put a
part of the Medium in the conclusion, where he says, Dispense with the reasons
of either of them; to wit, the law of nature or law of God, which is the Medium
of his syllogism: and had put in also Quatuor terminos. For in the one
proposition he names The equity of the law of God, and in the other, only
The law of God. The consecution of his Mayor he proves hereby, Because the
reasons which forbid pluralities are taken from the law of nature, and the
equity of the law of God. The one part of his Minor, that No man can alter or
dispense with the law of God, he proves by this, Because the will of God is
the only cause of the law of God, and his only will the rule of all justice
vnchangeablie. Now concerning the form of his argument, it is very absurd,
and such as any child of ten years old being in the Unsuersities, can tell
him to be Neither in mood nor figure, consisting wholly of negative
propositions, and therefore does no more follow than this argument; No man is
without sense, No stone is a man, Ergo No stone is without sense. And because
the matter of this reason here by him delivered, is one of his cheifest
fortresses and bulworks of this treatise by him opposed against Pluralities
(though I persuade my self, neither he nor any other shall ever be able to
frame a sound reason upon these terms:) yet it shall not be amiss, a little
to examine also the pith of all these his last several assertions, which he
takes as undoubted truths.

And first, that None may dispense for pluralities, but such as may also
dispense with the reasons that do forbid them, may apparentlie be showed to be
false, by infinite positive laws: which may be changed, abrogated, or
dispensed with, though the reasons whereupon they were grounded, be not subject
to such alteration or qualification, but only then declared, upon some
circumstances necessarily weighed, to cease, or not to have place in such
especial cases. Naturaliter obligamur ad antidora, we are even by c.
consuluit. in l. sed and si lege. 25. ff. de petit. haered.
nature bound to recompense one good turn with another. Xenoph. li. 1. Cyri.
Seneca. li. 3. de beneficijs. c. 6.
In which respect amongst the Persians and Macedonians, there lay an action
against him which should show himself unthankful. Now considering that
amongst us, and the most nations in the world besides, such actions have no
place, but it is thought most convenient to lcaue it to the very
shamefastness and good nature of him that has reaped a benefit: yet it may
not therefore be said, that we have also taken away the general reason,
whereupon this law of the Persians was grounded, being the very instinct of
nature. Herodot. li. 1
Amongst the Persians it was holden a dishonest thing for a man to spit;
because it argued he gave not himself to actiuitie and laudable exercise of
the body. But we may not hereupon argue, that amongst us, where no such thing
is noted, good exercise of the body is condemned. For the more grievous
punishment of droonkennesse, Pittacus Arist. in Polit.
one of the seven wise men of Greece made a law, that he which should beat any
man being droonken, should be much more greeuouslie punished, than if he had
done so being sober. Yet we which raise not the damages of a battery in
respect of the droonkennesse, cannot therefore be said to allow or to dispense
with droonkennesse. Also for a notable reason drawn from the law of nature,
whereby matrimonies are established, it was provided in Greece, that he which
was not married before he were five and twenty peers old, should not be
capable of any inheritance by descent. In the like respect whereof Plato.
a divine philosopher says, that God would have man to beget man, that thus
there might be a continual supply made of those which should worship him.
Nevertheless, those nations which in matters of matrimony, do yield a
continual freedom either to marry or not to marry, upon good grounds; may
not therefore be said to take upon them to dispense with the reason of such
laws, as seemed herein more neerelie to exact that which the law of nature in
some sort does require. It is most agreeable to reason, to have children bred
up in all kind of good learning even in their tender years: yet nevertheless
we cannot Lagus. lib. 1.
condemn Frederike the first, who thrughout all Tuscia did forbid, that in
inferior schools nothing should be taught but Grammar and Music, least
otherwise the tender wits should be ouerburdened at the first with matters of
too great weight. And though upon the reason and ground of the law of nature,
younger sons and daughters, as being both in like degree with the eldest son
unto the parents, and more unable than he to provide for themselves, are to
succeed their father in lands and goods by the course of the civil law, yet
retained in Germany and many other places, and sufficiently confirmed by
that reason of S. Paul, which we must needs allow to be most concludent, If we
be sons then are we heirs: yet may not the course of the common law of
England, giving by descent all the land unto the eldest, as most fit for the
entier conservation of the family, and being the first fruits of his fathers
strength, be accounted to impugn or dispense with the reason, whereupon the
other course is grounded: but only to be received as more fit for our
commonweal, and therefore agreeable to the rule of justice as well as the
other. There is no man can dispense that it may be lawful in general, that a
man need not pay that which he has borrowed: yet particularly the ff. de S.
C. Maccdo ff. de mincribus.
civil law has justly decreed, that the said reason has no place in such,
which being in their nonage, or being under government of their father, do
borrow money. Also L. patronus ff. de re. iudicata.
the patron, or master, his father, or his children, if they become debtors
to him whom he has infranchised and made free, they cannot by such a freed man
be sued to pay any more of such debt, than conveniently they may pay,
without their utter undoing. It were infinite to set down those good and
wholesome laws, which being settled upon the reasons drawn from the law of
nature, are nevertheless upon due consideration of circumstance restrained and
abridged from their general force, in women, young men, old men, soldiers,
clearkes, scholars, husbandmen, artificers, and such like; which all to diverse
intents do by the disposition of wholesome laws, enioie privileges,
immunities and exemptions: and Vide gl. in sed naturalia instit. de iure
naturali.
yet the reasons of the said general laws are thereby neither impugned,
altered, dispensed with, nor released. Whereby it is withal very evident,
that this reason of his does not follow: Because the reasons forbidding
pluralities are taken from the law of nature, and of God; Therefore no man can
dispense with the said reasons, but he that may dispense with those two laws.
For seeing a law may be upon circumstances dispensed with or altered, whereof
the general reason or ground is not touched: why may not in like manner the
reasons against pluralities be limited and restrained, though that law,
whereupon those reasons be grounded, be no way impeached? Which reasons
against pluralities, how well they be grounded upon the law of nature, shall
also in his due place appear. The first part of his Minor, That none may
dispense with the law of God, if it be understood, that such things as he has
perpetually and inuiolablie commanded to be observed, no man may by any
authority omit; nor such as he has likewise forbidden, by any man be put in
practice: it is very true and undoubted. Yet it is as undoubtedly true on the
other side, that many humane actions may without spot of impiety vary, and
be otherwise ruled and directed in commonweals, than is reported by scripture
in like cases to have been observed. For Matthew. 19.
though from the beginning it were not so, whereby is signified, that it swarued
from the integrity of the law of God, and purity of nature: yet did Christ
partly excuse the dispensation which Moses gave to the Israelits for putting
away their wives upon any mislike. In the Exodus 22.
law of God, theft was but punished with restitution of twofold or fourfold,
and Prouer. 6.
seems to be much qualified, as not being so heinous a sin in respect of
adultery: yet nevertheless our law, which punishes the one by death, and the
other too mildly indeed, is not therefore by the word of God condemned. By the
law of God confirmed again by our savior Christ, all matter of controversy
was Deuteronomy. 17. John. 8.
ordered according to the depositions of two or three witnesses:
notwithstanding our trialls at the common law by twelve lawful men, being like
to Pedanei iudices in the civil law, and Pares curiae in the Feudall law, not
always lead by two witnesses, but sometimes by one, and sometimes by none, but
only by violent presumptions gathered upon the words of the witnesses, are
both tolerable and lawful. Likewise, though three witnesses at the civil law
do directly depose concerning a man's testament, yet if no more were present,
the testament shall be overthrown, and that with good conscience, where that
law has place: which requires the seals of the testator, and of seven
witnesses. The like may be said of our inheritances, which descend only to
the eldest in blood, though the aforesaid reason of S. Paul being sound, does
make all the sons heirs, as before was touched. Concerning the other part of
his Minor proposition, that None can alter or dispense with the law of nature,
because all natural things are immutable: I say first, that by this untrue
translation of All natural things, in steed of All laws of nature, he has
disaduantaged greatly his own cause. For it is very notorious, that not
only all natural things, even the heavens themselves which do were old as
does a garment, are subject to mutabilitie; but even particular nature, or (as
the old schoolmen term it) Natura naturata is inuerted and changed by many
casualites, as in production of monsters: and the natural inclinations of
many are brideled, and almost wholly subdued by good education, joined with
the grace of God. Even the heathen philosopher Socrates confessed that he was
by nature blockish and lecherous, as the Physiognomer had coniectured, which
yet he had altered by Philosophy. But it is also requisite that we should,
upon particular discourse of sundry laws of nature, consider how well the
Abstractor does understand this law, which he brings, to prove the
unchangeableness of the law of nature. By the very first law of nature, no
man did seek any further than to lead a private life, thinking it sufficient
to provide only for himself, his wife and his children, without any care or
thought taking, for any public or commonweal. This appears by Aristot.
li. 1. Polit. c. 1.
Aristotle, who concludes the first and simplest society and community by
nature, within the straits of a man's own family. Of that time an ancient
Lucretiue li. 5.
poet speaking, says thus:

Nec commune bonum poterant spectare, nec vllis
Moribus inter se scibant nec legibus vti,
Quod cuique obtulerat praedae fortuna, ferebat
Sponte sua, sibi quisque valere and viuere doctus.
Whereof the wise and famous poet Homer gives also an example of a natural
course of life in the Cyclopes, where Odysi. 9.
he says (as he is translated very well:)

Soli habitant: nihilhos aliena negotia tangunt,
Vxori tantum and natis, ius dicere docti.
Now, how far we, and almost the sauagest Barbarians that live upon the face
of the earth, are altered and changed from this solitary private life, and are
reduced to interteine the commonweal and public benefit of our country,
even with hazard and loss of our own life, and of all that is otherwise most
dear unto us: we have experience by the daily examples of valiant resolute
men, and of good subjects in all ages. Which kind of prodigality, and
profusion (if I may so term it) of our own blood, and incolumitie in regard
of the publike-weale of our country, is greatly differing from that instict,
whereby every man is naturally lead by all means possible, to preserve
himself from all bodily dangers. Likewise the natural bond and conjunction
of man and L. 1.. ius natural ff. de iustitia.
woman by matrimony, as Vlpian does term it, has been subject to changes,
even by the Matthew. 19.
appointment of the divine lawgiver Moses: yea, and moreover upon the
necessity of the circumstances therein considerable (least that unkind people
should miserably torment their wives which they hated) is not condemned
simply in Moses by our savior Christ. But if we will affirm, as humane
writers do teach, that the first and simplest times of nature had no certain
marriages, nor knew no children in certeintie, till people had drawn themselves
into common societies one with another; and with Castrensis, that the
conjunction of man and woman is of the law of nature, the bond of matrimony
with one certain woman of the law of nations, and the solemnities about
marriage to be of the positive law of every several commonweal: then is the
law of nature herein greatly (though justly) changed and restrained by the
prohibitions of marriage in certain degrees of affinity and consanguinitie
first set Leuit. 18.
down amongst the people of God, and afterward by the light of reason, amongst
most nations (though heathen) interteined. Yea, if matrimony be of the law of
nature, then is the natural liberty thereof very much abridged, by such
Instit. de nuptiji. 1.
wholesome civil laws, which make it otherwise no marriage in those, who are
under their fathers tuition, except their express assent be first obtained
thereunto. Tull. li. 2. de natura deorum. l. liberorum. 220.. vlt. de ver.
signific.
Another branch of the law of nature, is that care of perpetuity which is
ingraffed in man: which because it cannot be atteined unto in himself only,
he seeks it naturally, partly by consecrating upon due desert, his name to
immortality, but much more by substituting (as it were) his children in his
own place: which may flourish when he is in decaie, and in whom he may seem
being dead, in some sort as it were to live again. And yet it is not
unlawful, no not in terms of divinity, for Matthew. 19. 1. Cor. 7.
a man that can contain, to lead a sole and a single life. And that this is a
kind of natural expectation in parents, as it were to were young and to live
again in their children, it may hereby be gathered; because L. isti quidem.
vlt. ff. quod metus causa.
diverse do much less esteem their own life, than the life of their children.
And even as by the disputation of philosophers, and decision of lawyers it is
found, that the Plutarc. in Theseo.
ship wherein Theseus was carried into Candie to subdue the monstrous
Minotaure, being for a memorial of that act, so long kept by the Atheniens,
that by continual repairing of it, no one planke or piece of timber was left,
which it had in the time of Theseus; yet was L. proponebatur ff. de iudicijs.
to be accounted the same ship: and as we are to be accounted the same people
which we were two hundred years ago, though no one of that age do now
remain: even so by the continual succession of our issue one after another,
we seem to be often borne again, and thereby to enjoy a kind of immortality.
The next bud of the law of nature, is the defense and education of our
children, both because of their weakness, which is such, that if we should
but deny our help to any other (though far more strange unto us than they
are) being in like case, we should break that Tull. li. 3. offic.
law of nature, which commands man to do good to man, even in that respect
that he is a man: and also because they are a part of our selves, to the
propugnation and bringing up of whom, we are taught by the lively examples
even of sundry dumb creatures. Li. 3. ca. 22.
Birds (says Lactantius) almost of all sorts have a kind of coupling in
marriage, and they defend their nests as their marriage beds; they love their
brood whereof they are certain: and if ye put unto them any other than their
own, they drive them away. Beasts also, for the rearing up of their young,
will abide hunger and cold: and will not be afraid to endure grievous blows
and wounds in their defense, So that where Euripides says, (...) Philustrat.
lib. 2. c cap. ^.
Apollonius does justly reprehend him, in that he should have better said,
(...): because not to men alone, but to all other living creatures, their issue
is unto them as dear as their own life. Nevertheless, we see by daily
experience how much this care of parents over their children, not without good
reason alters and decaieth, when the children are of that strength and
discretion, that they may well enough provide for themselves. In which respect
emancipation of children being grown to years, was also devised. Another part
of the law of nature consists partly in the repelling of danger and injury
from us, and partly also in the just revenge thereof. And although some
interpretors of the civil law, being deceived by the order set down, do
attribute the repelling of force to the law of nations: yet Did. 2. c. ius
natural.
Gratian directly does make it of the law of nature. It appears so to be by
that which In proemio. lib. 7.
Pliny says of beasts: There is none of them, but if violence be offered, he
has anger in him, and a mind impatient of injury, yea and a great
forwardness to defend himself when you hurt him, (...). And Pro Milone.
Tullie affirms this to be no written law which we have learned, but which we
have drawn even from nature it self. So does the L. 3. vt vins ff. de just.
law also decide this matter of repelling of injury and defense of our selves,
agreablie to that which Lib. 1. offic.
Tullie (elsewhere) to the same purpose notes. Who in the same book likewise
affirms, that it is a chief office of justice to hurt no man, except we be
provoked first by injuries: and this revenge of injuries depends also and is
strengthened by that law of nature, which wills us to yield to every man
that which is his own: which is done by benefiting the good, and punishing the
bad; least impunitie should entise them and others to offend. And that this is
natural, we may gather by the like instinct in all beasts. For the which cause
Plutarch. li. de profectu morum.
Brasidas being bitten by the hand with a mouse, did observe this, that there
was no beast so little, which would not seek to revenge himself being
provoked: in which Lucreti. li. 5.
respect it is said:

Sentit enim vim quisque suam, qua possit abuti.
Cornua nata prius vitulo quam frontibus extant,
Illis iratus petit, atque infensus inurget.
Yet notwithstanding, upon just occasions, men being weary to become their
own reuengers, and not able to retain a mean in reuengement, thought it best
at last to run to the remedy of laws for the punishment of wrong and
violence, as that poet in the same book testifies. Upon which occasion,
though the laws do still permit (according to the first law of nature) a just
defense of our selves, yet do L. 1. C. vnde vi.
they inhibit all violence offensive, and revenge of injury to be used by us:
for the which cause Baldus calls that moderation of defense the triacle of
those laws, which do permit the repelling of force and injury, with the
like. Also that law of nature concerning the succession of children in the
goods and lands of their parents, being reckoned by Gratian, and reported to be
a law of nature in sundry places of the civil laws, is no less than the
rest encountered, changed, and abridged upon diverse occasions by good and
necessary positive laws of several nations. By the L. verbis legis. 120. ff.
de ver. signifi.
law of the Twelve rables (which continued for many years together) the
fathers (without any cause) might disinherit their children. In England it is
provided, that the inheritance only shall descend unto the eloest son; and
yet may the father also by sundry means cut off all his children and kindred
from the inioyeng of his lands and goods, if he be so hardly disposed. Yea
both by the civil law and common law, if the father do commit treason, his
children are deuested of his lands, and by the one of them made incapable also,
to take any lands by descent from another. Another law of nature, which is
reckoned by Gratian, is, the common dominion of all goods and lands, without
any distinction of propriety to this or that man: by reason that the fruits
of the earth in that searsitie of men in the beginning was innough, and more
than sufficient for every one. But Gratian seems to misname the matter
something, where he affirms the possession of things then to have been
common. Which as as it could not possibly be, so is it certain that none
without injury and breach of the law of nature, might invade the possession
of that, which another had first taken up for his own use, so long as he would
so imploie it. Except we will with Castrensis extend this co^munitie only to
vnmooueables, as land; and not to mooueables: because such did fall to his
share only, which first did occupy them, as he is of opinion. Yet not long
after, and ever since, as well upon further increase of people in the world, as
for the avoiding of contention, and for some punishment of such as otherwise by
violence would have lived idclie upon other men's labors: it was thought meet
by general good liking of all nations, to bound out the dominions of every
man in several propriety: which course, all the civil nations in the world
at this day do inuiolablie and lawfully practice, notwithstanding the first
law of nature were to the contrary. The next law of nature to these, is, L.
manumisones. ff. de iustitia.
that liberty and freedom, wherein we are all borne, and whereby a man may do
what he list, so long as he offends not. In which Iustit. de iure naturali.
ius autens gentium.
respect the law says, that bondage and servitude is contrary to the right
and law of nature. Nevertheless it is very notorious, how from time to time
it has been usual, to keep such in bondage for their punishment, who either
themselves, or whose ancestors had been taken in war, and saved from death,
the danger whereof they had incurred: and it is yet amongst all nations (saving
in France) yea even in many places of England lawfully retained, without any
disagreement herein from good christianity. Yea it is so far off from
injustice to restrain and abridge that vnconsined liberty, which the
liberality of this law of nature had endowed us withal, that it was more than
necessary to bridle and bound it within the lists of good and necessary laws
and ordinances, as we see it is used at this day in all well governed
commonwealths. Another of those, which Gratian in the place before alleged
reports to be of the law of nature, is this, that the propriety and free use
of those things which live in the air, the land or sea, ought to be in him
which shall happen to take them. Yet now we 14. Hen. 8. 1. Trespass.
see, that it is not lawful for us to take the wild fowls, which breed in the
reserved trees, though growing upon that ground whereof we are leassees and
farmers for the time. Also it is not lawful for me to take such wild dear, as
are found within mine own land, being by due course of law once afforressed by
the Queen. Again, the sturgions, whales, seals, and other fishes royal
belong not by law unto the taker of them, but unto the Queen by her Highness
prerogative. Moreover Tullie says thus, If we will Paradox. 4.
weigh things by the weights of nature, and exact them according to that rule
of general justice, then those shall as much be blamed that do but in mind,
as those which do in act offend. Yet the L. cogitati. ff. de paenis.
law decideth, that no man is to be punished for thought only: and that an
endeavor shall not hurt a man, when the matter attempted did not sort to any
intended effect, except it be in those facts, which be most enormious and
heinous crimes. Another law of nature there is, which binds us to keep touch
in all contracts and compacts, as to Did. 1. c. 8. ius natural.
restore those things which of trust are recommended unto our custody, and
such like. Which is grounded upon these rules of nature, That we may hurt no
man, That we must give to every man his own, That nothing is more agreeable
to natural equity, than to keep touch and perform what we promise, and That
we L. nam hoc natura ff. de cond. indeb.
cug^t not to be enriched with another man's detriment. Which second rule In. l.
1. ff. de pactis.
Accursius makes to be also a bond of natural equity, though in that respect
he be (in mine opinion) not justly reprehended by Castrensis and Jason. Yet it
is easy to consider, how diversely the laws of sundry nations have altered
and changed these rules and laws of nature. For besides that both by the
Civil, and the law of this land, a bare compact or promise does give none
action, because no man is hurt by such breach of promise: the said laws do
also suffer without punishment, that in contracts men may freely one
circumuent and go beyond another: but the Civil law restrains it thus, so
that he be not deceived about half in half in the price. In which respect
Seneca li. 2. de ira. cap. 27. and seq.
Seneca wisely says: Who is he, which professes himself innocent of all
breach of laws? Yet if it were so, what a slender integrity is this, to be
only good according to law? For how much more is the rule of required duties
larger than the rules of law? How many more things does piety, humanity,
liberality, justice, and good meaning require of us, which are out of the
public tables of law? Naie, we cannot possibly conform our selves to that
most exact rule of innocence. For we have done, we have thought, we have
wished, we have favored matters differing from it: and we are perhaps innocent
in some things, only because it has not fallen out according to our desire.
Also by our own law these rules of the right Doctor and student. cap. 51.
of nature are manifoldlie crossed and altered. As if a man kill another with
my sword, I shall leese my sword. If my horse straie away, and I do not
hear of the proclamations, whereby I may challenge him, I shall leese him
without any default of mine after a year and a day. If my ship make wrecke
within a little of the land, and all living things there in perish, though
within three hours after by the ebbing of the sea, all my goods may be come by
upon the dry land; yet I shall leese them, and they are all come to the hands
of the Queen, or of her Nighnes patentees: which in show seems not only
contrary to the said rules of C. de naufrag. l. 1. lib. 11.
nature and rcason, but also to these principles, That a man ought not to ad
affliction to the afflicted, nor punish a man doubly, though it were for an
offense, nor to take away that which is a man's own without either fact or
fault of his. Therefore upon the premises we may conclude, that the Positive
laws of sundry nations do not only take away and abridge the permission
and freedom, and thereby change the law of Arist. lib. 5. Ethic. cap. 7.
nature in those things which of themselves contain no difference of right or
wrong, before they be commanded (as to go over the walls of Rome;) but also that
in many other points the said law of nature is partly released and enlarged,
partly abridged and restreined, and partly also changed and abrogated. For
the Lius civil ff. de iustitia.
law says thus, The civil or positive law is that, which neither wholly does
receed from the law of nature or of nations, nor yet does wholly follow it:
therefore when we ad or take from common right, then we make a peculiar or civil
law. To our authors allegation (which is now evident how well he understood it)
touching The vnchangablenes of the law Gl. in verbo. sed naturalia. instit. de
iure naturali.
of nature, the gloss thervpo^ answers, That the said paragraph speaks of
the law of nations, as may appear by those words, Quae apud omnes gentes: and
supra. eod.. quod vero naturalis. Yet he says, It may be understood of the
primarie law of nature, from which the laws that seem contrary, do not
derogate, though it be not observed in those cases. For notwithstanding this,
the law of nature remains good and equal. To the like effect does In dict..
Angelus answer, The law of nature in it self considered is always good and
equal, and in Abstracto is uniformly in force, but in Concreto it may be
changed in some point. Which confirms that disputation before had, that a
thing may be altered or dispensed withal, whose reason is no way In abstracto
thereby impeached. Another does answer to these things in another manner,
saying, That those things which are of necessity of nature are not changed,
but such as be by presumption in nature, as fierceness in a lion, gentleness
and humanity in a man, may be changed. A fourth man very well learned does
reconcile the matter thus: That the law of nature cannot by positive civil law
be broken with that violence, which the law of nations and positive laws do
judge worthy of punishment: as by making it lawful, that one might hurt
another either in deed or word.

Yet in my poor conceit none of these do sufficiently touch the point of the
meaning of that rule, nor reconcile and meet with all the Instancies which have
been and might be brought to the contrary. Which has given occasion to some)
whom Li. 5. Ethic. cap. 7.
Aristotle in that respect confuteth) to think, that there was no right in
deed or law of nature at all, but only in opinion: because they did see
natural things to be among all nations alike; as, for fire every where to
burn: but they perceived, laws were not in all places uniform. In whose
discourse against them, upon those words where he says, Truly amongst us,
some of those laws, that be naturally ingraffed, are changeable, though not
all of them, I do gather for this purpose two kinds of the laws of nature:
one consisting in the distinction of right and just things from those which are
not right but unjust which is called A law everlasting and unchangeable: the
other is that which is occupied and referred to the utility and commodity of
men, which upon circumstances of times, persons and places, without any
derogation to nature, may be altered and changed, as shall be thought
expedient. The first respects an holy and upright, the other a commodious
life in us. And out of the first do flow those three natural L. iustitia. 10.
ff. de iustitia and iure.
precepts, which without injustice can not be broken, To live honestly, to
hurt no man, and to give every man his own, derived all from those heavenly
sincere rules of righteousness, Whatsoever you would that men should do unto
you, that do you unto them: and do not that to another man, which you would
not have him to do to you. Which distination and reconciliation, though of all
the other before it seem to me most apt, yet the instancies of the deodand, of
the straie Superannated, and of the wrccke upon the sea brought out of our
common laws, and the prescription and vse-winning after a certcine time of
any moucable thing from the right owner by continuance of possession
established by the Civil law, do seem to me not only to change and alter,
but plainly to thwart and contrary even that chief law of nature,
consisting in the distinction of right and equity: and so does the L. nam hoc
natura. ff. de cond. indeb.
law it self affirm of the last of these. Yet I know there is variety of
judgments Gl. in c. ius natural did. 1. Bald. in L. ancill. C. de furto.
Azo. in summa C. pro empto. Angel. and Alex. in L. possessio. ff. de acquiren.
possess.
amongst interpretors, not only whether it be against the law of nature, or
Joan. Andr. Anch. Francus in c. possessor. de regul. iuris.
only besides the equity of it; but also whether the Joan. Andr. ibidem.
contra Cagnol. in l. iure nature. ff. de reg. iuris.
common opinion of writers be the one way or the other. So that the safest
answer, and whereupon generally we may best rely, is this, that there is a
kind of Subalternation (as the Logicians do term it) among the laws of
nature, whereby the superior and more general may encounter and prevail
against the more particular and inferior law of nature. And therefore this
being the general voice of nature confirmed by the word of God, That we are to
obey the law of our country, where we dwell, provided for the weal of the
people in public, L. vlt.. vlt. C. de caducis tollendis. L. ita vulneratus.
ff. ad leg. Aquiliam.
(though perhaps against the profit and also right of some private men)
according to that, Salus populi, suprema lex esto, (so that in the mean time
they be not contrary to Gods everlasting will revealed in the written word,)
we may upon this ground lawfully allow both of these, and of other laws of
like sort: how far soever they seem unto some, to swerve from the law of
nature in some respect, though in other regard, they stand grounded upon
diverse sound reasons, derived even from the said founteine of nature, yet
peradventure not so nearly and immediately as those do, which sound unto the
contrary, Neither is this to be thought strange to men of skill and
understanding, that two viuerse principles of the law of nature, and of nations
may be truly drawn to establish contrary things.

Having thus showed (besides the absurd form of that syllogism, which is
gathered upon his discourse in this Section, and consisting all of Nagatiues)
the wants also and untruths of both the propositions thereof Ex super abundanti;
I will now more briefly examine the two other syllogismes, which he has
annexed thereunto. It is evident (I hope) by that which has been spoken, that
the Mayor of his first reason is vnture, where, upon the perpetuity of a cause
or reason of any prohibition, he would ground a necessary continuance of that
which is thereupon established. The Minor thereof is also untrue, and to be
examined in particular, when he comes to the proof of it. Also, That every
law grounded upon the reason of nature, and the equity of the law of God is
immutable, being his Mayor of his second syllogism, he would prove by that
which has been examined before; to wit, That all natural things are
immutable. Which neither is of it self absolutelic true, but with that
understanding which I have showed; neither does the other follow of it, if
this were simply to be granted, by any coherence of reason. For the
groundwork, and that which gives strength to a thing, may be sure and
unchangeable, when as yet that which is built thereupon may be unsure and
subject to mufabilities. Else we must needs establish a perpetuity in all good
laws of man without any alteration, upon what occasion soever, seeing they all
(though many ways diverse among themselves) do take their foundation and
reason from the immutable equity of the law of God. His Minor of his latter
reason, when he comes to prove it, shall likewise receive (God willing) an
answer.

8. Section. Page 116, 117.
IN the very first front of this Section, wherein he undertakes the answer to
the fallacies (as he calls them) before spoken of, he assumeth by his old
warrant dormant, to take without proof as granted (which is very untrue and
never can be proved) That pluralities are prohibited by the law of nature and
by the law of God: and so upon this his own liberal vealing with himself,
without any further proof in this place, he denies the Minor by him in way
of objection set down: which assumeth Pluralities to be forbidden by the law
of man alone. So that if upon the examination and overthrow of his proofs
brought to the contrary, it may hereafter appear, that none other law besides
the law of man does forbid them; then will it follow by his own grant of the
Minor, which is, Whatsoever is prohibited by the law of man alone, by the same
law may be licenced again, that dispensations for mo benefices may be granted
lawfully: being the very contradictorie of his chief position of this
discourse. Where it is not also to be forgotten, that the said Mayor, which
here he suffers to pass Inconstancy.
without venial, he venied (though foolishlie) before, when he said, The said
consequence was unnecessary and sophistical. Page 213. in fine.
The rest of this Section brought for proof, that Dispensations for
pluralities do ratify monstrous things and against nature, (Which is the
Minor of his second syloogisme) he proves principally hereby, because the law
against pluralities is the law of nature and of God, being the Minor as yet to
be proved of his former syllogism. Which is the most childish kind of
Circuition, and begging that which Childish fallacy.
is in controversy, that ever I have heard the most foolish wrangling cauiller
or Sophister at any time use in schools, which wanted matter, and yet was to
speak Ad clepsydram, and to talk out his task. But if the law be monstrous,
what does he make, or how dutifullie does he speak of those which passed and
confirmed that act?

The proof which in hand, that Privileges and dispensations are bestowed,
where some general law is to the contrary, is wholly needless. Yet the
first is wrong quoted, because he alleges a Chapter in steed of the gloss
upon the Rubrike: and the second is not found at all whither he sends us,
though by way of argument it may be gathered out of that place.

9. Section. Page 118, 119, 120.
THat which he brought a little before, to teach another to go, is here in be
taught how to stand alone it self. For he would prove, because The reasons of
the prohibition of pluralities are taken and drawn from the law of nature,
and from the law of God, therefore pluralities are forbidden by the law of
nature and by the law of God. Which consecution though it hang together by no
knot of reason, yet is it left by him without further help, and by none other
means approved unto us, but because he himself made it. But if every thing
were to be said, either commanded or forbidden by the law of nature and of God,
which has for a reason and cause, whether near or far off, mediate or
immediate, either the one or the other: then should all good and wholesome
Positive laws of every nation under heaven, (all which do issue primarilie
from these sourses and fountains) come under this rule, both to be
unchangeable, neither to be dispensed withal upon any circumstance whatsoever,
according to his own collection: and also the laws of nature and of God
should be found to be diverse and repugnant to themselves in several nations,
and in some points also contrary one to another: which is absurd and execrable
once to be imagined: and therefore that absu^d and erroneous, where upon this
is gathered. For as sundry and different Positive laws may be drawn from one
principle of the law of nature, or of the law of nations, (called The
secondarie law of nature) according to the less or greater proportion and
measure of the influence of it into them, and yet all of them tolerable, and to
be obeyed by those, unto whom respectiuelie they do apperteine: so, much more
(no doubt) may repugnant Positive laws be grounded and established upon
several Principles and Maxims of the law of nature. As may be seen by the
inher it ance upon descent after the order of Common law to the eldest, by
Borough-english to the yoongest, and by Gauel-kind to all sons alike.
Likewise by the loss of lands in the son for the fathers treason, by the
course of the Common law, though the lands holden in Gauel-kind cannot be so
forfeited. None of which laws (though contrary one to another) but they have
both good and sound reasons, drawn from the law of God and of nature,
whereupon they are settled: and also may both lawfully be retained, and upon
just occasion in like manner be abrogated or reuersed. Out of the Civil law
this may serve for an example hereof, that although by reason it may seem,
that any thing is fully proved by two or three witnesses above all
exceptions: yet upon another reason, which is for the avoiding of all corrupt
dealing in Testaments, being the last wish of the Testator, (and therefore most
carefully to be provided for) it is by that law decided, that no ordinary
Testament shall be effectual, which is not signed with the Testators, and with
seven, or in some cases, at the least with five witnesses hands and seals.
The reason of taking oths in judgment is drawn from an ill cause, even that
corruption of nature whereunto we are inclined (without some strict bond to the
contrary) to deliver untruths, and to supplant our neighbors. Yet the oath is
a part of the service of God, and necessarily in all judgments retained for
deciding of controversies betwixt man and man. The reason and principal ground
of forbidding women to procure and solicit their friends causes being absent,
in judgment, was the unshamefast importunity of one Calphurnia: yet we may
not hereof gather, that all women, which are likewise forbidden and debarred
from appearing as attorneis for other, to be of like disposition unto her.

And if laws, grounded upon reasons and principles of the law of nature and of
nations, were thereby (as the Abstractor here gathers) to be accounted of the
like condition with the very primarie laws of nature and of nations
themselves: then could it not fall out, that there might be diverse principles
and reasons of laws about one matter, tending to contrary ends: which yet
happens three manner of ways. First, when of diverse principles and reasons
some one, amongst the rest, notoriously bears the swaie. Therefore, though
the freedom of man from bondage and thraldom of slavery, be many ways
favored in all good laws, as most agreeable unto the law of nature, whereby
we all are freeborne: yet for avoiding of injustice and injury among men, it
is provided, that a debtor may not infranthise and manumit his villains, if
thereby his creditors shall not find Assetz for their satisfaction. And the
like to this is observed, when as many or more weighty reasons do swaie one
way, against fewer or meaner reasons of the other side. Secondarilie, this
happens, when as one reason and principle is so counterpeised with another to
the contrary, that it cannot well be decided, whether of them ought to be of
more moment. As when it was doubted, whether in favor of liberty it were
better to permit a young man, already come to his own guiding, to manumit his
bondmen; or else to bind him from it, till he should atteine the settled
ripeness of xxv. years of age, required to other his alienations. It was by
Justinian provided, Feriendo medium, because of inconuentences that appeared on
both sides, that he might manumit them at the going into the xviij. year of
his age. And this equality and indifferency of principles differing as it
were euenlie among themselves, is that which breeds such great diversity of
judgments, and so many controuersed opinions in law both In schools and
consistories; when men in pondeting and waieng of them are distracted into
diverse opinions thereabouts. Whereof rightly to determine, is in truth the
cheifest point of maturitie and discretion that may be wished, or can be had in
a notable judge. And yet herein it offentimes comes to pass, that in respect
of right and justice, it is not greatly material, whether the one reason or
the other be allowed; because in regard of sundry circumstances, reasons, and
motions of a man's mind, the selfsame thing may be diverse ways, if not well
determined of, yet at the least not unjustly: which because unskillful men do
not understand, thinking that upon every external transmutation of any
matter, the inward property thereof is changed, and have not learned to
conceive, that as in the sea it is not requisite, nor skilleth greatly to have
all men sail just in one line, which go for one haven or port: they do
therefore make great stir about nothing, as some huge volumes of law (for
want of consideration hereof vainelie written) may testify. Thirdly when as
the weight of these contrary principles, about a matter, are neither such,
that one of them may far surmount the other; nor yet of such equality, but
that the one shall something rebate and diminish the force of the other:
whereby, that which directly cannot be brought to pass, is by some circuition
otherwise effected. As although no law of nature be to the contrary, but I may
freely marry hi^ which was betrothed only in marriage unto my brother,
without solemnization or carnal knowledge; yet is this (in regard of a kind of
external public honesty) not permitted by law positive. And though reason
would that a man should not be damnified by any contract, whereunto he is
inueigled by guile and mal-engine, nevertheless it is thought necessary, that
he should first by sentence have his entire restitution unto that condition,
which he was in before his circumention. And further, upon due consideration of
circumstances, even the principles and reasons that be general, do often
yield and give place to those which be but singular, ordinary to
extraordinary, internal to external; yea, and natural to such as be but
civil and positive, though by ordinary course it be clean contrary. Which
due pondering of circumstances is of such force, that it interprets
offentimes the generality of some laws of God, and declares in some
especial cases the reasons of them to cease, though they themselves in
generality or in Abstracto (as others do speak) are immutable. For though the
law of God be general, that he which sheddeth man's blood, his blood shall be
shed by man; and that we should do no murder: yet is not the magistrate or
executioner of justice upon malefactors, nor they which in their own just and
necessary defense, or by chance-medlie and misaduenture do happen to kill
another, guilty of the breach hereof, or to be punished with penalty of
death. And therefore upon these and such like circumstances, God himself did
dispense with their life, and appointed unto them certain cities of refuge, as
sanctuaries to fly unto for their safeguard. So did he by Moses his servant
dispense for the hardness of their hearts with the law of th^indissoluble knot of
marriage. And though by the law of God and of nations, all contrectation of
another man's goods without the owners consent be theft: yet is this matter so
qualified and abridged (not unlawfully) with us in England, that an apprentice
or servant, which carries and imbezeleth away his masters goods and wares
remaining in his custody, and under a certain value, shall not be holden as a
thief, or punished as a fellon. And it is evident, that exceptions do abridge
and limit the generality of rules, the common law of the land does restrain
and interpret the Maxims in that law, and the statutes and acts of parliament
do cut off the common law. But let us pass from those things, which in
generality being forbidden, have yet their exceptions, and upon the
concurrence of some circumstances, are exempted from the reasons and
generality of such laws. Touching his Antecedent, which is; that The reasons
of prohibiting pluralities, are drawn from the law of nature and of God: which
hereby he proves, because they were forbidden For avoiding of covetousness,
ambition, theft, murder of souls, dissolution, and for reteining of
comeliness and decency in the church, it has been partly spoken unto, in
the beginning of the examination of this treatise. Further, it is to be
remembered, that if these inconveniences do but (...), and for the most part
follow the enioyeng of mo benefices by one man; or be but Causae (...), or
impulsive unto that prohibition for the surer avoiding of such danger: then
cannot any sound reason be grounded upon them, to prohibit mo benefices to be
retained by one man: both because a good man may use that thing well, which
might be an occasion of sliding unto some other, not so well stayed: and also,
for that the law may remain, where the impulsive cause thereof cease; and of
the contrary such cause may be of force, when the law is abrogated. But if he
will make them necessary and actual effects, arising as of a formal or
efficient cause, from the reteining of mo benefices, and presume necessarily
that all these must needs possess him that inioyeth them: then should this
fall out to be so, either by reason of the quantity of the stipend and
liuelihood arising of them, by the quantity of ground and content of both the
parishes, by the number of the parishioners of both, or by the dividing of the
auditorie, whom at several times the minister is to instruct. If the
quantity of the living and revenue do so necessarily inf^ct a man with these
vices and enormities; then should he have set down what ought to be the just
measure and standard of every ministers yeerelie revenue, which he may not
come short of, least he want sufficiency of maintenance: nor any way pass
or exceed, least he fall of necessity into these damnable vices. But if there
be such a tax, what may be said then of such, as albeit they have two
benefices, are yet far under a mediocritie: and which if they might have six
mo, of such livings as they have, should not yet reach unto the value of some
one benefice? Shall we say, he which has but one such great one, is free from
this danger; and he which has two, though never so little ones, shall be
caught with ambition for aspiring to such an high honor, and be touched with
covetousness by the great temptation of such notable revenues, as peradventure
will not make his pot sees twice in a week? Naie if these sins must
necessarily take hold of him, that has even two of the fattest in England, by
reason of the quantity of the revenue of them: and if the rest of his reasons
be also in this point good and effectual, then shall the like stint of living,
in all men, as well lay as ecclesiastical, be simply condemned, as being
against the law of God and of nature, for fear of necessary staining of them
with ambition, covetousness, theft, murder, dissoluteness, and breach of order.
But if the quantity of ground, or number of the parishioners to be instructed
be the efficient or formal cause of producing necessarily such foul effects:
then should he likewise have cast out his model of ground, and proportion of
every flock, which may not be exceeded: and should have showed us, how far
the large parishes which we have in sundry places, ought to be shred off,
lopped, pared, and thereby reduced to the Comelines and decency which he
fansieth. And also how this devise may stand with theirs and his own
platform, which would have diverse parishes united into one. And likewise, why
one may not have two parishes by the name of two, as some (by law thereunto
allowed) have at this time: as well as by the new guise and devise, to allow
the same man three or four parishes in deed, but united together and called
but one. For the Abstractor makes no difference in this treatise, whether the
benefices do join together, or be disioined by any distance, for he
indefinitlie does condemn the having of mo benefices than one, howsoever they
be situat. And hereupon it would follow that it is more meet, that all the
parishioners (though in the foul and short days of winter, how old and crasie
soever they be) of three or four parishes, as they be now distinguished,
should take the pains to assemble themsolues into one place to hear their
minister, rather than he should come unto them, and teach them at home in their
parish churches, as they now do lie in seueraltie. But if the dividing of his
auditorie, and teaching them at sundry times, be the very efficient or
formal cause of this heap of enormities, and the only thing which misliketh
him: then truly (besides that it can not be proved or yet imagined, how the
division of a man's auditorie should make the minister guilty of such crimes)
he must also likewise condemn those which do teach and instruct several
families at home and apart, from the rest of the body of that congregation.
Also we must hereby disallow all chapels of ease whersoeuer, some of which (as
I have credibly heard) are in some places 6. 7. or eight miles distant from
their parish church. And by the like reason, if all dividing of a man's
auditorie be so unlawful, it will follow that the minister is much to be
blamed, which teaches not all his parish at one time, though in deed
necessary occasions of business falling out do draw sometimes one, and
sometimes another into other places abroad, and do deteine those which be
servants very often at home, whereby it is not possible to teach them all at
once. And therefore we may conclude safely, that the having of mo benefices
does not formallie or efficientlie infer any of those faults which the
Abstractor, by the misunderstanding of the canon law, would needs enforce: and
that thereupon the Antecedent of his reason is to be denied. And yet further,
these reasons taken (as he says) from the law of God, whereupon the prohibition
of pluralities is grounded, and those second causes of one man's enioieng the
stipends of many, of his inability to discharge many charges, of the
hinderance of other from doing good in the church, being causes (as he
affirms untruly) of nature, are not simply and absolutely alleged by the
law (as may appear by the discourse before) as things incident to any enioieng
of mo benefices: but only then, when as the party which so reteineth them,
is not qualified sufficientlic, nor dispensed with thereunto, according as law
requires. And therefore his collection is a fond Paralogisme (...), by taking
that as simply and indistinctlie spoken, which is limited and restreined
only unto certain offenders of law in that behalf. And he might with as
great probability gather, because coining is by law forbidden as high treason,
that those who by authority are thereunto appointed, do break that law. Or
because such who seize into their hands fellons goods, or wreckes happening in
their lordships, are unjust men, and punishable for taking that, which
belongs only to her Majesty: that those therefore are also wrong-dooers,
who enjoy the same by special grant or privilege from her Highness or her
predecessors, in reward of theirs or their predecessors good service. But the
Abstractor in effect here confesses, that all these great crimes in the canon
law, were but objected against such as retained mo Benefices without
dispensation: and therefore by the perfection that is required in us, he would
threap kindness of us, that for us to enjoy more than one benefice by
dispensation, is To defend all those horrible sins and impieties as tolerable
by dispensation. In which respect he asks vainelie, whether A dispensation
from a Pope, or an Archbishop, can make theft no theft? etc. Wherein though it
please him to join (in the poisoned cankerdnesse of his malicious stomach) the
pope and the Archbishop together, who is (I dare sat) as far (and that is far
enough) from popery, as the pope himself, either yet the Abstractor are from
christian modesty and charity. Yet if he had but common sense (which now is
drowned in malice) he might have remembered, that a dispensation does not make
a thing which is simply unlawful, to be thereby lawful; but declares the
rigor of some general positive law weied with all particular circumstances,
and the reason thereof upon especial grounds (considerable in that case and at
that time) to cease, or else worthy to be released, and to leese his force, as
being in such a case without the meaning of the law. And yet it is showed
before, that the enormities which he speaks of, are not by law attributed to
the having of mo benefices simply, but when they are enioted contrary to law:
nor even then as effects necessarily proceeding from pluralities, as from an
efficient or formal cause, but as faults which may be presumed to possess
those men, which will be their own caruers and judges, for the inuading of
many benefices, without authority. Yea, and if dispensation for plurality
were such, as being strictly so called, does release the rigor and extremity
of the law positive upon favor only, and not for just causes or equity: yet
might the Arg. l. sed e^s^ lege. contulit ff. de petit. haered. l. 1.. and
magis. verb. prodeg. ff. si quid in fraud. pat. l. quia autem. 1. ff quae in
fraude^ cred. iuncta. l. 1. ff. de constit. princip.
prince, or those to whom the law has committed such full authority, as in
diverse cases besides, with a good conscience dispense in it, even as well as
they may give away their own goods, seeing this law is undoubtedly meerelie
positive. Like as the prince may without offense to God, pardon (after the
fault committed) the life of a traitor or fellon upon mere grace and bounty,
because the penalty discendeth from law positive, though he can not dispense
without sin to God, that in time to come, a man may commit treason or
fellonie, because they are forbidden by the law of God. And such pardon he may
lawfully grant (even without any cause) to one, and deny to another, as
freely as he may create knights, endenize, ff. and C. de natal. restit. and in
Auth. quibus modi^ nature. efficiantur^ legitimi.
legitimate, and restore to blood whom he thinks good, and refuse to impart
the like grace and favor to other. And this, if it be for a matter past, is by
some termed an Indulgence or pardon; if for a benefit to come, a Dispensation;
and for a present pleasure or gratification, is called a Privilege. There may be
also good reason of granting these, when as for some considerations it is
profitable to grant such exemptions, besides the general ordinary course and
reason of the law. For it may so fall out, that the saving of some condenmed
man's life, or granting of some immunitie, may no less benefit the commonweal
than to keep a rigorous hand upon the observation of the strict points of the
general law may do harm. For (...) must be seasoned and sweetened with
(...), and the exact rigor of law must sometimes be moderated with with least
it degenerat into inturie and tyranny. For it is sure that as no general rule
or definition can be given in law, which in application to particular matters,
shall not fail and be limited with his exceptions: so can there no general
rule of right or law be framed, which in application to all times, places and
persons (who^ it may concern) shall not necessarily require some privileges,
exemptions, dispensations, and immunities, either in regard of their
excellency and well deserving; or in respect of their imbecillitie and
weakness, or some such like circumstance or other. In which respect we are also
taught by Aristotle, and other wise philosophers and Politicians, that in all
laws and administration of justice; we are partly to observe proportion
Arythmeticall, consisting in recompensing an equal thing with his equal,
which is a rule in trades, negotiation and traffike betwixt man and man: and
partly the proportion Geometrical, which is conversant in distribution of
honors or rewards, and in inflicting of punishments, and therefore yields
forth an inequality in both, according as the persons deserts are different
and unequal. Whereby also we see a common soldiors reward to be less than the
Lieutenants or Generals, and a Noblemans death not to be so rigorouslic
executed, as the common sort justly are put unto. And this strict and proper
acception of a dispensation, which is by releasing and exempting of a man upon
favor, clemency, or mercy only, from the severity of the law, the bond
thereof still remaining, is called A dispensation of grace, and may upon mere
bounty of him that is so authorized, be granted to some, and denied to other
some, as it shall please him (even without further cause) so long as the law is
but mere positive. But it has no place at all in the first Did. 5. in
princip.. and naturalia. just. de iure n^tur.
principles of the law of nature, nor in the commandments of the Decalog,
necessarily and immediately Romans 1.
derived from the rules of the light of nature. Which thing because the pope
most insolentlie took upon him to do, he is therefore justly by all which
do aright fear God, abhorred as Antichrist, which in the Luciferian pride of
his heart, has hereby climed into the throne of God, and does arrogate to
himself to loose the consciences of those whom God has tied by his law, and
to bind that (as by a divine law) which God himself has set at liberty,
which Bernard. li. 3. de considerat. ad Eugenium.
Bernard calls a dissipation rather than a dispensatio^. Which dispensations
of his, though some schoolmen, and of our late more manerlie papists do
otherwise qualify in words, and partly deny such matters which he has
dispensed with, to be of the law of nature, when as nevertheless no color can
be laid, but that they are of the prohibitiue moral law of God: yet his
parasites the canonists, who both knew his mind, and his practice herein
sufficiently well, and were never (that I could read) found fault with for
their over broad speeches about this matter, do fully declare what
blasphemous authority he challenged. They say that the law Abb. ca. fin. Ext.
de consuetud.
of nature upon cause may be taken away: Abb. c. non est Ext. de voto.
that the pope upon cause may dispense with the law of God; and Lud. Goza.
cons. 51. Ignorance of the Abstractor.
that the dispensing with the law of God is proper to the Bishop of Rome. Yet
the Abstractor shows here his great skill, when he pretends that the
canonists and popes chapleins do attribute unto him authority to dispense in
such matters, by reason of Merum imperium, a sovereign and supreme power in
him, which indeed is nothing but Ius gladij, the power over the life of men,
which the ordinances of France do call Haute justice. There is another kind of
Dispensation called of Justice: which is, when upon some especial
circumstances, the reason and rigor of the general law is by him which has
authority, declared in some case to cease, and the strictness of the words of
the law therein not to bind or to have place, and that for avoiding of injury
and inconvenience. And this is also an allaie of extremity of law by an
equity, which before I spoke of, and which the magistrate in justice cannot
deny; and is in that respect called A dispensation of justice, as it were an
interpretation or declaration of the true meaning of the law Iuxta aequum and
bonum. For a Thom. 2. 2. q. 88. art. 10.
law is established with regard to that which for the most part is good: and
because it happens in some cases not to be good, it was meet there should be
some to declare and determine, that in such a case it was not of necessity to
be kept. Likewise in this sense of dispensation, the same author as he is Dom.
Sotus de just. and iure. li. 1. q. 7. art. 3.
alleged, does define that it is, Commensuratio communis ad singula, an
admesurement or attemperance of a general unto his particular or singular
circumstances, or as some do read it, an attemperance of reason. For he
rightly may be said L sin. C. de legib. c. cum venissent. Ext. de iudicijs.
to interpret law, which declares whether the matter in hand is included in
the said law or no. An example hereof, where Gods law is in this sort
interpreted and declared not to have place, even by the positive laws of men,
may be taken from the commandment of God, that we shall no^ kill: which is
truly declared not to have L. vt vim. ff. de just. and iure.
place, where in necessary defense of our selves, we are driven to kill,
rather than be killed unjustly. In the law of nature, the general and most
usual reason requires, that upon request made, I should redeliuer that which
in trust you have recommended to my custody: yet some most just reasons and
considerations may L. bona fides ff depositi. Plato li. 1. Polit.
fall out, why this should be denied at some time. And therefore Offic. li. 3.
Tullie speaking hereof says, that Many things which naturally are honest,
upon some occasions are dishonest. In most countries they have a positive law,
that a man should not carry out of the realm any money, armor, or weapons:
yet such occasions and urgent causes may happen, that in justice a man may not
be denied to do this, whom the prince will have to travel into some dangerous
country. And of this sort of dispensations (or declarations of the meaning of
law) or mixed of them both, are all such, which the Archbishop of Canturburie by
act of parliament is authorized to pass, as may appear, in that he is limited
only to those dispensations, which be not against the word of God or laws of
the land, and for the most part also to those which usually have been granted:
and in that, the qualities of the persons also, to whom in some cases he is to
grant it, are expressed: and lastly, because if he do deny to dispense with
him which is qualified thereunto, and has need of a dispensation, without a
sufficient cause, and do so persist; this authority may be derived by that
act of parliament unto others. So that we see, in effect he is only made a
judge herein, to examine and wey the inward qualities and sufficiency of the
suter for the dispensation, whom if he find fit, and a good cause in equity to
warrant it, he cannot in justice put him off, but must grant the dispensation
unto him. And that none of such dispensations, faculties, or immunities, which
are usually passed according to law by the Archbishop of Canturburie, are of
that sort, which be either by the law of God forbidden, or yet such as may not
have a necessary use, so that without many inconveniences they cannot wholly
be abolished, may appear to the wise, who can consider of their several uses
upon rehearsal only of them: and shall be defended (God willing) by learning
and sound reason so to be, against the other sort, which are factuoustie bent
against them. As a benefice In commendam to a Bishop, who has a slender
maintenance by his Bishoprike, a trialitie for a prebend or dignity, being no
cure of souls by statute with two benefices having cure of souls; or a
plurality for two such benefices, to such as excel the common sort in Gods
good gifts. For take away inequality or reward, and no place will be lest to
endeavor for any excellency in learning of one above another, in very short
time. A legitimation of him to be preferred to holy o^ders, who was borne out
of lawful matrimony, or before espousals; or for a man to succeed his father
in a benefice, either in respect of the great and excellent gifts in them, or
upon some other weighty considerations. A dispensation for one above
eighteen, and not xxiij. to retain a prebend being without cure of souls,
though he cannot be assumed to be a deacon. A dispensation for some notable man
employed in her Majesty's service at home or abroad, to retain for his better
maintenance, a dignity ecclesiastical, or a prebend of like nature, without
his residence in that church, or entering into orders, which is not fit to be
made general to all, which have not like occasions. The dispensation for non
residence is very sildome or never granted: yet the recovery of a man's
health, mortal enmity of some in his parish against him, emploiment in some
necessary scruice or public calling, being of as great or greater utility to
the church and commonwealth, may be sufficient inducements in equity to grant
it, for a time. The dispensation of Perinde valere may have a necessary use,
where no right is grown to another person, for a man that has incurred
ecclesiastical censures, or is made incapable by law, ^ither to retain or
receine an ecclesiastical benefice, as by misaduenture occasioning the death
of a man, violating the interdiction, suspension, or excommunication of the
church unadvisedly, or by succeeding his father in a benefice, and such like a
number. In like manner many necessary occasions may happen, why a man should
be licenced to be ordained at some other Bishops hands, than where he either
dwells or was borne, or to be ordered deacon and minister both at one time,
or to solemnize matrimony, though the banes have not been thrice publikelie
asked in the church, or to eat flesh on days appointed by politic
constitutions for fish days, or to abolish the infamy or irregularitie of
some profitable man in the church, grown by law against him, upon ignorance,
simplicity, or want of due consideration, without wilful contempt. Besides
this, the statute of 25. H. 8. does not alone endow the Archbishop with
dispensing, but to grant rescripts in diverse needful cases: namely, for
creation of public notaries, and to grant tuitories for the lawful and
indifferent hearing of such, as are by injury (upon some great displeasure
conceived) too rigorously and violently handled and sought, by an inferior
Ordinary. But it may perhaps be said, that if to ground such a Dispensation of
justice, a just cause be required; then the reason of the law in that case
cease, and thereby, the law also cease therein, so that a dispensation is
not needful. To which I answer, that albeit the reason of the law do cease
and take no place in that particular action, yet in so much that the reason
cease not in general, nor in most usual actions, Cle. ad nostr. de heret.
c. and si Christus, Ext. de iureiurando.
therefore the law cannot be said to cease, but must have some (for avoiding
of inconvenience) to declare such particular cases to be out of the general
reason and meaning of the law, which in other points shall remain in his
profitable force still. For such laws as have a continual reason, and whose
end is common and universal, do not cease, though in some special case,
their intended end does not hold. And therefore, though fasts are commanded
for the bridling of our untamed flesh, yet Cle. ad nostr. d. Thom. quod l. 19.
ar. 15.
such also in whom this reason holds not, shall be tied by the generality
of this law, till a magistrate thereunto authorized, shall declare him to be
out of the reason and reach of this law. But it is Io. a Medi^a de con^ract. q.
14.
not so in those laws, whose reason is but directed to some particular end
only, as is the law of brotherly correction, which alonelie tending to his
reformation, does wholly cease (without any further dispensation) where no
amendment can be hoped for, and the party is become incorrigible. So that to
his question I answer, that no earthly authority whatsoever, may or can by
Dispensation or otherwise, make that which is theft, no theft, or dispense with
any other law of God, or primarie law of nature, in such sort; as that they
should loose, which he has bound: because the law of God contains those
Thom. 1. 2. q 100. ar^. 8.
things which are determined by GOD himself, not only in a general form of
justice, but also in particular actions, and therefore can be, by none
dispensed with by relaxation of the bond thereof, but onclie by himself. And
yet those c. maiores. Ext. de baptismo c. per venerabilem Ext. qui fi^^ sunt
legit.
that be in authority, may declare and interpret the law of God and of nature.
As that law of God and of nature, which says, Thou shall not stealc, is and
lawfully may be, by godly positive laws declared not Si quis prop.
necessitatem, Ext. de furtis.
to reach or extend unto him, which being compelled by extreme hunger, does
take away another man's goods only to eat, and to preserve his life thereby.
These things I have made bold upon presumed patience thus to enlarge, for the
better evidence of the Abstractors great malice, but slender skill: and to give
light both to that which has been before spoken, and to that also which upon
sundry occasions is yet to be delivered, as being loath often to be forced to
speak of one matter, not opened aforehand. But now he tells us Of a law of
Antichrist, which Christians must impugn by mainteining the law of Undutic^u^
and irreverent speeches.
Christ against it. If he speak thus (as it must needs be taken) of that law,
which in some cases allows a man to retain mo benefices, which in this
treatise he seeks to prove an Unlawful law, and here (as it seems)
calls the law of Antichrist: truly for her Majesty's sake, and the whole
parliament which revived it, being first made in the days of that renowned
Prince king Henry, after he had abandoned the usurped Komish power, and
afterward practiced in the reign of the virtuous king Edward: it might have
pleased him to have given it a more mild and a better term. But these
tempestuous and furious melancholic spirits, whom Gualter calls the
Donatists of our time, do esteem no benefits received at her Majesty's hands
worth gramercie, (seeing they thus make her Highness laws the Laws of
antichrist) only because they cannot be suffered to establish a sovereign
and popelike church-gouernment in every parish, which may tyrannize over the
Prince her self, without controllement. The places which he here quoteth
apart, as though they served to the confirmation of the several parts of his
talk, do indeed tend all one way, to show the lawless and unbounded
authority, which is challenged by the pope. Which speeches, though it be true
that by some canonists they are attributed unto him; yet none of these three
glosses do speak expreslie either of his Absolute power on earth, or of
making something of nothing, or of finne to be no finne. Therefore this is a
sin (as the old proverb says) thus to lie of the devil, or of his eldest
son the pope. Yea, the last of the three, rather restreineth that authority
which the other do attribute unto him, and sets down; that In vows he is
said not to dispense, but to declare and interpret: because it is thus
commanded by scripture, Vow and perform your vows to God. The second place is
wrong quoted, for it ought to have been: Glossa in verbo fiat c. lector did.
34. That which is here unto annexed, That a privilege or private law must have
all the properties of a general law, and that a dispensation is but a fiction
in law, is least by him as void of proof, as it is of it self void of truth:
for it is not possible that every privilege or Dispensation of grace only,
should tend to the benefit of the whole commonwealth, Thom. 1. 2. q. 97. art.
3. and 10. And in c. de multa Ext. de preb.
though a Dispensation of justice may in some sort so tend: or if it be But a
fiction of law, that it should have those adiunds and qualities which are
required in a public law. And Rebuff. in. 61 de dispens. ad p^^ra benefi.
Rebuff. whence indeed he borrowed it, does not say, that the dispensation is
a Fiction of law, but that He which upon cause is dispensed with, shall be
reputed in law as able, lawful and fit, by fiction of law, by reason of his
dispensation. And it is sufficient sometimes to establish a privilege or
dispensation, if an inconvenience be but thereby c. non potest in fide praeb.
in. 6.
avoided, which otherwise would happen, and so if it profit but a very little,
it shall be sustained. The law which he brings out of the L. liberos Cod. de
collationibus.
Code, to prove that It is all one in effect to enjoy a benefit by privilege
or by common right, proves nothing directly, but that such children, whom
the prince has set free from their fathers power, shall not be admitted to
enjoy their parts in their fathers substance, without this collation or putting
as it were so much amongst them all of their own goods in hotch pot, as they
are severally to receive of their fathers: eue^ as well as those children must
do, which were not so emancipate, but by their father himself. The reason of
which decision is, lest the princes favor and grace in freeing some from their
fathers power, should be drawn and extended to the injury and damage of
others. And it might have better been brought in argument, to prove that he
which enjoys a benefice by dispensation, as to the effect of observing
public laws (incident to be practiced in his ministry) is no more free than
others. Yet I will admit, that by way of argument it may also prove the
effect of that, which is done by privilege, and of that which is done by common
right sometime to be alike: but hereof or by the former, it will not follow,
that a privilege or dispensation must have all the necessary adjuncts of a
general law, which is his purpose. And it is worth the observing, that
because Rebuff. has an allegation out of Decius, immediately following the
place by him alleged, he quoted therefore in his margin Dec. l. liberos, as
though it were the tenth law of that title. Neither is it true that every
public law must necessary Tend to the honor of God, and to the peace and
safety of the realm: for there are many laws, which are referred and do
tend to the benefit and profit of the commonweal, as for assise of bread and
ale and other victuals, for currieng of leather, and true making of clothes,
etc: which are not referred either to the advancement of the honor of God, or
safety of the realm, otherwise than as all particular lawful actions,
whatsoever of any man, may be referred to them.

10. Section. Page 120. 121, 122, 123, 124.
HEre this man full of singularity, yet but a single soled singular man, will
show (if he can) how Plurality men do beguile themselves with an evident and
palpable fallacy, in handling whereof he moileth and labors, to roll up
Sisyphus stone, which still tumbleth down upon himself again: and like him
whom the old Satyr would not devil with, he blows both hot and cold,
affirming that which before he had denied; yet plaieth otherwise, as much upon
the advantage, as so bad a defense had need of. For to give unto his discourse
some luster and color of probability, he will not use the name of Parishes
but of Churches: and because some thing incident to this disputation, may be
spoken of establishing, which can not be verified of distinguishing churches;
and of uniting, which can not be taking away, he speaks of these
copulatiuelie, and so makes a fallacy A pluribus interrogationibus vt vna.
The argument which he frames for plurality men, because they (forsooth) could
not do it skilfullie, and after does skirmish with, it will not be amiss to
set down, together with his forces bsed against it: Whatsoever is established
(faith he) by man alone, the same may be taken away, and united by man alone:
But churches (that is to say) congregations of the Lords people; pastors of
these assemblies, and the livings for the pastors of these assemblies, were
established and distinguished by man alone: Therefore churches, pastors, and
livings for pastors, may be taken away, and united by man alone. The Minor
hereof he denies as false upon the equivocation of the word churches, which
has in all three acceptions: whereof two he says do make the said
proposition false. The first signification of that word with him, is,
Congregations and assemblies of people, which hereby he proves, not To be
established and distinguished by man alone, because the Lord has willed all
his people to gather and assemble themselves together, to th^intent they should
call upon his name; and because it is impossible for all the people to An absurd
reasoning.
be assembled into one place, or to hear one man's voice. This reason may serve
to prove, that God establishes assemblies, and that there must of necessary
consequence be distinction and division of assemblies: but it can not be racked
to give any testimony, that either the manner thereof, the number of people,
or the quantity of ground is prescribed, and as it were trodden out by God,
which is the point of the issue. Yea, the Page 124.
Abstractor himself confesses, that Where the congregation is too great, it
is lawful to make it less, and where it is too little, to make it greater:
and wishes Page 122.
this is reformed, which may not be done, (as he himself before reasons) if
this distination of assemblies which we have, had been made by God. And he
might as well gather, because God has appointed a distinction in propriety of
lands and goods to be retained amongst men, that therefore God has
distinguished, butted, bounded, and meared out every manors and lands as they
lie in seueralitie from others, and has likewise made this allotment and
proportion of goods which every several man enioieth. And then may we blot
out of the register, the writ De perambulatione facienda, and condemn all
their endeavors, which by honest means seek the increase of their substance.
And yet notwithstanding this his loose reasoning, he descends boldly from
hence to an uncharitable and Pharisaicall inuectiue, (which is an usual
vsemaking of their general doctrines) condemning all plurality men, for
Little preaching, for wearines of well doing, and respect to grease themselves
with the fat of the peoples labor. It is well he leaves unto them some
preaching, whereas his clients (for the most part) do but speak; (for so they
themselves do term it not improperly:) and some well doing: which some like
himself can never be weary of, because they use well doing and well
speaking, both in one measure. But his saints of his own canonizing, may not in
any case be touched with fatting their purses with other men's labors: yea,
though they should lay their money to usury, which is holden with some of them
scarce for a Peccadillo: or though they should, besides the revenues and fruits
of their livings allotted to them, have a Comorth and contribution yearly made
for them, which serves for a fee to hire them, to speak nothing unto their
good masters and dames, but Placentia: which is best compassed with all such
as have Itching ears, by bold brazen inuectiues, against authority and
against the present state of the church, and by keeping deep silence of all
usury, circumuention, engrossing, false wares, enclosures of commons,
monopolies, extortions and oppressions: for these be biles, which may not de
handled, if they mind to have any more of their custom. But the Abstractor
lets also this hold go, because it is too slipperie, and does guess that by
churches in the former reason, we will understand livings of churches, which he
inforceth not to have been established and distinguished by man alone, because
God has ordained that they which preach the gospel, should live of the
gospel. Wherein lurketh a double fallacy, first upon ioining by a copulative,
both establishing and distinguishing in one yoke together: whereas though A
fallacy, a pluribus interrog. vt vna.
God did thereby establish, that pastors should have livings, yet did he not
distinguish them how they should be used in seueralties one from another.
Secondly, in that he covertly intends quantities, rates, and proportions of
several livings to have been by God established, because he ordained that his
ministers should have maintenance, albeit there be great difference betwixt
living and quantity of living: for Rebuff. Whence he borrowed it, applies not
the place of S. Paul as he does, but to prove, that the benefit is given for
the duty. But if he meant not to implie thus much, then has he the less
color a great deal against pluralities: for he that does provide two
several benefices for them, where one is not sufficient, does more fully
satisfy the ordinance of God, to make them thus more able To live of the
gospel. Yea, and that it was his meaning to prove, that livings for ministers
were distinguished by God (though he deliver it but fearefullie and
inconstantlie, as commonly such do which openly avouch an untruth known
even to their own conscience,) these his Page 121.
words do make it manifest: Many livings (says he) appointed by the Lord
himself for many pastors, over many congregations, should not be taken from
many, and given to one. To which end also is that example, which he brings
concerning the division of the promised land of Canaan. Which most gross
absurdity and paradox, never avouched by any either old or late writer (I
think) till this melancholic snapstraw peeped out by owle-light; may be
cleerelie refelled even by his own words, wroong out from him by the force of
truth: to wit, Ibid.
That livings of churches and parishes are distinguished by man, and therefore
may be united by man, in some sense may be true. It is lawful for man to take
away, and to unite churches and livings. For if this be lawful, then has not
God, whose ordinance must be inviolable, either established any tax and
certain quantity of a ministers living, or yet distinguished and severed the
livings of churches one from another. But in case God has allotted a certain
rate of living for a minister, it were well it might be made manifest unto us
hereafter by the Abscractor, or by some other deep Cabalist, with sound
proofs annexed to strengthen it. Yet he takes this as very sufficiently
proved to be Gods ordinance, and therefore in effect says; It is no more
lawful now to give unto one minister that living which was appointed to
diverse, than it had been for Joshua to have altered that division of the land
of Canaan, which the Lord had commanded by Moses. But when he or any man else
can prove, that God has appointed and distinguished out the bounds and limits
of parishes, and the rates of church-liuings, as he expreslie bounded the
tribes in the land of Canaan, then will I say the comparison is equal: yet
seeing it was of temporal lands, it would more fitly serve for limits of
manors and lordships, than of parishes. But the comparison is far unlike: for
he will not deny (I hope) but that many lay fees and temporal lordships may
be possessed by some one, which yet he denies to ecclesiastical men, though
perhaps their desert and contribution to the public charges of the realm be
as great as theirs, who enjoy in true value ten times as much revenue. And yet
every several man's inheritance was not divided by Moses or Joshua, but the
Lord prescribed the bounds of the tribes, and the lot decided the rest. Nor yet
was the distribution so settled, but that one of the same tribe might enjoy by
purchase another man's possession till the year of Iubile: and diverse men's
inheritances might by descent be cast unto the next in blood. And his ignorance
or negligence is herein more palpable than he can prove to be in the
Pluralists fallacy, in that he says, Moses Number. 33. verse. 54.
gave unto some more and to some less, whereas in deed it was divided by lot.
Also Deuteronomy. 34.
Moses never came over Jordan, but did only take a view of the land a far off
from the mounteine of Nebum. Neither was he or Joshua appointed Decempedae, or
the very diuiders of it, but Number. 34. verse. 17. and deinceps.
others from the Lord were thereunto nominated. Insomuch that it is expreslie
set Joshua. 13. verse. 7and8.
down, that Moses made no distribution, but upon the east side of Jordan to
the tribe of Ruben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh: and all the Joshua.
14. 15. and deinceps.
rest of the land was divided only by the direction of Joshua: howbeit upon
the distribution of this land, so skilfullie (as you see) by him handled, he
takes occasion by similitude of a botching tailor, and a pilfering companion,
to make himself merry, rather than to patch up any good reason. For his
resemblance is so far from show of likelihood, that it well becomes such a
deep reasoner. For the theft of Caius can not any way prove, that Seius
garment is too long wasted: and therefore his reason smells of the shopboord
more than of the deske. But his wish hereupon is, whereas Some (according to
his audit-booke) have two or three thousand pounds, and some never a whit: that
is, (ass he fool wisely does interpret) scarce twenty nobles by year,
that there might be set down a better equality. Truly, if he had wished by
some good means a competencie of living for every minister, it had been a
good and godly wish: but to desire an equality, where the duties and gifts
required are so different; it is contrary to the rule of justice, which In
mandandis honoribus, and decernendis poenis, does follow the proportion
Geometrical, and not his proposition Anabaptisticall (I should say)
proportion Arythmeticall. For with as good reason he might enforce an equality
of livings in temporal men, as in ecclesiastical: considering both the
excellency of the subject and matter, whereabout the ecclesiastical are
conversant, and also as great inequality of one above another, and difference
of learning, and all other Gods good gifts to be showed in the governing and
instructing of the people in matter of religion, as may be found by any
possibility in the dexterity of one man more than of another in managing by
counsel, or defending by prowess the civil affairs and frontiers of a
commonwealth. Which thing, the slender sparks of the light of nature
remaining, did teach even unto the Gentiles: who were content to advance their
religious persons amongst them unto singular honor, to respect them with large
and bountiful maintenance, and to have their hests and advise in notable
recommendation. The Minor of his own syllogism being the very contradictorie
of the Minor before propounded by way of objection, he seeks yet better to
underprop (as he had need) not against such only, as are Disposed to cavil,
but those also that must deny as untrue, both his Minor, the Antecedent, and
also Consecution, whereby he would prove it. For he would prove Churches to
be established and distinguished by the Lord himself, because Though the
limits of parishes be bordered by man, and that a certain number of people,
called to make one congregation, and to hear at one time, in one place, one
certain pastor, be at the rule and disposition of man: yet that these things
should be thus done, is the special commandment of the Lord. As if he should
say, Though it be so, yet it is not so. For how does this follow? God has
commanded Churches to be established and distinguished, Ergo he did establish
and distinguish them: more than these like reasons? God commanded there should
be places comely and decent for holy assemblies, Ergo he himself built all
our fair churches. Or, God commanded every man to get his living by the sweat
of his own brows, Ergo God gets every man's living by the sweat of his
own brows. Yet would I also gladly learn, where this Special commandment
unto men, for the Bordering out of their parishes, and for a certain number of
people to be called to hear one certain pastor, may be found? But I will take
that which he here yields and prove thereby (contrary to his intent) that
the law of man may yield several congregations unto one pastor: Whosoever has
the rule and disposition of bordering out parishes, of calling a certain
number of people to hear at one time, in one place, one certain pastor, and
may lawfully take away and unite churches and livings where they be too
little, and divide them where they be too great: he may as lawfully assign
the like or greater number of people to hear one man at several times, and in
several places: (which is that which is called plurality) because of the
party of reason, Quia contrariorum eadem est scientia: But man * (as the
Abstractor here confesses) has the rule and Page 123. 124.
disposition hereof, and may lawfully do the one: Therefore man may lawfully
do the other, and consequently grant a plurality. But he seems to reason
against this, which he saw must needs follow of his own assertion, by an
allusion from a natural body, in which it were monstrous to have one head set
upon two bodies, and that therefore it is as unfitting a thing in a politic
body, and consequently for one sheepeheard to have many flocks. But if this
be the only fault, then let him call both the flocks but one, as to this
intent and purpose: yet none can be ignorant, how slender reasons such
allusions be, and what insinite absurdities would follow, if we should urge a
conformity in all points betwixt a natural and a politic body. For then
were it also a monstrous thing, for one king to rule over two several and
distinguished kingdoms: and when the king (who is the head) dies, the
commonwealth also should decaie withal. But that the distinction of parishes
is indeed only of the mere positive law of man, besides that which the
Abstractor himself peeldeth, whose confession must needs be strong against
himself: it may appear by Platina, who sets down in what Bishop of Rome
his time, they were first distinguished. And therefore a famous Canonist Abb.
inrub. de Paroch.
says: Though Bishoprikes and provinces were divided before Christ's time, yet
parishes were afterward divided: So that upon good Gl. in. c. 1. di. 10. and in
c. m^lli did. 93. Abb. in c. audientia^ Ext. de eccles. aedific. Card. c.
auaritie. in find praeb.
cause, and with consent required, one parish may lawfully be divided into two
parishes by the Bishop. And Rebuff. who has furnished out our author with all
his stuff of this treatise, and therefore may not be by him refused, being by
himself produced a witness, tells us: that although it be a part of the law
of nature and of God, to have a living allotted for the ministry and doing
of the office, yet 13. q. 1. c. 1. Panor. in c. olim Ext. de consuetud.
Benefices are brought in by law positive, and therefore about them
dispensations are tolerable. And the gloss Gl. in verbo aut in electa c. nec.
monerus. 10. q. 3.
says, that diocesses or parishes were distinguished by Dionysius. Where upon
in like manner may be gathered, that it is lawful (upon just cause especially,
and the utility of the church so requiring) to permit unto one sufficient man
two several parishes: because otherwise they were not able perhaps severally
to maintain a man of quality: and for the scarsitie of such men in regard of
the several parishes in England, they should be but slenderly furnished
though with two, yet both perhaps more insufficient men by many degrees.

11. Section. Page 124, 125.
IN this section he labors to overthrow the dispensations for mo benefices,
by the definition of a dispensation. Which is not auailable, being done by any
besides Him that has authority: which the Archbishop of Canturburie (he
says) cannot have, though the act of parliament have so enabled him: because he
Being a man, may not dispense with the positive laws of man against
pluralities, which are all grounded either upon the law of nature, or upon the
law of God: and therefore the one must be as immutable as the other. In effect
thus much, neither the makers of the act being men could yeed, nor he receive
any such authority. But what is this else, but plainly to derogate all
authority from the parliament, and from all other states whomesoeuer of
establishing any laws? For it is certain, there is no good law can be
devised, being lawful to be observed, that has not his ground (either near
or far off) from the law of God and of nature. And if hereupon it might be
gathered, that they which are grounded and derived from thence are subject no
more to mutabilitie than the laws of God: then should it not be lawful for
his Majesty to take to The Abstractor derogateth from her Majesty's
prerogative, and the common law.
her self felons goods and traitors lands, from the children of the male
factor, for whom he had provided them. For it is the law of God and of nature,
for parents to provide for their children. Upon the commandments against
murder and theft, are these secondarie laws drawn; that he which commits
such offenses, shall suffer the penalty of death. Which penalty
nevertheless, the prince does and may lawfully pardon, because they are but
positive laws, showing in what manner such crimes shall be punished, and are
provided for the benefit of the commonweal to ensue, by cutting away such
unprofitable members, and by terrifieng others thereby from offending. And yet
in some especial case the commonweal may receive more damage and hurt by the
taking away of some men, who may happen in that manner to offend, than it can
receive profit by their death. Upon which or like equanimitie, the people of
Israel importuned and obtained in sort at Saul's hands, the pardon of Ionathas
his son, who had offended the law positive, and might as justly have been
executed, as he was lawfully pardoned. And yet was that law grounded of the
law of God, which under the name of parents, do command us generally to obeie
all our superiors and their laws, not repugning to his everlasting will. The
two last places that are quoted, one out of the gloss, and the other out of
the text, speak no one word of the restraining of the Popes power in
dispensing with the law of nature or of God, for the which they are brought.
Again, it might be answered as before, that the law forbidding pluralities,
does not thereby take away dispensations for them; for if there were no
prohibition, there needed no dispensation: also that those vices which are
forbidden by the law of nature and of God, are no necessary effects of
enioieng a plurality, that such dispensation takes more portion of Justice,
than of Grace, and therefore is not much different from a declaration, that the
general law against pluralities in such a man's case, does or may very well
cease. And lastly, that if these were of the law of God and of nature, yet
they might be declared and interpreted, how far they reach and do bind,
though indeed the bonds of the laws of God and nature remaining, they may not
be (by any but God himself) released. And therefore this reason, that such
authority cannot be yielded to the Archbishop, is many ways easily
ouerblowne by the grounds of that which has been before delivered.

12. Section. Page 125, 126, 127.
HE which in all this treatise goes about to prove Dispensations for many
benefices unlawful, as though either there were no law to warrant them by
canon or statute, does here tell us of certain Defects in the quality of the
person to be dispensed with, which are just causes in law to frustrate and make
void every dispensation. If he had said every such dispensation, it had been
more probable, whereby will follow, if those defects and such like be the
only causes which make void by law a dispensation, then where no such defect
(nor any other by law set down) can be found; that the dispensation shall be
lawful: and so he has, like the evil servant, condemned himself by his own
mouth. For Exceptio firmat regulam in casibus non exceptis, as has been
alleged in the former treatise. And if all this which he speaks here,
concerning the qualities of the person to be dispensed with, and the causes
inducing dispensation were granted: can he thereby gather dispensations for mo
benefices to be unlawful? Truelic he must first presume without proof, and
against all reason, that all or the most of these are neglected in granting
dispensations, before the other will follow. But even here he stands upon an
unsure ground, and delivers that which is not true. For he says that A man
qualified and in all respects capable of a dispensation, may not enjoy the same
without just cause warranted by law. Whereas his own author Rebuff. Rebuff.
de disp. ad plura. nu. 43.
does teach him, that amongst diverse causes to induce a dispensation, the
excellency or prerogative and qualities of the person, as knowledge and
nobility of birth, are of the first and chief causes thereof: not that both
these must necessarily concur and join in every several person, but that
either of them by canon (especially learning) may suffice. In which respect In
c. de multa Ext. de prebend. vlt. notab.
Panormitane says: Note it well, that learned men are matched here with
noblemen or gentlemen by birth. And so the church ought to honor learned
personages not only in word but indeed, as in providing more liberally to
help and relieve them by the churches revenues, than for others not so
learned. And this is the reason hereof, because learning does not only
profit the owner, but also the universal church. For the world cannot be
governed without learned men, as it is to be seen Auth. hibita C. ne filius
pro patre. And another law says, that the universal church requires greatly
learned men for the better governing of it. C. cum ex eo. de elect. in 6. And
the said author in another Panormit. in c. innotuit Ext. de elect in 6. notab.
place plainly decideth, that the prerogative and qualities of the person, is
a sufficient reason whereupon to ground this dispensation. Where the text. c.
innotuit, Ext de elect. says, That for the prerogative of the person, he may
be postulated, it is to be noted that the only excellency of deserts is
sufficient to induce the prince (or him that has authority) to dispense,
although the necessity of the church or evident utility do not concur
therewith. Neither does this Canon say, that all those qualities there
reckoned, must necessarily concur in every dispensation: for then should it
be requisite also, that some about him which dispenses, should have known the
party at school or in the universities. Neither yet does any thing by him
brought in this place, give any pretext or resemblance to disanull a
dispensation for him, in whom these qualities shall not be found, as the
Abstractor gathers, before any such matter be scattered.

13. Section. Page 127, 128, 129.
THe Abstractor cannot enforce upon these words, When reason shall require, a
dispensation may be granted, that therefore not only the qualities requisite,
but some cause besides them must concur: because it is showed before, that the
qualities of the person to be dispensed with, is of it self a cause sufficient
there unto. The next place to this, which he quoteth, is impertinent to this
purpose of dispensation for plurality, and only speaks of a just cause of
commutation of a vow; and so does the other chapter which he says, is so
Plain and evident. For the decision there, is, that For So Much as the cause
whereupon the vow was undertaken, did cease, therefore the vow it self being
the effect, might the more easily cease, and be converted into other godly
exercises: so far is it from proof, that There must be some special cause
known, for the which every dispensation is to be granted, to the which
purpose it is brought. And he having no better proved than you have heard,
that there must be good and just cause of a dispensation; does even as
slenderly show what those causes be.

For the decision of that chapter, which to that end he quoteth, is not so,
that Urgent necessity and evident utility of the church are causes of
granting these dispensations which we speak of: but that for those causes the
pope did tolerate one to continue Archbishop of Capua, which was chosen
thereunto, though his learning were not exquisite, but only competent. The
four examples of dispensations which he lays down grounded upon causes
sufficient, and by him borrowed out of the canon law, cannot by any
possibility prove that which he intends, that no dispensation whatsoever in
any case may be granted, but upon cause; and much less that Urgent necessity
and evident utility, be those causes and the only causes of all
dispensations, (for his own author Rebuff. reckons four causes of this
dispensation.) Or yet that these causes (as he gathers) do signify nothing
else, but The well governing of the souls of the people. But it is not to be
omitted, that the Abstractor here contrary to himself before allows of
dispensations with such laws, whose reasons are grounded upon the law of
nature or of God; yea, even to dispense with that, which is Unlawfully taken,
only by color Contrariety to himself.
of an Unreasonable custom being void in law. First, the refusal to receive
moonks to cure of souls, who (as an ancient father says) had Officium
plangentium, non docentium, were to moorne not to teach, and were in those
days mere lay men, or the refusal of any other lay man whomsoever, is
grounded upon that scripture, Let no man minister but he that is lawfully
called, as was Aaron: and let him not be a young scholar. Yet I must put the
Abstractor in mind, that he mistaketh the matter, when he thinks that such
had dispensation for the Government of a Ignorance in the Abstractor.
church with cure of souls, they remaining still lay men. For Exlaico and Ex
monacho do only signify that it was against the general canons, suddenly
without great cause to prefer such from mere lay men to the order of the
ministry, and so to a Bishoprike, or other cure of souls, before they had
served as clearks in other inferior orders and ministrations. For by the
opinion of Fisher, even at the common 21. H. 7. 3.
law an act of parliament cannot enable a lay man so remaining to become a
parson of a church, because it is a matter mere spiritual: although the
parliament (as Vauisoure thinks) may take order in such spiritual matters as
are mixed with temporal causes. Likewise the prohibition of ordering the son
of a professed nonne, is grounded upon those canons of integrity required in
all ecclesiastical men which are set down by S. Paul, which is greatly
blemished and stained by the fault of such parents. As for that general
asseueration, which without all proof or weighing of any circumstances, he
uses against all inioyeng of mo benefices, as simply unprofitable at all
times to the church, when he shall deliver his proofs of it, shall either be
answered or yielded unto, and in the mean time is as easily rejected, as it
is by him boldly avouched. But although it did not carry with it an urgent
necessity or evident utility of the church, yet hereof it does not follow,
that a dispensation to that end is unlawful. Because he can never prove them
to be only causes of that dispensation: for that the law rehearses diverse
other causes of dispensations in general, and they are gathered by the gloss
upon that very canon, which in this section he alleges. A dispensation is
granted (says the Gl. in verb. vt plerisque in fine 1. q. c. requiritis.
gloss) when necessity or utility requires Infra. eo. tali. Also sometimes
a dispensation is granted, because a greter evil is feared, in which respect
the Englishmen were dispensed with 35. q. 3c. quaedam lex. quod scripsi. Also
sometimes for some good to ensue, as when we dispense with heretics, that
other may more easily return to the church, 23. q. 4. c. ipsapietas. Also
sometimes for the multitude and for avoiding of offense, c. vt constitueretur.
50. did. And the same canon rehearses other considerations and inducements to
dispense: as mercy, piety in the person, the circumstance of time, and the
event of the matter. Insomuch * that another gloss does thus gather: When as
Gl. in verb. causae c. exigun^. 1. q. 7.
rigor and extremity is of one part, and mercy of the other, the judge ought
rather to follow mercy. c. 2. Extra. de sortileg. and l. placuit C. de iudic.
So that it seems a dispensation is a due, because the precept of mercy is
common to all, c. non satis 86. did. Which I grant that indeed sometimes it is
due, and the judge should offend, which in that case would not dispense, though
no law be set down whereby we may demand a dispensation. But because both
schoolmen and some few lawyers, who handle this matter, do vary diversely
one from another, and confusedly speak concerning the causes of
dispensations, I do take it worth the labor, upon due weieng of all their
reasons and allegations, to reduce them thus briefly to an harmony. In
Dispensations of mere Grace and favor, which are such as the prince may
lawfully gratify one man in, and deny unto another, as are indenizations,
legitimations, pardoning or remitting the penalties for faults not very
heinous: there is not any L. 1. ff. d^ constit. princip. it. Authent. quibus
mod. nature. efficia^tur legit. and quibus modis. sui and C. de sententia^
passis.
necessity, either in court of conscience, or in the civil court of man to
the dispenser or dispensed, that they should proceed upon any cause more than
of mere bounty of the sovereign prince, who only has this authority;
seeing it is to be intended, that the people and laws of every country, in
these and other small matters have yielded this Arg. l. scioff. de minoribus.
power unto their sovereign princes. But touching those Dispensations, which
are called of Justice, they are conversant either about the law of God and
nature, or about the positive law of man. In the laws of God and nature there
is no relaxation of the bond of them, (which none but God himself may do) yet
there may be upon good grounds a declaration and interpretation, that the
generality of the words do not in deed extend to some especial cases. As
although Gods law do indefinitelie require credit to be given to two
witnesses: yet is this generality, by man's law rightly declared not to have
c. relatum, 1. etc. cum esses. Ext. de testamentis.. 1. instit d. it.
place, where such two witnesses are but children, and have not atteined the
years of diseretion, to accept of an oath. By the law of God it is commanded,
that he that kills, should himself be done to death: yet L. v. vim. ff. de
just. and iure and ibi. gl. and DD.
is this truly interpreted not to have place, where a man kills in his own
necessary defense. Yea, not only in the defense of his person, is this
thought not unlawful, but Jason. in d. l. qui dicit ea^ esse comet. and Diaz.
reg. 597.
also in the defense of his goods: although Felni. c. 2. Ext. de homicidio.
some other, not so truly, do hold in this case the contrary. The general
commandment of absteining from labor in the observation of the sabbath, is
declared by our savior Christ, not to bind nor to have place in the priests
occupied about the sacrifices in the temple, nor in the necessary works of
christian charity, neither did reach unto those Jews who were forced by their
enemies (watching the opportunity of that time) to fight and defend themselves
from violence even upon that day. And it is in L. omnes C. defer^^s.
some cases even by man's law, not wronglie declared to cease. The precept of
obeieng our parents, is aright interpreted to have no L. Lucius ff. de condit.
and demonstr. L. nepos. ff. de verb. signif. L. filius ff. de cond. instit. l.
reprehendc^da. C. de insti. and subst. and ibi. DD.
place where the father commands any unlawful or dishonest thing. The
commandment of keeping our oath is not so general, but that it is L. non
dubium C. de legibus l. fin. C. de non numer. pecu. c. non est obligator de
reg. iu^ is in 6.
declared rightly to cease, where it should otherwise bind us to perform an
unlawful thing. And although by the law of God and of nature L. manumissiones
ff. de institia and iure. inst. de iure personarum.
every man is borne free, according to that of the Psalmist; Thou have subdued
all things under his feet: yet has the law Ibidem.
of nations not vngodlilie attempered this, and declared bondage upon good
occasions to be lawful: least otherwise those which be overcome in war,
should without mercy be put to the sword. For S. Paul says: Art thou bond?
seek not to be loosed. By the law of nature and of nations, traffike betwixt
man and man ought to be free: yet has law positive C. ne Iudeus Christ.
mancipium l. inter stipulante^ ff. de verb. oblig.. sacra^ and ibi. DD.
justly declared the said law in some cases to cease. It is of the law of
nature, to have him called and cited to be present at any act, who may be
interessed or prejudiced thereby: yet the sovereign prince upon good cause,
using that right which is in him, although it may indirectlie turn to the
harm of another, may Gl. in l. an^ep. ff. ex quibus causis mayor. quam dicit
com. approbari Fely. c. eccles. Ext. de constitut.
infranchise another man's bondslaue, the master not being called. By which
examples it appears, that albeit princes, and other judges, who are all
inferior to the law of God and of nature, cannot dispense with them upon any
cause by releasing the bond of them: yet upon good and sufficient grounds in
such cases as be evidently of that nature, which by most strong arguments we
may gather that God himself would not have included in the generality of his
law, interpretation, declaration, and limitation may be made of them. And this
is one kind of Decius co^s. 112. and in c. que in ecclesiarum Ext. de
costi^utionibus.
dispensation of justice, largely so called, whereby the bond of the law is
not released, but the law is interpreted in such case not to have place
according to the true meaning of it. But yet with this moderation, that we
never so intend and presume for the sufficiency of the causes, where upon such
declaration of the law of God and of nature is supposed to be grounded: but
that for stopping of a dangerous step unto tyranny and blasphemy, proofs to
the contrary must always be admitted, if any may be brought. Now, in that
other member of Dispensations of justice, more properly so called, which are
bestowed about the positive laws of man, we have to observe two several
varieties. One is, when the general force and obligation of the law remaining,
yet the reason thereof in some particular case does cease, which may and ought
to be by the sovereign prince or other inferior judge so declared. Another
is, when as the law is grounded upon diverse reasons. For then, though one or
two of such reasons do cease, yet in regard of those reasons thereof, which
do remain, the law shall still retain his force. Nay, though the positive
law of man be envious, as L. vnica. C. de caducis tollend.
was Lex Papia, very L. prospexerit ff. qui and a quibus.
grievous and hard, or such as the reason thereof is wholly ceased, yet shall
the disposition and life of it continue, and howsoever the execution thereof
perhaps may be intermitted, yet is not the law thereby taken away and
extinguished, but is L. vnica in principio. C. de caduc. tollend.
only Sopita (as it were) laid asleep for a time, So that if the like
necessity happen, for the which such a law was first established, it shall
revive again without any new enacting, which it L. inter slipulantem. sacram.
ff. de ver. oblig.
could not do if it were wholly extinguished. For otherwise, if every private
man might take upon him to decide, when and how the reason of his superiors law
does wholly cease, and that thereby the law might be said to be extinguished
and abrogated; which kind of interpretation L. fin. C, de legibus.
does only belong to the sovereign prince, or to such as he commits it
unto: then verelie in this last case, there should need no dispensation, though
(in the mean time) such liberty would breed a great confusion, and an open
contempt of all laws. Howveit I have declared already, that wheresoever the
general law does remain, though in some particular case it do cease: that
there (as in the other cases here alleged) this Dispensation is needful, and
ought not in right to be denied; for the which cause it is also called, A
dispensation of justice. Besides these, there is a third kind of dispensation
mixed of both: as taking some part of that which is called Of grace, because he
that has authority to dispense hereby, is not in way of justice preciselie
compellable to grant it: and borrowing other some part of that, which is called
Of justice, because this ought not to be granted simply, but upon just cause:
by reason that the positive laws of man, about which only this dispensation
is conversant by common intendement, are enacted for some public utility and
benefit. So that without good ground, a man ought not to be exempted from the
general charge of the common-welth, which other are to suffeine: specially
when such his exemption shall be burdensome to others. This last sort of
dispensations may be defined to be A release in some especial case and
certain persons of the general bond, and reason of a positive law, by him
that has authority thereunto. And this authority must either be committed
expreslie, or is covertly implied to be attributed unto a sovereign prince:
either by the operation of the law, as when L. d. C. de legibus.
such sovereign is the lawgiuer himself; or by presumed intention, that they
which made the law, meant to yield power of dispensing with the rigor and
extremity of it unto him in all Arg. ex gl.. fina. l. tale pactum ff. de
pactis.
such cases, as by likelihood and probability they themselves would have
dispensed with, if they had been in particular it ie opened and recounted unto
them, at the first establishing of it. But an inferior, unto whom any such
authority is expresselie (yet without full power and authority) committed, is
to follow in all points the direction of his commission, or where the same is
defective, the common positive law concerning the ruling and guiding of such
dispensations.

And this same presumed intention of the meaning of the lawemakers, is the most
proper cause that (in my judgment) can be assigned generally of every
dispensation of this quality and condition. Now, when c. si quis culpatur. 23.
q. 1. c. in pres. de renunciat. gl. in c. ad aures de temp. ord. and in c. 2.
de mayor. and obed. Cynus, and Bart. in l. fin. C. Si contra ius vel vtil.
Fely. nu. 60. Dec. nu. 24. in c. quae in cccle. Ext. de constitut.
a sovereign prince does dispense with any positive law of man, the law
teaches us to intend and presume, both that there is a cause why he should so
do; and that the same cause is just and sufficient: insomuch that Anchor cons.
288. Fulgos. cons. 143. Loazes page 371.
no proof to the contrary of this presumption may be admitted as some do
hold: but if he do dispense with such a law of man as has some necessary and
near coherence with the law of God or of nature, as (for example sake we may
assign laws for distribution of alms and other beneficence to the poor,
godly bequests and devises of the dead unto good uses) without a good and
sufficient cause in deed: though both the dispenser, and he which is dispensed
with in using of it, do in the inward court of conscience and before God
offend, yet nevertheless that very relaxation of the bond there of, being
only of man, shall stand so far forth good and effectual, as that the acts
Fely. vt supra. nu. 6. Bart. post. gl. in l. relegati ff. de. poenis.
which by virtue thereof are done, shall be in the court of man auailable, and
not to be impugned. Yea by the opinion of some very well learned, such acts
done shall be of force Syluest. rer. Papa que. 15
even in the inward court of a man's soul and conscience. For example whereof
they bring a dispensation granted without any cause, for the mainteining and
sirengthening of a clandestine matrimony contracted: which is condemned
justly by the law of man, upon very good and pithie reasons. And howsoever
both the parties themselves (say they) have offended therein, first in so
contracting, and then in using a dispensation, upon no just ground: and he also
that shall condescend to dispense with it, being moved with no good reason
thereunto: yet the matrimony shall be of force, and the issue thereof is in
both courts legitimate. And whereas Fortun in l. Gallus. and quid si tantu^ ff.
de l. and post.
some do seem to be of contrary opinion herein, which think such a
dispensation granted without cause, not to enable any act to be of force, which
is done by virtue thereof: their opinion is thought not to be sound, except it
be understood of an inferior that shall by commission have a limited and not
full authority from the sovereign to dispense, Innoc. in c. cum ad
monasterium de statu regulaerium, and in c. dudu^ 2. Ext. de electio.
because such a dispensation from him cannot be of any validity either in the
one court or the other, except it be warranted as proceeding upon some good
cause. For we are not by law to presume and intend for the goodness and
sufficiency of the Fely. in c. que in ecclesiarum Ext. de constitut. gl. and
DD. in L. relegati ff. de poenis. and est com. opinion Loazes in loco citato.
cause for any dispensation, passed by an inferior not endowed with full power
and authority, unless it do so appear indeed. Now, on the other side, if he
that has authority (be he sovereign or inferior) do grant a dispensation
without any reasonable cause, about such a law as is meerelie positive, and
having none immediate or near relation unto the law of God or of nature: then,
albeit he in so dispensing Ber. in c. non est, Ext. de unto. Thom. 1. 2. q. 97.
ar. 4.
does offend (by breaking that right and equabilitie of the law intended to
public good, and which is common to all) in favor of one, yea and that
without any just cause of pre-eminence to him above other: yet he that uses
such dispensation (especially if it be without grievous offense given, and
direct damage of others) does not Gl. in ver. execrabilis Ext. execrab. de
praebend. Fely. c. ad audientiam 2. de rescriptis. Gigas de pensi. q. 6. nu. 13.
offend against a good conscience, but may lawfully enjoy it, because he is by
the same authority delivered from the bond of that law, by the which he stood
bound, as is evident in the very matter of plurality and dispensation which
we have in hand.

And according to these distinctions are all those things to be understood,
which to like purpose (here and there in this treatise) as occasion was or
shall be offered, are by me uttered: whereby the grounds and causes whereupon
all dispensations and exemptions may lawfully and safely be granted and used,
according to the more sound opinion of the best learned lawyers and schoolmen,
may partly I hope with some plainness be discovered. But if it should be
asked in which degree and sort of these three dispensations, those for
pluralities, which by statute of the realm are committed to the Archbishop of
Canturburie, ought to be placed? Truly in consideration that both they and
other dispensations by him to be granted are there so bounded for the matters
themselves, and for the persons, though not for the manner of proceeding, and
are so exacted of him to pass them where just cause appears, that if he
shall refuse to dispense, then this power and authority given by the whole
church and the realm to him, shall be deuolued over to others: I cannot see,
but that they are to be reckoned either amongst those Dispensations of justice,
which are conversant about the positive laws of man, or amongst such as be
mixed of both.

14. Section. Page 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135.
Here the Abstractor fansieth, that he has so battered us with his canons,
that we must be forced to raise a rampire of our statutes, to make up the
breach: whereas in truth his forces were nothing but a volee of colubrines,
puffed and hissed off with serpentine powder of a spiteful tongue, fitter to
scare children, than to atchiue any such enterprise. Where upon this
nevertheless may be gathered, that he imagines there is cause, why it should
be thought that the statutes of the realm are more loose in permitting
pluralities (which he so detesteth) than the very canon law it self. He
answers this point of our statutes, which establishes dispensations with a
wish and a prayer, That these laws might be respected, and that the law of
England might rule an English man in this case. Inconstancy.
ungodly, contrary to nature, and permitting things unlawful? Whereby he
would steal away. The clappers of these bells that they should not sound, and
would untie their bands, which should tie him and others more short up to the
observation and due estimation of them. For if there be any laws that do not
Sound or bind, they are such especially, as he and his clients not only
daily break, but do gnaw upon in their conuenticles, and bark at in their
public speeches. And here this wrangler confesses in discourse which he
denies in the title of his treatise, that some Dispensations are tolerable
for qualified men in cases of necessity, of conueniencie, for the honor of her
Highness person, and being warranted by scripture. Touching the first of
these, the statute in truth restrains it to dispensations unto the princes
person in cases vnwoont, but not contrary to the law of God. Concerning the
second, the words of the statute, Are necessary, etc: upon due examinations of
the causes and qualities of the persons, which after is left in some part to
the Archbishops discretion. The Falsificatio^.
third is more wressed than the former; for the words are thus: Not contrary
or repugnant to the holy scriptures and laws of God. In steed whereof (he
says) they must be warranted by them. Whereas in truth many things be not
contrary nor repugnant: to Gods word, which are not positiuelie and
expresselie warranted there, otherwise than that nothing is to the contrary.
And no less than the former, is that untrue and contrary to the statute,
where in saying that the Archbishop may dispense if he will in some cases not
contrary to the word, he would insinuate that he needs not at any time
ercept he list. And these things thus by him corrupted, he does before he come
to his brief reasons, recapitulate as falselie almost as he had done before.
The Minor of his first syllogism of the three, being vnture and to be denied,
wherein he assumeth the Having of many benefices, or non residencie, to be
repugnant to the laws of God, though he have not named non residencie before,
he tells us (if we may believe him) that he has already proved By
infallible conclusions of law, and undoubted truths of the word of God. Yet
his laws alleged do not once mention repugnancie with the word and
scripture. Corinthians, that ministers ought to have maintenance. But he
inforceth this matter by this argument, as I do gather it: Whatsoever cause or
matter is repugnant to the word of God, is by statute vndispensable: The cause
or matter of having many benefices, is repugnant to the word of God; namely,
ambition, pride, covetousness, peril of souls, etc: Therefore the cause or
matter of having many benefices, is by statute vndispensable. First, to speak
to the matter hereof, the Minor is untrue, because the sufficient maintenance
of the minister, and the enioieng of a preacher rather than none, are the
immediate impulsive causes of permission to enjoy mo benefices. But if
plurality should be an efficient cause of ambition, pride, covetousness, peril
of souls, etc: which it cannot be (otherwise than Per accidens by indirect
occasion) then are these vices effects of it, and not they causes thereof, as
here is auowched. But if we should admit these crimes to be causes of having mo
benefices, then would I grant his conclusion, that the Archbishop may not
dispense with those enormities: whereof nevertheless will not follow, but that
he might (this notwithstanding) dispense with having of mo benefices, being but
the effect as he supposes. To the A fallacy of equiuocatio^.
sorme I answer, that it is Paralogisticall (...) upon the diversity of
signification of the word Cause: which in his Mayor and the statute, is taken
for the matter it self to be dispensed with, so it be not repugnant to Gods
word: but in the Minor of this argument, it is taken by relation to the effect
of that matter, which is to be dispensed with for the very reason of the
prohibition it self. In his second syllogism, I have showed before out of the
statute, that the Mayor is by him fained. For neither is any mention made of
Peace or conservation, neither is The wealth and profit of the realm spoken of
there in all dispensations absolutely, but in cases vnwoont, and unto the
person of the prince. And yet his Minor proposition thereof, is also
vnsufficientlie vpholden. For the enioieng of two benefices, is as far off from
making up such folly and wealthy prelates, as they do seem only unto the
left envious eye of this Detractor; as this assertion is from the truth, that
Hereby stipendarie curats and poor ministers are kept in beggerie. For it may
be their allowance is according to the measure of their sufficiency, and it is
very small indeed, if it be not more than he himself thinks them worthy
of, who holds most of such curats for no ministers at all neither in fact nor
law. But if it were granted, that some such as are too meanly provided for,
might be placed in some several benefices that are enioied by another: does
he think that the releeuing of him hereby, will ease the commonwealth, or
profit the church, as much as the abridging of sufficient maintenance will
decaie both the number and abilities of our best grounded and most learned
divines, who are only fit to impugn the errors and heresies of popery and
of other sects? His second reason of proportion drawn from diverse other
mysteries and trades forbidden to be exercised by one rich and mighty man, to
the intent to prove that a damage grows to the commonwealth, by one man's
enioieng of two poor benefices, which can be accounted indeed but one trade:
if it be a sound reason of justice and equity, as it is pretended, it will not
only infer, that a several gift and faculty of learning is required for
every several congregation, as the cunning in several trades is different,
but also must enforce an unlawfulness in all sorts of men to enjoy several
lordships, or any inequality of possessions and substance whatsoever: because
many of The poorer sort might live of such possessions in one man's hand, well
and honestly in the commonwealth: which is a bitter root of the weed of
Anabaptisticall equality and community. The last reason, which he brings
for proof of his second Minor, is taken from the conueniencie of fulfilling
the deads wills and testaments: as though all foundations and dotations of
churches, had been by last wills and testaments only established, and as
though they had especially regarded by their said wills the serving of those
churches by pastors continually resiant, and not having any living elsewhere.
But (I pray you) how was it lawful for the latter men to alter the wills of
the former founders, by making new distinctions of parishes and allotments of
livings, if other parishes and livings were established before (as he absurdlie
seems to fancy) even by God himself? And why should he be so careful for
the fulfilling of their wills, who for the most part in time of ignorance, in
regard only of massing for their souls, rather than for teaching of the
people, and upon opinion of meriting heaven thereby, did erect and endow
churches; perhaps with some little glebe, though the chiefest benefit do arise
by tithes? Seeing he is of opinion that a matter grounded upon any cause or
reason, is of like nature and His reason retorted upon himself.
condition, with the reason it self: so that if the cause and reason,
whereupon they grounded their building and endowment of churches be impious;
then even the things themselves shall be stained with like impiety, and not
worthy thus to be tendered by him. But this his supposall is in deed a very
weak and slender conjecture, not worth the name of a presumption, and meerelie
consisting in fact without proof. And it might be better gathered, seeing
pluralities within these last six hundred years (in compass of which time
most churches have been built) were very rife, as may appear by laws
especifieng multitudes of benefices incroched, and retained without all license
or toleration: that patrones of churches could not be ignorant thereof, and
therefore meant to provide for no such matter, which otherwise they would have
expressed, and met with either in dotation, composition, or by testament. And
he might with more color use this reason, even against the just dissolution
of religious houses, being directly and expreslie contrary to the mind of the
founders: yet with no better authority warranted, than dispensations for
pluralities, both of them even by act of parliament. And therefore as the three
several Minor propositions of these his last syllogismes, built upon these
unsure and feeble grounds, for the proof of the Minor in his second syllogism
before, are to be denied: so are the very Mayor propositions all three, brought
as grounds to build the other upon, as weak themselves, as these which should
be underpropped by them. For the great riches of some few, is no small occasion
why some other do want, which might have more plenty, if all the wealth of
the richest in the land, were distributed abroad in the world, and yet are they
necessary for the profit and conservation of the commonweal, which
consists by inequalities, as the wise do know, which may serve also for
answer of his second Mayor: although he which by especial privilege has some
two livings assigned unto him, can not properly be said to enjoy many men's
livings, or any more than that which is his own by law. The like is to be
affirmed of the dispositions in last wills and testaments, as though whatsoever
did prejudice them, being made to lawful and holy uses, could not be
accounted necessary to the wealth and profit of the realm. For if a man would
devise and bequeath (to never so lawful and holy uses) his lands holden In
capite, in chivalry, or entailed, or another man's lands or goods, which course
is allowed of by the civil law: yet is it thought necessary in law, for the
wealth and profit of this land, that in some part the one, and that the other
should wholly be encountered. So does the civil law disannull and reuerse a
testament contrived never so solemnly, or to how good and godly uses soever;
if the testators son be omitted, or be without just cause disinherited in it;
or if a some be borne within ten months after his death, of the body of his
wife. Thus having, as shortly as I could, run over his reasoning, it rests
to show that by the statute law of this land, (which is the judgment of the
whole church and commonweal representatiuelie) dispensations for pluralities
are lawful. First the 21. H 8. ca. 13.
statute 21. Hen. 8. says, that men so qualified, (as is there prescribed) may
take and receive two benefices with cure of soul by dispensation, and therefore
it cannot be unlawful. But if it be answered (as the Abstractor goes about to
do) that all 25. H. 8. ca. 21.
dispensations are by a later statute restrained, saving such as be not
contrary or repugnant to the scriptures; intending withal this kind of
dispensation to be ungodly, and against the word of God: this may be refelled
easily by the preamble of the said latter statute, where it is affirmed To
stand with natural equity and good reason, in all and every laws humane,
made within this realm, or induced by custom, that the parliament should have
authority not only to dispense, but also to authorize some elect person or
persons to dispense with those and all other humane laws of this realm, and
with every one of them, as the qualities of the persons and matter shall
require.

Now the judgment of the parliament is, that the laws prohibiting one man to
enjoy mo benefices, are but humane, agreeablie unto that which to this end I
have set down, but namely in the gloss last before alleged; and therefore
that it may be dispensed with, it is hereby very evident: in that this latter
statute calls all these dispensations so authorized, An ordinance by policies
necessary and convenient, and does again establish the act for dispensations
in these words, That the same act for pluralities and non residencies of
benefices, and every thing therein contained, shall stand good and effectual
to all intents: which they could not without manifest contrariety newly
strengthen, if these prohibitions of mo benefices, were not by humane law
only, but had been prohibited also by the law of God himself.

15. Sect. Page 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140.
THE Minor proposition of the third syllogism page 133. [that It is not for
the honor and suertie of her Highness person, to leave any manner of authority
for the Archbishop to dispense] he goes about to prove, because the statute
contains A contrariety and absurdity. And before he come thus far, he
affirms that this is To set an English Archbishop in the room of the pope
over the king and his subjects, and to respect him more than the dignity and
preeminence of a christian king. As though that which was given by parliament,
were usurped, or he that claims it not as invested or incident unto him, by
any right, but as a trust recommended unto him by the whole realm, (whose
minister he is in this respect) could be justly said to have preeminence above
the king. For the Abstractor might as well gather, that the Lord Chancellor,
having many great and weighty matters of confidence and trust by parliament,
and the common law laid upon him, as namely Upon complaint made that the
Archbishop refuses to grant dispensation to any person, that of a good, just,
and reasonable cause ought to have the same, to direct a writ, inioining him
upon a certain pain by his discretion to be limited, to grant, etc; might
therefore be said to have preeminence hereby over the Archbishop, and
consequently (by his collection) over the Queens Highness. But before I come
to the examination of the proofs of his Minor, I must put him in mind that his
Mayor is untrue. For neither is the statute prohibitorie of all dispensations,
Corrupt collectio^ of the statute.
not Convenient for the honor and suertie of her Highness: neither yet (as
has been before showed) do those words reach any further, than to
dispensations in unaccustomed cases, for the princes own person. The
Absurdity and contrariety he says, is first in this point: because The
Archbishop is authorized to grant dispensation unto the prince in such cases,
as have been accustomed to be granted at the Sea of Rome: whereas the pope was
never any lawful magistrate in the church of God, and therefore every
dispensation granted by him was against the law of God, as granted by one that
was no member of the church of God. Truly my wits be passing dull, which can
not perceive how these do hang together. Might he not have been a member,
though he were not head of the church? Or dispense with some humane law,
without breach of Gods law? Or might it not be, that dispensations were
accustomablie granted by him, though he were not head of the church? Or might
it not be that dispensations were accustomablie granted by him, though he were
not a lawful magistrate or dispenser? Or may not the Archbishop by lawful
authority committed unto him, dispense in such humane laws as has been
accustomed, though the pope were an usurper herein? Or lastly, if all these
were admitted, does it here upon follow, that there is a contrariety and
absurdity in the statute? Assuredly he had need to be a kind and
tender-harted man, that will yield himself to be overcome with such reasons.
His second reason for proof of the contrariety, is to this effect: is a very
childish Ignorance of the elench, concluding of mere particulars, and therefore
neither in mood nor figure of argument. For although some were such that were
there granted, yet it does not follow that all dispensations from thence were
of like nature: but the Archbishop by authority of that statute may dispense
with none but such as be not against the word of God. But here the Abstractor
has joined with such as undoubtedly are against the word of God, Non
residencie, and many benefices. The latter whereof is the matter in
controversy, whereby this is Petitio principij: and the first can not be
dispensed with during life; for that the 1. H. 8. c. 13.
statute makes such dispensations void, and subiecteth the party using them,
to a grievous penalty. But where he makes Not eating flesh in Lent to be a
matter repugnant to the law of God: whereby he infers such dispensation to
be unlawful, he must needs confess that he was in his fit, and knew not what
he said: for if to abstain from flesh in Lent upon commandment, and by
positive and politic ordinance, be (as he says) Superstitious, and a matter
repugnant to the law of God: then as it seems should a dispensation to do
it, which restores the former liberty of eating flesh, be more agreeable to
Gods word, and the more meet to be used. But neither eating, nor yet not eating
of flesh at any time, is of the law of God, Quia esca nos non commendat Deo,
neque regnum Dei est in cibo and potu, and nihil quod intrat in os coinquinat
hominem: so that to dispense herewith, either to eat or not to eat, can not be
unlawful. And that this observation of fishdaies is but a politic
constitution, it is 5. Eliz. c. 5.
explaned elsewhere by act of parliament: whereby also he and others (which
shall affirm otherwise of the intent of the prohibition to eat flesh on
certain days) are to be punished as spreaders of false news. But at the last
he stumbleth upon the right interpretation, that the Archbishop ordinarily is
but to dispense with matters accustomed to be dispensed with at the Sea of
Rome, and not then simply, but only so far forth as they were not
contrary or repugnant to the word of God. Whereby he straight infers,
besides those which are before spoken unto, that he is not hereby Entitled to
dispense for simonie, Non residencie, marriages in Lent, etc: because those are
matters he says repugnant to the law of God. Touching simonie, it can not be
denied but it is a grievous fault, yet forbidden by the positive law of man
only, (albeit Canonists for the most part have derived it from the offense of
Simon Magus) and has his grounds and reasons very weightilie deduced from the
law of God and the light of nature. Notwithstanding, our author has almost
wholly qualified and dispensed with it, as much as he could with little
honesty, in his first treatise: namely, By right of covenants, by the well
liking of the people, by a good fire in the hall once in a year, and by a
slyuer of bread at the patrons door. But if Non residencie be against the law
of God absolutely and directly, and not by event and consequence only; then
must it be against some of the ten commandemeuts: and thereby will it follow,
that as upon none occasion, any of them may be transgressed, so will it be
sinful for a man upon any cause whatsoever, at any time to be away from his
benefice, though it were but an hour, no more than a man may kill for an
hours space. Lastly, where he affirms Marriages in Lent to be repugnant to
Gods law, and therefore not dispensable: except he will acknowledge that he was
in his melancholic mood, in a little house hard beside himself, he may happen
for this saying to be gravely censured by the eldership, where he hanteth. But
if the prohibition of marriage for some certain times brawne from the old
canons, be but of law positive: why may it not by the same authority be
likewise released and dispensed with? And in deed the occasion of such
prohibition (at some solemn times of fasts and prayers) was grounded upon the
same reason, that the Discipline of France forbad the receiving of the
communion by the new married couple that day. Yet he is not thus content to
rest in this interpretation, but must have a fling sawcilie to traduce the
whole parliament, as Falling into two palpable absurdities, by want of foresight
and due examination. D that they which were in parliament then, had been
powdered but with a little salt of that discretion and forecast, wherewith this
man thinks he is thoroughlie seasoned! Then no doubt some famous church-plat
would have been hatched, which as yet is but a castle built in the air, by
his own shallow conceit. The first Absurdity in this statute he notes, in
that it is Left to the Archbishops determination, what is repugnant to
scripture, what convenient for the honor and safety of the prince, and for
the wealth and profit of the realm. The first whereof if it should be
attributed to any one man (which for the difficulty of meeting upon every
occurrent, and other confusion in multitudes, cannot indeed conveniently be
otherwise) I do see no cause but by common intendment, the Archbishop may be
holden for as sufficient a man as any one other to decide, what is repugnant or
not repugnant to Gods word. Albeit there is no one word in the act, that either
yields the determination hereof, or of the other two unto him: but rather (as
may be collected) the contrary. For the two books of tares, which must
contain the rate of every sacultie, that is to pass, and which usually
before had been granted at the Sea of Rome; are by statute to be set down by
the Archbishop, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, and by the two chief
justices of both benches, for the time being. But in unaccustomed cases, the
Archbishop can pass no faculty at all, unless the prince or council shall
determine it, and give license unto him so to grant. But if all these
Contrarieties and absurdities that hitherto to the Abstractor vainlie (as you
see) has bungled about, should be granted to be in the statute, yet how could
the Minor proposition hereby be confirmed (which was his purpose to prove)
that It is not convenient for her Highness honor and suertie, to leave any
manner of authority in the Archbishop to dispense. For there might be some
parts of the statute, and some faculties absurd, yea all might be so; and yet
her honor and suertie no way impeached: for Vtile per inutile non vitiatur^
that which is to no purpose, does not hinder that which is to some use. And if
he would have authority of dispensing taken from the Archbishop, and to be
given unto her Majesty, in respect of unlawfulness of dispensations, how
shall this be lawful in her Highness royal person, more than in his? And the
vanity also of his Other absurdity is discovered, which would therefore
euerthrow the whole act, because it is unsitting, he says, For a subject to
grant a dispensation to his sovereign. But albcit there neither is nor can be
so frequent an use of such dispensing with the princes own person, as was when
the statute was made, by reason many humane laws brought in by canons of
councels were then throughout all this west church suffered to be in force,
even with sovereign princes, as about vows, marriages within certain degrees
of carnal and spiritual (as they termed it) consanguinitie or affinity,
clandestinitie, legitimation of children borne before espousals, and such like
a number more than now are: yet do I think it too general simply to be set
down, that now there can be no use of any dispensations at all for the
princes own person, as by examples might be showed, if it were requisite. For
although the person of the prince needs not to be dispensed with for the
positive law of man being made by his direction, according to that Dispensation
which is a relaxation of law in some particular case, the bond and strength of
it otherwise remaining in force: nor can for the law of God, which no man may
release in any particular man's case, the bond of it being perpetual: yet
notwithstanding I do not see, but by a Dispensation of justice, which is a
true and upright interpretation and declaration, that the law of God, of
nature, or of nations, according to the true sense and meaning thereof, has
not place in some particular action, which otherwise might in show appear to
be included in the generality of them: that in this respect it may be
expedient, even the princes person sundry times so to be provided for. And
this the rather, because by law and natural reason Nemo secum dispensat, no
man can impart a dispensation unto himself. So that the Archbishop in such a
weighty case, having with the best learned in the land maturelie debated the
matter with all circumstances, and found upon pregnant and invincible reasons,
that it cannot be truly said to be against any of the former immutable laws:
if then he shall In perpetuam rei memoriam, in autentike form under his seal
set down this resolution: it cannot justly be auowched that the princes honor
or prerogative is hereby any way abased, but rather the quiet of his mind well
provided for; and the doubts, which in process of time might here upon be
cast, wisely and godly to be met with, for the profit and benefit of the
realm. Neither can such dispensation, touching the princes own natural
person in matter of conscience, or of some positive ecclesiastical law, which
reaches unto him, be any more derogatorie to his honor or royal prerogative:
than 1. Hen. 7, 4.
when the judges of the land did determine, that the attainder by parliament of
the person of the noble king Henry the seventh, was upon his calling to the
crown, by the very operation of the law adnulled and discharged. Or when
Archbishop Cranmer gave sentence for the nullitie of marriage contracted
betwixt king Henry the eight, and lady Katharine Dowager, his late brothers
wife. Whereby may also be perceived, that the difference, which the Abstractor
takes betwixt the judgments of the justices and the dispensations of the
Archbishop, as not touching the kings own person, like as dispensations do,
to be destitute of footing, or sound and good ground to stand upon. And
although in words he seem outwardly thus to tender her Majesty's honor and
prerogative; yet the place which he alleges out of the civil law looks a
clean contrary way. For thereby he would subject the princes person to his
own positive laws even of necessity; because in the civil law the Imp.
Theodos. and Valentinian. in l. digna vox. C. de legib. etc.
emperors say: It is a word worthy the majesty of a ruler, to acknowledge
himself as chief tied unto laws. Whereas nevertheless the emperors speaking
elsewhere in the same law, do say thus of themselves: Although Seuerus and
Anthoninus. vlt. instit. quibus modis testa. infirmentur l. princeps ff. de
legibus.
we are not bound by laws, yet we live according to them. So that by the law
which he alleges, the very contrary unto his position, might seem to be
gathered: because, if the person of the prince be tied by the bond of the
positive law, then should a dispensation be as requisite sometimes for him, as
for any other which in like manner is tied and bound unto it. Some do reconcile
these laws thus: That a sovereign prince is therefore not said to be bound by
laws, because he may abrogate them at his pleasure. Other say, that he is
tied only to the law of nature and of nations, but not to positive laws. A
third sort do hold with good probability, that he is bound to positive laws
according to their force Directive, but not Correctiue, to be directed by them,
so far as may concern him, but not to be corrected of them; neither yet that
of necessity he is to be directed by them, but of congruencie and conueniencie
only according Claudianus de 4. consula^u Honorij.
to that:

In commune iubes si quid censesue tenendum
Primus iussa subi, tunc obseruantior aequi
Fit populus, nec far negat, quum viderit ipsum
Censorem parere sibi: componitur orbis
Regis ad exemplum.
And so is the king of 5. E. 4. 32. 39. H. 6. 39.
England also tied to some positive laws, according to the judgment of the
justices. Yea it is in this respect honorable to the prince to suffer himself
to be directed by godly ecclesiastical laws, not impugning his prerogative,
except good cause may be alleged of relaxation. And therefore the Dishonor
and danger to her Highness, which in the Minor he assumeth, we are easily
delivered of, till he can show better cards for it. And where he extends this
reason of Dishonor, to infringe all dispensations granted likewise to
subjects, he is not so well advised as he might be. For seeing it is
necessary, upon sundry weighty occasions, that immunities and dispensations
for Preamble of the statute 25. Hen. 8. ca. 21.
humane laws be granted to some above other, and the ambiguities of Gods law,
and of the law of nature in some cases to be declared and interpreted: it were
more dishonorable to her Majesty to attend these meaner matters from time to
time in her own person, than it can be in the woorst construction, to put them
over to some of her subjects. And as it cannot be convenient for her Highness to
attend in person the execution hereof: so her royal dignity is no way
impeached by yielding this authority to the Archbishop, who must (where cause
requires) perform this duty but as a minister herein to her Majesty and the
state: and who cannot dispense as he list, but with confirmation under the
great seal of England, as the statute does limit. Yet he importuneth her
Majesty still, by telling her what her Highness most noble father would have
done (if he had Understood so much as the Abstractor does) not only to take
dispensations away from the Archbishop, but belike in regard of them, to take
him away also, as he did An Abbat: a match truly and comparison as unlike,
as if we should compare the Abstractor to an honest modest man. And for this
end he exhorts her Majesty to Submit her self to the scepter of Gods word,
as though she had not done it hitherto. But he and all the knot of them, by
these speeches do indeed understand the submission and licking of the dust of
their Seniorie and Eldership, which is neither dishonorable (for sooth) nor so
dangerous to her Highness, as is the committing ouerof dispensing (in causes
requisite) unto the Archbishop, because they amongst them have so concluded,
that it shall be, touching the peril To her Majesty's honor and safety, which
grows By the Archbishops dispensing in matters repugnant to the holy
scriptures, upon a corrupt construction, a sinister judgment, and not right
discerning what things be repugnant to scripture, it shall easily be yielded
unto, that it is neither for her Majesty's honor nor safety, to suffer the
laws of God to be broken; albeit those words of the statute (as have been
showed) do not extend unto all dispensations, by virtue thereof to be granted.
But first he and his accomplices must beat their sconses a while, to teach the
Archbishop how he ought aright to construe, to judge, and to discern the
scriptures, where unto (as he says) his dispensations are repugnant belike
according to some anagogicall, tropologicall, or cabalisticall sense of their
own devise, whereof they have perhaps dreamed. Yea, and all this adoo, which he
makes about dispensations to the princes person, is unseasonable and
impertinent wholly to the matter in hand, concerning the validity or
inualiditie in law of dispensations for pluralities: and therefore might with
better provision to his own credit, have been spared.

16. Section. Page 140, 141, 142. 143, 144, 145.
THe Abstractor, which thinks he has found Absurdity in the Statute, goes
on still in his own absurd dealing: purposing to show as well by statute as by
the Canon law certain adjuncts necessarily to be observed in these
dispensations, which he in this whole treatise labors to prove by both the
said laws to be unlawful. Which course must needs seem to wise men a strange
piece of work, that those laws which do condemn them, should so exactlie
describe their properties and circumstances, in what manner, with what care, and
to what kind of persons they ought to be granted. And first of all he here
wounds the smoke very deeply, and fights valiantly with his own
shadow, in that he would prove Poverty to be no sufficient cause of
dispensation: and that every one dispensed with already for plurality, can
not justly be reputed for a poor man: neither of which I did ever hear by
any man hitherto to have been maintained. But in going over his proofs
hereof, I must put him in mind, that Rebuff his first witness hereto produced,
though he allow not of poverty for a sufficient cause of it self: yet he
insinuates thus much, that being joined with worthiness, it is adminiculant
(as we call it,) and that it adds weight to desert, for procuring of a
dispensation. For in deed, as it is reason, that a man worthy and able to
profit the church, should have sufficient maintenance, though it be by mo
benefices than one, for supply of his necessity, and toward hospitality: so
if he be of sufficient patrimony otherwise, though he be never so worthy, and
his ecclesiastical living be even under a mediocritie: then there is less
cause a great deal, why he should look for another. And again, the same
author by him vouched does directly decide, that A dispensation tending to
the profit of the church, or upon necessity, is lawful. And therefore by his
own witness, which in law he can not refuse, the scope and drift of his whole
treatise is again overthrown. And where he adds, that he which has taken a
small living, may not in any case seek to augment it: if his bare words did
make law, then surely ecclesiastical livings, which be but small, would
hardly be furnished. Yea, the reasons, which to this end he brings, are as
truly verified of any temporal living, as of ecclesiastical. But what if
both the sufficiency of the ministers gifts by his own inbustrie, and by the
blessing of God do notably increase, and his congregation also be multiplied
more and more in people, or if his domestical charge arise by number of
children, or by their sickness; may he not seek some augmentation of his
living? Truly this devise joined with that which follows, of driving
ministers to furnish the wants of their maintenance by Some handie craft and
labor, is an open window, to draw them from study, and so to ignorance,
barbarism, savage wildness, contempt with all men, and finally it leuelleth
directly at the overthrow of all religion. The first place, which to this end
he quoteth, does not speak to that purpose whereunto it seems to be brought:
but 32. q. 5. c. horrendus.
that Whatsoever has once pleased a man, ought not any more to displease him.
Now he that having too small a living to maintain him, seeks a further
supply by another: does it not upon any mislike of the former. And therefore
it might better have been applied to infer, that a man may not of his own
head relinquish his benefice; yea, it is not general without his limitations:
but is specially to be understood, where by variance in liking, a prejudice to
another man may rise. Which inconvenience if it be met with by the judgment of
the Ordinary, whom the law authoriseth to judge of the exigence of the cause,
fit for relinquishment of his former living: then that rule does cease. For
else should all translations and shiftings from one congregation to another,
upon sufficient ground (both allowed by law, and practice of most reformed
churches) be utterly unlawful. The next being cross quoted with the former,
and c. sanctoru^. 70. did.
which he says is Law in truth, does vary in very deed, from the canon it
self: which has nothing tending that way, either of Prejudice grown unto
him that has received a small benefice, or of seeking his living by his own
craft, but only thus: In what church soever a man is entitled unto, in that
let him perpetually remain. Not as though a man might not upon some occasion
renounce and resign his benefice into his Ordinaries hands: but that he has
it by institution for term of his life, and therefore may not be put out of it
against his will, without sufficient cause thereunto, as may appear by the
gloss. That 21. q. 1. c. 1.
part of the next place, which requires a man's continuing in his own
vocation, does not touch any thing now in controversy, seeing he which has
two benefices, does not give over his vocation. As to the other part seeming
to counsel a poor clerk to labor with his hands, for the better supply of
his maintenance, by the example of the apostle, it seems to me, not to be
spoken of the priests and ministers in chief cities, but of clearks in
inferior orders and degrees, whose attendance in such great churches was then
in great numbers practiced. Yet the Gl. ibid. in verbo necessitatem in ^ine.
gloss answers it, that Those things were in use in those days, but not now
wherein God had dealt more liberally with the church: and that those things
are to be considered according to the quality of the person, and site of the
church, seeing that which is sufficient for one, is not for another: and the
custom of the country is herein to be observed. And mine interpretation is
strengthened by the conference of two or three chapters together, of that
distinction which he alleges, in which a manifest diversity may be observed
Inter presbyterum and clericum, a priest and an inferior clearke. For the c.
Presbyter c. Clericus. 1. and 2. did. 91.
priest or minister has in those canons his task for the whole day so
limited forth, that it will not be possible for him to have time besides to
earne salt to his potage by his handie work. Yea, the very gloss Gl. in ver.
minus. c. ^i proponente Ext. de rescript. per c. de monachi^ infra de Prebendis.
whence he borrowed all this furniture at one clap, does tell him that this
course is changed sithence, if it had pleased him to have looked a little
lower. But (says the gloss) a man is not to be instituted, except so much be
assigned, whereby he may be sufficiently provided for, and be able to pay the
duties to the Bishop. And by the way the same gloss shows, that poverty is
some part of a reason, whereupon to ground a dispensation for plurality, though
not an entier cause. The example of S. Paul may be answered, that it is not
appliable to these times. Because the gifts of the Holie-ghost, for the
furnishing of the work of the ministry, are not miraculouslie now bestowed
as they were then, but by the industry, painful study and endeavor of the
party. Therefore if we should set him to a manual occupation to gain some
part of his living by, on the working days; assuredly his mind would be
clogged, his spirits so dull and wearied, his invention so mechanical and
deuoid of pith on the holie-daies, that it were as good to keep him at hedging
and diching, or upon his shopboord still, as to put the poor man any more into
the pulpit. And hereby it will come to pass, that if we have now too many
unlearned men in the ministry, with whom the Abstractor is so round in his
first treatise; by this devise of his we shall have in short time none else but
very dolts and idiots: except he can imagine, that men coming from the
Uniuersities, will be content to be preferred from being Scholars to be
scauengers, ^ro^ Sophisters to be shoomakers, from Bachelors to be bakers, from
Masters of art and other Graduats, to be millers or grinders, and yet to
continue the ministry still. Much like to the contemptuous surmise of Lucian,
that Alexander the great is preferred to sit on a three-footed stool behind a
door in hell, cobling and clowting of old shoes. Naie, though S. Paul was
content in that infancy of the church, for avoiding of grudging and murmuring,
to earne some part of his living by tent-making, that he might thereby spare
the churches more, and the rather thereby to allure them to liking of that,
which was not chargeable unto them: yet in sundry places it is not obscurelie
signified, that both he might have exacted his entier maintenance of them, and
that they in duty were bound to procure him, in all necessary worldly
relief. Furthermore, we Inconstancy.
are to note, that he which could find but two causes of dispensations before,
has now light upon two more. He alleges also to prove, that Poverty is no
sufficient cause of dispensation: the saying of the apostle applied by the law,
that A man having food and raiment ought to be there with content. Whereunto if
he will assume that those, who purchase dispensations for mo benefices, have
these things before, wherewith therefore they ought to hold themselves content:
then will it (being scripture and not spoken of ecclesiastical men alone, but
of all whomsoever) as well serve to prove, that no man may seek (be the
means never so honest) the bettering of that his estate, wherein he is at the
very first settled. And yet is it not meant of any food how little, or any
apparel how mean soever, but of a sufficiency in both, according to the
calling and degree of the person: and is but set down to meet with the
covetous, unmeasurable, and distrustful desire of riches, which when we have
atteined them in highest measure, can yield none other necessary use at all,
but that which tends either to the one or the other. Now, he going on this
course, says: that he which knowing the smalnesse of a living, has undertaken
it, has thereby debarred himself of all just cause to forethinke him, seeing
it was his own folly to provide at the first no better for himself. Which he
proves by no other ground, but that which has been answered before. And if
none of this will serve, yet will he by examples of two men show, that no
pluralitie-man wants living, or may pretend any necessity: but so
childishlic and ridiculouslie, that I am feign even to blush in his behalf.
For when a man has already a plurality of benefices (as he surmiseth) though
they may be such as be far from a competencie The Abstractor his foolish
malicious mirth.
of living: then there is no likelihood that he would desire that which he
has, or more which can not be had, or yet allege or pretend want, when it is
as far supplied, as law does yield. But if these two whosoever, with whom he
thus plaieth (upon envy no doubt to the great gifts of God in them, and malice
to their persons) neither justly can nor yet will pretend any want of living,
but will humbly and thankfully acknowledge in modesty, that God has dealt
very mercifully with them above many of their brethren: does it hereof
follow, that none other having but one benefice, can justly pretend
insufficiency of maintenance, whereby he may be induced by ordinary means to
procure an increase thereof? O shallow and barren pate, or else brazen
forehead, which dare thrust out into this learned age, such doltish yet
malicious fooleries! But we may see by his dealing here, that there is more
lusty spirits in this man, than are leapes in a bear. (...) Now therefore to
answer his mild question in the like key: may a melancholic mate, a shifting
corner-creeper, who in corporat towns where he comes, is of all spices most
afraid of mace, whose credit is so cracked, that every man will be as ready
to give him trust upon the paring of his nails, or pawning of an old razor, as
upon his single bond: whose learning in law is not worth a liard, whose
reasoning is rude, whose modesty is not worth a mite, may (I say) such a
son of the earth with toleration of good men, in an infamous libell renew the
practice of the old comedy, and play both fool and vice himself, cynicallie
to nip such men (as is thought he does in this play) in comparison of whom he
is in all respects but riffe raffe, and as base as a very dishclout? If he be
such, as I have described, who has done them this injury: then do I bowl
at him, and would hit him full patch. But if there be none such, then I do
only ask the question, and put the case. But whosoever they be, that will
speak and write which they ought not, let them be assured, that in the
necessary defense of the good and learned, whom they thus maliciously do
traduce, they shall hear that which they would not, nor yet happily look
for. But their injustice, which he exclaimeth of, and will (as he says)
Descrie and discover by law, he had need for the covering of his own shame,
and his corrupt or loose dealing, to decrie and call back again. For the
very Gl. in verb. tenues c. ean^ te Ext. de etate and qual.
gloss upon the place which belike made him unwilling to quote it, does
bewraie his packing and fond collection, as though there were no cause of
reteining mo benefices, but when they are very small, whereas that very
gloss gathers in a verse other causes also, which I have touched before.

Paupertas, pendens, defectus, gratia, seruans,
Ecclesias retinere duas, dat quodlibet horum.
And because he saw that this overthrew his former devise, whereby he affirmed,
that a man having once made choice of a benefice, be it great or small, might
not seek any augmentation: therefore as a pope which is fained to have all
laws and interpretations In scrinio pectoris, he takes upon him to declare,
that this lawful inioieng of two small benefices, is to be understood only,
when as the one of them being a competent living at his entrance, is by some
casualtie afterward impouerished, even clean contrary to the circumstance of
the place: and so by his own bold surmise, he dares to distinguish against
law, where the law makes no such distinction. Which like dexterity also does
he handle that matter, where it may justly be said, that churches are (to the
effect before mentioned) small in revenue. For 10. q. 3. 6. vnio.
the canon, which he has wrong quoted, does not once mention smalnesse in
revenue, which he would have us believe, that it goes about to define: but
only a politic direction is there set down in a council, according to the
use of those times, for Bishops to look unto, in uniting of parishes, which
were meet to be governed by one priest. Ecclesia quae vsque ad december habuit
mancipia, super se habeat sacerdotem, quae vero minus, alijs coniungatur
ecclesijs: That church which at the least had ten servants or bondmen, let it
have a priest over it, and that which has less let it be joined unto other
churches. That which this canon sets down for an estimat of some
sufficiency of revenue, by the bondment belonging to the property of the
church: the Abstractor ignorantly and untruly does transtate Corrupt and
ignorant translations.
Households, and would hereby gather wheresoever ten households be, that there
the ministers maintenance will rise to a full sufficiency. But I would wish
those which think so, might be tried but for seven years together, how they
could maintain themselves, and what hospitality they would use by the tithes,
offerings, or contributions from some several score of households which I could
name unto them. For as at the first the chief of every private man's wealth
consisted In pecudibus and pecoribus, in cattle, sheep and goats, whereupon
it came to be called Pecunia: so, about the flourishing time of the monarchy of
Rome, the chiefest part of their wealth either consisted or was esteemed
Permancipia, by the number of their servants and bondmen. In so much that this
word did hereupon, and by their manner of selling Per mancipationem then used,
come to signify all their moveable goods, as Praedia hereditaments, signified
their vnmoueables. Not L. 3. Offic.
only (says Tullie) in lands or hereditaments, the civil law drawn from
nature does punish ill dealing and guile, but also all deceit of fellers is
excluded in the sale Mancipiorum of mooueables. And again, It is manifest
(says L. 3. ff. de diverse. tempo. praescript.
the law that prescription of long time has place, Tam in praedijs, quam in
mancipijs, as well in vnmooueables, as in mooueables. Whereby appears that
not the Pluralists, but the Abstractor, is ignorantly or Wilfully blind,
which can make by a strange Alchimie of one bondsman a whole household, and of
ten of them a sufficient parish, in deed fit enough to maintain such a
profound doctor as he himself is. That which he alleges out of Rebuff.
against the practice of the Pope and church of Rome, which rather in
dispensations respect the utility of the party than of the church (which
ought chiefly to be regarded) pertains to be defended by the patrones of
popery, and not to this church of England, against which his forces are bent.
Yet it argues, both that the benefiting of the party, though not chiefly may
be respected, and that a dispensation may in truth tend to the benefit of the
church, and therefore may be lawful even by his own confession.

17. Section. Page 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151.
THis man surely has a great gift of a little more boldness than audacitie
comes unto, which not only provoke men to the examination of his wrested,
racked, and falsified laws, but to the hinderance of her Majesty's service,
and that he and his con^ederats, might in the mean time trouble the unity of
the church, would set her Highness commissioners aworke one against another,
as the devil in the person of Friar Rush has been fained to have done
amongst the covent. Which as he does malicioustie, with odious comparisons
against the ecclesiastical men in the said commission: so (I doubt not) but
withal his factious flattery is even loathsome and importune to all the other
employed in that commission, whom he makes Sounder and better than the
ecclesiastical men, and not only Godly (as they are indeed) but so far
forth, as though he could not bestow this Epither upon any of the other,
without derogation from them. Which if it be not to sow the seeds of
dissension amongst the great men of the land, I know not well what may be so
accounted. But those ecclesiastical men in commission, whom he so sawcilie
debaseth, are I hope all of them so borne up with a good conscience, that they
fear not either the virulent and spiteful accusations of any such Grachus or
Saturnius as this is, neither are they afraid to have their doings orderly
sifted by whomsoever. The laws, which he would have at his entreaty some of
The commissioners to put in execution, do make void (he says) every
dispensation granted for longer time than for seven years, to the enioieng of
mo benefices than one. But if the proofs which he has already brought to
prove them Contra(...)
to be unlawful, as being against Gods law and man's law, be so substantial,
as he would bear the simple in hand: then come in these Laws here to no
purpose, even a day after the fair. For if no law warrant them, they are void
in themselves without any further respect had unto any circumstances about
their granting. But a little to run over his proofs. The first speaks not
of dispensations for plurality, nor of the making void of them, nor of any
limitation of time to enjoy them, or to grant them: but only, that by
ordinary course of law, a man is to be resident in his benefice, albeit for a
time and upon a reasonable cause, the Ordinary may dispense with him for his
non residence. The gloss thereof he has falsified. For it says not, that the
Pope cannot, but that he which Falsificatio^.
was then Pope did not give faculties of perpetual non residence, such as were
granted by his predecessor. And he resoneth (as his use is) like a deep
Logician, A specie ad genus negative; Because dispensations for non residence
may An absurd reason.
not be granted during life, Therefore no dispensations at all may be
perpetual. The like may be answered to the next place, which speaks not of a
faculty for plurality, but De non promouendo. Whereby such as were students
abroad, might be suffered to retain a benefice by the space of seven years,
without taking any further orders than subdeaconship: which thing nevertheless
the Abstractor did omit, and does cut off with an, etc. But in the c. cum ex
eo de elect. in. 6.
preface of this constitution, we have an evident example to admonish us of the
necessary reteining of some authority to dispense: least laws being
generally made for public good, by occurrences falling out afterward, (which
could not be at the first foreseen) be turned indeed to the damage and
detriment of the church. For in this constitution it is reported, how by reason
of a canon made in the council of Lions, which exacted that within one year he
that would enjoy a benefice, should necessarily become priest: that few or
none which were learned, or meant to increase their knowledge, would accept of
any parochial benefice. Whereupon the Bishop of Rome was now urged to grant
unto Bishops liberty of dispensing for the space of seven years, to such as
would be subdeacons, De non promouendo, so they continued in some place of
study. But what is this to the practice of our church, which has by statute
no faculty in force for a beneficed person with cure of soul De non
promouendo. For he must needs be of a certain age, and a 13. Eliz. c. 12.
deacon, before he can be admitted to such a benefice: and within a year after
he must be full minister upon the penalty and loss of his living, Ipso facto.
And yet upon the like danger, for the which it was not thought meet that this
kind of faculty should be granted during life: he urges the cutting off at
the seven years end, of the validity of dispensations also for plurality.
But I answer, that this constitution is penal and strict, and therefore not to
receive any such extension: That the rule that the same reason makes the like
law has many limitations, whereof some may be found to be appliable to this
case, and are touched in the former treatise: and lastly, that in these two
faculties the reasons be not alike. For he that inioieth a plurality,
governs and profits the church by his learning atteined in that place where
he makes his resiance: whereas, if a dispensation De non promouendo, during
the time he would remain at study, should indefinitlie be granted without
limitation, then the party might continually be a learner without ever
profiting (by instruction) any part of the church in any place where^oeuer.
Yea, the law decideth this controversy, by permitting the grant of the one
dispensation for life, and making the other but temporary, which is above all
dispute. So that although he that is dispensed with to enjoy two benefices, be
not accounted directly to have a faculty of non residence, they two being
diverse: yet is it by law ( Gl. in c. in tantum Ext. de Praeb.
as to other accessaries necessarily consecutiue, without the which it could
not else sort to effect) to be extended also to contain and implie this
faculty, Gl. in c. non potest de prae. in 6. Fely. in c. fin. Ext. de Simon.
Ias. in l. beneficium ff. de constable. principum. Panorm. in c. extirpand^. qui
vero Ext. de Prebend.
that he need but to reside in the One of his benefices, because no man can be
personally resident in two churches at one time. Therefore out of the
premises I answer to his Mayor proposition two ways. First, that if
dispensation be taken for an administration of justice and right, as it is
sometimes used, then is the very collation and institution of a worthy man, a
faculty whereby he may enjoy the fruits of a parish church during life, though
not in his absence which is not here expressed: and in this sense his Mayor is
untrue, as making all such to be void. Again, there lurketh a fallacy in the
equivocation of the word Granted. For if it be understood of an express grant
to him that shall be absent (as I think he means) which is a direct faculty
for non residence, and be granted by an inferior since the making of that
constitution, considering no absolute or sovereign prince (such as the pope
claims to be) can thereby be tied otherwise than voluntarily, Quia par in
parem non habet imperium: then will I grant his conclusion. But if he will
extend the word granted so far, as to carry all such grants, whether expreslie
so conceived, or but by implication only: then is it to be denied as false:
because in a dispensation for plurality, by the secret operation of law, a
faculitie of non residence upon the one or the other benefice is necessarily
implied and allowed (without expressing) even during the life of the party.
And therefore there is no cause, why by collusion or indirectlie, the
Archbishop should seek (if he were so desirous in that sort to gratify any
man) to renew their faculties of pluralities after seven years: seeing he may
by law grant them for term of life; which may necessarily be thereof
inferred, because the party being instituted to a perpetuity in both, and
dispensed with to retain and keep them, it cannot be otherwise intended, but
that his dispensation shall last so long time, as c. si gratiosae Ext. de
rescri. c. satis peruersum did. 66. A confident and false asseueration.
he shall have title unto them, which is during his life. Therefore I cannot in
truth marvel enough at the confidence of this man, that so generally dare
auowch in the negative upon no more ground then you see, that Before the 25. of
H. 8. no faculty was granted at the Sea of Rome, or by authority thereof, for
the reteining (as he means) of the fruits of any parish church, longer than
for seven years space. When as many yet living, are able to show autentike
bulls (whereof some I have seen) to the contrary. And Rebuff. who Rebuff. in
forma dispen. ad duo. and in verb. quoad vixeris.
sets down the most ordinary tenor of them, as they were sped usually in
the court of Rome, and makes an exposition of them, does show that they were
not only in title but also In commendam granted there for term of life. Yea,
though they had not been there so granted, yet the 21. H. 8. c. 13
statute which throughout speaks of Purchasing dispensation, of taking,
receiving, and keeping of two benefices with institution and induction, which
breeds a title, and that without any limitation or distinction of time, does
convince him of arrogant vanity in this behalf. For 25. H. 8. c. 21
the statute for dispensations, does not alonelie establish licenses
accustomed to be granted by the Sea of Rome (as he untruly surmiseth) but
reaches also in some sort unto dispensations for any matter whatsoever, not
contrary nor repugnant to the word of God. And if he will affirm these
dispensations during life to be contrary to it, then shall he not be any more
able to excuse those which are granted but for term of seven years, (which
he seems to think lawful) than he may do the other which be perpetual.
And hereupon again he tells The commissioners, that many licenses will upon
this point be found void, which has told us by the scope of this whole
discourse, that all dispensations for plurality were simply forbidden by
law, whereupon it must needs follow, that they should be utterly Contrariety.
void, so that all this labor about making of them void, upon the Causes and
circumstances of granting, is hereby descried to be as needless and vain, as
his proofs of the former endeavor were weak and feeble.

18. Sect. Page 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156.
THe matters contained in this section (I do take it) may very conveniently
be reduced to these four heads, that dispensations are to be granted with
examination and looking into the cause, that they must be granted at and
according to the p^tition of the party, that nothing be expressed or
concealed, which by likelihood might have induced the judge to deny the
dispensation, and lastly that he dispense not, but where the lawmakers
himself would have been moved to dispense, by the equity of the cause, if
the case in particular had been opened unto him. Now if he meant hereby to
instruct the Archbishop how to observe law in granting such dispensations,
which he would bear us in hand are wholly unlawful; then has he sadly
endeavored himself (as the proverb is) to be stark mad yet with good reason
and discreation. Yet the Archbishop has perhaps some cause to give him thanks:
which out of that deep buttrie, and plentiful storehouse of law, wherewith by
long and painful study no doubt he is furnished, has at the length with
much travel and grievous throws, brought into the world such a litter of
laws, as the Archbishop could not have had with so apt applications, at the
best Ciuilians mouth about the arches, for a thousand pound. But if he meant
only to inform aforehand those, which shall sit upon the Commission, which he
minds to purchase forth, how they may trip the Archbishop for breach of these
laws, which yet For the most part heretofore were unknown and unpracticed:
then it were requisite he should yer he leap, look whether his Rapsodies and
Summaries have not deceived him, and whether his collections upon them, were
not something too hastily ripe for to last out any long time. That Gl. extra
vag. execra. bilis de praeb. ver. vltimo.
which he quoteth in the first place, though it be true that a knowledge of the
cause must be had, contains no such matter at all, that Privileges be
prejudicial, is neither generally true, nor yet proved and confirmed by any
of the laws which he alleges. But that those things which do breed
prejudice, are to be handled with full knowledge taken of the matter (which he
translateth unskillfully Decision of the cause) are the words of the summarie of
that law, and Summa. l. de etate ff. de minoribus.
not so full in the very law it self. And yet by the word Prejudice there
used, a damage or detriment (as it signifies in our common speech) is not
meant; but a foreiudging of one thing implied by another: albeit that other
meaning given by me elsewhere to the same place, may be also safely admitted.
That of the Gl. in ver. certa ratione c. sane Ext. de priuileg. per c. petisti.
7. q. 1.
consideration of the reason and deliberation to be had in granting a
privilege, are the words of the gloss, and not of the text, gathered by the
like example of that canon by him quoted Potuisti in steed of Petisti. The
other is too strange a quotation for me to conjecture what should be meant by
it, or where it may be heard of. The next likewise to these is such a. quoted
without law, as I can not find in the title whither he directs me. That
Linuito ff. de regulis i^ris.
following is not Inuito non debet conferri beneficium, but, Non datur: a
benefit is not bestowed of a man which is unwilling to receive it. The place
out of the c. licet Aeli. Ext. de simon.
decretals has no such matter as he ascribes to it, but contains a good
example of it, whereof by way of argument that may be drawn. And that Summar.
l. fin. C de fidei com. libertatibus.
out of the Code is the summarie only gathered of that law which is quoted;
but he shall never prove good lawyer, Qui sapit tantum ex summarijs, as one
truly says. And these be his proofs of the two first heads which he has as
slenderly (you see) proved, as it was in truth superfluous to stand upon such
points, which being truly understood, none will deny. Yet if either the
looking into the cause or petition of the party should be omitted, there is no
one word here so much as cast out, that in such respect the dispensation should
be void. But I do conjecture, that (of the Petition of the party) is brought
in by him, against the usual clause Ex mero vel proprio motu: though he do
not plainly express so much. If it be so, then truly he shows his
ignorance greatly therein, for a man may be said to grant of his own proper
or mere motion, although the party made petition: when Bald. in c. nisi Ext.
de off. legate. Dec. cons. 51. and pro tenui. C^^t sen. co^sil. 66. Paris. in c.
accedentes Ext. de preser. Cagnol. in l. qui cum ali^ ff. de reg. iuris.
as he is not moved to grant, only because the other desired it, but of a
willingness also and bounty in himself. But how the Abstractor should upon
these speeches ground, (which he was bungling about once before, even with a
contrariety to himself) that no cause may be alleged for obteining of a
dispensation, Saving necessity and utility of the church, I can not possibly
devise, except he be inspired with Anaxagoras spirit Per (...), by
Pythagoricall transanimation, who would make Quidlibet ex quolibet, even what
you will of any thing. Touching his Syllogism, I am to say, that if in his
indefinite Minor, assuming Dispensations to be hurtful and prejudicial, he
will speak like a Logician, with whom propositions of that quantity are
reputed equivalent with particulars; I will grant that some be such. But if he
speak therein as a lawyer, with whom such are correspondent to universal
propositions, I do deny it as untrue. Further I observe, that he has
ca^telouslie changed the words of the gloss, speaking of Deliberation and
aduisement, and whereupon his Mayor should be warranted, into Consultation: as
though it were requisite in granting of every dispensation, to have a solemn
conference (of I know not whom or how ma^^e) to debate the matter. And where by
supposall he saemeth to deliver, that upon The consultation, a Sentence must be
framed to that purpose, and thereto c. sano Ex^. de priuilegijs.
quoteth a place: it does no more serve this turn, than if he should have
alleged it for proof that an army of men ought also to be present. As
touching the third point I do yield, that he which seeks a dispensation,
ought not to suggest or conceal any thing outward and in fact, whereby it is
probable the judge might be led to deny such dispensation. And likewise, that
an inferior judge, who is tied in dispensations to the ordinary course of law,
should not dispense in such cases as he is persuaded the superior, who gave him
authority, would not dispense in. The first of the places, which to this
purpose he brings, is either by the printer negligentlie, or by himself so
peruerselie quoted, that I have no direction thereby to find it. The other place
speaks not of dispensing, but of judging, and decideth that there should lie
none appellation, A praefecto praetorio, being the cheifest officer under the
Emperor, and not much unlike the L. Chancellor here: because it was to be
believed and presumed, that he would judge none otherwise than the prince
himself would: and is not (as he alleges) Non aliter iudicare debet, He
ought not otherwise to judge, but it is to be believed that he will not judge.
Now to prove that the parliament, which by act authorized the Archbishop to
dispense, would not grant a faculty for two benefices, though all external
circumstances consisting in fact, were in specialtie truly recounted without
concealment of any point material and requisite therein to be known: he has
devised a proper new matter and interlude with diverse interlocutors, never
played before: wherein he plaieth all the parts himself, and one besides. By
which in effect he must for his purpose collect thus: The parliament would not
grant to some man a dispensation for the reteining of two benefices, Therefore
it will deny unto all men. Or thus: To him which has sufficient already,
they of the parliament would deny, Therefore the Archbishop ought also to
deny. The first does not follow, and the antecedent of the second is not
necessarily true. to be found in him which has sufficiency of maintenance
already, by ecclesiastical preferments. Therefore the Mayor of his
syllogism, speaking of the parliament or the Archbishops passing of a
dispensation to a man which has two benefices already, is a vain and
childish supposall of a thing impossible, the law standing as it does: for he
which presently does enjoy two benefices with cure of soul or parish
churches (whereof only this treatise speaks) can not effectually be
dispensed with for such another. And besides the drift of his speeches, it may
otherwise be certeinelie presumed, that he means not in this discourse by
Plurified men, such of his dearlings as make no scruple of inioieng not only a
Dualitie but a Trialitie, or Totquot of prebends, or such like ecclesiastical
promotions seldom or never coming thither to do any duty: yea, and that
without any dispensation, for else it were no bargain. Yet this is in very
truth the case, which such laws as he has brought (so bitterly inueighing
against pluralities) do for the most part speak of and mean, for that by law
they are reputed benefices as well as the rest: yea, although it were but a
Prest-monie or pension out of any ecclesiastical preferment, it ought not to
be retained together with another, without a dispensation. So that, if he deal
any more so strictly and unadvisedly, as to seek the taking away in
general of all dispensations for mo benefices, and thereby call into question
or endanger some men's holding of mo prebends, or other ecclesiastical
promotions than one; he may happen have his proxy of speaking for them
revoked, and be controlled hardly besides. The Minor also is but a loose and
uncertain conjecture, what the parliament would do in such a case. For the
Abstractor himself has given sentence already what they may do by law, if
any of the for(...) ^amed inducements be found in a man though otherwise
sufficiently provided for. Yet further he has not decided or touched any
proof of this: if the Archbishop dispense where it is not likely the
parliament would so do, whether thereby the dispensation shall be void? But the
statute it self does Ex superabundanti decide all these points, whereupon the
Abstractor so much ploddeth purposelie to make some dispensations void in some
other respects: because he can not prove them to be simply against law, and
also for to make the doings of ^he Archbishop odious, as though he did pass
some faculties in other manner than law would warrant. For the act does both
set down that in cases accustomed to be sped at the Sea of Rome, and also in
such as had not been so accustomed being first allowed by the prince or his
council (yet always so that they were not contrary or repugnant to the word
of God) the Archbishop might dispense: (for the which purpose also a book of
taxes of all such manner of dispensations in accustomed cases was agreed upon,
and rated out by authority thereof) and it does besides for the for^^e and
manner of proceeding in granting of them, indow the Archbishop and his
successors with Full power and authority by themselves or by their sufficient
and substantial commissarie or deputy, by their discretions from time to
time, to grant and dispose, by an instrument under the name and seal of the
said Archbishop to any subject, etc: all manner licenses, dispensations, etc.
By Gemin. in c. rela^^. 37. did. Imol. and Fely. in c. 1. de constit. Ruinus
cons. 18. li. 10. Bart. in l. alio ff. de aliment. and cib. soc. sen. co^s.
170. li. 2.
which words of Full power and authority, and by their discretions, they do
stand free and exempted (as law does teach) from the exact and limited
observation of the order and course of law positive concerning the manner of
proceeding: and do only rest bound, with the reason of the law of nature,
that therein they proceed not to deal any way dishonestlie. Which condition,
even in such Full and ample authorities whatsoever, must be L. 1. iunct. l.
dotalem l. in fraude^. and l. si a milite.. 1. and 2. ff. de milit. test. l.
3.. procurator. ff. quod quisque iuris.
always understood and observed. Now a Full and free authority of Bald. in
tracta. statut. verb. arbitrium.
disposition, is noted to be of four sorts in law. First, in the disposition
of a man's own private goods, whereby he may choose that which has less
equity, and leave that which has greater: l. fidei commissa. quanquam ff. de
legate. 3. iuncta. l. creditor.. Lucius ff. mandati. Secondly, when it is not
grounded upon any ordinary law: l. ante litem ff. de procur. ibid. libera
potestas. Thirdly, when without any constraint or commandment of another, a
matter is freely and willingly done: l. siquis mayor. C. de transact. and
ibi Jason. And fourthlie, that is called full and free authority, which
needs not to observe the solemnities of law: l. 1. ff. de Milit. testam.
Whereby it appears, that albeit the Abstractor had proved sufficiently, not
only the said four circumstances to be requisitie by ordinary course of
law, in granting dispensations for pluralities, but also to have been in such
sort necessary, that the omission of any of them should have made void the
faculty granted, and also had proved that in truth they were omitted, which he
does but vainelie and beyond ground of law, barelie surmise: yet would the act
of parliament (we see by law) have delivered all dispensed persons from any
such needless fear, and the Archbishop and his Commissarie from all just
blame.

19. Section. Page 156, 157, 158, 159, 160.
IN this section the Abstractor touches these points especially, that a cause
for dispensation must be alleged and also proved; that howsoever some causes
may perhaps be proved, yet other some can not, that the cause being not
proved, makes the dispensation void, with a declaration of his own resolute
opinion, and of some others, touching such dispensations. Concerning the first
three, the answers before made, may suffice. The first of them he would prove
by similitude of other matters: wherein a bare allegation without proof, is
not sufficient. Which though it might well be spared, as being nothing
doubtful, nor necessarily concludent to his purpose: yet I must tell him,
that his quotations in the margent do not warrant that, which is in the
discourse. For Bartol. in l. 1. C. de probat.
Bartol. in the place quoted, only says: that the plaintiff is to prove
his action, as the defendant is his exception. The place quoted out of the
Authentikes Collat.. teneantur; and the next Glos. and Doct. in proem. l. 6.
are newfound directions; which I cannot for my part skill of: except by the
latter of them, he should mean the preface upon the Sext where yet no such
thing is found. That Of restitution of a church damnified, wants wholly
proof; where he says, The like is verified of him that is dispossessed of his
goods in the time of his absence beyond the seas, and thereto quoteth, or meant
to quote C. consultationibus Ext. de offic. delegati. He is to understand that
no such thing to any like purpose is there verified, but that If a man
pretended himself to have been eiected out of possession through wrong or
force, by some that is then traveling abroad about study or such necessary
occasion, that possession may not be awarded in this case unto him. Touching
the next and second point, though the dispensations we handle, were such as
ought to be granted according to the strict course of proceeding in law: yet
one of the four causes (which is sufficient) being so easy to be proved (as
he himself does confess) we shall not need to expect a concurrence of them
all, as he must either here have insinuated to be requisite, or else must
yield, that he talks impertinentlie to the matter. Yet both necessity and
utility to have been looked unto in these dispensations, may be showed:
(though not in the prerogative court amongst wills and administrations as he
gesseth, nor yet as arising by Not teaching the people, as he calmunious^ie
does suggest.) But because it is more profitable for the people of two
parishes, to have a learned man sometimes to instruct them, and he thereby to
be well maintained: than that they should be committed to two several men,
though abiding with them continually, yet not able to preach to any purpose
unto them. And both the consecution hereof, and the thing it self, considering
the number of congregations, and the raritie (in comparison of them all) of
able preachers in England, is or may be notorious to the world. Yea, and they
are forced to take the like course for want of able preachers in other reformed
churches abroad, as in Holland, Zeland, and other places at this day, where I
wis they have not all their ministers learned and able preachers: but sundry
simple (though godly) artisans to serve in their meaner congregations. And if
he tell us here, it were better in this case to have an union; though this
cannot so be cast, that either the people may or will come together to one
place, but that even then there must be chapels for easier resort in winter,
and for the elder and weaker sort at all times, (which is all one in effect
with Plurality, seeing the auditorie receives partition:) yet it were more
thanke-worthie in him, or in any other that could devise a plat, not only how
all these and other difficulties, and the inconveniences of innovation may be
met with in these unions: but also the means how it might be compassed, that
patrones should willingly relinquish their inheritance herein, or join it
according to this devise with others, Per alternas, ternas, aut quaternas
vices: or how it may stand with reason, to break the founders and testators
wills in this case, more than in the other. In his entrance into the third
point, he contrarieth his Contrariety.
own saiengs as well before, where he assured the commissioners they should
find Many dispensations upon omission of some circumstances to be void, and
thereupon their benefices void: as here where he says: The most part of
dispensations to be nothing in effect at all. For here he alleges many
laws, only to prove, that such faculties ought to be revoked and made void
in law: and so confounds Void in law, and voidable only by law. But to
this third point I answer; Insomuch the Archbishop has by statute Full power
and authority by his discretion to dispense, whereby sufficient cause is
alwaie presumed, and he not tied to all these solemnities and circumstances,
and for that, neither the places by the Abstractor before alleged do make a
dispensation simply void, where such circumstances be omitted, and because
many things may be done in other form and manner than law prescribes, which
are not in that respect void and ad^^hilate, (as has been showed in the first
treatise:) and lastly, because the allegation of these omissions is a matter
in fact, and by himself but surmised without proof: that although all his
allegations of law here, were directly to his purpose, that yet these
dispensations are neither void nor voidable. But in the fourth and last place
he presses us with authority of The Lords servants, who speak against them,
preach against them, and write against them. Indeed a man may be the Lords
servant, and so do: though thereby it does not follow, that either they do
well and advisedly therein; or that they perfectly understand the matter, and
the exigence of the cause, or that therefore the thing is impious and wicked. I
have known as great and greater exclamation used against mere indifferent
things, (now by them confessed so to be) as though they had been either
simply impious, or so fowlie abused that they could not have any tolerable
use, even by as godly and learned men as these are, which now he speaks of.
But it is the abuse of some few careless men, and not of the matter it self
which gives occasion of that offense which is taken: and it were unreasonable,
because caterpillars some year have bred in your orchards, in that respect to
hew down all your trees. The philosopher says: Whatsoever has his use, may
be abused, saving virtue. And so, whatsoever may be abused, being not simply
vicious and wicked, may be well used. And it is not the continual abode
amongst their parishoners (which none of them all do) nor the often, but the
sound, orderly, and pithie preaching upon necessary points, that discharges
the duty of the pastor, who may be in truth as bad as Non resident, though he
were continually nailed to the pulpit, as Luther once pleasantly spoke of
Pomeran. And those which by following this theme, do shoot at nothing else,
but to tie up a good and learned divine, to a petit and mean salarie by year:
let them be assured, that desolation of the exact study of divinity, and
other good learning, whereby only the papist, and other heretics are
suppressed, and barbarism is kept out, will follow after a beggarly and
contemptuous clergy, when as by their living they shall be scarce able to
find themselves and their families: and therefore much less be able to furnish
themselves with such books as are requisite to atteine unto any exactness or
maturitie in learning. The lamentable experience of which decaie of learning,
by the smalnesse of church livings, some notable churches and commonweals of
the other side do already partly feel, but the wiser sort of them do more
fear to smart for, hereafter. And therefore, where the Abstractor assumeth,
that the cause and reason whereupon such dispensations were used, does cease,
and would thereby gather that the effect should cease: I say, that when he or
any other shall have proved, that not only some one cause thereof, but all
the causes; and not Arg. l. 1.. sextan ff. de postulando.
only the impulsive, but also the final causes of it are ceased: then (as
law wills) I must grant the act in that point to be laid on sleep, and not
to be put in ure, till some of the same causes shall happen again. But besides
his own assurances, which are sure and good enough, for any such as will
trust him upon so sufficient security: he inforceth this matter by the words
Of a lawyer (he says) of singular judgment. Whereas now for any thing we know
of him at his hands he may be who he will: peradventure the famous Grangousier,
grandfather to prince Pantagruel, or some such great renowned clearke as he
was said to be, which first in this world devised to play at dice with a pair
of spectacles on his nose. But it may be that one cause hereof was, because he
would not seem to have taken so much of Rebuff. by way of loan and upon
credit, which yet is no blemish for such deep lawyers as he and I are: and
another, because he has falsified Falsificatio^.
his author (I know not in whose favor) by translating, quid debet ecclesia Dei
plurium nobilium vanitati, vt patrimonio Jesus Christi dilectissimi sponsi sui,
etc: alat accipitres, educat canes, etc: thus; What? Shall the church of God,
the best belooued spouse of Jesus Christ, etc: feed hawks? bring up dogs? etc.
Whereas in truth it is: What does the church of God owe unto the vanity of
many noble men, that with the patrimony of Jesus Christ, etc: it should feed
hawks, bring up dogs, etc. But the great learned lawyer himself, whom he
indeed means, even Bernardus Diazius, and whom Rebuff. de dispens. ad plur.
been. (...). 60.
Rebuff. terms a reverend father, does in the next words following declare,
that he directed this inuectiue Against husbandmens sons more unlearned than
their parents, which Illicitis modis plura occupant beneficia, by unlawful
means do occupy many benefices: and also against such, which being never so
cunning, or how learned soever, Doctrina sua nunquam Catholicae ecclesiae
profuerunt, nec prodesse curant: yet did never by their learning profit the
catholic church, nor ever care to do good in it. The peremptory judgment of
Rebuff. which he afterward alleges, Ibidem nu^ 84. fol. 249.
but wrong quoted, is somewhat too sparingly by him translated in that word,
Si perperam concessa sit: if it be granted vnorderlie: whereas it should be, If
it be naughtilie granted. And it is grounded upon a false principle of popery,
that he which breaks even the positive ^^w of the pope Rebuff. de dispensat.
ad plura benefic. (...). 22.
(such as the prohibition of plurality is,) does (as they term it) sin
mortallie, even directly and immediately against conscience, which is no small
part of his Antichristianisme, whereby he sought to sit in the consciences of
men. Yet thus much may be gathered of this saying, that where it is orderly
granted as law prescribes, there it carries not in his judgment any danger
with it unto either party, the condition of it thereby ceasing.

20. Section. Page 161, 162, 163.
BUt now having so substantiaslie (as you have heard) overthrown all
dispensations, he was belike afraid he should be justly called Coram for
enforcing so violently a diminution of her Majesty's revenues, arising by the
taxes of them. To salve up which sore, he lets all other faculties alone;
wherein her Highness must (at his request) sit down by the loss: and for
three of them, that is, Dispensations for simonie, non residence, and mani^
benefices, he does assure her Majesty upon the credit of his arythmetike and
auditorship, that They are indeed a great diminishing of her revenues. But
albeit he lay out all three in his conclusion to be proved, yet he does not
in his proofs once name the faculty of non residence, which by no shadow can
prejudice her Majesty's cofers. And when he should descend to the casting
forth of his proportions, and extraction of the root, by the rule of Coss. and
Algebra: he misseth the principal matter (even his taxes) to work upon, and
leaves in his Book a blanke or a glass window, for any such to glaze up, as
come and will do him that favor, so that, Cum desint vires, tamen est
laudanda voluntas. The man was willing to have done somewhat, if he could but
have told what to have said.

That the faculty for Simonie committed, is a diminution to her Majesty's
revenues he proves (supposing first the tax thereof to her Majesty to be in
shillings, whereas it is indeed in pounds:) because if the party dispensed
with for simonie were deprived for it, then her Highness should reap more
benefit a great deal, by the first fruits of the next incumbent than the tax
mounteth unto. But how is the Abstractor here become so strict laced, as to
call for their depriving, whose fault (in way of gratification of simonicall
patrons) he almost wholly excused in the former treatise? The truth is, this
kind of dispensation is very seldom used, because most of those which are
guilty of that fault do deal so closely, and are so justly doubtful of
obteining it upon petition, that they hold it better (without opening of
themselves) to sit still quietly. Whereby it can not easily be put in
practice, but where some not knowing the rigor of the canon herein (which
condemns for simonie even entreatie and meanes-making, and that recompense
also which is but conceived in heart, perhaps only in way of thankfulness
after, so the same may upon necessary circumstances be gathered) and therefore
of simplicity without corrupt meaning falling into it, and fearing the malice
of those, which stand hardly affected to them, are forced for their further
safeguard, to procure this faculty. It may have a good and a commendable use
besides, where an old man meaning to resign, treats in simplicity with him
which is to succeed for a pension according to law, without the Ordinaries
priuitie: or where two beneficed persons in good and plain meaning, without
allowance of the cause by the Ordinary, do deal about a change of their
benefices: or where a man is circumuented by suborned witnesses, and deprived
for it without remedy of appellation, and the ill dealing is detected
afterward. In which and in like cases it is meet that they should be restored
to their ministry and living, if they be otherwise unspotted, and be
profitable to the church. And I verelie do persuade my self, that her
Majesty would be loath in such cases to have them deprived, that the might have
the first fruits of their benefices, as the Abstractor dishonorablie would
ins^^uat. Yea, and those also are directly within compass of that simonie,
which we call Mentalis, of mind only: which see well enough what is meant by
their patrons, but willingly do wink, and so enthrall themselves (by large
bonds to their patrones upon warning prefixed to resign) either to grant a
lease for a little to pay, or to pack. Whom assuredly I do so little pity,
that I think them as unworthy to obtain a dispensation, for dallieng with
the law and their own conscience, as those other merchants which bluntly go
to work, agree with their patron, pitch and pay.

That dispensations for many benefices (which is the last of the three) is a
decrease of her Majesty's revenues, he would prove thus: because they being
hereby in a few men's hands, do not fall void so often as they would do, if
every several man had a several benefice, and thereby her Highness
first fruits are not so often paid over as they might be. For the discussing of
which weighty point, let us imagine that a hundred men have two hundred
benefices, and on the other side, that two hundred men have two hundred
benefices. Now, can any man give a reason, why it is not as likely, that ten
men of the one hundred shall die in one year, as twenty of the two hundred,
seeing it is the same proportion? Then (I pray you) what difference or
alteration to her Highness treasure is it, whether twenty benefices fall void
by the death of ten men, or the same number become void, by the death of
twenty several persons in one year? So that, if hereby there arise no
diminution, and the tax for the dispensation be an increase of the revenues,
then shall the Abstractors argument Ab vtili, be found to be scarce to his own
honesty and credit. And if the time of expectance of the auoidance of his
benefices which has two, did work any diversity betwixt the two cases: yet
were this delaie of time sufficiently recompensed unto her Majesty by the
tax of dispensation paid to her cofers. Yea, if those which have mo benefices,
do fat up and grease themselves (as he before obiecteth:) her Majesty shall be
in great likelihood to have first fruits paid over for both their benefices,
much sooner than for him that lives upon one, more ^rugallie and sparingly:
yea, and further these times are so quarelsome, that by one quirke or other of
circumstance about them and their dispensations which have two benefices, more
auoidances a great deal do happen; than in such several benefices, which are
and have been inioied for the most part by several men, as daily experience
teaches,

Now, for the better removing of a scruple, which happily might be objected by
some unskillful man against all dispensations privileges, indulgences,
exemptions, pardons, and immunities, whose effects are either To benefit, to
exempt, to help, or to release: I hope it will not seem impertinent to speak
something. For it may be alleged, that the office and nature of a law is
generally and in common to ordeine, concerning the guiding of the affairs of
men, as Aristotle teaches in his Politikes. And the law L. 5. ff. de legibus.
says that Laws are to be applied rather to those matters which happen
easily and often, than to those which chance but seldom. And L. 1. ibid.
again, A law is a common commandment: where upon it seems, that the old
lawgiuers among the Romans, as holding it unequal to set down laws, which
were not to reach indifferently unto all in general, did 12. Tabule.
decree thus: Priuilegia ne irroganto, let no privileges be granted. In which
respect a L. 16. ff. de legibus.
privilege is described, That it is a singular right or law, which for some
utility, by authority of the lawmakers, established against the tenor of
reason. Whereby it might seem, that all immunities are unlawful. But it is to
be answered hereunto, that the natural justice and reason, whereby man's mind is
directed unto civil societies, does not alonelie rest in the generality of
laws, but advisedly weieth by the circumstances, whether right to all men be
well distributed in them, whereupon the Graecians called the law vou^, as it
were a distribution. So that if any person upon something especially
considerable, be not well and justly provided for, under the common and
general precept of law: then he is to be respected ^^ a private and special
law, whereupon the name of ^^^^^lege flows, Quasi priua, id est, priuata lex,
as (...) Romans used to speak. For not only they, but all other nations, as
they afterward grew more prudent day by day, through long experience and use
of things, did well perceive that no law generally written, without all
moderation by circumstances occurrent, could possibly but deliver, in steed of
right, oftentimes plain injury and tyranny: according to that common
proverb; Omne ius habet annexam gratiam: Every law has or ought to have
grace and savor annexed: an L. respiciendum ff. de poenis.
example also whereof is reported in law; and therefore sumum ius est summa
iniuria: Exact and precise law is great injury, being once disioined from
equity. And therefore those words Against the tenor of reason, are not to be
understood as though a privilege were against natural equity: but because it
is an abridgement or exception of the general principles and rules of law
which are grounded upon reason. Neither yet so, as though it did cleerelie
contrary and impugn the reason of the common and general law, which it
only does in some appearance: but being considered upon other good grounds,
it is for the most part very agreeable to reason, right and equity, which may
be made plain by this one example. It is of common right and equity, For
every L. 1. ff. de pactis. instit; de fideiuss, in princ.
man to keep touch, to perform promise, and to satiffie the credit given him
either in his own, or in an others behalf. Yet, if we should comprehend
children under age in the generality of this rule, who be subject by reason of
their tender years, and slender discretion, to be circumuented and manifoldlie
ouer-reached, it were a very unjust and unequal law. And therefore seeing
there is such inequality betwixt them and men of riper years, the same rule
cannot without iniusties alike perteine unto them both: so that it is meet by
some exemption and special privilege, that their tender years should be
considered and provided for. To conclude, neither are all privileges and
dispensations against reason or right, neither has the Abstractor
sufficiently proved any of these particulars of this treatise which here he
does recapitulate and rehearse, but much less has he proved his principal
issue, that Dispensations for many benefices are unlawful. Which at the
closing up of all (for very shame) he was forced a little to change, by
pretending to have spoken all this while of Two or mo benefices, and not of
Many, as the very title which he has prefixed to his treatise, and his whole
discourse thereupon, does plainly import. FABIVS. Foelices essent arts, si
de illis soli artifices iudicarent.

FINIS.
Quorundam vocabulorum and semiclausularum recognitio.
Page Lin. Recognitio. 6 16 Of 9 31 legatine 45 1 mustered 64 13 ever 64 30
whence 57 36 from other churches 58 24 sound 69 22 where 71 21 her 73 17
holds not when 76 25 yet with this 82 17 seeks 105 7 deposition 105 23
legatine 110 4 end 111 22 Bishop 117 9 altercation 117 11 matter 121 7 tossing
127 15 deconship 136 16 generally it is 161 29 for him not to 191 3 or 193 24
utility 196 34 Apostatare 227 19 deodans 228 13 as being 257 13 above 295 19
no man takes this honor 318 31 the dust of the feet of their seniorie

Addatur 3. line^ termino in page 227. istud subsequens: Ergo without a
dispensation it is not lawful to enjoy mo benefices.


