FOUR SERMONS, WHEREOF TWO, PREACHED AT TWO ASSIZES, this present year, 1638,
at MAIDESTONE in KENT, the other two, in his own charge.

By ROBERT ABBOT, Vicar of Cranbrooke in Kent.

The Titles and Texts follow on the next leaf.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Pain, for P. Stephens, and C Meredith, and are to be
sold at their Shop, at the sign of the Golden Lion, in Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

THE LORDS ASSIZE, 1 The Text Judge. 11. 27. The Lord the Judge, be Judge this
day, betwixt the children of Israel, and the children of Ammon NATVRES ASSIZE,
2 The Text. Math. 7. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the
Prophets. THE CHRISTIANS THRIFT in KEEPING, 34 The Text, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Holding
faith, and a good Consci^en^
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, AND RIGHT HONORABLE, WALTER LORD BISHOP
of WINTON, High ALMONER to the KINGS most excellent Majesty, and PRELATE of the
GARTER, honor in Both lives.
RIght Reverend, and right Honorable; many men are willing to cast in some of
their superfluity into the Lords treasury, the poor widow was willing to cast
in all, yet little. It is a wonder that she should be commended above all
those that had fuller hands. But when Christ looks to the giver, a poor
widow, and not to the gift, two mites; to the plenty in the heart, not to the
penury in the hand, the wonder cease.

My present gift is like the widows, from my poverty; yet should I be an
unthankful liar if I should say, it is all I have. God has vouchsafed me a
double calling: from himself, insuch gifts as have made me willing according
to my abilities; and from the blessed church (wherein I humbly thank God, to
be borne, brought up, and l^ve) in such power to exercise the ministry which
I have received, by reading, doctrine, approbation, and imposition of hands.

Whatsoever I have by both, I heartily desire may be for Gods uses, and the
service of the Church of God amongst us. I cannot commend them as they are
acted by me, it is by a weak body, and a weaker soul. As Saint Augustine
complained of old, heimihi! quam contrarius sum egomet mihi; ego in spiritu, et
ego in carne: so more justly may I. I have a long time been trained under
fightings within, and without and ever and anon, am ready to be overpowered
with sin, or grief. But as the ram in fight draws back, not to quit the
field, but to gain a course, to give the greater bruise at the next shocke: so
do I desire to be in my infirmities. I seem sometimes to my self to faint,
and almost to fail, and to bear about me a dying spirit every day. Quocunque
oculos converto, video documenta meae aetatis, said Seneca of old, and so say I.

Yet looking to what I have received, some strength yet, to work, and a
conscience to keep me within my traces, I press hard foreward, and find
that I loose not too much ground, thorough him in whom I am able to do what I
do.

This holds me up in my work, and keeps me in canonical obedience to my
calling, that I may say at last with blessed Augustine, liberavi animam meam,
yea, and sometimes also (though more to satisfy others then my self)
scribimus indocti, doctique, I stain paper with my pen.

How unable am I for any great task, no man knows better then your honor,
who from my youth have been a stay to my ways, an help to my studies, and a
comfort to my age, since by your Honors self I have been accounted worthy to
be your Honors servant. But since I have not had a resolved face to deny my
poor gleanings after the harvest, to be brought forth to this learned light
wherein we live, I humbly pray that they may first rise or fall, by your
honors censure.

This first presents it self, my labor that God may judge, in the judgments
of men. Next to that, my desire that Nature be not silenced in her good law,
when we practice that we call justice. And if any thing else follows help
faith, and conscience in our whole course, both public and private, whosoever
have been my friends, from whose motions these thoughts have been drawn out,
your Honor shall be my first judge here, and patron (if your Honor please,
and need require) to that which is with humbleness confessed to be unworthy of
you. I need not plead reasons, I am your Honors for humble service: it is a
just debt from me; and that due to your Honor now, and while I am. Due for
your undeserved favor to my self. Due for your encouragement to my eldest son
while he was at Oxford. Due for your exhibition to my youngest son now he
is in Cambridge. And if this could be a perpetual register of your Honors
love and bounty to me, and mine, I should heartily rejoice. But because
mothes and time will eat this out, I shall humbly desire to lay up a stock of
prayers, for your Honor, in heaven. This is all that I can do, and this is
all from me that your Honor desires. Would I do more, I could not, could I
do less, I would not. This I (by Gods Grace) can, and will; and so continue.

Your Honors humble servant to be commanded. ROBERT ABBOT.

TO THE TRVELY RELIGIOUS, HONORABLE, NOBLE, AND Worshipful Justices, and other
Gentry of Kent, who have heard, and may happen to read these poor Sermons,
especially to those of his own Parish, all good.
HONORABLE, Noble, Worshipful, you may justly ask, whence this sight comes? I
must excuse it a great deal, from importunity. But what is the present? A cup
of cold water to good Disciples of Christ: and you know that brave commander
who did accept of as low a present, from as poor a man as my self. It will
be rejected; because there is too much of that already: Charity and Justice
are too much watered, they are grown cold, they have waded so long that they
are benumbed, and less apt for use. I hope better things. They may be dwarfed
in some, like those three bones in the head of a man which Anatomists call
Malleolus, Incus, and Stapes, which are as big in a child as in a man* but
the less the body is in this (I hope) the more is the heat, the more vigorous
the spirits: and it may be this may water by an Antiperistasis may make this
heat greater, but cannot lessen it in those that are so full of goodness.

Your worths are well known to others, and are beleveed by me: go on still to
do worthily in Ephrata, and to be famous in Bethlehem. Do worthily in piety,
do worthily in private charity; and do worthily in public Justice. We have
an age made up of too much sin, profane swearing, and brutish profaning of
the Lords day, drunkenness, and malicious quarrellings cover too much
christians ground amongst us. As it is with the sea, there goes that Leviathan,
and creeping things innumerable; so is it with the land; there are too many
master sins, and untellable other sins, which wound single, but oppress by
heaps. A King we have by Gods blessing never better; laws never wiser, and
provisions never more wary: but to make all right, as the orator magnified
pronunciation, so do I execution.

Many hands make light work: and your hearts will set them on work; up and be
doing. I need not provoke your willing minds: yet may I show you what you do,
or should, though I press you not to what you do not.

A poor oppressed Surius in vita S. Basil.
woman did observe Saint Basil to have some credit with the governor of his
place. She solicits him to write to the govenour in her behalf. The good
Bishop presently took pen, ink, and paper; and wrote to this effect. This
poor woman came unto me saying, that my letters have great weight with thee:
If it be so, hear her, and show it. The woman carried it, the governor read
it, and writes back this again. Holy father; for thy sake I would have had
pity upon this poor woman, but I could not, except she pay all that is
required of her. The good Bishop writes again (once more) thus. Seeing thy
will is ready but thy power is wanting, it is a tolerable excuse: but if thou
could, and would not, Christ will make thee so poor, that where thou
would, thou shall not be able. These words were prophetical to this unjust
governor: for not long after he fell into the Emperors displeasure, was cast
into prison, and expected punishment. But then he remembered Saint Basil, whose
intercession he sought, and obtained, and by that means, his liberty. He then
came to Saint Basil, called to mind the poor woman, sent for her, and
restored to her the goods, he wrongfully withheld, twofold. He would not
hazard a second punishment for an act of Injustice unrepented of.

My observations upon this story are these; It is a great honor to be in
authority, it makes the Saints of God on earth to sue unto them. It is a
miserable place to be upon earth, oppressions may be done to Gods poor
servants. It is a fearful thing not to relieve the oppressed when it is in
our power; it casts the mighty from the throne, and brings them to shame. It is
a brave thing to do Justice at first: but better late then never, better of
love then when it is whipped outwith strokes* It is glorious too, not to refuse
to do right at last, when at first we have done wrong as he: for not one of
a thousand meets with such a day.

You will be pleased ever to be better presidents of Justice then that
Iusticer, and not to stand in need of his best part, his late repentance,
whereof you are not sure. And thus, the eyes of the Lord will be upon the
just, and his ears will be open to their prayers: His eyes will be upon the
just. As he that has made a goodly picture, looks upon it again and again,
that he may supply to every defect at last: so God deals with the godly that
are just. His ears are open to their prayers. When they call he will hear,
when they cry, he will say Ecce adsum, behold here am I, nor behold I will come
because he is hard at hand to comfort them with blessings, who comfort others
with upright Justice.

I cannot teach the meanest amongst you in your way: only I have presumed to
present this story, and withal to offer to your eyes (if you please) what you
have heard with your ears, The Assize of God, and The Assize of Nature. If
these may stand you in the least stead to show you what you are and do, and
put you in mind what you must continue, it is all the hearty wishes, and
humble prayers (upon this occasion) of him that is, and will be

Your worthinesses to use in possible services ROBERT ABBOT.

THE CONTENTS OF THESE SERMONS in short. 1 The Lords Assize, from Judge. 11. 27.
1 Which is fitted to the time, or setting down a trial of 1 The life. 2 The
liberty 3 The goods. 4 The goodname. Of Israel* Of Amo^n
2 And propounded to persuade all trials by the Lord the Judge. Where both. 1
What keeps the Lord from judging. 1 When truth is witheld in unrighteousness.
1 By denial. 2 By false accusation. 3 By profit. 4 By lingering delays. 5 By
flattery, fear, hope, etc.
2 Where (if truth appear) judgment do not attend upon it in full glory,
2 What brings the Lord to judging. 1 When such persons sit to judge as God
would have. 2 When the whole work is carried for the honor of the God of
truth. 1 By an holy heart. 2 By an holy hand. 3 By an holy eye. 4 By an holy
mouth.



THE CONTENTS OF THE Second SERMON 2 Natures Assize from Math. 7. 12.
1 Where for introduction 2 knots are clea^ed. 1 What it is inferred upon? How
it is the law and the prophets? 1 Whether in the law there be^e more then one
precept? 2 Whether there be a connection of all virtues, where one?


2 Where for tractation: 1 Are examined. 1 Laws of nature. 2 Principles 2 of
nature.
Are showed. 1 The praises of this law. 2 The power of it. 1 Brief. from
Christ. 2 Plain. Nature.


1 In sense: laid down 1 Negatively. 1 Not what we list. 2 Nor what others
do to us. 3 Nor what others do to others. 4 Nor what themselves would. 5 Nor
what we have bin accustomed. 6 Nor what profit, honor, pleasure persuades. 7
Nor as the laws of the land permit.
2 Positively, As would others do to us. 1 Whence this rule arises? 2 When
self-love is right charity? 3 How this rule of justice must be carried?

2 In application. To all. To the occasion. 1 With 2 means to do it. 2 With 2
motives to further it.



THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD, and fourth SERMONS. 3 The Christians Thrift in
keeping, from 1 Timothy 1. 19.
1 Where we are taught. 1 To keep faith, where. 1 How we must keep it? By
holding, 1 The ground of faith. 2 The object of faith. 3 The act of faith. 4
The power of faith.
2 Why we must keep it? 1 Faith is our life. 2 Faith is our power of working. 3
Faith is our workman. 4 Faith is our best light here. 5 Faith makes earth
heaven.
2 To keep our keeping of it, and to use means to keep it.
2 Where also we are taught. 1 To keep a good conscience: where. 1 How we must
keep it? By keeping. 1 The light of conscience. 2 The love of conscience. 3 The
work of conscience. 4 The charge of conscience.
2 Why we must keep it? 1 If it be gone, God will be against us. 2 Without it
nothing will do us good. 3 Without it nothing can do us hurt. 4 It carries with
it more then the whole world.
2 To try our keeping of it, and to use means to keep it.



THE LORDS ASSIZE, OR A SERMON ON JVDGES 11. 27.
The Lord the Judge, be Judge this day betwixt the children of Israel and the
children of Ammon.
RIght Honorable, Right Worshipful, and Beloved; Be pleased to hear these
words out of the Judges, by Gods assistance, driven to an issue before the
Judges. Verbum diei in diesuo.


It may be, you will say, they are not fit: they yield not a word in due
season: they speak of the Lord the Judge, and these here are men.

It is true; they are men by Psalm. 82. 6. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6.
nature, but they are Gods by Communion of office, ( I have said ye are Gods:)
and their Judgments are the Judgments of God, for God, says Iehosaphat. But
you will

This is true too; yet by the Romans 13. Distantia 1 Perfectionis. 2 Oppositionis.
sword: for the Magistrate bears not the sword for nonght. As all sinners
fight against God: (for they stand at a double distance from him; a distance of
perfection, and of opposition:) therefore God has a controversy with his
people, and proclaymeth war. So criminal offenders fight against the face of
government, the just laws of the kingdom. This is the controversy, whether
the laws shall be kept or broken? And as God, in case of rebellion, does
provide famine, beasts, pestilence and the sword: so Magistrates come against
such, not with the sword of the mouth as Preachers, but with the (...) Heb. 11.
34.
mouths of the sword, to be edged by the laws for correction, or confusion.

The greatest difficulty will be to fit the persons, and causes to be tried and
Judged.

It is confessed, that there will here be some difference. Here a pretended
title of land is that which draws on the whole quarrel: but this day will
bring forth other controversies. Here the proper sword of war decides the
doubt: but this day draws the borrowed sword of peace, for peace. Here Israel
is against uncircumcised Ammonites: but this day will unvaile christians by
profession, not by practice, in those particular acts they must fall in, and
for.

Yet look more narrowly into the present business betwixt Israel and Ammon,
and ye shall see all the causes of this day intertwisted.

Ammon charges Israel with unjust possession of land held from them to a long
succession. Iphtah the now Judge, being loath to fall upon such a desperate.
Phlebotomy as Ammon was prepared for, would first plead out, Iuridically, the
cause, by embassies, to clear the justice of his sword.

He confesses that they have that land in question: and he pleades a
threefold right unto it. The right of a 1 Jus belli justi.
just war; it was gotten by the sword. The right of Gods gift; God, whose is
the earth, 2 Donatio Dei.
gave it us, and cast out the old owners as forfeiters. The 3 Praescriptio.
right of prescription; we have had it four hundred years without claim or
charge of wrong.

But for the ancient possessors of it (that he might cross Ammons charge) he
pleads two things. First, that it was Amorites, who fought against them under
Sehon their then King: and of the Moabites who were justly ejected by God. But
secondly, Amorites (the now plaintifes,) they had none of their land: that was
a false charge, a picking of an unjust quarrel.

And that this plea was good is manifest in the Records of the law, those old
reports of God himself. God said, Deuteronomy. 2. 29
thou shall not distress or meddle with the children of Ammon: for I will not
give thee their land which I have given Deuteronomy. 2. 37
to the children of Lot. There is Gods edict, with the reason of it. And Moses
said, to the land of the children of Ammon thou came not, nor unto any place
of the river Iabbock, the land now in question. There is their obedience to
Gods charge, which they kept to that day.

Thus Isreal's case is clear, yet this prevails not with Ammon. Lies would
have dominion over truth: and Ammon would fight though the cause were cleared
against him. He joins issue, takes out his nisi prius, appoints the day of
Assize, and he will have a trial, for life; whether Ammon or Israel must live:
For liberty, whether Ammon or Israel must be homagers: for Goods; whether
Ammon or Israel shall have the spoil; for name, whether Ammon or Israel is of
better credit. And thus the text comes up to the whole business of the day.

Now, when all things were thus prepared betwixt guilty, and innocent,
plaintiff, and defendant, the wretched Ammonites were like prisoners in Acts 8.
Pro. 5. 22. Romans 11.
the bonds of iniquity, holden in the cords of their sins, shut up in the
prison of unbelief, and could not see the Judge set to be the avenger of his
people. But Iephtah was at more liberty. He sees with fuller eye the Glory and
presence of the just Judge. He (like a man confident in his cause) appeals
unto him; calls for these prisoners, and plaintifes, to the bar; prepares
for hearing, judgment, execution; and because he would not have the glory of
the day himself, but would give it to the Judge of right and wrong: therefore
as Ioab before Rabbah, when he was ready to take it, sent for David, saying,
Come thou and take it, least the 2 Samuel 12.
victory be attributed to me, and the city be called by my name: so does
Iphtah invite God to the day for all honor, the Lord the Judge, Judge betwixt
the children of Israel and Ammon.

But still you may say, that Ammonites that were to be judged there, and of
these there were none here.

It is true personally, individually life, liberty, goods, and good name of
Israel at their mercy, for spoil and prey, and so there are too many here, and
every where.

Israel had all their life in and from the God of mercy; all their liberty from
the God of freedom; all their goods and lands from the God of bounty; all their
credit and renown, from Gods protection and cohabitation: yet Ammon unjustly
seeks to dispossess them of all these. He puts them in fear of life, and
seeks it. He presents death, and pursues it. He hunts after their liberty and
would have it. He desires their goods, for a rich booty. He basely takes away
their good name, as usurpers not worthy to live: therefore I appeal to the God
of Caesar (says Iphtah:) the Lord the Judge, be Judge, etc.

By this time (I hope) you see Isreal's and Ammons case brought to the full
work of an Assize, wherein ye have presented three particulars.

1. The Judge set for the trial of guilty, and not guilty, plaintiff and
defendant, the Lord the Judge.

2. The causes to be heard, the life, liberty, goods, good name of Israel, and
Ammon.

3. The persons betwixt whom, the children of Israel, and the children of Ammon.

And now, what shall I say? the same or such like causes are the work of this
day. Let it therefore be all our wishes, desires, prayers, purposes, and
practices, as it was Iphtahs,

That the Lord the Judge may The issue of the Text.
judge them.

1. If he do not Judge, he will Judge the Judgment. He only is reason it
self, wisdom it self, justice it Summa ratio.
self.

2. If he judge them, he is Genesis 18.
the Judge of all the world, whose ways are equal and cannot but judge justly.

Thus we shall have an happy assize for the maintenance of virtue, and
punishment of vice, which is always the issue when the Lord the Judge judges.

But what? shall we wish to decline the judgments of

God forbid: God is the Iam. 5.
only Savior; yet the prayer of faith saves too. God only converts the
heart; yet Luke 1. 16, 17. Job 33. 23, 24.
John Baptist shall turn many hearts of the fathers to the children, and of
the disobedient to the wisdom of the just. God only delivers from hell; yet
the Interpreter, one of a thousand, shall deliver a soul from the pit. God
only forgives Mic. 7. 18. Ioh. 20.
sins, out of authority, as the great Judge; yet whose sins ye remit shall
be remitted. In a word, God accounts them as authors with him, that are
instruments from him of good. If therefore men judge with God, from God, the
Lord the Judge judges too. So be it this day, we decline them not, let them
judge and spare not. There are two things 2. What keeps the Lord from judging.
Romans 1. 18 1 When truth is withholden in unrighreousnesse.
keep God from judgment seats. First, when truth is withhold in
unrighteousness: when it is held in prison that it cannot speak. Thus the
Gentiles did in themselves: when a beam of natural knowledge was ready to
break out of them, to give them light to see more of God then they did, they
withheld and smothered it, and so God judged not in them. Thus it may be at the
bar.

Be pleased to conceive it thus. As in a reasonable man you may see an Assizes
set: for there is a Judge, Conscience, which viewes and censures all the ways
of man. There is a Jury of natural or revealed principles. There is a prisoner
to be tried, and that is truth; Her case is this, whether she shall be set at
liberty yea or no, to go freely, speak freely, rule freely in all our courses.

Truth pleades, I am the Veritas odium parit.
daughter of the great King: his very Image: But when I appear, I am hated and
suppressed, and this brings this trouble upon me.

The jury of natural principles is silenced or corrupted by carnal reason and
wisdom. The judge hearing no evidence is silent: and as loath to trouble
himself, is content to put off inquiry till another time, as Foelix.
Hereupon the will triumphs Acts 24. 25.
over truth I will do as I have done: and all the affections put Ier. 44.
in after the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life.
And thus is Truth 1 John 2.
imprisoned, and God the Judge judges not in man.

So in places of judicature truth is tried too. There are judges set, godly,
wise, grave, impartial, hating covetousnes, and persons out of the cause, who
are ready to pass sentence according to allegation, and proof, set on with
all good conscience. There are juries of natural subjects and brethren; who
should not be like Diogenes his man, who was called Manes, a non manendo,
because he ran away: so jury a non jurando, because they forget the oath of
God, and run away from it: but must present according to truth so help them
God. There is a glorious Martyr to be tried, and that is Truth; which would
have truth in person of Judge, jurer, guilty, innocent plaintiff, and
defendant: and truth in cause too; nothing but truth objected, nothing but
truth answered, that all may cry, great is truth and it prevails.

But now, if on all sides Ioh 18. 38
there be Pilates good motion what is truth. But no further sifting into the
nature, and power of it by witness, oath, circumstances: then are at Si
inficiari sat est ecquis erit nocens?
hand, these prisons to with hold truth. The first is venially, I did it not.
And if it be enough to deny, who shall be guilty?

The second is false accusation Si accusasse sat est ecquis erit innocens?
by those who are Graeca fide testes, knights of the post, and will swear any
thing for a fee. And if it be enough to accuse, who shall be innocent?

The third is Profit, in those Canes venaticos.
who will rouse up Verres his hounds, who continually do Dare offam Cerbero.
lie in the wind for gain, except a man will stop their mouths by some
fat morsel.

The fourth is off-putting to Frustratoriae dilationes.
another time, that is, lingering and costly delays, though the case be never
so clear in truth.

The fifth is malice and all ill will, which never speaks well, in those that
pant after the earth on the head of the Amos 2. 7.
poor, and turn aside the way of the meek.

And lastly, that which helps on all these is, selfeflattery, friendflattery,
fear, hope, or some other by-place for truths oppression: These or the like
prisons are in a readiness, and then truth is clapped up, and kept out of sight,
like some malicious man's adversary, who is with great care put in prison
before the day of hearing comes, because he fears his cause.

Say I pray: who Judges now? not the God of truth, but the Prince of
darkness, lying, and vanity.

Secondly, God is kept from 2. When judgment does not attend upon truth in
full glory.
judgment seats, when (if truth do appear) judgments do not attend upon it
in full glory. All judgments of men are not good enough to wait upon truth.
There is darkness in them, and nothing but light in truth: Yet if God will so
honor our judgments, as to put them into that service; whenever she
appears we must be glad to follow her: and for truths sake to do, and for
truths sake to die; because God is in truth, and the faithful witness, Christ
is in truth Apoc. 1.
too.

To conceive it, call to mind that God requires (as you know) a threefold duty
of chief magistrates. First, to 1 (...).
advise, consult, and take care for common good, as our good King does. These
are the secrets of government: which Arcana imperij.
if they were discovered, the strength and weakness of a kingdom would soon
be discovered to all the world: Therefore privates meddle not with these
things, that last is too large for their shoe.

Secondly, to provide by 2 (...).
laws, edicts, and proclamations to keep every man under them in good order.
And thirdly, to give judgment, 3 (...).
according to his laws, and ordinances, for the punishment of evil doers, and
praise of them Romans 13. 4.
that do well.

And Judges know their duties under them, that is, according to laws, edicts,
orders helped forth by the God of truth, to wait upon truth, and pass
judgment for it, with an equal balance of causes, a blind eye to persons,
and a sharp sword of offense, and defense as need requires. Now, if this be
away, God judges not. He is kept from judgments seats, because his truth is
not honored and his 2 What brings the Lord to judgment seats.
kingdom of truth advanced. These two keep the Lord the Judge from judging
amongst men.

There are two things also which bring God to judge. First, when such persons
sit to judge as God would have. They should be shepherds to defend and keep
their flocks: Psalm. 77. 70. Ezekiel. 28. 12. Genesis 50. 20. 2 Samuel 14. 17.
signets upon Gods right hand, to seal no rescripts and warrants but his:
saviors, to preserve and save much people: and Angels, to guard the good, and
inflict punishment upon the wicked. God has made them images of his
excellency, 1. When such persons sit to judge as God would have.
in being set aloft; of his wisdom, in making and applying laws; of his
Justice, in punishing malefactors; of his mercy, in passing by, and pardoning
if need require; and of his goodness in fostering and cherishing his people.
Therefore he makes glorious Emblems of them in the Scriptures: we read of one,
in the image of an he Goat Dan. 8. 5.
with a notable horn betwixt his eyes. There is an horn for glory and
strength to offend and defend. A notable one visible to all his subjects that
stand in need. An horn between the eyes, because it is used with
circumspection and wisdom: such must be a Judge. And let it not grieve them,
that they are set out by a beast, when Christ himself is called the Lion of
the tribe of Judah.

We read of another in the image of a goodly spreading Dan. 4 19
tree. A beautiful tree, because of majesty. A spreading tree, because he
offers access to others. A fruitful tree, because of his doing of good. A
shadowing tree, because of his mercy. And a tree having branches for birds,
because he extends favors to others according to qualities: Such must be a
Judge.

But above all, we read of 1 Kings 10. 18, 19, 20.
Salomons goodly throne which was thus set out. On each side were six Lions,
because all the twelve tribes were subject unto him, not Levy excepted. Two
Lions before the stayres, because two tribes, in after-defection, should not
depart from his house. The assent unto it was by six steps, whereon when the
King ascended (as the Rabbines say) the crier proclaimed thus, when he was
upon the first, wrest not judgment; when he was upon the second, accept no
man's person; when he was upon the third, take no bribe; when he was upon the
fourth, plant no groves for Idols; when he was upon the fifth, erect no pillar
to honor them; and when he was upon the sixth, kill not an ox, to sacrifice
unto them. And all this to put him in mind of religion and justice. If they be
such as God has thus resembled, this brings the Lord to judge: now, Gods are
come down unto Acts 14. 11.
us in the likeness of men. Not as if God did not judge though the persons are
faulty: for if sentence pass according to Gods truth, though it be by
Antiochus, a wicked person; Herod, that Fox; or Ananias, that painted wall;
yet these sit in Moses Chair, hear them: But when their persons, qualities,
and judgments center and meet in holiness, then then are they the fuller
image of the Lord the Judge; and he bows the heavens and 2 When the whole
work is carried for the honor of the God of truth.
comes down among them.

Secondly, this also brings the Lord to judge, when the whole work is carried
for the honor of the God of truth. When truth in witnesses, Oaths,
Allegations, Evidences, Judgments, and Records meet, then Christ's kingdom is
advanced, and God is Judge indeed. For here is a conformity betwixt truth and
the things that are to honor God.

If now you shall ask me, holy heart, hand, eye, and mouth, in the whole
work of the Assize.

There must be an holy heart, By an holy heart. John 6.
when all persons are faithful to the rruth. Christ distributed bread, and
fish by the hands of his Disciples to the hungry people: they kept none for
themselves, but gave for Christ, and gathered for Christ. Here was
faithfulness. Joshua divided the land of promise to the Israelites: and as if
he had forgot himself, he reserved not a part, nor would have any to hinder
his office. Here was faithfulness too. Joseph might have amassed up a world of
wealth to himself in the time of famine; but he was content with the portion
from the King: and here was faithfulness also. When all you shall receive from
the Lord, the King, and the law, and distribute faithfully, without seeking
your selves, this is an holy heart, God judges.

There must be holy hands, 2 By holy hands. Hos. 4. 18. Genesis 14. 21.
when all persons are not guilty of shameful Give, Give. Higher powers will
hate it: but may they not be abused by some inferiors who love it too well?
The King of Sodom, when he was rescued, said to valiant Abraham, give me the
souls* take the goods to thy self: but just Abraham would have none from a
thread to a shoe latchet, least he should say, he had made Abraham rich: Here
were holy hands. Ye know how it was with Balaam, he would for a reward have
said good of evil, and evil of good, in cursing Numb. 22. Esa 5.
Israel. An Angel meets him, his Ass speaks, and Balaam wonders not, but
speaks to his Ass again, thou have mocked me. Saint August. lib. quaest. V.
Augustine wonders at that, and lays the fault upon the love of money, which
blockt him up so, as he could not see miracles to keep him in a right course:
his were not holy hands. Take heed: let Israel be Israel, and remember Balaam.

There must be holy eyes, 3 By holy eyes.
which may be two ways* first, when all are looked upon without any respect of
persons. The Judge and the Altar are all one (said an heathen of old,) all
appeal unto 1 King. 1. 50. and 2. 29.
them. As Adonijah runs to the horns of the Altar; so Absalom in his case,
referres himself to the King the Judge. Therefore Cleon of old, when he was
delegated to the helm of the common wealth, called al his old frinds into a
chamber to him, to dissolve all relations and respects of old frindship, that
he might look upon all with impartial eyes. And the old Ephe. 25. Bona est
erga pauperem misericordia sed non contra Judicium. Job 31. Genesis 12. Genesis 18.
Judges of Athens called A^eopagitae did hear all causes in darkness, where
they could see no persons: why should it not be thus still? especially
considering Gods saying, thou shall not respect a poor man in judgment.
Surely mercy to a poor man is good (says Saint Augustine) but not against
judgment: this is an holy eye.

Secondly, when the cause is searched out diligently. As God, in the case of
Babelbuilders, and Sodomites came down to see whether the case were according
to the cry: so must all do that look toward judgment.

Philip the Macedonian, sitting in jvdgement upon one Machetes, was not
attentive: he was more ready to sleep then Dormitabundas.
hear (says the Historian:) yet at the end of the pleading he pronounced
sentence against him. Poor Machites cried out, I appeal. To whom says
Philip? A te, ad te: from thee half asleep, to thee whole awake: with that
Philip rowzed himself up and heard the cause again. And though he would not
reverse the sentence, to discredit his public judgment, yet he himself paid
the fine to punish his own sloth. Here is an image of an holy eye. 4 By an
holy mouth.


Lastly, there must be an holy mouth, when nothing is spoken in judgment
which does not become an holy mouth. Christ looks upon himself, as the Judge
of the world, and says, I can Ioh. 5. 30. Non per infirmitare^ sed per
integritatem faciendi, sed per observantiam Iudicandi. Examinat causae merita,
non mutat. Ambrosi.
do nothing of my self: what nothing? he says not so for weakness, but for
integrity; not for his impossibility of doing, but for his uprightnes in
judging. And again, As I hear, I judge: not judging by pleasure, but by the
religion of right judgment. He is not indulgent to his own will, but does
examine the deserts of causes, and determines without alteration. Here is an
holy mouth. Again, wicked men had taken a wicked woman in adultery even in the
very act. Christ came not to judge as an earthly governor; and therefore he
pronounced not sentence according to the law. He does measure them all as
wicked persons, and says, he that is guiltless throw the first John 8. Put a
vit lapidanda^ sed non a lapidandis. Ambros.
stone. He though her worthy to be stoned, but not by them that would have
done it: they must pull the beam out of their own eye, before they undertake
that in their brothers: Here again is an holy mouth. Again Mary Magdalen was
not invited to Luke 7.
the Pharisees house, but yet she came, and pressed upon Christ; while others
entertained him with meat, she did it with tears. Christ commands her not to
be shut out of doors though she troubled him at dinner: no he commandes
Omnium horarum judex. John 3. John 4.
the grumblers to let her alone. He is for all hours, for Nicodemus that came
to him by night; and for her that interrupts him at meat. It was meat and
drink to him to do his fathers will: Here was an holy mouth. Yet once more,
Publius Rutilius the Roman, when a dear friend pressed him hard with an unjust
suite, denied him. His angry friend cries out, what need I thy friendship, if
thou will not grant me my request? He should have been a Christian that thus
answered, what need I thy friendship if thou press me to sin against law
and justice? Here is an holy mouth.

Right honorable, Right worshipful, and beloved, oh Application.
that all that are to deal in any passage of justice this day were thus good!
as that they had such hearts, hands, eyes, and mouths! then should the Lord
the Judge, judge in the judgments of men.

I confess that justice (as every other virtue) is harder in practice, then in
contemplation, for not only the Minorites Hist. of Council of Trent.
but the Majorites are the objects of reformation: high as well as low are two
guilty; and an ox flayes hardest when he comes to the head. Besides our vices
Vitia sunt a dulta and praevalida
are not infants, they are grown men and strong: and as Livy of old complained
of Neque vitia neque remedia far possumus.
Rome, we neither can endure faults nor their corrections: so may we say of
some popular and Epidemicall vices and sicknesses of the soul now. This made
David groan under the burden of Ioab, who had slain Abner a prince, and a
great man in Israel, when he could not do as he would for the present, I am
this day 2 Samuel 3. 38. 39.
weak though a King, and the sons of Zervjah are too hard Mar. 14. 18. In
bonum vniversitatis.
for me: yet if every one in his place do what he could, for the common good,
upon sound examining of witnesses with all circumstances (which is that which
does bring the edge of the law upon offenders,) then the Lord the Judge judges.

But if it fall out that reason Iudicium legis est Iudicium solius rationis:
Iudicium hominis est Judicium rationis and libidinis.
soundly regulated rule not, (for the judgment of law is the judgment of pure
reason, the judgment of the man is the judgment of reason and lust:) or if
witness be not truly weighed (as in Pilates case, who sentenced Christ to
death though he might legally know he was innocent, because Mar. 14. 59.
the witnesses agreed not: or if circumstances be not 2 Samuel 1.
well sifted, as David did, who justly put the Amalekite to death upon his own
confession, that he killed Saul; (for though Saul killed himself, as at least
after known) yet considering these two circumstances: first, that his
confession was not out of Frenzy and discontent with his life, but out of
full reason to claw David: and secondly, that his bad thoughts were discovered
by himself against the Lords anointed, which justly make him an unworthy
traitor;) his death was justly inflicted by David:) or if it fall out that
conscience be not fully satisfied with the light of truth before verdict, and
judgment, and so proceedings be precipitate and hasty (which Nero himself
could scarce endure, in his first part, and therefore being moved to set to
his hand to an execution, he would say, I would I Vtinam nescirem literas.
cauld neither read nor write.) If either of these four fall out, then the
Lord the Judge judges not.

Now (I beseech you) you having heard thus much; both how you may drive God
from, and draw God unto judgment seats, preach the rest of this judge to your
own hearts, that ye do not this day wilfully sin against his judgment; and
so I turn to the children of Israel, and the children of Ammon and their cause.

The children of Israel are 2. 3. The parties Judged, and their cause
here in full colors: something like Adam in innocence making all the beasts
before them to tremble. They have 1 The children of Israel.
all the advantage of laws, liberty, Judges of Israel, and the Lord the Judge
looking upon their cases.

You are not Israelites according Though wronged.
to the flesh, yet God prevailed with for abundance of blessings upon you.
Notwithstanding some of you have been feared in your lives: some of you have
been spoiled in your goods: some of you have been hurt in your names: Must
get the Lord to judge.
some of you have been disquieted in your possessions: some of you have been
battered in your members: and in this only different from the children of
Israel here: As you have the Lord the Judge let the Lord the Judge judge for
you in the judgments of men.

When Hezekiah received a blasphemous letter from By declining revenge. 2 King.
19. 14.
proud Senacherib, he went to the temple, and spread it before the Lord: he
thus appealed to this great Judge: you are now as in the temple, even so do
you. Show God your cause with honest hearts, and seek, and receive judgments
as from him. How gloriously will this work? it will make you proceed, not in
the lust Non Libidine unidictae sed amore justitiae.
of revenge (which God hates) but in the love of justice (which God loves,) you
have the sword of justice in your hands upon the best terms: and in truth,
Christ says for you, sell a garment and buy a Luke 22. 39.
sword. But hear how an ancient worthy meditated upon that text: O Lord, why
do Ambr. in Lucam.
thou bid me buy a sword, and forbiddest me to strike with it? Surely it is
for just defense, not for revenge. Thou have showed me that I could revenge,
but I will not of conscience to thy command. Even so do you: So be it. Love
law, love justice, love peace, love truth, but Romans 12.
vengeance is mine, says the Lord the Judge.

Philosophers say that seeing is the noblest sense (if not for discipline) yet,
for general use: because it suffers not by contrary objects. It can look upon
black and white without an appetite of revenge on either. Why should it not
be thus with Christians who are better enlightened by him who is all eye? If
your annoyances be great, let the Lord the Judge judge by his Iphtahs,
liefetenants, and deputies: and rest in that without the picklocks of new
vexations.

But if they be less, cloy no^, surfeit not the honorable bench. Is there not a
wise man amongst you? shall the pillars 1 Cor. 6.
of the earth wear themselves out in bruising dust small, when there are
mountains enough to level? God forbid. If you and your causes are such, the
Lord the Judge will not judge for you at last.

But for the children of Ammon, 2 The Children of Ammon.
where are they? It is pity they have not a ring in some place of this crown,
that the word may fall upon them like rain upon the dry ground. They are
peeping out of their gates, thinking this time too short, which (happily) some of
you do think too long. I can say nothing to them, because absent: yet give me
leave to speak a word of them, against them, for them. This be spoken of 1 Of
them.
them. They are such as love not the law. Though let the Vivat Rex, currat. Lex.
King live, and the law run be the good subjects prayer: yet the old law
Iulia could not please adulterers; nor the law Cornelia, murderers; nor the
law Rhemnia, promoters; so nor our laws can please those wicked Belialists:
Their blisters must be let out.

This be spoken against 2 Against them. Ne sint pedes nimium lanei, ne tandem,
manus fint nimium ferreae.
them. They have lived in this blessed Church, where they might have been
better taught, or, if they have been taught, where they have unlearned many a
good lesson. If the ministry can do no good, the magistrate must take the
care. Let not your feet be too much made of wool, least at last your hands
be made of two much iron.

Magistrates, and ministers are compared to the teeth. Some are Cutters, which
cut the meat, and Incisores.
form the voice: these are like ministers who convince Tit. 1 13 (...).
Molares.
cuttingly. Some are grinders, which bruise the meat and fit it for passage:
these are like magistrates who (by justice) bruise the sons of wickedness in
pieces, and send them down into the draffe of the world. Neither let it grieve
you to be so compared, seeing Christ is called the Rock of offense, that breaks
them in pieces on whom he falls.

This lastly, be spoken for 3 For them.
them. They are subjects, (though bad ones;) for else the law could not fall on
them. And though they have made themselves of christians in name, Barbarians
indeed in particular acts: yet are they of two sorts. Some are misled,
Errones: Turbones.
and some are misleaders: some are apprentices to sin, some monsters in that
black art.

Now do but consider how For mercy of Gods making.
careful the Lord the Judge is, least he slay with the wicked the righteous,
who are so either in present act, or under charitable hope. If he work a work
of mercy, he delights in mercy, if a work of Mic. 7. 18.
justice, he calls it a strange work, because he shaves with Esa. 26. 21
a razor that is hired, if he had no justice of his own. If he Esa. 7. 20.
be to work a work of justice, he is slow to anger, and comes to Exodus 34.
it when there is no remedy: but if a work of mercy, he is rich Chro. 36. 15.
in mercy, abundant in goodness. If he look upon occasions, it is a great
matter that mooves his justice: when the sins of the Amorites are at the
full; Genesis 15. 16.
when all flesh had corrupted her ways, and the wickedness Genesis 6. 5.
of man was great in the earth; when old and young, even, all the people from
every quarter Genesis 19. 4
were given to sin: but a small matter mooves him to show mercy. If there be
but ten men in Sodom; If Genesis 18.
there be but one Jacob in the house of Laban, one Moses praying for Israel,
one Phinehas executing judgment, and one man in Jerusalem Ier. 5. 1.
that seeks the truth, he will spare multitudes. So do you, and prosper when
it is fit. God is well pleased if you follow his own son, who excused his
disciples in some infirmities, saying, their spirit is willing, their Mat. 26.
41. Ephesians. 5. 9.
flesh is weak, and he is never angry, if ye follow him as dear children in
works of imitable mercy.

Only know, this is Gods Salvis prietate and justitia.
rule, that mercy must never be showed, but when piety and justice can be
kept safe and sound. Thus do, and ye shall this day be Iephtahs appealing to
the Lord the Judge to judge betwixt the children of Israel, and the children of
Ammon.

And that ye may do thus, the Lord the Judge grant unto you, who looks upon
no man in his person, all men in their cause: and has made himself to you a
pattern of executing justice and mercy; and that for JESUS CHRIST his sake,
who is the Lamb of mount Sion, the Savior, the Lion of the tribe of Judah the
Judge, and is angry with them that honor not the father, kiss not the Son,
and grieve, resist, quench, and despise the Spirit; to the which coessentiall,
coeternall, and coequall Trinity, be all kingdom, power, and glory henceforth
and for ever

Amen.
NATURES ASSIZE, OR A SERMON ON MATH. 7. 12.
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
even so to them: for this is the law and the Prophets.
RIght Honorable, Right worshipful, and beloved: the last time I presented
unto you the Assize of God, and now I shall (if God please) lay before you the
Assize of nature, if both shall meet in Gods rule, example, and your
imitation, ye can not fail in the work of the day.

All scriptures are good, and fit to make perfect, yet have 2 Timothy 3. 17.
they an accidental difference as instruments of music. Some like Jacobs
hasel rods, Greg. Mar
are partly pilled, and partly covered: some, like Ahabs Heb. 5.
house of Ivory, are without a covering. Some are like milk, some like
stronger meat. Some are so clear that the 2 Pet. 1. 19. 2 Cor. 3.
day star arises with them in our hearts: and some are dark through the
veil upon 1 Cor. 15.
our minds. As one star differs from another in glory, yet are all heavenly
bodies; so is it with the scriptures: some are large in handling weighty
matters, same bind up much in a word.

This here is of the playner sort (as all highly necessaries are.) So clear
that he is blind that sees it not: so emphaticall that he is an adamant that
is not moved: so short that a snaile has more blood, then Plus habet limax
sanguinis, quam ille sensus.
he has sense that receives not much in a little. Yet must you suffer a
little more then a word of exhortation, to convey unto your souls that little
which I can commend from them.

They contain a sure rule of justice: but every word must be scanned to bring
it to the practice even of a willing people.

The very first word ( therefore) 1 Therefore what it concludes.
is not without a knot: for it may be asked, upon what it is inferred? Some
think it to refer to the justice in the chapters foregoing; but this the God
of order. Some think it to be redundant, as many elegancies in the Scriptures
are. But certainly it is use, and a note of an excellent conclusion to be for
ever held out of it self. Nature teaches it, the law and the prophets revive
it: therefore hold it, do it.

The last words have a 2 How this is the law and the Prophets.
greater knot. For how can this be said to be the law and the prophets,
seeing they set down the love of God, and the promises of salvation by Christ,
as well as Justice to each other?

Hereupon two questions are disputed in the schools. Whether more then one
precept. Romans 13. 9
First, whether in the law there be more then one precept yea or no? The doubt
arises thus. Saint Paul says, if there be any other commandment, it is
briefly comprehended in this, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: And
Christ says here do as you would be done unto: for this is the law and the
prophets: therefore it seems there is but one. But (...). Ephesians. 2. 15. Aquin.
1a. 2 ae* q. 99. Art. 1.
one law of many commandments; it is resolved thus, that there is but one
precept with the respect to the full end, charity: but there are more with
reference to the means subservient to it.

Secondly, hence it is asked, Whether there be a connection of all virtues. Iam.
2. 10.
whether there be such a connection of virtues, that where one is in truth,
there are all the rest? This doubt arises from two texts too. Saint James
says, whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, is
guilty of all. If it be thus in breach, it is thus in complement. For there is
but one body of legal justice, either to do, or sin against. And Christ
says here, that to Io. de corb. com. theol. lib. 5. c. 8.
do as we would be done unto is the law and the prophets. If justice to men
be the law and the prophets, then surely where that is in truth, all that they
require is by way of concatenation, and chayning Wall. Eth Arist. Majores
extravitia quam intravirtutes.
together. This question is expounded to be understood of perfect and
gratuitous virtues, which are by infusion, not of such as are acquired by
industry. Of these it is said of the grave moralists of old, that they are
greater in being without vice, then in being within the lists of true virtues.
Of those there are some that are more noble then others: and therefore are they
called the mothers of virtue. Thus Faith is the mother of virtue in original;
Matres virtutum. 1 Origin. 2 Educatione.
for out of the acts of faith these flow: Charity in education; for it feeds
them all with faiths provisions: humility in conservation; for they being raked
up in her ashes are kept alive: and prudence 3 Conservatione. 4 Regimine.
in government; for it she do not order them all, they are not carried without
a blemish. Though these have thus their due glory, yet where one is in truth,
there are all the rest in link.

Some subtle doctors go against Scotistae.
this being overswayed (as they think enough) by experience. But though of the
shadows of virtues this be true: yea, and this be as true of true virtues,
that some are more conspicuous then others by humane aptness, fitness of the
instrument, office, time, and occasions: yet a virtuous man, who can not be at
one time good and bad, happy and unhappy, which yet he could be, if he had
some virtues, and wanted others. Gods bounty requires it, which gives not one
to fit receivers, without the others. The weakness of solitary virtue in it
self requires it: for as one member needs another, so does one virtue need
her fellows. And lastly, the use of virtues must have it so too.

As if there be but one string wanting in an instrument, there can be no
perfect harmony: so nor spiritual melody in the soul if one virtue be absent.
As a soldier is not well furnished against an enemy, except he be in
complete arms: so nor the christian soldier except he have the whole
virtuous armor of God. As the stars, and planets are always in their
spheres to make a perfect firmament: so are these lights of virtues to make an
upright soul. And as a physic garden, or Apothecaries shop, are defective,
if any herb or drugge for use be wanting: so is it with a soul that has not
the whole body of physic against the whole body of sin and death.

Thus therefore we might conclude from hence: but we need not go such a
circle to untie Christ's knot here. For how justice to our you must understand
Secundu^ subjectam materiam. 1 Cor 9. 22.
Christ speaks according to the matter in hand. As when Paul says, to all men
I became all things, he must not be understood to comply with the stool of
wickedness, but that in matters indifferent, which were neither commanded nor
forbidden, he did so. Even so Christ speaks here of all things concerning
charity and justice betwixt man and man.

We are thus come from 1 This text is a law of nature.
both the ends to the heart and middle of this text, which lays down a great
law and principle of nature for the advancing of justice among men, to do even
so to others, as we would that others should do to us.

It is a law, and there are 3 Sorts of laws.
three sorts of laws. The eternal law in God; which is his counsel and will
for the being, supportation, and order of the world. By virtue of this we have
a creation, and a providence. The natural law in the creature; which (referred
to man) is the law of God written in his heart, for Romans 2. 15.
the view of the understrnding to inform, and of the conscience to bind to
do, or to bind over for not doing. Lastly, the imposed law upon the creature:
which is that positive law in the scriptures, to revive and perfect the law of
nature which through tract of time, and custom in sin was in great part worn
out.

This here was first a law of nature, now positively revived: which through
the foul shoes of sin though it be worn into rags and shreads, because we
are made vagabonds from our own hears Facti sumus fugitivi a cordibus nostris.
(therefore we read of ancient Germans who did allow of theft, and of our
Northern borderers, who were persuaded that the eight commandment was of King
Henry the eights putting in:) yet is it of excellent use to revive these old
statutes, as Christ does in this place; that we may be helped to feel our
degeneration, and find our need of the law of Chris. Thus it is a law.

It is a principle of nature too 2 It is a principle of nature also. 1 Primo
prima principia.
and there are two sorts of principles which are bound up in the heart of man.
The first before others, which are made up without discourse, and help from
without. Though these be not always in perfect act, yet may they always be
known, as a stone by the weight may be known to move downward, though it do
not always so do. The second next unto the first, which 2 Secundo prima
priucipia.
are made up of the first by discourse, as conclusions contained in them. As
thus, I may not defile my neighbors wife, hurt his goods, life, or the like,
because I would not have another deal so with me.

This here is of the first sort; which if it be quickened is hard at hand to
promote justice. As when you write upon Paper with the juice of an onion (as
many say) the letters at first are not legible, but bring it to the fire and
warm it, and then ye may read it. So at the first (in some) ye can read
little or nothing of this law: but bring it to the fire of the word and
conscience, and all Justice to men will appear to your comfort, or conviction.

Thus does our blessed Savior here. He knows that if the flies of Egypt get
into our eyes, the frogs of Egypt will soon get into the chambers of our
hearts, and then the catterpillers of Egypt will destroy the fruits of our
lives. Therefore he rubs and chafes the light of the law upon their, and our
consciences, that it may be better read and done in after times. As if he
should say, I am sure that Amor 1 concupiscentiae. 2 charitatis.
some of you, by the love of lust, others by the love of charity, do love your
selves; ye would not be hurt in honor, life honesty, justice, or truth:
therefore all things whatsoever ye would that others should do to you, even
so do to them.

To bring the law, and 2 The text opened and applied.
principle close up unto you, be pleased to receive,

1 The praises of it, 2 The power of it.
The praises of it are these: 1 By the praises of the law.
that it is Christ's brief, yet plain sum of all justice to men. To be short
for memory, and plain for understanding, do seldom meet in the words of
men. If we labor to be Dies brevis esse laboro obscurus fio.
short, we are so much the more obscure, But this is so short, that the poor
man cannot complain, he cannot buy it: so plain that the ignorant man cannot
complain, he cannot comprehend it, when it is propounded to him and it is
thus short, and plain from Christ's mouth (as well as natures voice), who is the
wisdom of the father* that one lawgiver, and Judge of the world, for rewards
and punishments.

Therefore certainly it extends to all his subjects: none can plead immunity
from the sound and transcendent equity of it, and from the way to blessing or
cursing according to our dealings with men. For they will not thaet I rule over
them, (says the same Christ) bring them forth and slay them before me.

It may be you will say: If Ob.
Christ have given me so plain a sum, what need I so much preaching to teach
me justice to men?

I answer; though it be never

First, to expound, and apply the particulars: Husbandry, is a ploughing,
sowing* reaping, threshing; yet there needs teaching an art in all these, or
the commonwealth would starve: so must we be taught an holy art in our
christian duties. Secondly, to persuade Heb. 13. 22.
the practice of it. I beseech you brethren (says the Apostle) suffer the
words of exhortation, for I have written unto you in few words. The fewer
words the necessary rule has, the more words of exhortation are necessary to
draw on doing. The understanding is blind, and may judge amiss of plain
things, as Zebul said, they may see Iud. 9. 36.
the shadow of the mountains like men: and as the blindeman Mar. 8. 24.
under cure said, I see men walking like trees: so may the understanding
misgive us. The will is perverse, therefore beauty, and bands must come, the
rod, and the spirit of meeknes, line upon line, precept upon precept, till
judgment be brought to victory.

But yet you may urge for

It is an old saying of a wise Lex jubere, non disput are debet: Sen. 1 Cor. 1
4.
Stoic, the law must command, not dispute. Oh that our laws were plain! for
if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who will gird himself unto the
battle? The riddles of the old oracles bred many a man's ruin. Oh that all
might fall upon all with equity. The law should not be a mother Non aliis
matter, aliis noverca.
to some, and a step-dame to others: but (circumstances considered) should look
with the same eye upon rich and poor. But because, be it never so plain,
brief, and equal, yet it is rather to be hoped, then found, in all points, as
it should: therefore ascend we from the praise of this law, to the power of
it, which will be seen,

1 In the sense, and 2 In the application of it.
No man disaffected to the truth is an enemy to the sense of any of Gods
oracles. The The sense of this law.
sense of this may be taken up two ways, first, negatively, secondly,
positively.

Negatively, we must do Negatively.
to others, not what we list. It is cruelty and tyranny to run Sic volo, sic
jubeo.
this race, thus I will, thus I command. Our wills are corrupted, and if we
follow them, the cart goes before the Fertur equis aurigae.
horse. If a man have power, and employ it thus, Salvian will salute him thus,
a rich power, Dives potestas pauperem facit esse rempub: sal. de Guber. lib. 2.
not well regulated, makes a poor Church, commonwealth, or family.

We must do to others, not as others do to us; men's actions toward others
are ordinarily thus excused, why did he thus to me? therefore are they at an
eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, even by private revenge. They hold this
good charity, to deceive Fallere fallentem nonest fraus.
him that deceives me, is no deceit in me. But as Saint Peter says, we must
not render evil for evil: so Xenophon did when one rayled on him, thou have
learned (said he) to speak ill, but I to contemn it, and speak good,

We must do to others, not as others do to others. Examples Exempla haberi
possunt pro testimonio. Sal. lib. 2.
are too often accounted testimonies (not only of things lawful, but of
things necessary, though without a law,) that begins presently to be lawful,
which by patterns is grown public; men are Incipit esse licitum quod solet
esse publicum. Cypri.
too apt to look upon presidents. Plato's scholars followed his crookedness;
Aristotle's stammering, and Alexanders courtiers his stouping: so will men
follow others, though to their own and others wrong. It is safe (says the
politician) to offend when Tutum est peccare autoribus illis.
such, and such, go before us. But we must live by Gods rules, not by the
examples of men, we must do to others, not as men themselves would. Saul
would have had his Page kill him, and Abimelech would have so died, out of
pride, that it might not be said, a woman had overpowerd him. It is said
indeed, that to him that is willing to volenti non fit injuria.
receive it, an injury cannot be done. But this is not always true, yea
sometimes false: therefore Joseph had learned to run away, when Potiphars wife
would willingly have had him to her Iustful embraces: and the friends of the
Demoniack pulled him out of the fire, and water, though in devilish raptures
he would cast himself into them.

We must do to others, not as we have accustomed to do; Saint Ambrose
wondering how it came to pass, that our forefathers did themselves, and
others, so much wrong, as to have many wives, answers, surely Certe cum fuit
mos, non suit eulpa. Amb.
when it was a custom; it was no crime But custom is no good plea, though in
common course it sometimes finds reasonable plea, and passage; yet will it
hardly be heard in the court of conscience, against equity. For the custom of
sin, will blunt the sense of Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati. Cedat
consuetudo veritati. Text. 6 Pro 30. 15. vivitur ex rapto.
sinning, either against our selves, or others; therefore let custom veil the
bonnet, and give place to truth.

We must do to others, not as profit persuades. If the horse-leaches two
daughters cry, give, give, then are men apt to be wolves to others, and to
live upon the spoil. Gehazi will lie, and deny for gain: Achan will steal
for Lingua idoli, sic gladius ab antiquis.
the golden sword, and costly cloak of the Idol: and Judas will betray his
master, though it be Christ himself. Thus by the unrighteousness of sin,
profit will make men fall into the unrighteousness of vengeance. It is an ill
rule of justice.

We must do to others, not as pleasure allures. If this prevails, Ahab will
be sick for Naboths vineyard; Dives will roll in pleasure while Lazarus
starves at his gate; and Israel will have the calves of the stall, wine in
bowls, and instruments of music like David, but withal he will forget the
afflictions of Joseph. Pleasure cannot be the rule of justice: for I said to
laughter thou art mad, and to Eccles. 2.
joy, what is that thou do?

We must do to others. not as honor prickcs us on. He that affects to rise
from the ground to the stirrup, from the stirrup to the saddle, from the faddle
to the throne, from the throne to the triumphant chariot, had need of a
different law to this, to rule in his carriage to others. He will make a path
of men to walk upon, horses of men's shoulders to ride upon, wine of men's
bloods, carousing cups of their sculls, and sacrifices of their persons to
honor him in the way. If Haman would have all the honor, all the Jews must
dye as well as the offender. If Absalom would judge, his own father must
suffer. Yea, if but a praise (the shadow of honor) falls from the mouth of one
that should be punished. In such a case, when the Devil praised Christ, he
cried out, hold thy Mar. 1. 2 4 3 5. Laus mea est silentium tuum, nolo me
laudet vox tud, sedtormenta tua, poena tua laus mea. Chrysostom 9
peace, as if he should say, my praise is thy silence, I will not that thy
voice praise me. but thy torments, thy punishment shall be my praise. But men
do far otherwise: this is a bad rule of justice.

We must do to others, not as the laws of the land permit. Though high
honor be to be given to the laws of nations (for they are the wall of
virtue, and the bridle, and scourge of vice) yet must we not absolutely rest
in them for all justice. Sometimes they are permissive, not preceptive, like
Moses bill of divorce for the hardness of men's hearts: such is the law of
usury. Sometimes they are corrosive commanding; provided to eat out the dead
flesh of vice, therefore applicable only in such cases: such is that for taking
of forfeitures, which is unjust, when the cure can be had without such a
remedy. Sometimes they are for terror, not for constant obedience; as when
they set down the worst to keep unruly spirits in better course. In such a
case, extreme right, is extreme wrong. Therefore Ius Rhadama^thaeum, et
reciprocum.
the whole law of the kingdom is made up of common, and conscientious
extremity, and mitigation, rigor and chancery. Therefore not always what law
permits, is the rule of justice.

If now we may not do to others what we list, nor what others do to us, nor
what others do to others, nor what others would, nor what we have used, nor
what profit persuades, nor what pleasure allures, nor what honor pricks us
unto, nor what the laws permit, what then is our rule of justice?

Positively, we must do to 2 Positively.
others, so as we would that others should do to us. The answering of two or
three questions will clear all of this.

First, whence the rule does Quest. 1. Whence this rule does arise?
arise? It arises from self: what ye would to you. This cannot but direct
aright: for no man hates himself, intentionally, but loves and cherishes
himself. It may be you the love of our selves may be vicious, and then it is
no safe rule of our love to others. This is most true: the death, and ours both
Ioh. 12. 25. Apoc. 12. 10. Luke. 14. 26. Math. 24, 16. Deuteronomy. 33. 9
things, and persons. It is a precept, then to deny our selves: and it was the
practice of Levi, not to see his father and his mother, nor to acknowledge his
brethren. But if the love of our selves be right, and Christian, then must we
love our selves, and others as our selves.

It is worth your notice Quest. 2. When self-love is a right charity. 1 Vt se.
then to know, when our love is a right Christian charity? A man may love
himself three ways. First, when a man loves himself as himself; this is not
good: It makes self a God. But man has a superior, at whose beck he must
stand, and fall to himself. Secondly, when a man 2 Vt finem principalem. Pro.
16. 4.
loves himself as his principal end. This is not right neither: for man is
made for another end, as Solomon says, God made all things for himself.
Thirdly, when a man loves himself in order to God: that 3 In ordine ad Deuus.
is, when the love of God, and of our selves, are sweetly subordinate: when we
love our selves in God, and for God, and his will sake. This is right christian
charity indeed: and then, if thou Si nosti diligere teipsum, tunc committo
tibi proximum quem diligassicut teipsum. August. Quest. 3 How this rule of
justice must be carried?
know thus how to love thy self, I will commit thy neighbor unto thee,
whom thou may love as thy self.

But now you will ask, how this rule of justice must be carried? It is
certain, that four sorts of persons would ill to themselves: children, idle
persons, malefactors, and malcontents. Children see not the benefit of
education and correction; If they might be cockered and spared, they would do
so to others, except in pang, and passion. Idle persons know not the comfort of
a sweating and well ordered life. They go on themselves in an unprofitable
course, and would that others would do so too, though it end in ruin.
Malefactors and sons of Belial, not being sensible of the overthrow of
church, commonwealth, and family by lawles courses, would be let alone, and
would let others alone: therefore do they cry down reformers as busy persons,
and no good neighbors. Malcontents, swelling with pride, and not enduring the
floods of opposition, care not, with Abimelech, and Spira, if others would kill
them, and with Potiphera, if others would dishonest them: and so would be an
ill law of justice to others.

Therefore you must know Voluntas 1 Inordinata.
that there is two sorts of wills First, disordered wills, (as most are) which
would indulgence to all vice: what these would have others to do to them, they
must not do to others. For they care not if there were no king in Israel, if
every man did what he list: when all is in a combustion, they would then fish
in troubled waters. Reason is clouded, and the showers of wickedness would
fall upon men. Secondly, there are ordinate and regulated wills by the 2
Ordinata et regulata.
law of justice and charity. From these wills arises this law: If ye have
orderly and well governed wills, then what ye would that others should do to
you, even so do ye to them. Thus (as I could) ye have the power of this law
in sense.

And now for the application 2 The application of this law. Minoris criminis
rea^us est iegem nescire quam spernere. Sal. lib. 4. Terrae filius, nihili
nepos. Greg. Naz. Aures omnium pulso, conscientias singulorum convenio. August.
of it, which is the life of the law, know for certain, that it brings a less
guilt to be ignorant of the law, then when you know it, to cotemn it: therefore
be sure to be doing.

Though man be the son of the earth, and the nephew of nothing; yet God has
given him a law which must be kept for use: yea God has made him a law to
himself in his justice to others: therefore I knock at all your ears, and
would feign talk a little with every conscience here present.

This law of Christ and nature, might be an help to us upon many occasions.
Suppose there fall out a new case wherein there is no law to order it; we must
not say, I Will do what I lust: but in want of a law, this must supply, what ye
would that others should do to you, that do you to them.

Suppose there be a law, but we are ignorant of it, we cannot walk by rule,
when we know it not. Here have recourse to this, which will show the effect of
the laew, written in Romans 2. 15.
our hearts, and will work us to do well to others, because we would have
others not do amiss to us.

Suppose we have a known law fitted to our case, but it is so imperfect that
holes of evasion offer themselves to a russet coat. Have then recourse to
this: for of this it may be said, as that Philosopher said of old, when he was
asked what he had gained by his study? I have gained this, in brief, that
what others do Summum hoc, quod quae alij non sine legibus c^acti faciunt,
sponte faciam.
not, but as compelled by the stroke and whip of the law, I do it of my own
accord.

Suppose ye be to give rewards to others, we read of one Crates, who gave to
his flatterer six hundred pounds; to his whore threescore pounds, to his Cook
an hundred Diog. Laert. invita Crat.
crowns, to his Physician eight groates, to his Philosopher (who was his
divine) three halfe-pence, and to his Lawyer (for his words) fume and smoke.
But if we walk by this rule, we will not set best rates upon basest things,
and worst upon best: for by a well ordered will, we would not be so dealt
withal our selves.

Suppose lastly, we are to administer punishments for others, one punishment
for all faults were not just: neither must we punish in life, when a member
would satisfy; nor in body, when goods are enough; nor in goods, when loss of
credit is more then sufficient; nor in much in any thing when a little would
serve the turn: we must look with a charitable eye to both proportions,
Proportio. 1 Arithmetica. 2 Geometrica.
for we would be so done unto our selves.

Upon all these, or like occasions, wear this law before our eyes, as Christ
and nature would have it, it would be a Sampson of justice, to destroy princes
of Philistines by heaps.

But for want of this, as Theocritus said, of a great talker, Incipit verborum
flumen, ingenij ne gutta quidem.
now begins a flood of words, but not a drop of wit: so have we floods of
accusations, aggravations, actions, without a drop of grace or modesty.

If we could take a view of all the law of justice knit up in this one, we
might convince the world of another world of sins, and sins.

All inferiors do lay the honor of superiors in the dust, from the subject
under the throne, to the people under the priest, yea to the child in the poor
man's cottage, for want of this in power, what ye would that others should do
to you, that do you to them. All malicious, and envious strikers, oppressors,
wounders, ahd hurters of body, and spirits, do prejudice the comfortable lives
of others, because they forget what ye would that others do to you, that do
you to them. All adulterous persons, of lustful eyes, hearts, hands, or other
members, do hurt the chastity of others, because they contemn this, what ye
would that others should do to you, that do you to them. All trusters in
wrong and robbery, hurt the goods of others; all liars, backbiters, and
slanderers hurt the goods, and the truth of others, because they neglect and
put in the back part of the wallet this glorious law, what ye would that
others should do to you, that do ye to them. All that rob themselves of their
own hearts, and spoil that sweet contentment they might have in the God of
Love, by vexing themselves with what others have, do slighte the royal law,
what ye would that others should do to you, that do you to them. Oh the world
of transgressors against this law! Give good manners, and Da bonos mores et
legis scita pro nobis sunt. Sal. lib. 5.
the requirings, and ordinances of the law are for us: but by our wicked lives
this is against us, and will burn the conscience like fire in the day of Gods
fierce wrath.

But I Will go no further then the proper business of the day. The honorable
Judges will be pleased to remember that the judgement-seate endures not either
rash judgment, or riper, if it be overswaide with wickedness. If rash oaths
be employed, vexing contentions nourished, or suites drawn out at length: If
judgments like some conclusions follow the worst part of the plea, they know,
that they do not as they would be done unto.

The witness must speak nothing but truth, and the whole truth (as the cause
requires) so help him God, if he overweigh the wheels of the clock to make
it strike false. If (like Nauplius to deceive the Grecians homeward) he set up
a beacon upon a rock, and make the judgment suffer Pro 6. 26.
shipwreck, he nourishes contentions, and does not as he would be done unto.

The Jury must find according to truth of evidence, else life, goods, and
liberty, (the precious things of a man) will fall before the injurious: and
then he does not as he would be done unto.

The Lawyer must remember that of Solomon, that the gathering of riches by a
deceitful Pro. 6. 26.
tongue, is vanity tossed too and fro by them that seek death. But if he
speak good of evil, and evil of good, he does not as he would be done unto.

The Plaintiff must not load with false accusations, as 1 King. 21 9. 10.
Iezabel who accused Nabeth of blasphemy; the Jews who accused Christ of
forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar; and 1 Kin. 21. 9. 10. Luke 23. 2. Act. 24.
5.
Tertullus who in a starched speech presented Paul to be a pestilence. If he
do, he does not as he would be done unto.

The Defendant must not color his fault with false glosses against conscience,
or deny it when his sins are on his skirts, and written in his forehead, or
refuse any legal trial. If he do, he does not as he would be done unto.

The Register must preserve faithful records, and not closely, and illegally
take off what is legally put on for the punishment of vice and maintenance of
virtue. If he do, he does not as he would be done unto. Oh how hard is it to
be a good naturalist! much harder to be a good Christian in observing this one
law of justice

But that ye may do better 2 Instructions for the keeping of this law.
according to the full bent of this law, receive but a double instruction.
First, ye must be extraordinary persons. As it is with a batte or
flindermouse, it is a kind of bird, but an extraordinary one. It flies 1 Be
extraordinary persons.
like a bird, and so is among the fowls of the air; but it brings not forth
young like a bird, nor feeds them like a bird, nor feeds it self like a
bird: so be you singular among Mat. 5. 47.
men, one of a city, and two of a tribe. Ordinary men do love the world to a
miracle. They forget they are the generation of God; and so (to the dishonor
of their race) the world and worldly things do blot out this law of justice.

But as we read of Hercules when he wrestled with the mighty Mauritanian
Antheus, so often as he threw him to the earth (his mother), he soon
recovered his strength again; but when (beyond ordinary course) he lifted him
up above the ground, and so held him at arms end till he was breathless, he
soon vanquished him. So when ye wrestle with your own hearts for justice
(which are earth, earth, earth), and throw Ier 22. 29.
them to the ground, ye never go away conquerours: for they are where they
would be. Therefore lift them up extraordinarily into another element, and
have your conversations in heaven, and ye shall soon gain the victory, to
do this law of justice.

The prudent searchers of nature, consider the soul of man according to the
three powers of it, and speak (though not so accurately as others) of three
parts of it: The reasonable, angry, and 1 Rationalis. 1 Irascibilis. 3
Concupiscibilis.
lustful part. From the reasonable part proceeds reason itself, judgment,
discretion, and wisdom; and this they seat in the head. From the angry part,
issue the hot motions of fortitude and courage; and this they seat in the
heart. From the lustful part, come desires and appetites after meat, drink,
and other pleasures; and this they seat in the ventricle.

These three may represent unto us, the three ages of the world. In the first,
they Melanch. post.
were wise; then wisdom flourished, arts and sciences, were invented: and if
we seem to be more in this then they, it is because we are Pigmies upon those
Giants shoulders. In the second, they were valorous. From Ninus to Julius was
the age of warrious. Then David, Sampson, Achilles, and Hercules were in prime.
But in this third and last age, most are given to appetite. The understanding
and heart have had their times, but now the Belly is the great God: and as
hunger after pleasure, profit, or honor prevails, so all laws of God and
nature are more or less neglected. Had ye not need then to be singular (now)
if you would do, as you would be done unto?

Secondly, being singular and 2 Let the Spirit of Christ dwell in you.
extraordinary, let the spirit of Christ dwell in you, as well as the law of
nature; even that spirit wherewith he did revive this. Nature is a good
mistress, if Christ be our master. Nature shall well direct us in our works
of justice, when by Christ's spirit we are created to good works. Therefore be
sure that you be in Christ by faith, and that Christ be in you by the life of
justification, sanctification, and comfort: and then as Christ teaches this
law of nature, so you, through Christ, shall grow more and more abounding in
the practice of it, so long as you are.

Experience teaches that a tree lives longer then a man, or foul, or beast;
and we ask the reason of it; It is resolved S. Fr. Bac. Not. Hist.
thus. Other creatures grow to their full stature, and then grow no more but in
excrements, as hairs, nails, feathers, and the like: but a tree, (live it
never so long) grows in proper parts, and so draws juice and sap, from the
root, thorough the whole body to quicken it.

So if you inquire why a man in Christ does keep all laws better then another
man? I answer, because he is never at his height so long as he is here. He
daily sucks in, and draws (in his growing parts of greatness or goodness)
the heavenly oil, and liquor of Christ's spirit, which Phil. 4.
inables him to do all things thorough him that helps him.

Be it (in the name of Jesus Christ) thus with you; and ye shall not fail to
do as you would be done unto in minds, mouths, and members. I Will Motives to
observe this law.
give you but two incentives, and so an end.

The not doing this, will judgment or goodness (by witty evasions) have been
swayed this way, and that way. But then, let conscience have her perfect work,
and when it spies that, by these means, ye have not done as ye would be done
unto, it cries, and pricks, and wounds, and ye know not what to do,
especially when death comes to draw you to the barie of God. Therefore as
Pythagoras gave a precept to his scholars, not to taste of any thing that had
black tails: so do I advise you here, and I pray God you may follow it in my
christian sense.

The king, says (according to the old picture) I rule you all: the soldier
says, I fight for you all: the husbandman says, I feed you all: the priest
says, I pray for you all: but death says, I devour you all. And then, if
notwithstanding your pretense of faith in Christ, you have impenitently, not
done, as you would be done unto, hell will say, I will torment you all.

Lastly, consider that the memories bless your understandings for seeing; your
understandings bless your memories for recording; your understandings and
memories, bless your wills for decreeing; your wills bless your affections
for maintaining; the whole soul bless the body for practicing; and God shall
bless all for cleaving unto his law of justice from Christ, and nature. And if
with this you have also the law of faith, and piety, and follow them according
to the rule of Christ, then shall you hear, well done good and faithful
servants, enter into your masters joy.

To which joy our good God bring us all in his good time, thorough his way of
piety and justice: without holiness no man shall see thee, O Lord; therefore
bring us thither thorough the way of piety. He that does not righteousness,
is not of thee, O God; therefore bring us thither by the way of righteousness
also. Oh let us serve thee here in holiness and righteousness all the days
of our lives, that in the end, when we shall come as a shocke of corn to thy
barn, we may be happy in thee, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom with
thee and the blessed spirit, be all Kingdom, Power, and Glory, now and for
ever.

Amen.
THE CHRISTIANS THRIFT IN KEEPING: OR TWO SERMONS Preached on 1 Timothy 1. 19.
Holding faith, and a good Conscience.
THe men of the world are much for keeping, the father presses his son, the
master his servant, the friend his friend, to keep. They would have them keep
their houses, keep their land, keep their stocks, keep their credit, keep
surely whatsoever 1 Timothy 6. 20.
they can get honestly. This is among the best.

The Christian must be for keeping too. He knows whom he has trusted, and
2 Timothy 1. 12
would feign have him keep his soul to the day of Christ. And because he
keeps not them that do not keep themselves, and save their souls Act. 2. 40
from this froward generation wherein they live: therefore he desires to do
it himself, and to press every member else within his reach, to this golden
rule, which blessed Paul gives to his beloved Timothy, keep, or hold faith, and
a good conscience.

A brave work, worthy a Christian! If there had been a better, Paul would
have set it upon Timothies soul. Other things he presses unto: but if he
give him a thousand taskes, of diverse matters, if this do not give life and
form to them all, they may do others good, but they shall do them none:
therefore be thou holding, faith, and a good conscience;

Timothy was a brave young spark of grace, blown up to a great blaze in the
church of God. He had so well approoved himself to men, and God looked upon
him with so right an eye, that there went about prophecies of him, for the
great use the Church should have of him, and the manly service he should do
to God. Paul therefore ver. 18.
puts him in mind of them, and provokes him to take such a course as may make
them good, by holding faith, and a good conscience.

And to raise him up to a greater vigilance, he sets before him some that had
made shipwreck of them, together with their punishment, and ver. 20.
end of it.

This is the scope then, to provoke Timothy to hold whatsoever may be useful
unto him, to make his employment in the church comfortable unto him, he must
hold.

If you say, he must only have them; for so the word Paul says,) that we
thorough patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope, that is, hold
it thorough the whole course of life for use.

If you say, it is enough to (...) pro (...). Romans 15. 4
hold them for the present. I answer, no: it is in such a part of speech, as
signifies a continual act, holding today, tomorrow, and for ever. Therefore in
Timothies person, it commends these two savoury rules of life unto you; that
when ye have faith, ye must hold it, and when ye have a good conscience, ye
must hold it too.

Ye must hold faith. Faith is 1 Ye m^st hold faith. Gal. 5. 22. 1 These. 5.
19. Apoc 3. 3
of a flying nature in it self. It is but a fruit of the spirit, and we are
apt to quench it. But as Christ says to the church of Sardis, remember how
thou have received and heard, and hold fast: and to the church of Philadelphia,
hold that fast Apoc. 3. 11
which thou have, that no man take thy crown: so be you all sure to hold faith.

I shall labor (with Gods 1 How ye must hold faith.
help) to clear these two particulars, how ye must hold faith, and why ye
must do it. First, as he that would hold his possession and inheritance must
have a good ground of tenure; his right by gift purchase, By holding.
or descent; a good object of tenure, his deeds and evidences; a good act of
tenure, to say with confidence this is mine; and a good power to use it as his
own for his proper benefit. So if ye would hold faith, ye must hold

1 The ground of faith. 2 The object of faith. 3 The act of faith, and 4 The
power of faith.
The ground of faith, is 1 The ground of faith.
your saving right to it, without which you have nothing to do with faith to
save you. And what is that? it is an humbled soul: none have right to faith to
save them but such. To make a loose and broken ground the foundation of an
house, is the next way to see the ruin of it: but to make a broken heart the
ground of faith is the only way to see it hold. Come unto me all ye that are
weary Math. 11.
and heavy laden: if ye be such, then build upon me for the rest of your
souls. God carried the Israelites forty years thorough the wilderness to
Deuteronomy. 8. 23
humble them, prove them; and to make them suffer hunger, and then he fed them
with Mannah. God makes the house of David look up Zach. 12. 10. 11.
to Christ pierced, and mourn as a woman mourns for her only son: and
then in that day he opens a Zach. 13. 1
fountain for the house of David, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin,
and for uncleanness. The Holy Ghost convinces the world of sin, and then of
righteousness, Ioh. 16. 8. 9 10. 11.
that Christ has fully satisfied, because he is ascended: and then of
Judgment, to set up a throne and cast out Satan by degrees. Even as physicians
do first purge to pull down rebelling humors, and then give cordials: So God
first whips by the Schoolmaster of the law, and then Gal. 3. 24.
brings us to Christ: this is the ground of faith.

The object of faith is, the 2 The object of faith.
deeds and evidences of it, the whole word of God. There are no other deeds
and evidences of saving faith but there. These are the testimonies, and records
of God: he that believes 1 Ioh. 5. 10
not God, and his record which he has witnessed, has made him a liar. This is
that for which God looks to be credited. A very knave looks to be credited
for his pawn or bond; an honest man for his honesty; a noble man for his
honor; a Prince for his word: much more God. Ye must therefore look to the
Precepts of God like David: who when he took notice of Psalm. 119. 4 5.
Gods commandments, given to be kept, he had an heroical motion to do more
then he could, he prays that he might be taught them, that he might keep
them, and be ver. 48.
quickened by them, and resolves to lift up his hands to Gods commandments,
which he had loved, to do them. Ye must look to the Judgments and
threatenings of God, as the Ninevites, who were presently Ion. 3. 2 Chro. 34. 27.
in sackcloth, and Josiah who rent his clothes, with weeping eyes, and melting
heart. Thus David's flesh trembled for fear of God, and Psalm. 119. 120.
he was afraid of his judgments, ye must look to the promises of God as
David: who hid Psalm. 119. 11
them in his heart that he might not sin against him. Whatsoever is in the
word, ye must have an eye unto. For though they do not so immediately concern
you in the way of life and death (as many Genealogies, Chronologies, Histories,
and Prophecies) yet you must be ready to understand Praeparatione animi.
them and their uses as God shall offer them: yet ye must principally hold
precepts to direct, threatenings to humble, and promises to allure and comfort;
ye must hold them, by understanding what the will Ephesians. 5. 17
of the Lord is, till (if ye can) ye come to all riches of the full Col. 2. 2.
assurance of understanding. Ye must hold them by assenting to them: yielding
to all the truth of them, as Saint Luke to the story of Christ whereof he was
fully persuaded. Ye Lu^e 1. 1.
must hold them, by bringing your bodies and souls into subjection unto them.
For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith working Gal. 5. 6.
by love. This is the object of faith.

The act of faith, is to say, 3 The act of faith.
this is mine: to adjudge and appropriate father, son, and holy Ghost unto
your selves; without this ye cannot feel any comfort of what you believe.
Therefore as David, and Christ said, My God, My Psalm. 22. 1. Ioh. 20. 28
God: as Thomas said, My Lord, and my God: and as the Luke 1. 47
Blessed Virgin said, my spirit (that is the quintessence of my soul acted by
the spirit of God) rejoices in God my Savior: so by way of adherence, (when
most times ye have no evidence) ye must take God in Christ as your own, as
he offers himself. I am the Lord Ex. 20. Ier. 31.
thy God, I will be thy God. This is the act of faith.

The power of faith, is to make use of the riches of it The power of faith.
Psalm. 32. Psalm. 45. Romans 4. Act. 15. Mal. 4. Ephesians. 3. Heb. 6. 2 Cor. 4. 13.
for thy own proper good. Great is the power of faith, and it prevails. It
covers our sins by the garments of Christ our elder brother, and so is
imputed to us for righteousness. It cures our sins, bringing Christ, who
has healing under his wings, to dwell in our hearts by faith. It brings forth
a world of the labor of love, we having the same spirit of faith, believe,
and speak, and think, and do. For by Ephesians. 2. 10.
faith we are Gods workmanship created in Christ to good works, to walk in
them. And this affirm constantly that they that have believed in Tit. 3. 8.
GOD, be careful to maintain good works. This is the power of faith.

Now, this ground of faith, 2* Why ye must hold faith.
this object of faith, this act of faith this power of faith, you must hold
upon these five Grounds.

First, faith is our life; we live by faith, not by sight; and 1 Faith our
life. 2 Cor. 5. Hab. 2.
every just man must live by his faith. Not efficiently: for so, in GOD we
live, move, and Act. 17.
have our being. Nor meritoriously: for so says Christ, I am the way, the
truth and the life. Nor by way of immediate Ioh. 14.
application: for so the holy ghost is a quickening spirit, as Adams soul was
the 1 Pet. 3* 18. Genesis 2.
breath of life. But as a prime instrument of our life in Christ, without this
we cannot have life, either before God or in this miserable world. This Romans
1. 17 Heb. 10. 38
unites us to Christ, and receives a quickening spirit (as the virtue of
Christ), from the spirit of Christ, in the means of salvation. As men say of
their trades, and hands, under God, they are my living, take away these, and
take away my life: so say we of faith: it is your life: therefore hold it.

Secondly, faith is our power 2 Faith is our power of working.
of working, to do us our best good. In a natural man, his reason is his
power. He is borne naked, with abundance of bodily weakness; a beast has a
great deal of bodily strength: and if a lion rationally knew how to use his
paws, a dog his teeth, a bullock, or buck his horns, or an horse his hoofes,
how few men would there be in the world? But let man come in with his reason,
and he subdues them all. But in a believer his faith is his power: and what is
the power of reason to this? As Christ said of miraculous faith, it pulls up
trees by the roots, and removes mountains, it makes sun stand still, and go
backward: so much more of this saving christian faith in another kind. It
covers more sins then heaven and earth can cover. Get the heavens to cover
them: our sins are more then the stars, and are come up above the heavens.
Get the sea to cover them: the sea can cover the sands at a full tide, but our
sins are more then the sands of the sea. Get the earth, and all the creatures
to cover them: our sins overtop them all, and make Romans 8.
the whole creation groan under the burden. But get faith, and as love covers
a multitude of sins in others, so faith covers all sins in our selves. It
brings the garments of Christ, and then we cannot Apoc. 16. Phil. 3. Dan. 9.
be naked. It brings the righteousness of God, the everlasting righteousness
to dwell amongst men, and then, God cannot but be there, where his
righteousness is, to give grace and Psalm. 84: 16
glory, and every perfect gift. It is your power to do your best good, and
therefore hold it.

Thirdly, faith is your workman. 3 Faith is our workman.
Set faith about any work, and what can it not do? Art thou at Gods Genesis 12.
word, to go a great journey, thou know not whither? Faith did it for
Abraham. Art thou to fight against lions, Heb. 11. Genesis 22.
bears, Philistims, and other puissant enemies? Faith did it for David,
Sampson, Gideon, Barach, and their fellows. Art thou to do what nature
abhorres? Faith did it for Abraham in the sacrifice of his son. Art thou to
cleanse the unclean stables of sin? Faith will take Christ's spirit, and
arguments, and do it. It cries out, shall I that am dead to sin yet live
Romans 6:
therein? Shall I sin that grace may abound? God forbid: I will mortify the
deeds of the Romans 8.
flesh by the spirit. Art thou to suffer persecution?

Faith will suffer it for thee in goates-skinnes, and sheepesskinnes, Heb. 11.
in the craggie wilderness. Art thou to overcome Death, and Hell? Faith will
do it too. Faith receives Heb. 11.
the dead to life; and sends a defiance to the greatest enemies of it, O Death,
where is 1 Cor. 15:
thy sting? O Hell, where is thy victory? Thanks be to God for Jesus Christ,
the Captain of my salvation. O who would be without faith! It is our
workman, hold it. Romans 7. 4 Faith is our best light here.


Fourthly, faith is all the comfortable light, ye have in the world. Without
the sun the earth would be an Egypt, and without faith we are in a region of
darkness. The wisemen Math. 4. Math. 2.
came out of the east and worshipped Christ, offering also gold, frankincense,
and myrrh: why? what did they see in him? They saw a child, not a man: they
saw him in a stable, not in a throne, in rags, not in robes, crying in a
cratch, not thundering in the clouds; how then came it about they now
worshipped? Faith saw God in him, for the heavens waited upon him in his
star. Faith saw in him a prophet, a priest, a king, and their oblations were
answerable. The thief upon the cross cries out unto Christ, Lord remember me
when thou come into thy kingdom? was he a Lord that was dealt with like a
slave? had he a kingdom that was disgracefully thrust out of the world? Could
he remember him, that would not remember himself, when they cried, come down
from the cross, and save thy self? Faith casts away these mists, and saw
glory in shame. Ye know what the Centurion said, verily this man was the son
Mat. 27. 54.
of God, what? a man, and the son of God too? The son of God, that could not
have the favor to live, or dye so well as the son of man? Surely, some
spark of faith saw life in death, light in darkness: It is your light, hold
it.

Lastly, faith makes earth 5 Faith makes earth heaven. Math. 13. Genesis 28. Ephesians.
2.
heaven unto you, and the church the kingdom of heaven, the house of God, the
Gates of heaven, and sets us on the seats of heaven here below. Before we come
to the proper place and mansion, which Christ has Ioh. 16.
provided for us, by faith we sit with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the
kingdom of heaven. Put case we hope for it, we see it not: faith is the
ground of things hoped for, the evidence Heb. 11. 1. (...).
of things not seen. It stands under the weight of the whole world, and yet
says, heaven is mine. It sees nothing but earth, and sinners, and beasts, and
trees, under the canopie of the starrie heaven, and yet says, heaven is mine,
as if it had it already. O the world of grace and glory that is in faith!
therefore hold faith.

Oh that I now knew how Application.
to screw my self into your souls to search whether ye hold faith! How many
thousands have it not, and cannot hold it? How many thousands have it a little,
and know not whether they hold it or no? ye are to be married to the lamb,
and till that day come, Annulum sponsalem.
ye have but the wedding-ring of faith, to have and to hold, first for
promise, then for fruition. Tell me then:

Do ye hold the ground of 1 Try the ground of faith Romans 8.
faith? Then ye are humbled souls: ye have passed thorough the spirit of
bondage, whereby ye have been shut up in prison under Moses, till the son
has made you free, Ioh. 8.
and ye walk humbly ever after for fear of loosing this estate. This lays
the foundation of faith deep enough. Hymeneus and Alexander 1. Tim. 1. 20.
built upon the sands, and so they ship-wrackt against the rocks of the world.
Therefore you must down lower, under the sands, earth, rocks, to the gates of
hell, and then, Out of the depths have I cried Psalm. 130. 1
unto thee O Lord. Are ye thus in some measure, or other, according to your
sins? Say it if ye love faith and your salvation. Are ye convinced Ioh. 16.
Act. 2.
of your sins? are ye pricked at the heart for your sins? Are ye so all
this, that ye are at utter enmity with all sin? Then keep this ground of
faith.

Do ye hold the object of 2 Try the object of faith.
faith? This nourishes and keeps faith alive. It is like oil to the lamp,
like fuel to the fire, and like sap to the tree. Have you full assurance of
the knowledge of the scriptures? Can you say, I Will pawn my life, body, and
goods, and soul, that, though I cannot conceive all, yet all in the scripture
is true? what I know is true, and I resolve to learn more: what I know not is
true, and I will do my best to comprehend that too. Have ye a free assent to
all the truth of it, and to that alone for salvation? Do ye not come off basely
as Agrippa, almost thou Act. 26. 28
perswadest me? Have ye a belief to all the precepts, promises and
threatenings of the scriptures? Do ye say all the commandments are true, and I
must do them: all the threatenings are true, and if I live in Deuteronomy. 32.
sin, I must undergo them, even to burning in the nethermost hell: all the
promises are true, and I must relieve my flagging and drooping spirit with
them, in despite of my unbeleeving heart? Does thy faith in the knowledge of
them change thee, as it did David* who when he could Psalm. 40.
say, that in the volume of thy book it is written of me presently cries out,
Lo I come, to do thy will? If it be thus, hold faith. But do thou not
rather hate the being of the word in thy understanding? Thou know it will
strip thee of all thy lusts. Do thou not therefore say as those miscreants,
depart from me, I desire Job. 20.
not the knowledge of thy laws? do thou not hate the nature of the word, to
will as that wills? Hear that cursed voice, and fear to find it in thy
self, I will do as I have done, Ier. 44.
whatsoever the word of God says. Do thou not hate the rules of the word?
Art thou not sorry they are true: Would thou not they were false? Can a
fleshly-man love that, flesh and blood cannot inherit 1 Cor. 15.
the kingdom of heaven? Can an old sinner love that, the child shall dye an
hundred Es. 65. 20.
years old (so ripe shall he be for God) and the sinner being an hundred
years old shall be accursed? Can an usurer love that, he is not for Gods
tabernacle, and holy hill, that Psalm. 15. 5
puts his money to usury? Can an whoremonger love that, whoremongers and
adulterers Heb. 13.
God will judge? or any of those sinners that, be not deceived; neither
fornicators, nor 1 Cor. 6. 9 10.
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortiouers, shall inherit the kingdom of God? If they love not the nature,
being, and rules of the object of faith, this is not to hold faith.

Do ye hold the act of 3 Try the act of faith.
faith? Do ye rest with confidence upon the promises of God in Christ? ye
pule and cry in the sorrow of your hearts (even when your sorrow has turned
you to God) and say, I know not what to do. This ye do; but ye look not
upon the new and everlasting covenant, and say, God is mine, Christ is mine,
the holy Ghost is mine, and I hold faith, as Jacob did God, I will not let thee
go Genesis 32. 26. Ruth. 1.
except thou bless me: and as Ruth did Naomi, whithersoever thou go, I
will go with thee both in life and death.

Do ye hold the power of 4 Try the power of faith. Romans 16. James 2.
faith? Say then, what does it make thee to do? Show the obedience of faith:
show me thy faith by thy works. It is as the plummet on the clockline which
makes you strike. It will make you look upon sin which pierced Christ, and
Zach. 12.
mourn for it, and cast it out (as Agar the bondwoman) with a, Get thee
hence. It is in thee as in the sea, there is that Leviathan and creeping things
innumerable: so there are in Psalm. 104. 25, 26.
thee, master sins, and creeping lusts innumerable: but let faith loose upon
them, and then as when God made man after his Image, he said, let him have
dominion over the fish of Genesis 1. 26
the sea, and every creeping thing: so does God say to faith, be it unto thee
as thou believe, even Math. 15.
against the whole hoaste of sin. It will make you look upon Christ and love
him above all, and delight in all that belong unto him, the word of faith, the
prayer of faith, the seals of faith, the household of faith, for it will not
let you stroke the head, and strike the body: yea, it will make you desire the
appearance of the Lord Jesus, that ye may be with him for ever: you will stay
his leisure, but with winged desires* O make haste my beloved, and be like the
Roe: come Lord Cant. 8. 14 Apoc. 22.
Jesus, come quickly. It will make you look upon God the father, and depend
upon him for all things, (for faith reasons thus, if he have given me Christ,
how shall he not Romans 8.
with him give us all things also?) yea, and submit unto him in all things,
(for the children of Abraham, will do the works of Abraham; John 8, Gal. 3. 7
and they which are of the faith are the children of Abraham): yea, and go
boldly to the throne Heb. 4. 16
of grace, that ye may have his strength to do all obedience, and to trust in
him in hardest Job. 13. 15
times. It will make you look to God the holy Ghost, and submit to his work of
conviction, and conversion, yea, and to do whatsoever he enableth unto. He is
the great master of faculties, who helps Romans 8.
your infirmities: you take his help by faith and do it. It will make you
look upon your selves, and work the work of God upon your souls with power.
The fowls pick-up the good seed so soon as it is Luke 8.
sown, because it is not mixed with faith: but the word Heb. 4. 2 1 These. 2 13.
works effectually in you that believe. Yea, it will make you fight the
battles of God insuperably. When Paul came to Ephesus, there arose no small
stir about that way: so when Act 19. 23 Math. 2.
faith in Christ comes, Herod is troubled, and all Jerusalem: but faith makes
you like the house of David, grow stronger and 2 Samuel 3. 1
stronger, and sin like the house of Saul, grow weaker and weaker: It makes you
like Rachel, Genesis 30. 8
who wrestled with the wrestlings of Christ, and prevailed. Let the world fight
against you: this is your victory, 1 Ioh. 15. 4 1 Pet. 5. 8
even your faith. Let Satan come; resist him, steadfast in the faith. Let the
flesh come; as those beasts had their dominion Dan. 7. 12
taken from them, yet their lives were prolonged: so faith spoils the flesh of
her Kingdom, though it must live as a Iebusite. Let God himself desert and
forsake thee, yeth faith says, though Job. 13. 15
thou kill me I will trust in thee. Lastly, faith will make you look upon
your brethren, and fill you with mercy and Tit 3 8. Ephesians. 2 9, 10
good works. When Dorcas believed, she made coats and garments to cloth the
naked. Act 9. 39
When Tyrus was to believe, she would nor treasure up merchandise, but get it
for them that dwell before the Lord, Es. 23. 18.
to eat sufficiently, and for durable clothing. When the disciples were
taught to forgive their brethren, they cried out, Lord increase our faith; as
if Luke 17. 4
they should say, faith will do it: the more faith, the more mercy; for if you
believe your own ten thousands forgiven, you will forgive others tens: yea,
when you look upon your brethren, faith will move you to draw them to Christ.
It sets you upon the high mountains, which do make the valleys fat with the
drops that descend from them, when Luke 22.
thou art converted, strengthen thy brethen, says Christ to Peter. If Andrew
have found Christ, he calls Peter; If Philip have met with him he calls John. 1*
Nathanael. If thou thus have the power of faith, hold it: If thou have it not,
be humbled in time, get faith and hold it,

It may be thou will say, What we must do to hold it.
what shall I do to hold it? if then thou would have all in a word, stop
thine ears against the enemies of faith; I was In hac fide natus sum. August.
born in this faith, is a lose plea, it is the gift of God. Hear duly the
friend of faith, the preaching of the Gospel. Pray the prayer of faith in the
name of Christ. Use the seals of faith, the sacraments. Keep experience to
nourish and fatten faith. Buy faith, but sell it not for a thousand worlds:
part with all domineering sin for it; they that set not this price upon precious
faith, shall never have it, nor ever hold it. Thus do and thou shall give
glory to God, and bring comfort to thy own soul for ever and for ever,

Amen.
THE SECOND SERMON, on 1 Timothy 1. 19.
And a good Conscience.
YOu have seen the holding of faith. The second savoury rule which Paul under
the person of Timothy, commends unto us is, when we have a good conscience to
hold that also.

Ye must hold a good conscience. conscience too; it has many wings to fly
away from us, the weak owners of it. It flies A good conscience is of a flying
nature. 1 By fears
away, first by fear, Abraham was afraid of the court of Abimelech, and
Pharaoh, and therefore weakly taught his wife Sarah to tell a lie: and Peter
was afraid in the highpriests hall, and he denied his master with cursing:
Daniel, and the three worthies banished fear from their souls, and would
worship God alone, and pray unto him what ever came, and so kept a good
conscience, whereas Abraham and Peter lost it. Secondly, by unmercifulness:
Adonibezeck 2 By unmercifulness. Judge. 1. Luke 16.
was cruel, and what a wicked conscience had he in cutting off the thumbes of
seaventie Kings, and using them like dogs? Dives was so too, and what a
conscience had he in denying the crumbes of his table? Thirdly, By the love of
2 By the love of the world* Gal. 6. 12.
the world: the false Apostles making a fair show in the flesh, constrained
christians to be circumcised; only, least they should suffer persecution for
the cross of Christ: and thus a good conscience did fly away. Fourthly, by the
love 4 By love of sin.
of sin: David loved the sweet sin of Bathshebah; therefore he contrived
the death of Vriah, and so conscience fled. Fifthly, by the love 5 By love of
honor.
of honor; Achitophel was not honored above Hushai the Archite, and he
hanged himself. Adonijah was not honored above Solomon, and he ended in
rebellion. Bigthan and Teresh had not honor answerable to their minds, and
they proved treacherous. Haman could not have Mardocaies knee, and all the
Jews (if he can help it) must die for it. And thus a good conscience fled
from them. Sixthly, by the guilt and 6 By the guilt and horror of sin.
horror of great sins: Judas was pressed sore with what he had done, and
he went out and hanged himself: and thus a good conscience did fly from him.
Lastly, by 7 By profit Psalm. 73. Ier. 12. Job. 21. 2 Timothy 4 10.
the profits of the world: David, Jeremy, and Job had not the prosperity of
wicked men, and in a passion they fell to grumbling against God: Demas had it
cast* upon him, and forsook Paul, and embraced the present world: and thus
good conscience was almost in the first, altogether in the last chased. What
shall I say? There are some sins of daily incursion, which are lamented,
Peccata quotidianae incursionis, et vastantia conscientias.
groaned under, and fought against, which may be lived with, though not lived
in, and yet a good conscience may stay by us: but if any sin lay waste the
conscience by selfe-libertie, and presumption: good conscience flies, and
therefore hold it.

To help you in this also, I 1 How to hold a good conscience.
shall labor to show you two things: how you may hold a good conscience, and
why you must do it.

If ye would hold a good conscience, ye must hold four things,

1 The light of conscience. 2 The love of conscience. 3 The works of
conscience. 4 The charge of conscience.
1 The light of conscience must 1 Hold the light of conscience
be held. Be a workman never so good, he cannot show it, if he want light to
do his work by: so is it with conscience. Now conscience has a double light:
1 the light 1 The light of nature.
of nature, which light still presents some principles to frame our life by, as
that there is a God, that he is to be worshipped, that we must do to others,
as we would be done unto: and if these be not followed, conscience checks. 2
The light of the 2 The light of nature.
word, which fully presents the particulars of those generals, and shows with
what, how, and when God is to be worshipped: together with that honor, life,
honesty, goods, truth, and quietness of nature, wherein we must so do to
others, as we would they should do to us. If ye keep not both these lights,
conscience can never be good. Three eyes view all 1 of God. Heb. 4. Ier. 9.
There are three eyes that look upon all things done: first, the eye of God who
has all things naked before him. He sees and writes with a pen of iron, and
point of a diamond: and either he censures here, or hereafter. Secondly, the
2 Of the world.
eye of the world: this sees all things manifested; and would make you believe,
thorough squinteyed jealousy and suspicion, that it sees more then it does,
and so passes censures accordingly. Thirdly, 3 The eye of conscience.
the eye of conscience. This sees all that it is enlightened to see: but if it
have not light, it sees not, and censures not; therefore hold the light of
conscience.

The love of conscience 2 Hold the love of conscience Genesis 31.
must be held, If ye love it not, it will away. As Jacob, when he saw Labans*
countenance changed, and his wages too, and that ten times, away he goes: so
does conscience. As David when he saw himself not loved in the court of Saul,
away he goes to the Philistines, Achish, wilderness, any whither where he
could find entertainment: so will conscience deal with you. As therefore ye
say of that you love, I thank God for this, I would not be without it: so say
of conscience, I thank God for conscience, I would not be without it for a
thousand worlds: thus hold the love of conscience.

The work of conscience must be held too. It is an officer under God to
determine, upon 3 Hold the work of conscience
information, of all our actions for excusation, accusation, conviction, or
conversion: and can Gods officers be idle? The officers of men may be idle,
yea, foundations may be out of course. The out-ward Psalm 83.
officers of God may be idle too: magistrates and ministers, may too often be
found to be idol shepherds: but this privy counselor, and immediate
internal officer, Zach. 11. 17
conscience, cannot be idle. God sits on the throne with it, and though it
seems to sleep, yet in still silence it registers all acts and neglects,
omissions, and commissions; and when a man would think that all is forgotten,
then ( In an evil day) it brings forth all, and lays it in order before us,
Eccles. 12.
to our shame and confusion. Hold therefore the work of Psalm. 50.
conscience; and what is that? It is threefold.

First, to propound unto you from the light of nature, and The work of
conscience is threefold. 1 To propound.
the word, what ye ought to be, and do in the whole frame of life, and
course of living. It lays the rule of GODS Image, and will, before you, and
says thus you should be, and do so and so: as to Adam, I should not have
eaten the forbidden fruit, I should have kept the Genesis 2.
covenant of my God; for he said, do this and live: to David: I should not
have committed adultery, or contrived murder; for God has said, thou shall
not do so.

Secondly, to apply (by way 2 To apply
of reflection upon themselves) what ye have been, or done. I should have
been, and done so, and so: but I am, and have done thus and thus. As to Adam,
I should not have eaten the forbidden fruit; but I have done it: to David I
should not have committed adultery, and murder; but I have done them: and to
all of us, I should have repented, believed, hoped, loved: but I have not done
them as I ought. 3 To pronounce.


Thirdly, to pronounce impartial judgment upon your persons and actions: as
therefore I am a wicked man, have done foolishly, and am accursed: 2 Samuel 24.
or therefore I am in Christ, have done uprightly, and am blessed. Thus David,
I Psalm 119. Luke 1. 5.
have gone astray like a lost sheep: thus the prodigal, I have sinned against
heaven and before thee: thus Paul, I was a persecutor, blasphemer, oppressor:
and thus Hezekiah, I have walked before 2 Timothy 1. Es. 37.
thee with a perfect heart. This work of conscience will make you run out of
Sodom with a shower of brimstone at your heels: or make you pass thorough the
wilderness under a cloud of comfortable protection: therefore hold it.

Lastly, the charge of conscience 4 Hold the charge of conscience
must be held also. It has a large Diocese over every secret, and every
manifest thing of yours in person, or by communion. It has a charge over
inclinations. David's conscience saw the inclinations and pronenesse of his
heart to cleave unto the dust, and therefore he flies to GOD, incline my heart
Psalm. 119.
unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness. It has charge over the
understanding: therefore Agurs conscience looks upon that, and complains,
surely I am more brutish Pro. 30. 2
then any man, and have not the understanding of Adam in me. It has charge
over the memory: therefore God presents memory to his people, they remembered
not the Lord Iud. 8. 34 Psalm. 106. 7
their God: they remembered not the multitude of thy mercies, that their
consciences might work accordingly. It has charge over thoughts, wills,
affections, Es. 55. 7
and desires. Let the unrighteous man forsake his thoughts, says God to
conscience: Math. 15.
the thoughts defile a man, says Christ to conscience, therefore, how long
shall your wicked Ier. 4, 14.
thoughts lodge within you? ye Ioh. 5.
will not come unto me that ye may be saved, says Christ to conscience. Oh
how I love thy Psalm. 119. Psalm. 18. Psalm. 119. Psalm. 42.
law! yea, I love thee dearly O Lord my God; I hate all wicked ways (says
David) from conscience. My soul longs for thee, as the heart pants after
rivers of waters; I desire to be Phil. 1.
dissolved, and to be with Christ, say David's and Paul's consciences: but wicked
men's consciences shall cry at last, we desired not the knowledge of Job. 21.
thy laws. Yea, the charge of Conscience reaches to your words, and deeds.
Ye must give an account of every idle Math. 12.
word to God, and your consciences; of every idle word, that has no natural,
civil, or religious end: therefore David's conscience pleaded against him, that
he said in his haste, all Psalm. 31. 22. Psalm. 116. 11
men are liars, even Samuel himself in his message from God, and Peter's
conscience lashed him to the purpose for his detestable words in the
highpriests hall. David's conscience also comes to his deeds, I have sinned
greatly in that I have done; I have done 2 Samuel 24. 10.
very foolishly and Ezra, when he presented others consciences as well as his
own, cried out, and now what shall we say? Ezr. 9. 10
for we have forsaken thy comma^dements. O the large charge of Conscience! As
ye must hold the light of conscience, the love of conscience, and the work of
conscience; so hold the charge of conscience, that ye may do as Paul would
have you, hold a good conscience.

Would you now know the grounds of holding a good 2 Why you must hold a good
conscience. 1 If it be gone, God will be against us.
conscience? Do but mark these four that follow. First, if conscience run
away from you, GOD, and your own souls will be against you. Gods eyes are
purer then to behold iniquity, with approbation; and when he with rebukes
does correct man for sin, as a moath he makes his beauty to Psalm. 39. 11
consume away: he does not presently thunder out of heaven, but secretly
gnawes out the comfort of their hearts, when he is to Ephraim as a Hos. 4.
Ier. 20. 3, 4 Pro 28 1 Levit. 26. 37
moath. He makes them plagues to themselves, magor missabib, flying when none
pursues, at the sound of a shaking leaf, making every moate a beam, and every
beam an whole house. Yea, by conscience he makes them an whole wilderness of
woe. Hezekiah complained that God would break all his Es. 38. 13
bones, that he could not speak for anguish of spirit, but chattered like a
crane or swallow, and mourned like a dove Jobs bitter Job. 12. 26
things that God wrote against him; made him cry out, that the arrows of the
Almighty Job. 6. 4. 8. Job. 7. 14. 15.
were within him; scared him with dreams and visions, and made his soul
choose strangling and death, rather then life. David's bones waxed old with
roaring all the day long, and his moisture was like the Psalm. 32. 3. 4.
drought in summer, when Gods arrows stuck fast in him, thorough the power of
conscience. Therefore hold a good conscience.

Secondly, nothing will do 2 Without it nothing will do us good. Psalm 51.
you good without a good conscience. Have you all houses, lands, gold, silver,
kingdoms, Empires, they will do you no good without this; no nor faith it
self: for a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1. 5
and a good conscience, and faith unfayned will go together; they all work
one for another, a good conscience rises from a pure heart: and faith unfeigned
cannot be without a good conscience. There is a A fourefold sting in sin.
fourefold sting in sin; the guilt of sin, the fruits of sin, the service of
sin, and the habits of sin. Faith in Christ pulls out the two first, and a good
conscience from Christ the two last. If therefore ye would have any good of
what you have, hold a good conscience.

Thirdly, with a good conscience 3 With it nothing can do us hurt.
nothing can do you hurt. It stands out against all the world. Let slanders
come, Paul sets the sentence of his conscience against them, with me it is a
very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of ma^s Judgment: for I
know nothing by my self: and though this justify me not before God, yet it
comforts me against your clamors, Let a thousand troubles come, Job sets his
conscience against Job. 31. 35. 36. 37.
them all. Let mine adversary (says he) write a book against me, I would take
it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown, and declare my steps, and go as
a Prince against him, yea, a good conscience shall go with you thorough the
pikes of death, and the grave. The warfare of our faith, and hope, shall end in
sight, and having but our love out of a good conscience, shall pass all, and
continue for ever.

Lastly, a good conscience 5 It carries with at more then the whole world. Romans
2.
carries with it more then the whole world to do us good. It carries God along
with it. If God go with an ill conscience to accuse, much more with a good one
to excuse and comfort. The sentence is the judgment of conscience, but as Gods
interpreter: and what conscience speaks (when it is well regulated) God
confirms, as ye see in Adam for ill, and in Job for good. It carries all the
host of heaven and earth along, as Gods great and mighty train. The good
conscience of Daniel Dan. 6. Dan. 3.
is attended with mild lions; of the three confessors, with an unburning fire;
of penitent Jonah, with a sanctuary in the Ioh. 2.
hellish belly of the whale; of Elijah with a raven to cook and 1 King. 17 2
Ring. 6.
cater for him; and of Elisha with an army of Angels to guard him. And if yours
be not so attended, it is with better; with the immortal seed of the word to
make you bring forth unto life, and with powerful prayer, which landed Jonah,
quenched the thirst of Ion. 2. Judge. 15. 2 King 19. Josh. 10. Ex. 32. 16
Sa^pson, slew an hundred fourscore and five thousand enemies, stopped the course
of the sun, and is the wel-pleasing bonds of God to hold him close to you for
obtaining all good. Therefore hold a good conscience.

Thus you see how you may Application.
hold a good conscience, and the grounds of it. Oh that I could now dwell in
your souls, to set them on work, totry whether you conform to this rule of
holding a good conscience, yea or no.

I find some good people, Some think they have no good conscience, and why?
who (being clouded with temptations) think they have no conscience at all, and
therefore that they cannot hold it. They look for more in themselves Abraham's
full sail of faith, Paul's chariot of conscience, and those first Christians
ecstasies of joy, with joy unspeakeable 1 Pet. 1. 18.
and glorious even in the fiery trial: and if they are not thus (though their
cases differ) down they fall. They read themselves still in a lecture of the
law, and look for a deal of legal righteousness to purge conscience, before
Justification by the blood of Christ, made theirs by faith, to pacify it: and
if they have not, at the first Deus et natura non faciunt saltu^.
leap what they would, they put off good conscience, as the high priest Judas,
what is that to us?

I find more wicked people, So^e think they have all good conscience, and why?
who think they have all good conscience. They sleep out the storm, and do
not feel the heart-quake. The God of this world blinds them with prosperity.
cannot but be good. They are covenant with hell and death. Es. 28.
They have leisure to do nothing to draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and
sin as it were Es. 5.
with cart-ropes: they still their consciences with sweet words, and cousen
them with outward Luke 15. 1^. Matthew. 7. et 25:
formality. They are in their own delights, as in their own proper places: and
then as elements dead in sins 6 ph. 2.
and trespasses; and if you lay the load of the whole world upon a dead man, he
feels it not: so, nor conscience the heavy burden of sin. But as a
melancholic man, in his passionate pleasures forgets his own thoughts, but
when the game is ended, he thinks more dismally, though for the present he is
set up to the merry pin: so the poor sinner lays aside his pensiveness to
indulge to his presenr fancy, till the time of rousing comes. Hence, or from
such like springs, wicked men think they have a good conscience, and therefore
they think they Therefore try whether ye hold good conscience 1 Try the light
of conscience
hold it: therefore it behooves you to try whether you hold a good conscience,
yea or no.

Do ye hold the light of conscience? good souls do desire to enform themselves
in every particle of Gods will for faith and manners, As a good master desires
to give light to his servants, that they may see to work: so deal good
christians with conscience. But do not you love ignorance? Indeed, ye come to
the church, and hear the word, but ye quickly lay it aside, like a strait
payr of shoes, wherein he cannot go in ease. How shall conscience work (think
you) if it have no light? There is an in Lumen. 1 Innatum. 2 Seminatum.
bred light which will help in some things; but if ye have not that sowed
light which the sower went out to sow by the word of Christ, it is not so good
as it should. Works of darkness will be committed by men ^n darkness, who
love not light, because their deeds are evil: Do ye therefore hold the
light of conscience?

Do ye hold the love of conscience? you will all say, yes: and 2 Try the love
of conscience
I grant that ye love it as a dog loves a cudgel. It is ready to smite you at
every turn, as it can spy day at a little hole, and to make your hearts heavy
in the midst of laughter, and do you love this? A good man's loves it dearly.
Oh says he, let me have a good conscience still! let a righteous conscience
smite me still: let it be my counselor, comforter, corrector still. But had
you not rather be without it? ye cannot gain so much as you would for
conscience: ye cannot drink so freely of pleasure as you would for conscience:
ye cannot advance your selves as you would for conscience, Oh how it troubles
you! therefore ye wound it, smother it, stop the mouth of it, and will not
hear it, though a good man might by it be satisfied from Pro. 14, 14.
himself, Is this to hold the love of conscience?

Do ye hold the work of conscience? 3 Try the work of conscience Es 57.
A good man will let it perfect its work in the fear of God. He propounds
fairly; he that is broken hearted shall be comforted: he that is weary and
pressed down with sins shall Math. 11. Apoc. 2.
be refreshed: he that fights the good fight of faith, shall have the crown of
life: he that adds to his faith knowledge, to his knowledge virtue, and so
forth, shall make his calling and election 2 Pet. 1.
sure, because he shall neither be barren nor unfruitful: he that has the
fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5. 22. 23.
against him there is no law to condemn. He applies as truly: but I have a
broken heart, I am weary of sin, I fight faithfully according to strength
received, I chain my graces together in act (as occasion is offered) as I have
them in habit, and as I have the fruits of the spirit in me: therefore he
concludes as necessarily, therefore so long as I continue in this estate, I shall
have comfort here, and salvation hereafter. A wicked man will sometimes suffer
conscience to work too, according to light: Abimelechs conscience will not let
him wrong Abraham's wife, which Genesis 20.
comes not because the conscience is good out of faith unfeigned, but good out
of fear and awe. But tell me: do ye suffer conscience to work in all
things? Then would ye so powerfully conclude against your selves, that ye
must say, 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10.
I must amend, or perish. No unrighteous person what ever, whether fornicator,
adulterer, reviler, drunkard, covetous person, extortioner, shall inherit the
kingdom of heaven: but I am so, and so; therefore in this estate, I shall
never get heaven. He that neglects the call of God, shall call upon God, and
God will not hear, but laugh Pro. 1.
when his destruction comes: but I have done so; therefore God will deal so
with me. He that being often reproved, Pro. 29 1.
hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed without remedy: but I have
hardened my neck against all reproves; therefore what may I look for (if I
amend not) but destruction? Do ye thus conclude for your amendment? Do ye not
rather conclude quite otherwise? Gods word says so, and so; but I do not so
do; or if I do otherwise, God will save sinners, and I shall escape. Is this to
hold the work of conscience?

Lastly, do ye hold the 4 Try the charge of conscience.
charge of conscience? What an universal bishopric has conscience over the
whole man, and all of man? There is no inclination, imagination, power,
thought, word, or deed, but it is under the power of conscience, and do ye hold
this? David's conscience looked to his inclinations; I was Psalm. 18. 23
upright before God, and kept my self from my wickedness. Agurs conscience
looked to his understanding and thoughts; if thou have done foolishly, if Pro.
30. 21
thou have thought evil, lay thy hand upon thy mouth. David's conscience looked
to his words; I will keep my mouth with a bridle: and to his deeds, Psalm 39.
I said I will take heed unto my ways. But as Christ did mourn within
himself, when he saw the multitude, because they were as sheep without a
shepherd: Mat. 9. 36.
so may you for the neglect of conscience in all these. Ye are inclined to
every evil way, yet conscience takes no notice. How is your understanding
overwhelmed with ignorance, and stuffed with worldly vanity? How are your
memories charged with unprofitables, and your affections lavished wickedly, and
yet conscience is silent? your thoughts, words, and deeds, are not visited by
conscience as they should. It neither viewes, nor censures, nor corrects, as is
meet. Oh why do you not hold conscience? Let it look to every secret, and
when it knows the duty, let it look about and apply it (as need is) to every
part and power of body and soul. This will work amendment for the present, and
care for the time to come, and so shall ye hold conscience.

It may be you will say, how How to help to the holding of conscience.
shall I help my self forward to such a glorious work? I answer, Get a a rich
mine of grace and duty into your hearts. As a in your Deuteronomy. 16. Pro. 6.
hearts, and binding it to your hearts, by a powerful impression. Present this
treasure to your consciences, that it may make you smite your selves upon your
thighs, and say, what have I done? Then walk in the presence of God, as
David, when I awake, I Psalm. 139.
am ever before thee: and then the servant will work when he is before his
master. Next, have a settled watchfulness

And lastly, commit your waeyes to GOD by hearty prayers, and he will rectify
all by the blood and spirit of your JESUS: and so, surely, shall you hold both
faith, and a good conscience too, to the comfort of your souls, and to the
Glory of your GOD, to whom be praise, power, and Glory now, and for ever,

Amen.
FINIS.
Imprimatur

Sept. 1. 1638. Tho. Wykes.


