ESSAYS Of Certain PARADOXES.

At London, Printed for Th. THORP. 1616.

praised.
K. RICHARD the 3d The French POCKES NOTHING Good to be in DEBT
THE PRAISE OF King RICHARD the THIRD.
THat Princes are naturally ambitious, and that Ambition makes them to effect
their desires, rather then to affect the equity of their designs, may more
truly then safely be auowed. For all of them, I think, were the record of
their actions indifferent, might be taxed of this vice. But this excuse cleares
not the accused; yet it testifies, that Princes err against nature, if they
aspire not. We hold (not without reason) that if the bill of the Plaintiff be
stuffed with frivolous assertions, that the complaint favors more of malice,
then of wrong. Why should not the same Axiom be a motive to clear this
wronged Prince, whose accusers lay to his charge the anguish his Mother felt,
when he came into the world? then which accusation what can be more frivolous;
it being a punishment hereditary to all women, from the first? His being
toothed, as soon as borne, seems to me rather a blessing, then any
imputation, as being a presage of his future worthiness, and as all Nurses
will confess, an ease of much pain and danger. But he was crook-backt, lame,
il-shapen, il-fauoured. I might impute that fault to Nature, but that I rather
think it her bounty: for she being wholly intentive to his mind, neglected
his form, so that she infused a straight mind in a crooked body, wherein
she showed her careful providence. For oftentimes, the care to keep those
parts well formed, with-drawes men's minds from better actions, and drownes
them in effeminate curiosity. His lamenesse turned to his glory; for with
those imperfect limbs, he performed actions most perfectly valiant.

How rightly his Father Rich. D. of York, father of Edw. the fourth George D.
of Clarence, and Rich. the third.
claimed, his brother Edw. E. of March, eldest son of R. D. of York, after
K. by the name of Edw. the fourth.
obtained the Scepter, is sufficiently known, and therefore superfluous and
impertinent: and also how his brother dusked his right, (if right) by
abrogating the oath, which he swear at York, that his coming in arms was
only for that Dukedom. For the Dukedom of York, as his right, fro his father
D. of York.
But to dilate how variable, and inconstant the people of those times were,
shall be more necessary and effectual, that knowing their inconstancy, their
traditions (like themselves) may the less be believed: so lightheaded, so
foolish, so irreligious, as their opinion (for what else are the thoughts of
Ignorance but opinion) made them break their oath to their Prince, K. Henry
the sixth.
and to such a Prince as they did not shame to dislike, only because he was
too good. Him they abandoned, deposed, after restored; not as desiring, (being
guilty of their own fault) but only that it stood with the liking of Warwick
the child of their love. Rich. Neuile Earl of Warwick, surnamed the King-maker
If then they were such, (as indeed they were) and that those relations we
have, must come from that people, it were better (I think) to bury their
traditions, then refute their objections, were not our age, apt to err,
infected with this folly.

For his brother K. Edward: K. Edward the fourth.
though his vices seem not to add virtues to this condemned Prince, yet
questionless they do; making all his ill-estimated actions of an other
nature. He obtained the Crown, but rather fortunately, then wisely, were not
all wisdom thought folly, to which Fortune lends not success. For I think,
Lust, or if you will term it Love, could not more have prevailed with the most
licencious creature, then at once to break the bonds of amity, discretion and
policy; and all to enjoy a woman, in respect of his height, base: a widow,
Lady Eliz. Gray, widow of Sir John Gray Knight, afterward married to K. Edward
the fourth.
and of his enemy, without bringing him either alliance, or riches; proppes
most pertinent to his new-erected buildings. Wherein, besides his breach of
regal discretion, with his chiefest friend the Earl of Warwick, whom he had
sent into France, to treat of marriage between him and the Lady Bona, Lady
Bona, Niece to the French King Jews the eleventh, and daughter to Jews D. of
Sauoy.
(wherein being deluded, he became his mortallest enemy) his abuse to God was
more abominable; being before betrothed (as his own mother constantly
affirmed) to the Lady Elizabeth Lucy: in testimony whereof he had laid such
earnest, For he had got her with child.
as should have bound any common man, much more a King, to performance. How
soon the wrath of God followed this his irreligious inconstancy, his being
driven from the Seate-Royall into exile; the birth of his son in a Sanctuary;
(having no place else of freedom in his Fathers kingdom) the misery of all
his partakers sufficiently testify. In which general misery, who did more
truly follow him? Who more faithfully aided him, then his now disgraced
Brother? Whereas his other Brother George D. of Clarence, second brother of K.
Ed. the 4.
Clarence not only left him, but joined in marriage He married Isabell,
daughter of Richard Neuill Earl of Warwick.
with the daughter of his principal enemy, and help to expulse him: with
what love, what constancy, his endeavors, his aduenturing his life to restore
him, does witness.

Never was he noted all the life of K. Edward, to thirst after the Kingdom;
never denied he any commandment of his Prince, but performed all his
employments discreetly, valiantly, successfully. The suspicion of helping his
Brother Clarence to He was drowned in a Malmsey butt in the Tower.
his end, was but a suspicion, since the kings old displeasure awaked by a new
Prophecy, was vndoubttedly the cause; if otherwise (when he after repented
him) he would have misliked of Gloucester, it being natural to sin; but
unnatural, to ease others of their crimes. For the killing of the Heir of the
house of Lancaster at Tewksburie, Edw. Prince of Wales, son of K. Henry the
6. slain after the battle of Tewksbury.
(if so) seems to me, rather the effect of love to his Brother, then cruelty
to the Prince: for he was an enemy, yea, the chief and principal enemy of
the contrary faction. Yet it cannot be proved the action of Richard, but that
it was an act wished by the King to be done, and executed in both their
presences, by the Duke of Clarence, the Marquess Dorset, the Lord Hastings and
others.

The death of Henry The death of Henry the 6 in the Tower.
the 6. in the Tower, can no way belong to him, since the same reason that
clears his Brother, fitteth him; he being able, if desiring his death, to
have effected it by a more unworthy hand. And indeed this accusation has no
other proof, then a malicious affirmation. For many (more truly) did suppose
that he dyed of mere melancholy and grief, when he had heard of the
overthrow of his friends, and slaughter of his son. But if it were true,
though it spots him with blood, yet it confirms his love to his Prince; which
love was so coldly requited, as might have moved a true lover of Rewards more
then of Virtue, to have altered his indeauors, whether it were a jealousy of
the Nobility of his blood, or of the height of his spirit, whether the
abundance of affection to be led by a woman, or that he was defective in all
brotherly affection, certain it is, he rather employed him, then rewarded his
employments. Contrary, the Queens kindred, daily to rise, merely without
desert, but that they were of her kindred; and their baseness being thus
suddenly exalted, not only to pluck from him promotions, due to his deserts,
but to envy the Duke, and contend with him; how insupportable it must be to so
magnanimous a spirit, whose memory bear witness of their unworthiness, his
own worth, any like spirit may imagine.

Thus continued this unequal contention, until the King, sent for before the
great The death of K. Ed. the 4.
King of Kings, to make an account of his greatness, left his body, to testify
the worlds folly in contending for Worlds, when one little part of the earth
must contain them. King Edward Prince of Wales son to K. Ed. the 4.
His successor at that time very young, was wholly possessed by the mothers
blood, whom the Richard D. of Gloucester made Protector.
now Protector had great reason to fear, being ever his mortal enemy, and
now most strong, by being most nearly allied to this Prince: Therefore jealous
of his own preservation, of the safety of the Commonweal, and of the ancient
Nobility, with great reason and justice he executed them, whom, if he had
suffered to live, were likely enough to have been the destruction of him, it,
and them. But the deed accomplished, stirred up no little fear in the
Queen Mother, and her faction: For the Queens taking Sanctuary with her
younger son Richard D. of York, younger son of Edward the 4.
Richard Duke of York, without any cause that he knew, drove Gloucester to
suppose that they doubted of their right, and put him in possibility of
obtaining his own: wherein by ambitious Hen. Stafford D. of Buckingham.
Buckingham he was assisted, who then related to him afresh the unlawful
Marriage of his Brother, that being unlawful, consequently his children were
bastards, and so undoubtedly the Crown was lawfully his; to which discourse
he annexed protestations of furtherance. Though perhaps an earthly spirit
would not have been moved with these motives, but rather have desired safety,
then Sovereignty: yet in a true Heroic spirit, whose affect is aspiring, they
could not but be embraced, using the wings of Time, to bring him to that
height. Be not obstinate (Mortality) against this climing Axiom, for hourly
you commit worser errors, more groueling, more base. Were it not common, every
days issue, it were admirable to note the impudency of man, who at this
instant condemns actions, which himself would instantly accomplish, were he
permitted by occasion. The Queene-Mothers fear, his own right, Buckinghams
aid, and his own jealousy to erect a Prince, too young to govern himself,
much less others, but was likely to be governed by his Mother, and her
kindred, the Protectors mortallest enemies, men of mean birth, not inured to
government, such as were likely to destroy the ancient Peers, to fortify
their new Nobility, could not but draw a true discerning spirit, to favor
himself, to protect the ancient Nobility, to defend the people from being
wasted, and oppressed by the ambition and tyranny of new unexperienced
Statists, and to respect his own preservation, rather then others. For well
he saw he could not live, unless he were a King; that there was no safety,
but in Sovereignty. Should I put thee in choice (condemning Reader) whether
thou would not be, rather then be a King; thou would perhaps answer no:
but that answer should proceed, rather from the knowledge of thy want of
power to Royallize thee, then through the abundance of thy modesty. No, no, it
is a desire befitting the most worthy desirer; and were all men's affections so
high, their actions would not prove so vnwor-thy.

The State being thus in labor with Innovation, the Peers in counsel about
their Infant Kings Coronation, all busy, yet dissenting in their business; in
a Council holden at the Tower, Hastings Lord Will. L. Hastings, Chamberlain to
Edward the 4.
Chamberlain was apprehended, and no sooner apprehended, but executed. The not
leisurely proceeding by form of Law, may seem to plead Hastings innocence,
the Pretectors cruelty. But they that consider the nature of the people of
that time, apt to sedition, greedy of innovation, and likely to be glad of so
pitiful a color (for Hastings was a man grown very popular) will hold the
Protector in that action very judicial, and, if guilty of any thing, of
discretion, and policy: But could Hastings be innocent, whom Phil. de
Co^mines, Lord of Argenton in his History.
Co^mines reports to be a Pensioner of the French King, Lewis the 11. the
only subtle Prince of that time? he, of all others, that most affected
tyranny, and was naturally the mortal enemy of this kingdom. Or was he fit
to be a Statesman or Counsailor, who being corrupted by the bribes of an
enemy, had dissuaded his Master, the late King Edward the 4. from assisting
the oppressed Lady Mary sole daughter and heir of Charles D. of Burgu^dy,
after married to Maximilian the Emperor.
the heir of Burgundy, against Jews the French King, whereby that Lady was
driven to seek aid elsewhere, who, otherwise, was likely to have married with
the Duke of Clarence, or some other English Prince, and so to have united that
Dukedom to this Crown, to the eternal benefit and security of both
Countries; who gloried in his private reuenges, who not only enticed his
Master, but accompanied him in all sensuality: who in the deflowring of men's
wives, Shores wife.
and such other his vnprincelike actions, was his perpetual attendant, and
sometimes (as it is thought) would begin to him? Doct. Shaes Sermon at Paul's
Cross.
Doctor Shaes Sermon not a little illustrates the malice of his accusers: For I
think, no man that is discreet, will imagine this Prince so indiscreet, as to
have witness that he commanded that Sermon, and gave instructions what should
be said: Then how do our Chroniclers report it for truth, were not their
malice greater then either their truth, or their judgment? But they are
Historians, and must be believed.

Alas, poor men, how would they be believed, whose greatest authorities (as a
learned and honorable Knight writes) are built upon the notable foundation of
hearsay? Sir Philip Sidney in his defense of Poetry.
men that have much aid to accord differing writers, and to pick truth out of
partiality. But it is not mentioned, that Shaw ever executed this action, with
alleging him to be the cause. It is likely indeed, that Shaw being ambitious,
gaping after preferment, supposing some such intent in the Protector (as he
had a reaching head) was bold to set his Rethoricke to sale, to publish his
fancies: but seeing his hopes vanish into smoke, and his expectation deluded,
seeing the Protector neither rewarded, nor regarded his Rhethorick, he soon
after languished and dyed: a just example to teach Theologians so boldly to
intermeddle with Princes affairs, before they be commanded: for (doubtless)
had the Protector set him a work, he would have paid him his hire. But if it
were so, that he commanded the Sermon (as that is yet unproven) was that an
offense to make the people so publicly partakers of his right; yea, to
prostitute his cause to their judgments? for charging his Mother with
adultery, was a matter of no such great moment, since it is no wonder in that
sex: And surely he had more reason to adventure her fame, then his Kingdom,
because of two evils it is wisdom to chose the least. If it were true, it was
no injustice to publish it; and what could be expected from his, but true
Justice, who was so impartial, that he would not spare his own mother? if
untrue; good faith, he was therein too blame, and her innocence the more
meritorious; but certain it is, the people approved his right: for he was
crowned The Coronation of K. Richard the third.
with such consent, and so great applause both of Peers and people, that if we
will judge by the outward behavior (the only mark our judgments may or can
level at) we must determine them so contented, as no actions which might
testify the satisfaction of their minds, were omttted: surely, if ever the
vniudiciall multitude did any thing iudicially, it was in receiving this
Prince, whom his chief disgracers cannot but acknowledge for valiant; then who
was more meet to restrain domesticke, to subdue foreign seditions? For these
civil dissensions had almost wasted and made desolate this populous Nation:
discreet he was and temperate, (two so rare and excellent qualities, as he
that truly possesses them, meriteth the possession of a Diadem:) for in these
virtues, joined with that Cardinal virtue Fortitude (whereof also he had a very
large portion) consists the soul of Sovereignty, which whosoever wants (be
he a while never so powerful) his own greatness so crusheth him, that he
forfeiteth all in a moment: most liberal he was, desiring rather to want, then
to suffer worth unrewarded: and this liberality is the only true Nurse, and
fosterer of virtue; virtue unrewarded being insensible, our flesh being
governed, advised, yea mastered by our senses: this worthy, this Princely
ornament some calumniators have sought in him to deface, alleging; that his
liberality to some, proceeded from his extortion from others: but even those
cannot deny him to have been politic and wise; then is it likely that a
Prince of his wisdom and policy, could not discern between the worthy and
unworthy? And to take from vndeseruers, to bestow upon deseruers, must be
acknowledged a Virtue.

He was neither luxurious, nor an Epicure, not given to any riot, nor to
excess, neither in apparel, nor play: for had he been touched with any of
these vices, doubtless they which object lesser crimes, would not have omitted
these: then (without question) he was largely interessed in virtues, (their
contraries) but those (through malice) are either not registered, or (if
registered) so infamed, as if all his virtues had a vicious intent: yet to
acknowledge the virtues of the vicious, is such a right, that what Historian
willingly omitteth them, therein becomes vicious himself. But in all that I
have hitherto among tee vulgar observed: Calpatur factum, non ob alaud, quam
exitum: they approve, or disprove all things by the event; which though
sometimes it proves like the cause, yet it is more often governed by the will
of the divine providence. And surely, but that the gracious goodness of God,
to manifest the weakness of humane policy, overthrew his designs, took from
him his Kingdom; and contrary either to man's hope, or our merit, united by a
blessed and happy conjunction The two dissenting factions of York and
Lancaster, united by the marriage of Henry the seventh to Eliz. eldest daughter
to Edw. the fourth.
the two dissenting factions, to the true establishing of sweet peace and
prosperity of this desolate kingdom: for, otherwise, had he lived to have left
Issue to have succeeded him, such might have been his and their merits, that
Fame would have been no more injurious to him, then to his Predecessors, the
fourth Henry and Edward, whose reigns were polluted with much more royal
blood: for he omitted nothing, that in wisdom, or true policy might secure
himself, or establish peace, or good laws in this Kingdom.

His Statutes are extant; what can be found in them not becoming a King? what,
not befitting the service of God? the worship of Religion? the good of his
Country? yea, I have heard of some, accounted both good Lawyers, and good
Statists; that in those three years of his government, there were more good
Statutes for the weale-publike inacted, then in 30. years before. He was no
taxer of the people, no oppressor of the Commons, though he came to manage an
Estate, whose treasure was exceedingly exhausted; no suppressor of his
subjects, to satisfy either licentious humors, or to enrich lightheaded
flatterers. But (alas) who robbes virtue, but ingratitude, detraction, and
malice? what a curse is it to Mortality, that no fashion of life, no merits,
no regards can free Princes from discontentments in their life, and infamy
after death? who is it that hears of any one so endued, so laden with virtues,
that judges him not happy? yet he is defamed; and by whom? even by those, for
whom he cared, labored, and omitted nothing that might profit, committed
nothing that might prejudice them.

This, the charge and commandment that he gave presently after his
coronation, to the Lords and Gentlemen (whom he sent home into their
Countries) that they should in their Countries* see Justice duly administered
and impartially, (that no wrong, nor extortion should be done to his subjects)
does testify; this, his laws, and all his actions approve: yet neither the
care of his Country, his laws, nor actions, are thought to be sufficient to
plead his equity and innocence: for malicious credulity rather embraces the
partial writings of indiscreet Chroniclers, and witty Play-makers, then his
laws, and actions, the most innocent, and impartial witnesses.

It is laid to his charge (as a maine objection) that he was ambitious, let us
examine the truth of this accusation. Was he ambitious, who was only content
with the limits of his own Country, who sought to be rather famous for
instituting of good Laws, then for atchieuing great conquests? No, no, he
wanted nothing to make him an accomplished Prince, but that he was not
ambitious enough: for had he imitated that worthy King Henry the 5. who, in
a like unsettled estate, led out the Nobility and people, to make wars upon
foreign enemies, to make conquest of France, and to embrue their Warlike
swords (lately bloudied against one another) in the blood and bowels of
strangers: he might (perhaps) have had a fortunate success: For he wanted not
the like title, he was no less valiant, no less politic. So might he have
re-conquered that kingdom, and those Territories, which by the pusillanimity
of some of his Predecessors were given away, and lost, and (peradventure) so
busied the stirring heads of the Nobility and people, that they should have had
no leisure to think upon any Innovation or part-taking at home: so might he
happily have secured himself, and enlarged the bounds of his conquests beyond
any of his Ancestors. What lets or obstacles could hinder him from those
glorious enterprises? His Subjects were warlike, trained up in arms; somewhat
too much exercised in blood, because it was in their own. His neighbors, the
French, were governed by Jews the 11.
a king, who had some policy, but so little valor, that he would rather yield
to any Capitulation, then hear the sound of an adversary Drum. So that his
people, being vnured to wars, were easily to be conquered by that Nation,
which had so often beaten them in the height of their daring.

The Scots, their colleagues, he had already been victorious over: his name
among them was grown terrible. For in the time of his Brother he wanne from
them many Castles, and Holds. But principally he conquered Barwick won from the
Scots by Richard the third.
Barwik, the chief and principal Town upon their frontiers a piece of
special importance, either to make easy our entrance into that kingdom, or
to keep them from inuading ours: so that I cannot justly accuse him of any
crime so much, as that his ambition stretched not far enough. To justify his
adversaries accusation, in this time chanced the death of his two young The
death of Prince Edward, and Richard D. of York in the Tower,
Nephews in the Tower, whose deaths promising quiet to him, and wholly imposed
upon him, how truly, I have reason to doubt; because his accusers are so
violent, and impudent, that those virtues (which in other men are embraced, for
which they are esteemed as Gods) they impute to him rather to be enamellers of
vices, then really virtues: His Humility they term secret pride: his
Liberality, Prodigality: his Valor, cruelty and bloudthirstinesse: yet in
these days, their partial opinions are thought to be of validity sufficient,
to make proof of any imputation: But if it were so, that their deaths were by
him contrived, and commanded, the offense was to God, not to the people: for
the depriving them of their lives, freed the people from dissension. And how
could he demonstrate his love more amply, then to adventure his soul for
their quiet? But who knows, whether it were not Gods secret judgment, to
punish the Fathers transgression in the children? and if it be so, complain of
their Fate, not Richards cruelty: (for in these fatal things it falls out,
that the High-working powers, make second causes unwittingly accessarie to
their determinations) yet, in policy, Princes never account Competitors (how
young soever) innocent, since the least color of right prouokes innouating
humors to stir up sedition, which (once kindled) threatens the subversion,
both of Princes and Subjects.

And if some wise, and politic Princes have imprisoned, and put to death, such
as have been reputed their heirs and successors, because some factious heads,
(weary of good government, and hoping for authority by alteration) have sought
to establish them before their times; (as commonly, giddy-brained people do
more reverence the Suns rising, then his fall) had not King Richard great
reason to deprive them of their lives, who were not to succeed him, (but in
many men's judgments) had most right to be invested before him with the
Diadem? And (indeed) the remoouing such occasions of civil wars in a
well-ruled Commonwealth, is most profitable, most commendable; being no
cruelty, but pity, a jealousy of their subjects, and a zealous regard of
their own safeties. And (indeed) if we duly consider, how much the duty we
owe to a Country, exceedes all other duties, since in it self it contains
them all, that for the respect thereof, not only all tender respects of
kindred, or whatsoever other respects of friendship, are to be laid aside; but
that even long-held opinions, (rather grounded upon a secret of government,
then any ground of truth) are to be forsaken: since the end, whereto any thing
is directed, is ever to be of more noble reckoning, then the thing thereto
directed; that therefore the weal public is more to be regarded, then any
person or Magistrate that thereunto is ordained, the feeling consideration
hereof moved King Richard, to let principally before his eyes the good estate
of so many thousands, over whom he had reigned, rather then so to hoodwinke
himself with affection, as to suffer his Realm to run to manifest ruin.

If any man shall object, that his course was strange, and unlawful: let him
know, that new necessities, require new remedies; and for him there was no
remedy, but this one. Then if for this action he ought to be condemned, it is
for indiscretion in the managing; for as safely might he have had the Realms
general consent, in disposing of their lives, as of their kingdom. Had he
held a secret execution best, he might have effected it more secretly: but he
rather chose a middle way, content to let the people know it, holding their
knowledge equal with their consents: And it should seem, the people, (though
they were at that time very factious) yet approved thereof: for we find not
that in any action, either inward or outward, they showed any dislike. And
(truly) such is the difference between the thoughts, the actions, the
dispositions of Princes and Subjects, that I hold no subject sufficiently
judicial, to censure them: their courses so unlike, that what is meet,
expedient in a Prince, in a lower fortune is utterly unmeet, inexpedient.
Therefore let no servile condition adventure to condemn them, since all such
eyes lose their faculty, if they but gaze against the Sun of Majesty. It is
sufficient for us to know how to obey; this Nature commands and exacteth of
us: but to search into the actions of our Commanders, dilates more curiosity,
then honesty: Nay, though we would, we cannot: for our knowledge extends to
things equal, or inferior; those above us, in divinity, are comprehended
only by faith; in terrene matters (if superating our estates) they are only
snatched at by supposition. And this our Laws approve, which appoint every man
to be tried by his Peers; shall then the head, the director of civil
policy, the anointed Majesty of a King, be barred from the right, allowed to
subjects? No (surely) it is preposterous, most unlawful to condemn a king, if
not found faulty by a A King not to be condemned, but by a lury of Kings.
Jury of Kings. Were man in his innocence, this advice were not lost: but
being nousled in misusing of his malicious tongue, ever to condemn others,
never to amend themselves, it is (as they will be for their abuse) perpetually
lost; No more then for them.

Let us yet further clear this wronged Prince: It is constantly affirmed (say
our Croniclers) that he first noysed, after, contrived the death of his wife:
Anne Wife of K. Richard the 3. daughter of Ri. Neuill E. of War. and widow of
Prince Edward, son to Henry the 6.
and that it was bruited, before it was effected, thereby with her sorrows to
confirm the report. This evidence they adiudge pregnant, and effectual enough
to condemn him: did Fame never lie? What are more generally received for
untruths, then flying reports, seeing no creature sensible will give credit to
Fame, or take her word, without a surety, whom they may assuredly know to be
credible? But constantly (say our Croniclers) could their words be so
constant, whose actions were the very stage of inconstancy, who opposed,
deposed kings at their pleasure, and (to make sure to be no worse then they
were) swore allegiance to two To Henry the 6. and Edward the 4.
Princes at once, and with both broke theif Oaths? But I will spend no more
time, in proving the vanity of these Croniclers, since their own pen
contradicts it self; first, showing the affections of this people to be
mutinous, and after, approving them: for certain it is (but uncertain, that
the King caused it) that such a rumor there was, and that it made a great
impression in the Queen, deeming (as women are ever fearful) this
prophetical relation to be the forerunner of her end: which bewailing to her
husband, he fought with all kindness to remove that melancholy fantasy. What
more could he do to testify his love, to cure her passions? But how absurd
is it to think or imagine, that the king contrived her death? Where, if he
had pleased to marry elsewhere (for that is made the cause) he might and would
have used a more safe means by a divorce; did not the French king Jews the
12. (because The wife, from whom he was divorced, was Ioane, daughter of
Jews the 12. sister of Charles the 8. Ga^. Iab. 4.
his wife was barren, and crooked backed) sue a divorce, and obtained it from
Pope Alexander the sixth, and afterward by his dispensation married with Anne
Duchess of Britain, the widow of his predecessor Charles the 8? Might not
King Richard have done the like: for he had the like cause (his wife being
barren) whereof he had often complained to Rotheram then Archbishop of York?
And the Popes of those times were not so nice conscienced to deny Princes such
requests, but were easily won thereunto, either by favor, or rewards:
therefore, that he contrived her death, was a slanderous, false and absurd
accusation; but her The death of Anne wife of Richard the 3 and second daughter
of Richard Neuill Earl of Warwick.
time was come, which Mortality might sorrow, but sorrow might not prevent,
Death being deaf to all humane lamentations.

After her death, being desirous to reconcile himself to all such, as held
themselves offended (as at his Coronation he had done with Fogg a mean
Attourny, who had highly offended him) he labored to win the one sort with
benefits and rewards, and freely pardoned the others misbehauiors and offenses:
he had no cause to fear Fogg, therefore fear was not the cause. No, it was a
worthy, a kingly humility, that would rather abate of his greatness, then to
have it stained with the blood of so mean a vassaile, for a crime committed
against himself, yet was he guilty of counterfeiting his Royal hand and
Signet, and of a most untrue and infamous libell: therefore how falsely do our
Croniclers seek to clear Collingborne, who was (as may appear by his
indictment Collingborn executed for Treason, not libelling.
executed for treason against the state, not for that ryming, foolish,
ridiculous libell? for neither they, nor any other can ever prove, that ever
he revenged any injury whatsoever committed particularly against himself. For
the good and safety of his kingdom and people, he was zealous, he was
fervent: for, only for their peace, for their quiet, he was content to suffer
his nearest kinsmen, his dearest friends to be executed; so now with the mother
Queen he labored reconciliation, he often solicited it, at the last he
effected it: This rare, this excellent work of Christianity, this true
cognizance of a Religious Queen, our Chroniclers defame, and impute it to her
as an horrible crime: such is the obstinate error of mankind, that, when
hatred is by God absolutely prohibited, they dare say and maintain the
contrary: but (were not they thus corrupt, partial, governed wholly by
affection, not truth;) their Histories would be the wisest guides, making men
that are young in years, old in judgment, making experience most precious)
most cheap: For Knowledge, Judgment, and Experience are dearly purchased,
when we must wander into infinite errors, ere we can be perfect in our way;
nay, they were most dear, were they had with no other expense, but growing old
before we enjoy them, waxing rotten, ere they grow ripe. The end and scope of
this reconciliation was, to unite himself in marriage with his The Lady
Elizabeth eldest daughter to Edw. the fourth, after wife to Henry the seventh.
Niece: a contract (no doubt) inconvenient, and prohibited the Vulgar; but
amongst Statesmen it is like to produce infinite good, both to Prince and
people. It is an inconvenience, most convenient, nothing strange, because
usual, and accustomed amongst Princes: tolerated, yea allowed by their
received Oracle of divinity; the Pope, who considering the cause, ordinarily
dispenses with the Consanguinity. It is granted that this desire of marriage
was mentioned by this King, in respect of the public peace; to make
satisfaction to the Mother, in exalting the daughter, for the deiecting of the
Sons, and to avoid the effusion of much of the peoples blood, which was
likely to be spilt, if his Niece should marry elsewhere: as if (sayour
Chroniclers) the first could not be established, the latter avoided without
this Platform of Policy; No, had not Gods secret working bin beyond man's
wisest apprehension, it could not: for well he knew the headstrong obstinacy
of this people could hardly be kept in awe by a man, therefore impossible to be
restrained by children: this made him dispossess them of their Kingdom, and
(peradventure) of their lives: for had they been suffered to live, they would
ever have bin the firebrarnds of new seditions; and therefore he thought it more
convenient, they should be quenched with their own bloods, then with the
bloods of infinite numbers of the people; yet to make satisfaction for this
wrong, (if it were a wrong to deprive the disturbers of the common good) he
was contented and much labored to marry their Sister, his Niece: but he is
therefore adjudged ill: why? because his accusers would be reputed good, though
(without doubt) he was a good Prince, and they all, or the most part of all,
evil, phantasticke, and seditious people. And even at this day, though the
fortunate and succesfull government of our later Princes, has somewhat altered
their natures, and bettered their conditions; yet it were a less difficult
quest to find one good man, then many. But it pleased not the divine Ordainer
of marriage to permit that conjunction, but rather to set a Period at once to
his kingdom and life.

About the time of the plotting of this marriage, the judicial Buckingham, (not
thinking himself sufficiently regarded) grew discontent, and got the Princes
favor to retire himself into the Country; where (no doubt) his fantastic
melancholy would soon have vanished (being a man more happy in the
inheritance of his Father, then in the legacy of Nature, discretion, or
judgment) had not the Prisoner corrupted the Iaylour: namely, This Moreto^ was
after in the reign of Henry the seventh Archbishop of Canterbury, Cardinal
and Lord Chancellor of England.
Moreton, Bishop of Ely (committed by King Richard to his custody) who finding
this Duke discontented, more desirous to inflame his griefs, then to redress
them, with his fiery wit so wrought upon the Dukes combustible matter, that
suddenly he brought him to kindle a fire of rebellion, and to take up arms
against his Sovereign: this K. Richard soon hearing, he prosecuted him as an
enemy, and so labored (what by his own wisdom, what by his especials) that
within a while he took his head from The death of Henry Stafford D. of
Buckingham beheaded at Shrewsbury.
his body, for being no better able to advise him in his proceedings: was it a
fault to punish perjury in him, who had sworn true allegiance? then the
executing of law is a sin; if so, let transgressors be accounted innocent, and
Magistrates and Judges guilty of transgression. And had this been the action of
some other Prince, it had been good, just, necessary; but being his, it is
censured the contrary: so that sin is not sin, nor virtue accounted virtue,
by their own natures or effects, but are made virtues or vices, by the love or
hate that is borne to the committer: such is our humane understanding, as they
rather confound all things, then by distinguishing them to make choice of the
worthiest; for let a Nobleman be popular, if he have an ill face, it is termed
warlike, his drunkenness is termed good fellowship, his slouenliness,
humility, his prodigality, liberality; thus is virtue suppressed, and forced
with her own titles to adome her mortallest adversaries. But, to return to our
defamed King had not his mercy exceeded his cruelty, his safety had been better
secured, and his name not so much subject to obloquy: for though he cut off the
head of a mighty Conspirator, yet he suffered the conspiracy to take so deep
root, that (in the end) the branches thereof ouertopped his glory, and
ouershadowed his greatness. Margaret Countess of Richmond, wife of Thomas ^.
Stanley, mother of K. Henry the seventh.
For the Countess of Richmond laboring in her sons right, daily enticed and
inueigled many to be of her faction: to streng, then which the more, it was
plotted between the two Mothers, to join Q. Elizabeth mother to Elizabeth,
eldest daughter of Edward the fourth, and Marg. Coun. of Rich. mother to Henry
the seventh, after King.
the two dissenting houses in unity, by York and Iancaster.
a marriage. This practice the King well knew; yet mercy, love, lenity so
prevailed with him, that he only sought to prevent that conjunction, by
uniting his brothers daughter with himself, and inflicted no other punishment
on the Countess, but only the committing of her to the custody of her Tho. L.
Stanly, after by Hen. the seventh created E. of Darby.
Husband. Would a cruel bloodthirsty Prince have done so? could any thing
have been performed with more mildness and lenity? could he do less then let
her understand, that he knew her secretest practices? Surely, if he were an
Usurper (as that he could not be now, standing after the death of his Nephews
in the same rank, that Edward the fourth his brother did) yet his equity in
justice, his mercy in pardoning offenders, his care of Religion, his providence
for the safety of the people, should and ought to have tempered the bitterness
of his most malicious enemies, with no less merciful gentleness he used her
husband, (and that) at such time as her son was already landed, and made
claim to the kingdom: for he only took his son George Lord Strange, son
and heir to Tho. L. Stanley.
the Lord Strange as an hostage, and then suffered him to go into the Country
to levy his forces: so far was he from blood and cruelty, as, though he knew
his alliance to the contrary faction, a motive, sufficient to make him (as
indeed he did) incline to their aid, though he might justly suspect him, and
could not have wanted color to have beheaded him (as being father-in-law to
his Competitor) yet he only detained his son in his Camp; and when he had
assured notice of his Fathers disloyal revolt, yet he suffered the Hostage of
his loyalty to live: an evidence effectual enough to testify, that he desired
rather to settle, then to overthrow the quiet of this Land; that he labored to
win the hearts of his subjects, rather with meekness then cruelty; what
Prince could have done less? Nay, what King would not have done more? since
both the effect, and the present fear, are both such inward tormentors, that
it is hard to determine which is most grievous: so opposite, so contrary to the
nature of a Prince (borne, not to fear, but to be feared) that it is most
just, most natural, to remove such a terror; but now Henry the 7.
the Heir of Lancaster being come to challenge the Crown, what did the King?
Did his spirits fail him? Was his magnanimous courage daunted? No, he then
gathered new spirit, he new steeled his courage, he withstood him with the
height of fortitude; protesting rather to dye valiantly, then to live less
then a King. With what a Roman-like spirit did he resist fortune? being
overthrown, how Heroically did he encounter with death? This our detracting
Chroniclers cannot but acknowledge: for so high, so powerful was his
magnanimity, that (in spite of malice) it prevails, and (like the Sun)
breaks through the misty clouds of his adversaries slanders: was it a fault
to withstand the Lancastrian heirs claim? then those are faulty, who being in
possession of lands, to prove good their title, prosecute suites, and are
ouerthrown by the law: for the sentence of judgment makes them to perceive
that to be an error, which before they imagined none. Besides, he knew well,
that his kingdom and life had both one period, to which life he was persuaded
his Competitor had no right, and therefore he would never be guilty of such a
sin (as wilfully to betray it) till he which had lent it him required
repayment.

Had his life, his actions been most abominable; yet (like a slave) to have
yielded his throat to the execution, would have been an imputation beyond all
other imputations: but could he as openly have manifested his other virtues, as
he did his valor and policy, the worlds opinion had been otherwise, and I
neither had taken such pains to defend his innocence, nor in some weak
judgments to endanger mine own. But surely he did courageously and valiantly
withstand his enemies, with great expedition rallying his forces, and
performing all things with wonderful celerity, he went to encounter the
disturbers of his quiet.

It is reported, that, the night before the day of battle, he dreamed a most
K. Rich. dream the night before the battle of Bosworth.
dreadful and horrible dream, which by our Chroniclers is interpreted to be a
testimony of his wicked and tyrannous life. Did not Caesar, Plutarch is the
life of Caesar, Dion and Brutus.
before he attained the Empire, dream that he knew his own Mother carnally?
had not both Dion and Brutus the figures of terrible spirits represented unto
them, the night before their end? and yet these were reputed good men, and
lovers and protectors of their Country; and because king Richard dreamed with
some terror, must his life of necessity be evil? O vain! O frivolous
objection! but they hold this dream to be a compunction of his conscience:
happy Prince to have so indiscreete slaunderers; for how could they more truly
witness his integrity? since only they which reverence and fear God, are
endued with that inquiring conscience, which censureth their actions: for they
which are given over to a reprobate sense, are insensible of that good Angel,
which seeks by telling us our faults, to make us repent our sins past, and
to be wary, lest we commit any more.

Surely, I think, his conscience (like a glass) presented before him the
figures of all his actions; which he faithfully examining, humbly craved pardon
for his misdeeds: and so having made atonement with God, like a devout
Penitentiary settled his mind, he went with alacrity to the bloody Court, where
the cause of his life was to be tried: where his sword being his Advocate,
pleaded most valiantly. In all which tumult, he failed neither in discretion,
nor in execution, but boldly encouraged his Soldiers, both by word and example.

There is extant in our Chronicles, an The Oration of K. Richard. Holliniheds
(...) in the end (...).
Oration, which at that time he made to his Soldiers, wherein he confesses
his errors, and desires pardon of all the world, as he hoped his repentant
tears had obtained mercy of God.

What a Saint-like thing was this, for a King, to crave forgiveness of
subjects? for a General, to humble himself to his Soldiers? What could it be
but the effect of a more divine, then terrene understanding? If (like the
common fashion of men) he would have put his affiance in humane assistance, and
neglected his God, he might (in common reason) have promised himself the
victory: being double in forces, and nothing inferior, either in valor or
policy; but he acknowledged and confessed the power of the most powerful: he
knew that it was not the multitude of men, but God, that gives the victory.
And therefore having first made peace with his own soul, he humbled himself,
and asked pardon of those, over whom he had government: knowing no government
to be so perfect, wherein some good men are not offended.

This was the effect of his compunction; to put him in remembrance, that
Princes are mortal, and that his being a King, bound him to a more strict
reckoning, then one that enjoys a lesser Farm. Now whether this merciful
remembrance of God disgraceth him, judge ye that have grace. But now (both
battles being joined) what did this valiant King? Did he only stand to give
directions to others? No, he did rigorous execution with his sword upon his
enemies.

Did he, when he perceived some of his Subjects disloyally to revolt, and that
his forces were put to the worst, think upon yielding or flight? Though by
some of his faithfullest servants he was counseled to fly, and for that
purpose presented with a Horse of wonderful speed, yet he would not: for
having been inured to conquest, he scorned to yield: having been a King, he
would not die a vassal; and therefore, because the garland was a Crown, the
prize a Kingdom; victory, Majesty, and perpetual renown the reward, this
Lyon-hearted King courageously charging his spear, ran into the Battalion of
his adversaries; where, with his own hands he slew the stout S. Will. Brandon
Standard Bearer to Henry the 7. slain. He was father to Charles Brandon, after
created D. of Suff. by Henry the 8.
Sir william Brandon, Standard Bearer of his enemy: he overthrew the strong and
valiant Sir John Cheney, and singled out his Competitour: who being the most
Heroic and valiant Prince of those times, yet had doubtless been slain, had
not he been rescued by S. William Stanley, who came happily with three thousand
men to his rescue, who on all sides encompassing King Richard, so assailed him,
that though he did more then a man, though his Sword acted wonders, yet being
oppressed by so great a multitude, he was there manfully slain; not overcome,
for he conquered the betraiers of men in danger, passion, and fear.

Thus lost he both kingdom and life, but nothing diminished his interior
virtues: When the adjudged punishment is performed, our Laws do account the
offender as clear of the crime, as if he never had committed it. Why should
this common benefit be denied a King, since if guilty, his blood made
restitution, and being dead, his royal body was dispoyled of all kingly
ornaments, left naked, and not only vnroyally, but inhumanely, and reprochfully
dragged? Yet neither can his blood redeem him from injurious tongues, nor the
reproach offered his body, be thought cruel enough, but that we must still make
him more cruelly infamous in Pamphlets and Plays. Compare him now (judicious
Reader) impartially with other Princes; judge truly of all their actions,
their form of government, and their Statutes and ordinances, the vpholders,
the strength, the sinews of government; and thou shall find him as innocent of
cruelty, extortion, and tyranny as the most; as wise, politic, and valiant as
any: if so, censure him, his actions, his ordinances, according to their
deserts, and this Treatise of mine as a charitable well-wishing to a
scandalized and defamed king.

Yet for all this know, I hold this but a Paradox.
FINIS.
THE PRAISE OF THE FRENCH POCKES.
IT is the complaint of an ancient writer, Nulla tam modesta foelicitas est,
quae malignitatis dentes vitare possit: There was never any felicity, whether
moderately seasoned, or complete in perfection, so happy; that could avoid the
griping teeth of envy and backbiting. Out of which natural inbred malice,
men do not stick to defame and discredit the most noble and illustrious
disease of the French Pocks, and to wrong those that be the worthy subjects in
whom they reside: insomuch that the very mention of them is so noisome and
offensive, and does so much overcome their stomachs, as the naming of the
things which are the purgings of the belly, and are within the ward and
bailiweeke of the girdle. Whereas the name of the Pocks is of so reverend
estimation, and foundeth so pleasingly in the ears of them that are not
passionate, that even Diana her self whom the Paynims adored for their
Goddess of Chastity and honesty, took her name from them; whom the Latins
call Bubones, the French Bubes, and the Spanish Buvas; Latrator Anubis Sanctaque
Bubastis, Ovid Meta. lib. 9.
so is she called Bubastis. Yea, the famous star Boots, which guides Charles
his waine, admits these syllables into his name, and is called Bubulco. And why
then should men here on earth think skorne of this name, which is well brooked
by stars of the first magnitude, and Goddesses of the fairest beauty? But
because Deriuations do many times drive words out of fashion, and a notation
of names is of all the Artificial Arguments in Logic, one of the weakest,
lest, by seeking to lift the Pasty by one end, we mar all; let us fasten upon
some thing more material, and from the original of the word, come to the
beginning of the thing.

Amongst those rich treasures, which Christopher Columbus brought home into
Spain, after his discovery of the Indyes, one of the chiefest was the Pockes;
For in his Fleet (amongst other fraught) were wafted over certain Indian
Women, with whose happy conversation the Castilians came home plentifully
furnished with this holy contagion: Holy I call it, because the cure of it is
that, which they call lignum sanctum, or Guaiacum; Holy, for the place, where
it is healed, which is the Hospital; called by the French, Maison-Dieu, and
holy, because they are great helps to make them that have them, Saints. For,
whosoever shall behold the outward mortification of a pocky companion, the
delicacie of the tone of his voice; his pale and meagre face; his wanne color;
and his whole body broken and disioynted, that a man may shake all his bones
together in his skin; and lastly, shall see him wholly made a very picture and
painted table of repentance; he may see sufficient tokens (at least wise) of
apparent holiness: for you never see fat panches, and plumpt cheeks, and idle
fellows ever admitted into the school of repentance; nor into the Stews the
workehouse of Courtizans; nor in the Hospital and Lazer-house of the
Pock-rotten adventurers.

Among the three Capital enemies which with fire and sword do assail the
soul, the greatest of them, which is the flesh, is wholly subdued by the Pocks:
because by them it is made unable to exercise any unlawful act. Is there any
thing in the world that does more open the gates to holiness, then to take
away the occasions of sinning? and what is there that has more efficacy to
withdraw a man or a woman from occasions of evil, then this holy leaprosie?
for if a woman know that a man has the Pocks, she flies from him as a ragged
sheep from a bramble-bush. Again, what greater token of holiness can there
be in a man, then to have a sense and feeling of his sins? Now who is he that
does suffer greater grief and pains for his sins, then he that has the
Pocks? Who are more frank and more bountiful in gifts then such men? for a
Pock-master was never accounted a pild paltry fellow. For as when we see a
Black-moore cross the street, we say, speaking by the contrary, There goes
John Blanco: or when we see a common woman, we likewise say, There goes a good
one: so we call this holy infection, the peeling disease, understanding that
such a one will part with his very skin.

All other aches and pains have some enemy that may destroy them; or by a bill
out of the Apothecaries shop, like a writ of Remove, they may be dislodged; but
the Pocks have made their peace with all drugs and confections, there is not
found among all the Phials and Gally-pots any simple, or syrop so powerful,
that can disturb the Pocks out of their possession: whence it is plain, that
it is wrongfully and abusiuely called an infirmity: for the word infirmity
argues and imports want of firmenes; whereas the Pockes are so far from
not being firm, that to him that has once caught them, they continue so
firm, so stable and so well settled; that they never forsake him, but
accompany him to his grave; and I think, into Purgatory too, because no
lenitiues, or purgations, can either assuage their pain, or drive them out;
surely so good a thing never goes to Hell.

They that set out the worth and greatness of that excellent Poet Homer,
ascribe it much to his honor, that he drew his beginning from many Cities and
Islands, as Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon and the like: how much greater is the
honor of this spreading gangren of the Pocks, which deriues his descent not
from Islands and Cities, but from great kingdoms and Provinces. Some call it
the Neopolitane disease; others the French evil; some the scab of Spain,
others the Indian Sarampion or tetter, and ring-worme; Others that speak with
some reverence and respect to these Lady-mistresses, they fear to usurp their
proper name; they do not say plainly to a man, You are a Pockie-knaue, but
rather Vous auez, sir, ye are peppered; and indeed such is the dignity and
greatness of this malander, that they speak of it, after the style of Kings and
Dukes and Grandes, in the plural number. For whereas we commonly call blaines
and sores in the singular number, the scurfe, or the scabbe, or the Winchester
goose, these are all saluted in the plural number, the Pocks, as if they
should style themselves nos bubones, and pustulae Gallicanae. And well does
this style agree unto them, because they deal royally and nobly with their
attendants; for whereas in Princes Courts they that are suitors, do not see an
end of their pretensions in many years, and when all comes to all, they
seldom reap the fifth part of what they sued for: these nobles do soon
dispatch all that negotiate with them, or plead at their bars, wonderfully
well provided for.

Now let not any man object as an inconvenient, that the Pocks do peele all
those that are of their fraternity and livery, and make them as bald as an
egg: for if we consider it, they do unto them no therein small benefit: For
look what proportion the leaves bear to the Tree, feathers to a Bird, the
same have the hairs and the bush-naturall to a man, that is, they are given
both for an ornament and a defense; for a covering and for comeliness.

And seeing that Nature does do trees a favor, in making them to shead their
leaves, and Fowls to moulter their feathers, that so she may dight them and
cloth them yearly with new; she does not deal so with men, but leaves them
to themselves, to effect it by their own industry and providence, whereunto when
they are disposed to moulter and to do off their perriwigs or perruques, the
Pocks in this case is Natures agent, which does maintain herself with that
which is most delicate in that subject, such as are the thin locks of the
head, the daintines of the eye-liddes and the eyebrows; the venerable beards,
and the most valiant mustaches: for never any timorous and white-liuered
cowards have the Pocks, but the most foole-hardie adventurers are admitted into
this corporation.

It is a rule infallible, that men are usually such as are those with whom they
converse. And who are they (I pray you) that are most hanted with the Pocks but
noble Lords, Caualiers, and men of high parentage? The plow-swaine or
day-labourer never knew that there was any such thing in the world as the
Pocks; such is their miserable ignorance; nor yet the Porters or Carre-men are
greatly troubled with this Luggage in their own persons, neither do they ever
descend so low as to chare-maids and Tankard-bearers. But you must seek for
them amongst the lusty gallants, and gay Ladies that ruffle it in silks, and
outward bravery* And therefore may it please thee to be advertised, gentle
Reader, whosoever thou be that stand upon complement; that whenever thou
shall salute such a Lady or Caualier in the street, by vailing thy bonnet,
know, that by that obeisance thou do homage to two Grandes and great
personages at once, one to the party principal that is obuious to thy eye, the
other to the Pocks which he carries about him.

How does the world dote upon Astrologers and Starre-gazers, that can foretell
and divine of things to come, whether they be the writers of the Greek
Menologies and Calenders of the Monthly variation of days; or Prognostications
of the changes of the Moon: or days Almanackes for the alteration of the
weather? Whereas there is no Astrologer more vveather-wise then a Pock-master,
or whose predictions are more certain: for, if there be any change of weather
or season approaching, presently the intrinsecall Accidents that cleave to his
bones and sinews, do give him a perfect notice of it, in that he feels an
ache in every commissure of his ioints, and his bones do even rattle in his
skin.

Add hereunto, that men thus affected (or infected rather) have this great
privilege above other men, that although they be in vassallage, and slaves by
condition, yet are they observed and respected as absolute Lords; and are
served of every body, whereas they serve none but God, whom by the Pocks they
are brought to remember. And see, I pray you, to what a Lordlinesse they are
advanced, in that not only their persons are in a manner sacred, and may not
be approached, but at a certain distance; but whatsoever is about them, and
belongs to their necessary use, cannot safely be touched of any man, as if they
were some holy Relics; For no man dares to lie in their bed, or to wear
their clothes, or to drink in their cup, or to sit in their chaires; men
willingly withdrawing themselves from these things, as from vessels consecrated
to this great Idol of the Bubositie.

Howbeit, it is not greatly to be maruailed at; that the Pocks have attained to
so high a pitch and prerogative of excellency, considering that the same act
and operation, and the same instruments which Nature imployeth to produce a
man, which is the noblest of her creatures; the same are also the generature
causes of the Pocks; I mean, the great and honorable Pocks: for those other
pushes and inflammations that arise in the body, of cold, or from an
ouer-heated and exulcerated liver, are not properly pocks, but pouts and
pimples. So then, this reason being considered, the Pocks may very justly take
state upon them, and stand upon puntillos of honor, and out-braue a man to his
face and say, that they are issued from as good Parents as he. And surely it
seems no less; for as they that are nobly borne, the better to show their
greatness and to maintain their state, they live retiredly in the inmost and
remotest rooms of their house: so do the Pocks, out of the same rule and
reason of State, keep residence in the very bones and the marrow of him that
has them; which is the reason also why for their birth and honorable rank,
they find place and intertainment in Loves Court, into which nothing is
admitted, but what sauoureth either of greatness or of goodness, as brave,
resolute and determinate men; gallant and fair women; free discourse; wanton
witty Poems, and plenty of great Pocks. And lastly, what greater token can
there be of a Noble Nature, then to show thankfulness to those that have
suffered any thing for their sakes, or done ought to procure their good? in
which kind of retribution the Pocks are no way deficient. For whereas the nose
in the purchase of the Pocks does suffer a kind of lesion and hurt by the
arrosion of its gristle; to make it ample amends and satisfaction; the pocks
do make the nose the trumpet, or horn-pipe of their own praises; whose
graceful tone varied Chromatically upon the musicks and halfe-notes of
snuffing and snorting, is much like the untamed voice and braying of Silenus
his hobbyhorse.

Now if there be any man so ill an husband, that amongst other things of his
own getting and acquisition has not been so happy, as to become owner of the
pocks; let him blame himself for an unthrift, that has mis-pent his time; and
say, that he is without them, because they are not within him: or with the
Spaniard, that he wants them, because he is not worthy of them:

Yo no Lis padezco,
Porque no las merezco.
Carnestoliendas de Castilla. Noche tercera.
FINIS.
The Praise of Nothing.
PArdon, Grave Sages, Natures Treasures,
Earths best Surueyers, Heavens best measures,
Who in the deepes of Sciences do wade,
Teaching that Naught of Nothing can be made.
I will untwist the strength of your decree,
And from your errors Labyrinth you free.
Since to the making of this All-Theater:
Nothing but Nothing had the All-creator:
And as the structure of this worlds great mass,
Out of vast emptiness first reared was,
Embellisht with each curious ornament,
Without or staff, or matter preiacent;
So by great Nothings frank and free expense,
We yet enjoy each rarest excellence.
For Nothing is more precious then gold:
Amongst all those things which Neptunes arms enfold,
Amongst sublunarie bodies which do range,
About the worlds Center suffering daily change,
Which fill Fates mort-main, and which death death mierce,
Driving them from their cradle to their hearse:
Amongst all these, and whatso else we have,
Nothing did ever yet esape the grave.
Nothing's immortal: Nothing ever joys;
Nothing was ever free from all annoyes.
Why should not Nothing then of us expect,
That shrines and Altars we to her erect?
Nothing more joyous is to us then light;
Or the Springs flowery mantle all bedight
With Pinks, and Primrose, when sweet Zephirs breath
Inspireth life after long Winters death.
Nothing is safe in war, Nothing in peace
Is just; which made Tibullus once confess,
That to avoid all danger, dread and scath,
The happiest man is he that Nothing has.
He Thieves by land, nor Pirates fears, nor wracks,
Nor iuggling Judge, whose sentence often rackes
The richer Client, who must seldom spare
To waste his wealth in fees, his health with care.
So Zenoes wiseman only does aspire
Nothing to covet, Nothing to admire.
And Socrates it his profession made,
Nothing to know: which is a thriuing trade;
Since not to know, but to have much to give,
Is that which purchases best means to live.
The Alchymist, who with Spagyrick tricks,
Does sometimes sublimate, and sometimes fix,
Nis baser mettalls by a Chymick fire,
Excocting them by art and fell desire,
From Stannar and Calaminary mould, Stannar is the Mother of Metals.

To turn crude Mercure, into liquid gold.
How! how does he in this gulfs Baltic sound, Calaminaris lapis, out of which
brass is drawn.

His wit, his wealth, himself and all confound!
And all for Nothing, to whom he is in thrall,
And amongst fools moral, a pure Natural.
Nothing to Phoebus is unknown, Architas Tarentinus. Hor. lib. 1. od. 28.
vnskann'd,
Of him that number could the Lybian sand.
And you, great Clerks, who dry and waste your brains,
Through sleeplesse nights, and with incessant pains
To compass Knowledge; if I should but ask
Th'intended end of all your toyling task;
Your answer, I suppose, to this would tend,
That you know Nothing, Nothing comprehend.
Yet Nothing is more bright then Summers Sun;
Or purest flame. Nothing can swiftly run,
And fly as swift without both feet and wing;
Without a voice, Tangere enim aut tangi nisi corpus nulla potestres.
Nothing can sweetly sing.
Nothing without a body can be touched.
As wise Lucretius gravely has auouch'd.
Nothing can move without exchange of place:
Nothing is seen without fair colors grace.
Nothing's more helpful to assuage our smart,
Then noble Phisicks euill-curing Art.
Whosoever then is liuer-sicke of love,
And feign would Philtres and loue-potions prove;
Let him not seek to the help of Magic charms,
For no such spells will ever heal his harms.
Only of this let him himself assure,
That Nothing can loves hot Imposthems cure.
Yea those who once have past the Strg^^ lake,
Nothing can them from Death recover back.
Nothing can conquer the infernal Furies,
Nothing can alter their eternal Iuries.
The Giants felt when with the Heavens they strove,
Nothing more fearful then the wrath of Jove.
The gods fear Nothing; Nothing keeps in awe,
Rebellious men that reake not of the Law.
Nothing with God may be compared right,
For Justice, Wisdom, Majesty, and Might.
And though within, God fill this spacious Round,
Yet Nothing may without it well be found.
This is the task that I did undertake,
Of Nothing Nothing, something for to make.
Johannes Passeratius apud Theodorum Bezam in Epigrammatis.
FINIS.
THAT IT IS GOOD to be in DEBT.
WE are fallen into that dotage of the World, in which, the worst things do
ouertop the worthiest, sense does besot the understanding, drink overcomes
the brain, and the eye beguyleth and misleadeth the sight. And therefore in
tender commiseration of mankind, I will endeavor to rectify their judgment
in a Paradox, then which there has none more intricate, been discussed and
canuassed among the Stoiks in Zenos porch, that is, That it is better for a man
to live in debt, then otherwise.

Ordiar ab ouo, I will begin from the egg, that your concoxion may be the
easier. In the whole course and frame of Nature, we see that nothing is made
for it self, but each has a bond of duty, of use or of service, by which it
is indebted to other. The sun by his splendour to lighten all the world; by
his warmth and heat, to cherish and comfort each living and vegetable thing.
Yea, man himself is so framed of God, that not only his Country, his Parents
and his friends claim a share in him, but he is also indebted to his dog,
and to his Ox, to teach the one to hunt for his pleasure, the other to labor
for his profit: so that quicquid habet genij, ingenij, moris, amoris, the
abilities of his spirit, the affections of his mind, he has them for others,
as much as for himself; nay the more for others, by how much he desires to be
the greater Lord over others. Let him but look into himself, and see how his
constitutiue parts are debtors each to other, the soul does quicken and give
life to the body, the body like an Automaton, does move and carry it self and
the soul. Survey him in his parts, the eye seeeth for the foot, the foot
stands for the hand, the hand touches for the mouth, the mouth tastes for
the stomach, the stomach eats for the whole body, the body repayeth back
again that nutriment which it has received, to all the parts, discharging the
retriments by the Port-Esquiline; and all this in so comely an order, and by a
Law so certain, and in so due a time, as if Nature had rather man should not
have been at all, then not to be a debtor in every part of him; which has made
me resolve, that to whomsoever I mean to be a friend, I will strive to be in
his debt: and what can I do less? for to him that does me a good turn, I am
bound to return him the greatest pleasure; which I can no way do, but by being
in his debt: for what contentment will it be unto him, when I shall repay him
his own again? The Alchymists, who promise to themselves to turn Tin into
silver, and Copper into gold, how will they be transported out of themselves
with joy, if they should but see a happy issue of their attempt? How much more
a Creditor, when he shall recover a desperate debt? It is like the joy of a
Father that receives his lost Child.

Again, he that is in debt, has this great privilege above other men, that
his Creditors power out hearty prayers for him, they wish that he may live,
and thrive and prosper, and grow rich, and all for their own advantage. They
seem to be careful for their debtors, that they may not lose their principal
with the interest, for their money is their life, witness those Usurers of
France, who, when they heard that the price of Corn was fallen, went and
hanged themselves for grief.

What a command does the debtor gain over his Creditors? He becomes in a
manner their Landlord, to whom they cap, crouch, and kneel, as if they did owe
him all suits and services, and are as ambitious of their favors, as they who
in Rome did canuas the people for their voices to attain the greatest offices:
but here is their cunning: Laudant vt Leadant, they praise them, that they may
prey upon. And therefore, you brave gallants and spendthrifts, who find by your
woeful experience, that no whip gives a shrweder lash then the label of a Bond
or Obligation, with a Nouerint vniuersi Skinner and Lacy. Whenever you fall
into the Mercers books, never take care, or make conscience of paying your
debts, for by that means you shall keep your Creditor in awe, and shall have
him wonderful courteous and officious, and obsequious toward you, and a great
mint-master of fair words.

Without debt and loan the Fabric of the world will be disioynted and fall
asunder into its first Chaos. The beauty of the Stars, what would it be but
vastness and deformity, if the Sun did not lend them light? The earth would
remain unfruitful, if she did not borrow refreshing dewes from the watery
Signs and Planets. The Summer is pleasant, and promises great hopes of
plenty, but it is, because it takes up much upon trust, from the friendly and
seasonable temperment of the Elements. And to say the truth, there is nothing
good or great in the world, but that it borrows something from others to make
it great, or lends to another to make it good. And therefore I marvel why
Antiquity, who made Mildew, 1. AErugo.
Fever, and Scuruinesse goddesses, did not matriculate loan and debt among
the rest. 2. Febris.
3. Psora.


The Elements who are linked together by a league of association, and by their
symbolizing qualities, do barter and truck, borrow and lend one to another, as
being the Bursse, and Royall-Exchange of nature: they are by this traffic and
intercourse, the very life and nourishment of all sublunary bodies, and
therefore are called Elimenta quasi alimenta, whose happy concord and
conjunction has brought forth those, whom the World for the good done to
mankind, has esteemed gods, as Bacchus the great Vintner, Ceres the
Meale-mother, Flora the Tutty-maker, Vertumus and Pomona Costard-mongers.

Now, if every man would render and repay in full weight, that which by due
debt he owes and has borrowed from others, Saturnes golden age would return
again, in which there was no difference of metals, but gold and silver were
all one Oar, and made the yelke of the earth, Natures great Egg, neither did
Meum and Tuum bound out, and apportionate Lands and Lordships, by meare stones,
and diversity of Tenures of sockage and focadge; since when, Qui habet terras,
habet guerras, and the King of heavens peace has been disturbd amongst men:
but then all things were all men's, as necessity did allot and award, who was
then the only judge and arbitrator, competently allowing to every man, that
which he stood in need of.

With what dearness have both gods and good men countenanced and graced
debtors? To whom Diana the great goddess of Ephesus, granted her Temple for a
Sanctuary, to keep them out of Bagwell: Pigeon-houses. Or if they were
caught, Solon by a solemn Law inacted, would not have their bodies to be
fettered or manacled amongst malefactors, but that they should enjoy their
liberty throughout all the Parkes and Purlues of the prison, or to speak more
mildly, of their restraint and indurance: For the Prison is built
Purgatory-wise, after the Architecture of Rome, with a Limbus and Tullianum.
The dungeon is the Devils pinfold and the very suburbs of Hell, where varlets,
roarers, and stilettostabbers are let down, as the proper food that stuffes
that great greedy maw. The next room is the Lollard of trunck-hosed famulists
and separatists, who after they have been rowelled in the neck, to cure them of
the Megrim of the head, they are by the gentle flame of this Stoue, and the
heat of their own zeal, made to sweat out their contumary and other peccant
humors. The upper skirt and stage of this building, is the Garret of
expencefull wasters, gamesters and unthrifty debtors, where though they live
robbed of their liberty, as they rifled others of their money. Yet is it their
great happiness, that being glutted, as it were, with an Apolausticke
voluptary life, they have an easy ouverture made to the contemplative and
practick life of Virtue. Who ever lived more like a Souc'd-gurn-head amongst
men, then Diogenes the Cynick, barrelling himself up in his tubbe like a Kegge
of Sturgion? Yet was the happiness of his contented life envied of the
greatest Monarchs, who having made their throats the through-face and the
cullenders of meats and drinks, found an ouergorged belly, to be Wits clog,
Reasons sepulcher, Lusts Arsenall, the Magazin of lewd practices, and the
Nurserie of all vices: all which prouocations are defalted by Debts wants and
indigency.

And lastly, the Lumbards, Usurers, and Scriueners, who are the Bedles of
Beggars, and are accounted the Tetters upon the body politic of the
Commonweal, who turn the Calends and new Moons, and the Festival days of
quarter-gaudies, into the Octanes of disaster and Doomes-day reckonings, when
any of these come to Heaven, there is a wonderment amongst the Angels, and they
cry out with Sr. Gurman of Alfarache, fruta nueua, fruta nueua, here is a new
kind of fruit start up, a Pumparadise upon a crab-stocke, Lumbards and
Scriueners are become the Popes cannonized and beatified saints.

Farewell then, Vlpianus, Modestinus, and other pettifoggers of the Law,
Sollicitours, and molesters of causes, who account being in debt a kind of
bondage and servitude. I pity Senecaes weakness, who blushed to borrow;
miserum verbum et dimisso vultu proferendum, Rogo: Th. Ocleue. in. Chaucer.
That Poet Laureat, for-faited his wreath of Bays and Iuie twine, who made his
prayers to his purse to keep him out of debt, in this manner.

To you my Purse, and to none other Wight
Complain I, for you be my Lady dear:
I am sorry now that you be light,
For certes ye now make me heavy cheer,
Me were as lefe laid upon a Beer.
For which unto your mercy thus I cry,
Be heavy again, or else mote I dye.
Now vouchsafe this day, or it be night,
That I of you the blisfull sound may here,
Or see your color, like the Sun bright.
That of yellowness had never Pere,
Ye be my life, ye be my hearts flere;
Queen of comfort and of good company,
Be heavy again, or else mote I dye.
Now Purse, that art to me my lives light
And savior as down in this World here,
Out of this Town help me by your might,
Since that you will not be my Treasure,
For I am shave as near as any friar:
But I pray unto your courtesy,
Be heavy again, or else mote I die.
Yet welfare the Prodigal unthrift, who is magis promus quam condus, and
serves at the Buttry-hatch, whatsoever is in his Binn or his Barrel, and
therefore could never endure the complaint of his Purse, who thus bemoaned her
self unto him.

Materia infoelix, detracta cadauere; forma, tam varia, vt nec ego me mihi
nosse queam.
Haud melius fatum, nam pendeo more latronis, ingenium sic me fueris habere
putant.
Si dederis seruo; seruatum reddo petenti non nisi at auriculis tracta refer
volo.
A skin flayed off, yields my materials, my form is various, where my self
I loose,
My doome's a fellons death and funerals, for at a Belt I am hanged by a nooze.
I do not filch for mine own thrift and gain, but what you give, I closely
keep and bear,
And when you ask, I it restore again, yet not, except you pluck me by the
ear.
For the Al-te-mael, and foot of the reckoning, this is the summa summarum:
Debemur morti nos nostraque. So that whilst I live, I must resolve to live in
debt, in debt to God, for my being; in debt to CHRIST, for my well-being; in
debt to Gods sanctifying Spirit, for my new-being: And I will ever be ready to
pawn my life for my Countries liberty, I will owe obedience to my Parents,
Faith and Loyalty to my Prince: And when I shall pay my great debt unto
Nature, I will render my spirit into the hands of God; bequeath my body to be
deposed in the lap and bosom of the earth, and cry, Domine, dimitte debita mea.

FINIS.

