A DEFIANCE TO DEATH. WHEREIN, BESIDES SVNNDRY HEAVENLY Instructions for a
godly life, we have strong and notable comforts to uphold us in death.

BY Mr. WILLIAM COVVPER, Minister of GODS WORD.

PHIL. 3.20.21. But our conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look
for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ.

Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is even able to subdue all
things unto himself.

LONDON, Printed by I.W. for John Budge, and are to be sold at his shop at
Britains Bursse. 1610.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir Thomas Stewart of Gairntilie, and his virtuous
Lady, Grizzell Mercer, Grace and peace from God the father, through our Lord
Jesus CHRIST.
IT is a notable saying of the Apostle, If in this life only we have hope in
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.19
we are of all me^ the most miserable: For, whereas others being ignorant of
better things to come, set their hearts on these, which are present: if we
despising such comforts as now we may enjoy, should also be disapointed of
those, which afterward we look for, Our case indeed were most lamentable:
but praised be God, it is far otherwise; for where the comfo^t of the
worldling ends, there the greatest comfort of the Christian begins. Psalm.
17.14
The men of this world (says David) have their portion in this life: Luk* 6.24.
yea our Savior says, They have received their consolation here. Luke 16.
It was spoken in that Parable by Abraham to Dives, Remember that in thy life
thou receiuedst thy pleasures: And it appertains to all the wicked: better
things then these, which pr^sently they see, need they never to look for. And
therefore no marvel, that as the taste of the Coloquint, or wild Gourd, made
the children of the Prophets abhor their meat, so the taste of death make all
the pleasures and refreshments of their life loathsome to them. Or as the hand
which wrote to Beltazar on the wall his imminent judgment, did in a moment turn
all the solace of that house into sorrow, for the Kings countenance was
changed, his thoughts troubled, his Princes astonished, his Musicians
silenced, his servants amazed, their delightful drinking became despised, and
all the house disordered: and in a word, his Banquet concluded with a cup of
wrath, sent to him from the Lord: so is it unto all the wicked; the smallest
signification of death interrupts their greatest joys, and causes them with
the Peacocke, looking to his feet, let fall the proud feathers of their hie
conce^tes within their own minds, what ever they pretend in countenance. As
is the noise of thorns under the pot, so is the laughter of fools, says
Solomon, Eccles. 7.8.
both the one and the other quickly vanishes: and death like that worm, which
eated up the gourd of Jonas, deuoures at length all their Worme-eaten
pleasures, and then woe be to them, When all these fat, and excellent things,
Reu. 18.14
after which their soul lusted, are departed from them, and not so much as any
hope of better remains unto them: But unto the Christian, death can do no
more but demolish this parpen wall of clay, within the which the soul is
captiued for a time, it opens the door of the prison, and gives liberty to the
soul, to go out and return to her Maker, as shall at greater length appear
in the Treatis following, which I have offered, and presented to your Honor,
partly to testify my unfeigned affection toward you in the Lord; for that
unfeigned and incorrupt love, which in so corrupt a time ye have always carried
toward the truth of the Gospel, and by which also ye have lived, as rare
examples of piety and love, and godly liberality, and partly that ye may be
remembered of these instructions concerning life and death: which ye received
from us by hearing, during your residence with us, and unto the practice
whereof shortly ye must be called: for albeit it is not long, since it pleased
the Lord beyond all expectation of man to deliver you out of the hands of the
Sergeants and officers of death, which had violently seized upon you, and
threatened to slay you both, your self by sickness, your Lady by the sorrow
of desolation, more heavy then death unto her: yet are ye to know (and I
doubt not, are preparing ^o^ for it) that the same battle will shortly be
renewed against you, wherein both of you must be divorced from other, and
divided from your own bodies, that ye may be married and conioyne^ with your
Lord, whom ye have not yet seen, 1. Pet. 1.
but long to see him, because ye love him, and rejoice in him with joy
unspeakable and glorious. And herein, if these little fruits of my Ministry
may serve any way to confirm you in the end, as some way they have comforted
you in the journey: and if for your sake they may be profitable to others who,
constantly keeps with you the same course toward the face of Jesus Christ, it
shall be no small comfort unto me, knowing thereby that I have not run, nor
labored in vain; for there is no thing in the world I desire more, then that
I may put my talent to the uttermost profit, fulfilling with joy the
Ministration I have received, and so may be welcomed of my Lord, as one who
has been faithful in little: But because all increase comes from God, I
humbly commend you, and al^ that love the Lord Jesus to the grace of God which
is able to build you further, and give you inheritance among them who are
sanctified by faith in Christ, and so rest

Your H. in the Lord Jesus M. William Cowper Minist. at Perth.

A DEFIANCETO DEATH. Mine help is in the name of the Lord.
2. COR. 5.1. For we know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be
destroyed, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens


IT is appointed (says the Apostle) for all men once to die, As our death is,
so shall our estate be after it eternally.
and it is certain, that in whatsoever estate we die, in it we shall remain;
for where the tree falls, there it shall lie (said Solomon). He that dies in
the Lord is blessed, Reu. 14.13. Eccles. 11.3
for he rests from his labors, and shall remain for ever in Abraham's bosom,
which is the Paradise of God: he that dies in his sins goes down to the
prison, out of which is no redemption, and shall never get license to come
back to learn to die over again, August. Hesych. Epist. 80
Qualis in nouissimo vitae die quis que moritur, talis in nouissimo mundi die
iudicabitur, such as every man dies in the last day of his life* such shall he
be judged in the last day of the world.

It is therefore a special point of wisdom, Our life should make our death
good, and our death should make our resurrection happy.
so to live, that by living we may learn to die, that a godly life may
prepare the way to an happy death, and happy death may make us sure of a
joyful resurrection: these three follow one upon another inseparable; if the
life be good, the death, whateuer it be, cannot be evil: Nunquam mala mors
putanda est, Aug. de ciuit De^ l. 1. c. 11.
quam bona praecessit vita: and if the life be evil to the end, it is certain
the death cannot be good: for even that Thief, If that our life be not first
good, our death shall never be good, and be the contrary.
who was crucified with our Lord, before he got comfort in his death, was first
amended in his life, ^or upon the Cross was he converted, and incontinent
brought out the sweet fruit of righteousness, accusing himself for his sins,
Luke 23.40.
rebuking the railing of his companion, pleading the innocence of our Lord,
giving to God the glory of justice, and praying to Christ for mercy, that he
would remember him, when he came to his Kingdom.

As it is comfortable in death to think upon life, How the life and death of
the godly each one of them help another.
looking to Jesus, who for us died before us, and has left this comfort to us,
who through death are to follow him, Ioh 11.25.
I am the resurrection and the life: Ioh 5.2^.
And again, He that believes in me has past from death to life: So is it
very profitable in our life to think upon death, in our youth to remember the
evil days and years approaching upon us; wherein every work and secret
thing must be brought to judgment. Our Savior at the Banquet in Bethania had
his conference of his death and burial: and Joseph of Arimathea had his
Sepulcher in his Garden, both of them teaching us to season the plea^ures of
our life with the remembrance of our death, Gregor. moral. lib. 13.
for Meditatio mortis vita est perfecta, quam dum iusti solicit peragunt,
culparum laqueos euadunt: The meditation of death is perfect life, which while
the godly carefully practice, they eschew the snares of sin: and for this
same cause Bernard commends the meditation of death, Bern.
Tanquam summam Philosophiam, as the most high and profitable Philo^ophy that
we can learn in our life. The Apostles purpose and manner of proceeding her^
offers two things.


To this purpose the Apostle in this Treatise delivers to us a most wholesome
preservative against the fear of death, 1 Preservatives against the ^eare of
death.
set down summarily in the first verse, and then draws out of it three notable
conclusions, which if we can lay up in our hearts, 2 Instructions for a godly
li^e.
shall learn us to order our life well, and so serve as preparatiues to make
our hearts ready and capable of this comfort in death. The preservative given
us in the first verse, is the certain knowledge of a better estate, into the
which we shall be translated by death. In handling of this, he first sets down
the loss we have by death: it is no more but a dissolution of our earthly
Tabernacle: and then subioynes the vantage we get by it: to wit, that we are
entered into a better building, given of God, not made with hands, but eternal
in the heavens, and so lets us see, that the vantage we receive by death, does
far exceed the loss that we sustain by it.

We know, He first affirms it as a thing not doubtsome but certain, Two ways
know we that a better estate abides us after death.
and well enough known, that by death we are translated into a better estate:
the warrants of our knowledge are two; for first we know it by the revelation
of the word, ^oh. 14.2.
In my fathers house are many dwelling places, I go to prepare a place for
you. Our soiourning place is on earth, our Mansion place in heaven: And next we
know it by the persuasion of faith, which is proper only to Gods elect
children effectually called.

And of this we learn how the Christian man only walks in light, Only the
Christian walks in light, the r^st of the world are in dark^nesse.
where all the rest of the world are groping in darkness, in their life
wandering after vanity, and in their death departing comfortles or at least
doubtsome, and uncertain where-away to go: Something they knew by experience
of the vanity of this life, for the which some of the natural Philosophers,
did think it was Optimum non nasci, and others, as Heraclitus was moved to
mourning by every thing which he saw, Naturalists knew some thing of man's
misery in the body, but had no certain knowledge of a better life.
but certain knowledge of a better life to come they have not, and therefore in
their best estate go doubting (as I said) and lamenting out of the body, as
did that Emperor Hadrian, like a wilsome man, not knowing whither to go,
Animula Vagula, blandula, quae nunc abibis in loca? And no marvel, he being
destitute of the light of the word, and taught by his Master Secundus the
Philosopher, that death was incerta peregrinatio, an uncertain peregrination.

And truly no better is the comfort, The doctrine of the Rom^sh Churchleaues
her disciples comfortless in death.
which that Stepmother the Church of Rome gives to her children, for she
sendes them away out of the world without any assurance of salvation, and keeps
them in suspense with a vain hope of help to be sent unto them, for their
deliverance from the pains of Purgatory, by soul Masses, and such like
rotten caddle as must be made for them when they are dead, upon their own or
their friends expenses. And in this all the bastard Religions of the world are
alike, that they render no solid comfort to their professors in death.
Neither can it be otherwise, for seeing they are not upon the Foundation Jesus
Christ, in whose merits only we get life, who are dead in our selves; what
marvel if they die oppressed with doubtings and fearful despaires.

But as to us we know who^ we hauebeleeued, It is otherwise with the Christian
taught by the word os God.
and that when our course is finished and our battle ended, a crown of
righteousness shall be given unto us: we know that the day of our death is but
the day of our cha^g from the worse to the better. And this should animate us
to co^stancy and perseverance in godliness, because we go not like uncertain
men carried upon vain hope to an unknown end, but before hand we are both
forewarned and certified of the'nd whereunto we are called: why then shall we
linger in the way, and suffer our spirits to be discouraged with doubting of
the event.

It is the praise of Abraham the father of the faithful, Abraham followed God
calling to a country which h^ knew not.
that albeit he knew not the land, whereunto God called him, yet he obeyed the
calling, and willingly forsook his native country and kindred, being assured
the word of God could not beguile him, and that the Lord never biddes his
children exchange but for the better: And we certainly are unworthy to be
accounted the children of Abraham, How much more should we, being called to ^
Country which we know.
if we refuse joyfully to follow the heavenly vocation, considering the Lord
has foretold us, or ever we go out of the body, of a better building into
which we shall be translated. Let them doubt and fear, who know not of a
better: let us give glory to him that has called us, and through the valley of
death he shall lead us to eternal life.

That if, The Apostle speaks not this doubtingly, as if it were uncertain
whether our bodies were to be dissolved, or not, but by way of concession,
having in it a strong affirmation: as if he did say, albeit it be so, that
the earthly house of our Tabernacl^ must be dissolved, Some godly men before
us have been taken away, and their bodies not dissolved by death after the
common manner.
yet are we sure of a better. It is true that in the ages before us, there
has been some of Gods Saints, whose bodies were not dissolved by death after
the common manner: before the flood HENOCH was taken away, and he saw no
death: after the flood ELIIAH was transported into a Chariote of fire: and
strange is it that is written of MOSES, Deu. 34.7.
that when he died on the top of P^sgah, being an hundred and twenty year
old, his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.

But we have not upon these to fancy unto our selves a privilege, But w^e
must not dream of any such privilege to our selves.
whereof God has not assured us, neither are we to think we are the less
beloved of God, because after the same singular manner, he takes us not away out
of the world, but we must look on the other hand to the remanent Patriarchs,
Prophets and worthy Apostles* But must look to other of the Fathers who d^ed
the common course of death.
who finished their days as Joshua speaks, after the way of all flesh: so
Abr^ham the father of the faithful died, being worn with the infirmities of
his age, Genesis 27.1.
and Isaac thorough weakness waxed blind before he died: and Jacob that famous
Patriarch, Genesis 49.33.
being in his bed, by ordinary death pulled up his feet unto him: and we must
be content after the same manner to suffer the dissolution of our bodies by
diseases, which are the Sergeants and officers of death. The godly also alive
at Christ's coming shall not be dissolved.


It is true also that they who shall be found alive at the second coming of
Christ shall not be dissolved but suddenly transchanged: but this priuiledg in
like manner we are not to look for, having no warrant that we shall continue
alike until that day, for that man of sin is not yet so weakened by the
Gospel as he must be: But we have no warrant that we shall be of that
number.
Neither are our eldest brethren, the Jews converted to the faith of Christ,
as in likelihood they will be, before Christ's second appearing: Sixteen hundred
years were they in the covenant, when we were strangers from it: During that
space sundry of the Gentiles in sundry parts of the World became Proselytes,
as Naaman in Syria, and Ebedmelech in Ethiopia: For before Chri^ts coming the
I^wes must be recall^d.
but that was not the accomplishment of the promised calling of the Gentiles,
till the body of IAPHETS house were persuaded to dwell in the Tents of SEM.
And now other sixteen hundred years have we been within the covenant, and
they strangers from it: in which space sundry of them also have embraced the
faith of the Gospel, but that (as we conceive) is not the performance of the
promised recalling of the Jews, but the body of that people shall be
converted, that the prophecy may be fulfilled, Romans 11.24.
And there shall be one Shepherd, and one Sheep fold: then shall our Lord
appear the second time for our full redemption. It is out of al doubt, our
bodies must be dissolved by death.


So that these words of the Apostle do not make any peradventure of our death,
far less do they give us any exemption from death, but rather assures us
that our bodies must be dissolved. Our life on earth is no inheritance, Heb.
13.14
our breath is but a vapor, we have here no continuing City: Men may
preasse to repine, Al fortification against death is in vain.
and sit the summonds of death, made by sundry diseases as long as they can,
and do all they may to fortify themselves against the dart of death, but it
shall not be eschued. These dainty women which will not suffer so much as
their soles to touch the earth, Deu. 28.
must at length lay down not the soles of their feet only, but the Crown of
their head also to be covered by it. The labor of man in his life is to turn
over the earth in the sweat of his brow, seeking in her bowels food and
fuel, materials for building, and Mineralles of sundry metals for his other
uses; in all which she renders to man her service, receiving at length for a
recompense, man in her bosom, to fill up her wants, whose finest flesh, is
turned by her without difficulty into dust.

If we were as Ada^ who never saw one die before him by the course of nature
(for Abel was taken away by violence) it were somewhat more tolerable then now
it is, As Adam was the first living man, so the first that died by the course
of nature.
to doubt whether if, or not, we shall be dissolved. It was threatened against
him, that if he brake the commandment, he should die, yet after the
transgression he lived, a bodily life I mean, nine hundred and thirty years,
even to the eight generation; a father of many children in both the houses of
Caine and Seth: as he was the first man that lived in the world, so it seems
he was the first that died by the ordinary course of nature. But now so many
have gone through death before us, that it is a shame for us to scare at it
But now death is become Via trita, a paid gate: All generations of men since
the beginning of the world have walked through it, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles and all that Congregation of the first borne, who stand as witnesses,
that there is no danger in death, and shall we only scare at it, and stand
afraid, as though it would devour us: yea even the very Ethniks esteemed
death to be Non supplicium, Seneca.
sed tributum viuendi, Not a punishment but a tribute which every man must pay
for his life; and therefore said one of them, Quod debeo paratus sum soluere,
vbi me faenerator appellat: I am ready to pay my debt, when he who lent me it
shall call upon me, and require it: And if notwithstanding o^ all this we live
in security, as if we were in covenant with death, and it would not long come
near us, in very truth we deserve that we should perish in it.

By the earthly house our body here is to be understood.
Our earthly house. Sometime both the soul and body of man are compared to an
house, and that is in regard ofGod dwelling in them by his spirit: but here by
the house the body alone is to be understood, in regard of the soul that
soiournes in it: and this is clear in that also he calls it an earthlyhouse.
And here we have three things to consider: First, that the body is called a
house: next a house of earth: and thirdly, a Tabernacle, and the reasons why.
For two causes is our body called an house.


Our body is called an house for two respects: I For the c^mly and orderly
workmanship thereof.
first in respect of the comely and orderly work-manshippe thereof: for as
Artificers out of an inordinate heap of things amassed together, do raise up
most pleasant buildings, by walling out one of them from another, by preparing
the^ and placing every thing in the own room, and making them by line, and
measure one, of them proportional and answerable to another: so that now they
make up a comely house, pleasant to look unto, where before they were a
dissordered mass. So is it with the body of man, which of a confused lump of
clay without form, God has builded up in this pleasant form and comely
order, wherein now it stands.

It is true, Other creatures were made by the word of God, but to the making of
man God put too his hand also.
all the works of God are very wonderful, what ever is done by him, cannot be
but very excellent and good, he himself being most excellent and infinitely
good. But a singular wisdom and goodness has God shown in the creation of
man, for he came out in the last room* as the perfection of Gods works, and
last design of the thoughts of God: and therefore was he not created after the
common order, which God observed in the rest: for where other creatures were
made by his word only, he puts too his hand to the making of man, Consultation
also among the persons of the blessed Trinity going before, And consultation
among the persons of the blessed Trinity goes before.
which was not in the creation of any other creature, whereof thou may
learn, Basil hexam. him. 10.
O man, Quantitu vnus venias est^mandus, in what great account thou art in
regard of all the rest of his creatures: all other like* servants were brought
out by naked commandment, Tortul. de resur. car.
homo tanquam eorum dominus ipsa Dei manu est instructus, Man as their Lord is
built up by Gods own hand.

All this preparation going before, This preparation before shows that some
great thing was to follow, as it did indeed.
was to show that some great thing was to follow, as indeed it did: for man is
so made a work of God his wisdom, that he is a compend of all Gods creatures,
admired by those* who had no more but natures light, as a little world, but
more highlycommended bythose who had also the light of the word whereby to
discern him* Omni miraculo quod fit per hominem, Aug. de ciuit. Dei. l. 10.
cap. 12.
maius miraculum est ipse homo: Man himself, said Augustine is a greater
miracle, then any miracle that ever was done by man. Man an excellent
workmanship even i^ respect of his body.


And this not only in regard of his soul but even of his body also, which
here the Apostle calls a comely house: If there were no more to commend it,
yet, as says Gregory, this wereenough, Quod a corpore humano in se
similitudinem trahat deus, Gregor. m^ral. l. 32. Sect* 13.
That God borrows Similitudes from the body of a man to express and shaddowe
himself unto us: a scribing to himself an eye, a mouth and a hand, and such
like, which we are not to think with the Anthropomorphites, that he has per
naturam, Bernard.
sed per effectum.

A short view of the excellent workmanship of man's body as it is given by
Solomon.
But beside this* if we do take but a short view of the workmanship of man his
body, we shall be compelled every one for himself to say with David, O Lord I
am fearful and wonderful made. Psalm. 139.
The entry to this house is the mouth, which God has fenced with a folding
door of the lips, opening and closing most commodiously at the will of the
Indweller. Next unto it are the grinders which God has set in the entry to
prepare food for the whole man to nourish him: the third room he has
assigned to the tongue, which he has made most artificially, and set in the
thorough gate of the hou^e* as the Trenchman and Messenger of the soul* to
declare his will unto all that come near: And he h^t^ set the head as an
eminent Tower in the body, wherein he has placed the seat of four most
excellent senses, every one o^ them near unto another, and not one of them
impeding the function of another, he has locked up the brain within it, as a
treasure, and fenced it not only with a covering of hair, of skin, and of
bone without: but has also spread over it within the Golden Ewer the least
rupture whereof imports death: and because the windows, Man even in regard
of his body is a world of wonders.
and watchmen are also in it, he has made it to turn like a Wheel
pleasantly and without pain, to prevent all dangers that from any side may
come unto the body: and if we shall yet go further in into this house, and
consider the daughters of singing, which he has made most artificially for
modulation of the voice: if we look to the silver cord stretched throughout
the length of his body; if we consider the Well, how it prepares and furnishes
blood to all the members of the body: if we look to the Pitchers, by which
as thorough Conduits it is conveyed through the whole body. If we consider the
Cesterne which is the heart, the fountain of life: if this manner of way, I
say, with Solomon, we view the building of man's body, beside other innumerable
things which Naturalists and Theologs have marked concerning it; Eccles. 12.
we shall be compelled to acknowledge that man even as concerning his body is
a world of wonders.

And this have I but briefly marked, We should not d^shonour the body which
God has honouredso highly.
that we might learn to possess our vessels in honor, acounting it a
great shame unto us, to pollute and defile this body in any dishonorable
manner, which GOD has created so honorable, comely and pleasant.

Secondly, 2 The body is called a house in respect of the soul dwelling in it.
The body is called an house in respect of the soul, which dwelles in it: and
this also highly commends the excellency of the workemanshippe of man,
marvelous for the substances, whereof it consists, more marvelous for the
wonderful union and conjunction of them: in heaven there are understanding
spirits without bodies, Man for his two substances whereof he consists, is a
compend of all Gods creatures.
as Angels: In earth are bodies without understanding spirits, as beasts; in
man ye shall find them both; wherefore one affirmed man to be all things, for
there is no crea^ure which lives, but man partakes of the li^e thereof, the
plants and trees have a life vegetiue, by which they grow, the beasts a life
sensitive, by which they hear, see, smell, taste and touch: the Angels a life
reasonable, by which they understand: in the first two man co^municates with
earthly creatures: in the third he transcends them, and is companion to Angels.
But the conjunction of these two substances is more marvelous.


But the conjunction of these two substances, and the habitation of the one
into the other is yet more marvelous, commonly the honorable and the ignoble,
Bern. in die ^ Natal. dom. er. 2.
the foolish and the wise, thestrong and the weak, agree no better then Iron
and Clay, Non sic in opere tuo, non sic in commixtione tua, O Domine: Not so in
thy work, O Lord, not so in the mixture which thou have made: for here the
Lord has joined in most marvelous manner Spirit with flesh, a heavenly
substance with an earthly, Nazian. That flesh and spirit should agree so well
together.
so that Communio haec mentis ad corpus in^ffabilis sit, and incomprehen^ibilis
intellectu, This communion of the mind and body can neither be conceived by
our understanding, nor uttered by our speech, the soul being so in the body,
that yet it is not mixed with the body, it is within us, and yet goes thorough
all things that are without us, That the soul should be kept in the body by
blood and breath, yet not living by them
it is kept in the body by blood and breath, and yet lives not by blood and
breath, being a Spiritual thing, it gives understanding to any other Spirit
by the earthly Organ of the tongue, and receives again intelligence from
another spirit by the earthly Organ of the ear: God has done it, we feel
it, but know not the reason of it: all these and many more should move us to
reverence the goodness and wonderful wisdom of our Maker, ^hewed in the
creation of man.

Carnal men so live as if they were nothing but flesh only.
And of this we learn how far the judgment of Gods spirit, differs from the
judgment of man, and that even as concerning man himself: It is thought among
carnal men, that the body is the man, Sic dediti sunt carni ac sanguini, ac si
nihil aliud, quam carnem se esse reputarent: and therefore are they so given to
pamper flesh, as if they were no other thing but flesh: these do not separate
the vile from the precious, Ierem. 15.
the Lord from the servant, the indweller from the lodger, ^or in the judgment
of Gods spirit, the body is no more but the house: VVh^reas the body is but the
house, the man is he who dwells in the body.
the man is he that dwelles in the body; and look what difference there is
between a house and him that dwelles in it, such are we to put between the
soul, and the body: in exteriall dangers though the house be burnt and blown
down with winds, if the indweller be safe, we account that the loss is the
less, and much more if the soul escape when the house of the body is thrown
down by death, are we to esteem that the loss is but small: It is reasonable
indeed, Let us so care for the house, that much more w^ ^^re for him who dw^ls
in it.
that the soul should love the body, but so that it neglect not the own
self: let A^am love his Euah, but so that he hearken not unto her voice more
then to the Lords: if we seek the welfare of our bodies, with neglect of our
souls, we shall lose the^ both, but if we subdue the body by discipline, that
the soul may be safe, then shall the body also be partaker of her glory.

The body is called an earthly house.
Earthly. The second general observed here, is, that the Apostle calls our body
an house of earth: and this he does for two causes: first in regard of the
matter, for it was made of the earth: next in regard of the means by which our
bodies are continued, and vpholden, for they are earthly.

First, because it was made of the earth
As to the first, that man is made of earth, which is manifest out of the second
of Genesis, it does highly commend the great power of the Creator: to do
great things by great means is no great matter; but when by smallest means
greatest things are done, it does argue without all doubt the great excellency
of the worker, as that God made all things of nothing, and that of the basest
matter he had made before man, And herein appears Gods power and wisdom that
of so base a matter has made so excellent a creature.
he made man a more excellent creature, then any other that he had brought
out before him; he made him of clay, but in many respects more honorable then
that whereof he made him, and in this that he has given to man, Vt sit aliquid
sua origin gloriosius, Tertul. de resurrect car.
He has set out the glory of his power and wisdom: As likewise in that he
has placed such a Grace and Majesty in that same face, which he framed of
Clay, that the fear and terror of him was upon all living creatures, Genesis 2.
which they acknowledged by their first comperance before him at his calling to
receive names from him as it pleased him to improve them, and yet even after
the fall, by the benefit of restitution, we have in CHRIST, they so reverence
man, that albeit in nature there can be none stronger then the Elephant,
stowter then the Lion, fiercer then the Tygre: yet all these does service to
man, Et naturam suam humana institutione deponunt. Ambros. hexam. l. 6. cap. 6.


Secondly we learn here GODS Sovereignty over man, The sovereignty of God
over man, is more th^n that which the Potter has over his clay.
he is but a vessel of earth, framed by the hand of God and therefore VVoe must
be unto him, if he strive with his Maker: a vessel of clay is not so easily
broken by the Potter, as man is confounded by his Maker, if once his wrath
kindle in his breast against him. It were therefore good for man before he
enter into enmity with God, to bethink himself of an answer to that
question of the Apostles, 1. Cor. 10.22
Do ye provoke God unto anger, are ye stronger then he? Therefore woe to him
who lives in ^nmity with God.
The Sidonians would not make war with Herod, because they were nourished by
the kings land; and it might more justly be a reason to keep vain man from
waging battle with the Lord, Act. 12 20.
that he holds his life of the Lord, and that if he do but take his breath out
of our nostrils we fall incontinent as dead unto the ground. Surely of all
follies in the world this is the greatest, for a man to cast himself in danger
of Gods wrath, which he is neither able by flying to esch^e, nor yet by
suffering to endure.

The consideration of our original does le^rne us humility.
Thirdly, the consideration of our original learnes us humility, si^ce we are
of the earth, why shall we wax proud, specially for any quality of our body,
which was taken from the earth, and must return to earth again? Therefore God
gave unto the first man the name of Adam, signifying red earth, that as often
as he heard his name, he might remember his original, and and his posterity
also, considering the Rock from whence they came, might let fall the comb of
their natural pride.

Which if we cannot learn, They who will not learn it by their original, ^et
them look to their end, and they shall see no cause of pride.
by looking to our original, let us at least remember our end, and it shall
learn us, that we are but dust: yea much more vile then common dust, for as
beautiful Snow, when it is resolved into water whereof it was congealed,
becomes fouler water then any other else, so man being turned again into earth,
it becomes viler earth then any other earth whatsoever: so that the flesh which
in life is most beloved, death causes to be most abhorred: Genesis 23.4.
Abraham loved Sarah well, but from the time that her soul departed from her
body, he was glad to entreat the Hittites for a Sepulcher, that he might
bury his dead out of his sight. And truly, Greg. moral. l. 16. sect. 105
if, as Gregory councels us, Vnusquisque hoc quod viuum diligit, quid sit
mortuum pensaret: every man would pond^r, what that creatur is being dead,
which so greatly man loves, while it lives, it would serve to repress in us
the immoderate desires of our affections.

O man, Neither is there strength nor beauty, nor stature of the body to be
delighted in.
why will thou be bewitched with that which in the body seems worthy to be
loved? Is it for the strength, or the beauty or stature thereof, that thou art
delighted with it? I pray thee consider what these are: Is not the strength of
the body weakness? Ere it be long the grasshopper shall be a burden to the
strongest: And as to beauty, is it not deceitful? Esa. 40.6.
All flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the field. The
body like a wall of clay. plastered over and painted with colors.
As a wall of clay plastered over, and painted: after that a little wind and
rain has beaten vponit, the Lime falls away, and the clay appears: so is it
with the most pleasant body, which now being trimmed with the colors of God
seems very beautiful, but after that the storms and showers of diseases has
beaten upon it: then shall it appear that which it is, to wit, but Clay
indeed; and though for stature thou were like to the sons of Anack, yet
neither art thou for that the more precious: for the highest trees are not most
fruitful, Esa. 14.11.19.
the mighty Oaks of Basan bears fruit for Swine, where the little Vine-tree
renders comfortable fruit for man, neither can thy height protect thee against
death, for even gold thristy Babel which grew up like a great tree, so high
that the fowls of heaven made their nests under it, was at length brought to
the grave like an abominable branch: so shall it be with the pomp of all
flesh, the worms shall be spread under thee, and the Worms shall cover thee.

Rem^mbrance of that which we have bin, should keep us from waxing proud for
that which we ar^.
Let it therefore be far from us to glory either in the strength or beauty,
or stature of our mortal bodies: they are but rotten and ruinous habitations;
nothing is there in them to puff up our pride, if we consider them aright, but
much matter to humble us. It is written of Agathocles, who of a Potter was made
a King, that he caused to furnish his table with vessels, some of Gold, and
some of Loame, that by the one he might be served as a King, and by the other
admonished that he was once a Potter: and it much more becomes us, who now are
called to the high dignity of the sons of God, to remember what we were
before, that so we may be humbled in our selves, and be thankful to our God.

Secondly, the body is called an earthly hou^e, Secondly, the b^dy is called
an earthly house because it is vpho^den by earthly means.
because by earthly means it is sustained and vpholden, so that the very food
by which we live does warn us of the fragility of our mortal bodi^, the
fowls of the air, and beasts of the earth are slain to feed us, they must
quit the silly life they have, before they can be convenient food for us: And
I pray you, what enduring life can they cause unto us, which must die before
they can help our life: yea within short time, if they be let alone, they
corrupt and putrify of their own accord: thus every creature that feeds us,
testifies to us in their kind, that our life is but a silly life, the end
whereof is death and filthy rottenness.

Of this Tabernacle: the third general point we marked here is: Our body is
called a Tab^rnacle, first because we have here a covering, but not a
foundation.
how our body is called a Tabernacle: And that first for some similitude of the
building, a Tabernacle being such a soiourning place, as Tectum habeat non
fundamentum, Ber. parui Sermones.
has a covering, but not a foundation, to warn us, that how ever in this life
w^e have above us the protection of God, Esa. 4.6.
as a Covert for the storm and for the rain, yet beneath there is here no
foundation, whereon we may rest, Heb. 11.
and settle our selves: but we are with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to look for
that City above, having a Foundation: that is, our Temples building, in which
without danger, we may lay up our treasure, having both a roof and a
foundation, fundamentum est stabilitas aeternae beatitudinis, Ibid.
tectum consummatio and perfectio ipsius.

Secondly, our bodies care called Tabernacles in regard of the use of them,
S^condly, because we should use it as a Sconse or Tent for the warfare.
since our life is a warfare, we should soiourne in the body, as soldiers in
their Sconses and Tents, that out and in them we may watch for vantage over
our enemies, to annoy them, and defend our selves from them: but it is to be
lamented that our bodies, which should be used as Tabernacles for war, Basil.
ser. 10. in Psalm. qui habitat.
are turned in domicilia turpissimae captiuitatis, in little houses of
servitude and bondage

Thirdly, because it is not fixed in one place, as an house, but is made for
transporting.
And thirdly, to show their mortality, they are compared to Tabernacles, for
they are moveable at the will and arbitrament of God, who has pitched them, we
have here no continuing City, but should live in the body, as ready every hour
to be transported, for we know not when it shall please the Lord to pull up
the stakes of our Tabernacle, to slake the cords, and fold up the covering
thereof, which shortly must be done to every one of us: but our comfort is,
that as the Ark of God, which in the Wilderness dwelt in a moveable
Tabernacle, was afterward placed in a fixed and stablished Temple in Canaan: so
our souls shall be translated from this earthly Tabernacle to have their
dwelling in that Temple of God in heaven Great joy was in Jerusalem, when
Solomon transported the Arc from the Tabernacle to the Temple, but greater joy
shall be to our souls, when God shall carry them from this earthly Tent, to
that heavenly and eternal habitation.

Be dissolved. Here we see, that in the Christian, death does no more, but
dissolve his earthly Tabernacle. That death wh^rein all deaths concur, is the
proper pun^shment of sin.
It is demanded by Augustine, what kind of death it was, which God denou^ced
to man in paradise, if he did eat of the forbidden tree, Aug. de ciuit. Dei. l.
13. cap 12.
Vtrum corporis, an animae, an totius hominis, an illa quae dicitur secunda:
And he aunswers; that into that death, which is the proper punishment of sin,
all kinds of death concurres: for as the whole earth co^sists, says he, of
many earths, and the Catholic Church consists of many particular Churches, so
universal death, which is the proper punishment of sin consists of all sorts of
death.

Now the Scripture makes mention chiefly of two sorts o^ death the first and
second: Of the two kinds of death mentioned in holy scripture.
the first death has in it two deaths, the one of the soul, the other of the
body: the death of the soul is, when the soul quickening the body, is not
quickened of God, Ephesians 4.
but is as the Apostle speaks a stranger from the life of God, and by this
death many are dead, who in regard of their bodies seem to be living, Ephesians. 2.
2. Tim. Revel 3.
as is spoken of the Ephesians before their calling* of the wa^to^ widows who
living are dead, and of the Angel of Sardis: the death of the body is the
separation of the soul from the body. Death of the whole man, what it is.
So then the death of the whole man is, Cum anima sine deo and corpore ad
tempus paenas luit* but the second death, which is so called, because by many
deg^ees it is greater then the other: and there is not any other behind it,
is, Cum anima sine Deo, cum corpore aeternas paenas luit.

Where that we may yet more clearly distinguish the death of a Christian from
the death of the wicked, it is to be enquired, It is demanded seeing the soul
and body of the wicked shall be vni^ed in the resurrect^on: how shall they be
punished with the second death.
seeing in the resurrection the wicked shall have their souls and bodies
united together, how shall they be punished with death? The answer is, that
this union of their souls and bodies shall be with such a fearful division
from God, and among themselves, that they shall rather wish to be extinguished,
and turned into nothing, then be united again, Gregor. moral. l. 15. Sect* 55.
Ad augmentum tormenti, and hic de corporenolens educitur impius, and illic in
corpore tenetur inuitus. In this life the wicked is taken out of the body
against his will, and in the life to come, he is kept in the body against his
will: and by both of these his torment is increased: In the first creation God
conjoined soul and body; that they might be a mutual comfort one to other, It
is answered that this ^nion of their ^oule and body, is for their greater
punishment.
but in the second death by the contrary they are united for the mutual
punishment one of another: so that the body shall be for no other end
quickened by the soul but to make it feeling, and sensible of horrible pain:
for if even now in this life it be come upon man, as a just punishment of his
rebellion against God, that the body is not so serviceable to the soul as it
was in the beginning, Anima quippe quia sup^riorem Dominu^ suo arbitrio
deseruit, Aug. de. ciuit. dei l. 13. c. 13
inferiorem famulum, sibi subiectu^ non habet, how much more shall it be so in
the last reco^pense that either of themshal become a grief, and burden to
others.

Here is then to be taken up that great difference which is between the death
of the Christian and of the worldling, A great difference between the death of
the Christian and the wicked.
in the death of the wicked, all sorts of deaths concurres, ^hereas the
Christian suffers but Aliquid mortis a piece of death, to wit, the dissolution
of his earthly house: the Serpent can do no more to him, but manducare terram
eius, fasten his teeth upon his earthly part, as to the heavenly soul it
falls not under the danger of death.

So that the vantage is great, which the Christian has over his enemies, The
Christian shall never die that death which is the punishment of the wicked.
in that the death which the wicked shall die, the Christian is exempted from
it, but that part of death which he shall suffer, and they are able to
inflict upon him, they themselves shall shall not escape it. Iezabel may make
her vow to have the head of Elijah: but how little effect there is in such
fury of flesh, is manifest in that same example, And the wicked cannot free
themselves of that death, which they inflict on the godly ^ beside that, a
worse abides them.
for God preserved his servant safe, and her own head was given in a prey to
the dogs, and they like the Burrios of the Lord devoured her, leaving nothing
but the skull of her head, and palms of her hands: why then shall we be
afraid of them, who are not exempted from that doom, which in their greatest
anger they give upon us: when it was told Anaxagoras the Philosopher, that by
his enemies means he was condemned to die, he never troubled himself for the
matter, but made this answer: Iam olim istam sententiam tulit natura in illos
aeque ac in me, that long since nature had given out the sentence of death
upon them, as well as upon him. If such strength was in any Ethnik, what
should there be in any Christian?

But beside this, By death we get deliverance from our present evils.
the excellent benefits we receive by death should confirm us against all the
terrors and pains thereof; for first it relieues us of much evil: for by it
our days of sin are finished, and we are delivered from the miseries of
this life. If we had been immortal in this this miserable mortality, our
estate had been most lamentable: even the Ethniks by the light of nature
understood, that it was a great benefit that the body was but Mortale
vinculu^ animae, Aug. de. ciuit. Dei. l. 9. cap. 10.
a temporal or mortal band of the soul; and they gave the reason, What a
great benefit it is, that our bodies are mortal.
Ne semper huius vitae miserijs anima tener etur, least the soul should be for
ever deteyned under the miseries of this wretched life: but praised be God,
this comfort is made sure to us by a clearer light, that our souls shall not
for ever be deteyned in the body, as in a house of bondage, but that shortly
they shall be delivered, and that in so wonderful a manner, that death which
is the daughter of sin shall become the destroyer of her own mother: for
unto the Christian, death is a perfect mortification of all his earthly members.

Neither are we by it only delivered from evil, By death we are set at
liberty to enjoy our greatest good.
but also entered to the fruition of our greatest good: for as a cloud dissolved
gives us clear sight of the Sun, which before was obscured from us, or as the
doors of the prison being opened by the Angel, made a fair way to Peter to
come out and enter into Jerusalem, so is it, Aug. de. ciuit. dei. l. 9. c. 20.
, dissolutio corporis, absolutio est animae, the dissolution of the body is the
absolution of the soul: as the snare being broken, the bird escapes, so the
body being dissolved, Athanas in q^estionibus quaest. 18.
Euadit reclusa intus columba hoc est anima, the soul has a ready way to the
face of God.

There is wrought by death, Many looks to the dissolution, but not to the
coniuction made by death, and therefore are afraid at it.
as says the Apostle, both a dissolution and a conjunction. The cause why
death seems terrible to many, is, for that they look to the dissolution, and
not to the conjunction, the dissolution is of the soul from the body, the
conjunction is of the soul with Christ: if the^ we be afraid, when we look
to the dissolution, let us also look to the conjunction, and be comforted, I
desire to be dissolved, there the dissolution: and to be with Christ, there
the conjunction. We use commonly to call death a departure, and so it is a
departure from them who are dear unto us, but to them who are more dear: and
therefore should we not so much be grieved at our departure from that company
we leave behind us, as rejoiced by thinking of that blessed fellowship, which
is before us, for we return to our father, from whom we came, to our eldest
brother, whom we have not yet seen, but long to see him, because we love him,
to the company of innumerable Angels, to the Congregation of the first borne,
and to the Spirits of just and perfect men.

But here two things must be removed, Two things removed which make death
fearful.
which impair this comfort, and makes death seem much more terrible, 1 The
fear of punishment after death
then it is indeed. The first is the fear of punishment after death, but in
very deed, quid hoc ad mortem, quod post mortem est? Ambr. de bono mortis. c.
8
Why shall death be blamed for that which falls out after death, Acerbitas
non mortis est, sed culpae, the bitterness is not in death, But indeed death
is not to be blamed for thatwhich comes after it
but in sin: let a man therefore purge his conscience, and death shall
neither be fearful, nor bitter unto him: As a Serpent wanting the sting, may
be put in our bosom without perrill, so if sin, which is the sting of death
be taken away, we may boldly welcome death, yea embrace it without fear: it
cannot hurt us.

The other cause is, that men apprehend death, 2 An apprehension that death
destroys man.
to be the destruction of man, but in very truth it is not so, but rather as I
said, the absolution of man, it is neither total, for it only dissolues the
body, nor yet perpetual. Some Ethnikes falsely called it, Aeternus Somnus, it
is a sleep indeed, but not eternal, for in the resurrection the body shall
be wakened and raised up again, so then Non mors ipsa, Ambros. ibid. Death it
self is not terrible but the opinion of death.
sed opinio de morte est terribilis, it is not death it self, but an opinion
of death which is terrible, for since it translates us from this present evil
world unto everlasting life: I know not said Nazianzen, how it can be called
death, it being Nomine magis, qua^ re sormidabilis, fearful in name, Nazian.
orat. de funere patris.
rather then in deed. The separation of the soul from God, that is death: the
separation of the soul from the body, Greg. moral. l. 4. sect. 47.
Vmbra tantummodo est mortis, is only the shadow of death, and therefore such
as are dead, not in ^he soul, but in the flesh, non vera morte, sed vmbra
tantum mortis o^eriri dicuntur, are not said to be truly dead, but only
covered with the shadow of death.

We are not then to look upon death in the glass of the law, Death should
not be looked upon in the glass of the law, but in the mirror of the Gospel.
but in the mirror of the Gospel: life looked upon with the eyes of nature,
seems a better thing then it is, covered as it were with a white veil, though
in deed it be very black: for if the pleasures thereof be compared with the
pains, it will be found that the pains exceed the pleasures, both for their
number, greatness and continuance, it being most certain, that no pleasure in
the earth has been found to endure so long, as the pains of a fever, whereas
on the other hand, if death be looked upon with the eyes of nature, it seems
to be very terrible, and as it were covered with a black veil, but is white
indeed, being to the godly but a finishing of our miseries, and entrance to our
endless glory.

And this shall be evident if we mark these phrases by which the spirit of God
describes death to us in holy scripture: Comfortable phrases, by which death is
described by the spirit of God.
the death of Abraham Genesis 25.8.
is called a gathering of him to his fathers: Deu* 31.16.
the death of Moses a sleeping with his fathers, Psalm. 16.9.
David calls the death o^ his body a resting of his flesh in hope: Luke.
S. Luke calls the death of our Lord the time of his assumption: 2. Pet. 1.14.
S. Peter calls it the deposition of an earthly Tabernacle: Now I pray you, what
here is terrible, unless to be gathered to our fathers, to let our bodies
sleep for a time, and rest in hope, that our souls may be assumed up into
heaven be terrible to us. S. Paul expresses the nature of our death by thr^e
similitudes.


But most clearly does S. Paul by three proper similitudes, expressethe nature
of death unto us; for first he compares it to the laying aside of an old rotten
garment, in stead whereof, we put on a better, teaching us thereby, that as no
poor man will grudge to lay aside his contemptible garment when a better is
offered unto him, 1. He compares it to the changing of a garment.
far less should a Christian murmr, when God vncloths him of his corruptible
body, since he does it, that he may cloth him with a more excellent garment
of glory, and ^mmortalitie. Secondly, he compares the laying of our bodies in
the grave to the sowing of seed in the earth, To the sowing of seed in the
earth, tha^ it may grow again. 1. Cor. 15.
teaching us thereby, that suppose our bodies being covered with moulds rot and
putrify under the earth yet they shall spring up again, and the^fore we should
willingly render our bodies to the Lord that great husbandma^, to be dimpled
like pickles of lively seed by his own hand, in any part of the earth he
pleases, yea if it were in the bottom of the sea, seeing the whole world is
the Lords husbandry, which he can cause to bring out fruit to him at his
pleasure: At his word both the earth and water brought out to him living
creatures which never had been: and shall we not think that at his word they
will render to him these creatures, 3 To a flitting from one house to another.
which have bin before? And thirdly he calls it here a flitting from one house
to another, a remoouing from our cot house on earth, to a Palace of glory in
heaven.

Albeit death be certain, yet the time, place, and kind thereon is uncertain
Now this being spoken upon the word Dissolved for our comfort in death,
something further must we mark out of it, for our preparation to death: Howeuer
death be most certain, yet the Apostle speaks indefinitly of it, both in
regard of the time, the place, and the kind of death: it is out of al doubt,
our bodies must be dissolved, but we know not when, nor where, nor how: in
these three respects death is uncertain.

As to the time of our death, Many dream of more days the^ they have and are
far deceived at the length. Aug.
God has hidden it from our eyes, Nihil certius morte, nihil incertius hora
mortis. Many go out of the body, being disapointed as concerning the time,
lipning and looking in their own thought for a longer time, then they find
ordained for them. In this folly by nature we are all followers of that rich
man, who dreamed to himself that he had many days to the fore, when in very
deed he had not one: for that same night his soul was taken from him, Ber. de
fallatia vitae praesentis.
Vita haec multipliciter illudit hominibus, longam se simulat, vt fallat.

Time of our death left uncertain to make us the more vigilant
Always the uncertainty of death in regard of time, God has done it in wisdom,
to make us the more careful: Ignoratur vnus dies, vt obseruentur multi: He
has made one day unknown, that many days may be observed* If the good man of
the house had known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched,
and not suffered his house to be dug through. Be ye therefore prepared: the
house is the body, the thief that breaks it is death, the treasure thou keepst
in it, is thy soul, therefore watch and pray: the conclusion of the Parable
tells us, that God has hid the hour of death from us, not to snare us but to
stir us to vigilance, Ideo voluit horam mortis incertam esse, Gregor.
vt semper sit nobis suspecta, God has made the hour of death uncertain,
because he will have it always suspected.

The life of man is but a life that turns upon seven days, and in one of them
man must die.
The life of man on earth, is but a life of seven days, how many years
soever he live, yet has he but these same days multiplied unto him: As he
therefore, who having seven servants to serve him, if he be advertised that one
of the seven will slay him; takes service from them, with the narrower
obser^ation of every one of them, when they come by course to serve him: so
man, Therefore sh^ld he take heed to them all.
whose life runs upon seven days in the week, which together with their
shadows serve him by course, since he is told that in one of them he must
die, and he knows not which it is, he should the more carefully observe them
all, to live holily, and godly in them: let all of them be passed over in
fear: let none of them want their own exercises of godliness, so shall we
die peaceably, and with comfort in any of the^, wherein it shall please God to
call upon us.

Secondly, The place of death uncertain.
in regard of the place death is also so uncertain, somehaue died in the womb
wherein they took life, some in the Cradle* as the infants of Bethlem, some in
the bed, as Ishboseth, some in the Parlour, as Eglon, some on the stool, as
Arrius, some at the table, as Ammon, some in the Chapel as Sennacherib, some
in the Temple, We can come to no place in the which some have not died before
us.
as Ioab: In a word, what place is there wherein we can come, in the which, or
the like of it, some men have not died before us: and this to warn us, how in
every place we should be prepared, Vbique te expectatmors, Bernard.
and tu, si sapiens fueris, vbique came expectabis.

Thirdly, the kind of our death is also left uncertain unto us, The kind of
death is also uncertain, that for all deaths we might be prepared.
that against all kinds of death we may be prepared; there is one way by which
we all come into the world, but many ways by which we go out of it, for
some die in the water, as Pharao, some in the fire as the King of Edom, some by
Lions as the disobedient Prophet, some by Bears as the railing children, We
come all into the world by one way, but we go out of it by many.
some by dogs, as cruel Iezabel, some by vermin as proud Herod, some by
the sword, as swift Azahel, some smothered in the house as the children of Job,
some by the fall of a wall, as those eighteen men, slain by Siloam Tower,
some by the cast of a stone as Abimelech, some of a pain in their head as the
Shunamits son, some of a pain in their belly, as Antioc^hus, some of a Gowte
^n their feet as Asa, ^ome by the private corruption of their own
distemperate humors, some by distemperature of public humors, which are
corrupt laws.

In a word, We should not much care for the kind of death but for the way we
go after death.
so frail a vessel is man, that easily by innumerable ways he is broken:
and all these have we seen before us, that for a^l them we might be prepared,
making ready our selves to die, and referring the kind of our death to the
good pleasure of God, Aug. de ciuit. dei. l. 1. c. 11.
Non est multum curandum, necessario morituro, qua morte moriatur, sed quo post
mortem ire Compellatur, since of necessity we must die, let us not care much
for the kind of death, but rather of the way which after death we are to go:
And for this cause, did our blessed Savior undergo a cursed death, that every
death might be made blessed to them who die in the faith of the Lord.

Be dissolved. Men should not be violent actors of their own death, but
patient sufferers.
Last of all we observe here that the word which the Apostle uses, being
passive, we are taught, that men should not be violent Actors of their own
death, but patient sufferers at the good pleasure of God: In all the Book of
God there is not asillable allowing selfe-murther: The law which forbids to
kill, does first of all forbid to kill thy self: I will require (says the
Lord) your blood at the hands of Beasts, at the hands of a man himself,
Genesis 9.
at the hands of every brother will I require it: And hereby that story of
the Maccab^es, 2. Mac 14.
commending RAZIS, A self murderer never allowed, but condemned in holy
scrip^^re
for self murder may be known to be but a bastard breath, being so
discordant from the rest of Scripture, breathed by divine inspiration of the
holy Ghost. Ethnikes counted it magnanimity in desperate troubles to dispatch
themselves, but indeed it is pusillanimity; that is a great mind, which can
endure trouble with patience: and it is but a feeble spirit, which being
impatient of trouble, seeks by selfe-murther to eschew it. Properly did Jerome
call such Martyrs slultae philosphiae. As to Samsons fact it was singular, no
more to be followed, then Abraham his offering of his son, or Isreal's policy
in spoiling the Egyptians, which had their own warrants, but cannot warrant us
to transgress the known and common commandments of God.

The second part o^ ^he verse conteynes the vantage we ^aue by death.
We have a building. Now follows the second part of the verse, containing the
vantage we get by that exchange we make in death, to wit, that by it we are
translated into a better building: where before we enter into the words, if it
be demanded, what then? Is there no more to be done to the body? When it is
dissolved, must it lie still in Dust and Ashes? And have we no further comfort
concerning it? The comfort given here against death concerns the soul only.
The answer is, that the comfort which here is given does only concern the
soul but if we will conioyne with this, other places of Scripture, we shall
find full and perfect comfort, both for body and soul.

For not only know we that our bodies shall be raised up again in the last
day, Comfort concerning the loss of our bodies by death is to be sought ^n
other places of Scripture.
but that when they shall sleep in the grave, the holy Ghost who now dwelles
in them shall watch over them, to preserve them to immortality, from the time
we be dead, our bodies are neglected and forsaken of these, who loved us most
deerly in our life, after that they have laid us in the grave they return to
eat and drink, and in their wonted manner to refresh themselves, and within
short time they quit all remembrance of us; The Lord will no^ forsake that
body, which was the Temple of h^^ spirit, ^ut will ke^pe the d^st thereof.
But as to the Lord our God, he will never n^glect, nor forsake, nor forget
that body which he honored to be his own Temple, dwelling in it by his holy
spirit, but will keep the very dust thereof, till he restore it again to
life. An example whereof we have in the favorable dealing of God with Jacob,
who dyed in Egypt, and was conveyed to Canaan by Joseph and Pharaoh his
Chariots, I^cobs dead body honorably buried by God.
yet unto none of them will God give the praise of the burial of Jacobs corpse,
he is not ashamed to take to himself, according to the promise he made unto
his servant, that he would not only go with him down to Egypt, but also would
bring him up again to Canaan, thereby declaring how precious in his sight the
death of his Saints is, and how honorable he esteems these bodies, which have
bin the Temples of his holy spirit.

Three things to be considered here.
Now in these words we have three things to be considered: first, what is meant
by this building: secondly, how says the Apostle, that we have it: Thirdly,
what are the properties, by which it is described.

By this building some understands that immortal and glorified body, The first
thing to be considered here, is, what is meant by this building.
which shall be given us in heaven: the same body in substance which now we
have, but transformed, and made like unto Christ's glorious body, and indeed
unto it agrees this description; for that body is of God not made with hands,
not preserved by the help of secondarie means, as is this body which was
begotten by our father, conceived by our mother, By this building is not to be
understood our glorisied bodies, for those we get not till the resurrection.
nourished and brought up to the state wherein now it is, by the help of
hands: and again, where this mortal body is a temporal Tabernacle, the
immortal shall be an eternal habitation. All these are true: but because our
souls shall not dwell in these bodies till the resurrection, they cannot be
meant here by this building to the which we are transported incontinent after
death.

By this building then we are to understand that place of glory, But that
place of glory into which we are transated aft^r death.
which in the third heavens God has prepared for his children, called in the
Gospel the everlasting habitations, Luke.
and by our Savior his Fathers house, Ioh.
wherein are many Mansions: Hebr.
called by Saint Paul a City, having a foundation, whose builder and maker is
God, Revel.
and by Saint John called the New Jerusalem; a City having the glory of God in
it, a City four squared, in length, breadth and height equal; a City
wherein all the Citizens sees the face of God, through the streets whereof runs
the water of life, and in every side thereof the tree of life: this is the
glorious building, into the which our souls are carried by Angels, so soon as
they depart out of the body.

The second thing to be considered here, is, how says the Apostle we have this
building.
The second thing we proposed here to speak of, was, how is it, that the Apostle
says, We have this building, he says not we shall get it, but that presently
we have it: The reason is, because presently we have the rights and
securities: If worldlings account themselves sure enough of earthly
inheritances, whe^they have the charter, The reason is, because presently we
have the rights and ^ecurities of it, which are, Charter, Confirmation, Seazing
and Possession.
seazing, confirmation, and possession of them, how much more arewesure of that
heavenly building, who have already received all these rights and securities
thereof from the Lord our God.

The Charter Of the Charters of our heavenly building.
of our heavenly inheritance is the good word of God, wherein the Lord of his
special grace, and favor has disponed it unto us, Luke 12.32.
Fear not little flock, it is the fathers will to give you the kingdom:
besides that, the same is left to us in legacy by our elder brother Jesus
Christ, who before that he offered himself in a Sacrifice for our sins upon
the Cross, Most comfortable Meditations.
did first commend us to his father by an everlasting prayer: Father, I will,
that these whom thou have given me, be where I am, that they may see the glory
I had with thee from the beginning. Ioh.
O most sweet, O most sure word: What sweeter word can there be th^n this*
that the Son in his latter Will, will have us to be with him: what surer
word? It is spoken by him, in whom the Father proclaims himself to be well
pleased, and who then will revoke or annull it? Surely most comfortable is it,
that we have not only the Father bidding the son ask what he will, Psalm. 2.
and promising to give it: but we have also the Son asking, and in his
asking craving no other thing, but that we may be with him: Is not then our
heavenly Inheritance sure enough unto us?

Of the confirmation we have received upon our Charter.
But we have yet more beside this disposition made us of God, strong
Confirmations thereof, for the father has confirmed the disposition, made by
him with an oath, Heb. 6.17.
and that as the Apostle says, to show to the heirs of promise, the stability
of his Counsel. Again, the Legacy made by the son, he has ratified by his
own blood, and the death of the Testator interuening, has made the Testament
unchangeable, and both of them are sealed in our hearts by the holy Spirit of
promise, whom God has given us, as his witness, his earnest, and his seal to
assure us of that which he has promised.

And thirdly, Of our seazing and inuestment in our heavenly building.
the Lord our God by his Stewards and servants, who^ he has ordained to
govern his house, delivering to us in the Sacrament the Symbols of the body
and blood of Christ Jesus has thereby seized us, and given us inuestment of
our heavenly Kingdom.

Of our present possession we have of that building
Last of all, he has put us in present possession thereof, by delivering unto
us the keys of the Kingdom, which are Faith and prayer, by which every
Christian enters in at the door of that building, and gets familiar access to
the Throne of Grace: ^uppose he be on earth, he has his conversation in
heaven, talks familiarly with God his father, and viewes, to the great delight
of his soul, that glorious inheritance, into the which after death he knows
he shall fully be perfited. In all these respects it is, that the Apostle here
says, not only we shall have, but we have (already) a building in heaven. The
3 thing to be considered here is the description of the building wherein are
four things.


The Third thing to be considered here, is the description of this building,
wherein first we see how the builder and maker thereof is said to be God:
Secondly the manner thereof, it is not made with hands: Thirdly, the endurance
thereof, it is eternal: and fourthly, the place thereof, it is in heaven.

First then that God is called the Author and maker of this building, First God
is called the Author and maker of this building, and therefore it must be a
glorious house
it leads us to forethink with our selves, what a glorious and excellent
building it must be. Among men theirworks are according to their power and
greatness: ^f Kings go to build, they build Palaces, if they prepare banquets
they make them royal, esteeming it no honorable thing for them to do that
which without difficulty may be performed by the common sort of people.

When King Ahasuerus made a banquet to show the riches and glory of his
Kingdom, Ahasuerus made a royal banquet, in a very pleasant place, to show his
glory. Esth. 1.
and honor of his Majesty, he prepared it in a very pleasant place: the
Court of the Garden of the Kings Palace was decked with Tapestrie of white,
green and blew clothes, fastened with cords of fine linen and purple in silver
ringes, and pillars of M^rble, the beds were of gold and silver, upon a
pauement of Porphyrie, and Marble, and Alablaster in blew color, the banquet
was made to his Princes of an hundred and twenty Provinces, What shall we then
think of that building and banquet God has prepared for declaration of his
glory.
and it lasted one hundred and four score days. Now if such provision was
made by a mortal man, to show his glory, what shall we think of that
preparation which the eternal God has made for declaration of his glory; not
into the utter Court of his Palace, which is this visible world, but in the
inner Court thereof, the heaven of heavens; not in a banquet to last for an
hundred and four score days, but for ever and ever. The glory of Sa'omons
Temple may lead us to consider of the glory of our heavenly building.


Solomon built a Temple, which was justly counted the glory of the world: but
God furnished unto him both the matter, for in his days he made gold as rife
as stones, as also the engine, for he gave unto Hiram and other Artificers to
work all manner curious work in Gold, 1. K. 7.14.
Silver, Brass: what ever was excellent in that building, was done by the
wisdom of God in the Artificer, which is but a small sparkle of that infinite
knowledge and wisdom which is in God himself: yet seeing of these earthly
materials with the small sparkles of his own light, such excellent works have
been done by men, as draws others in admiration of them: may we not think,
that it is a work far surpassing in glory, and above the reach of all our
understanding, which he himself without help of hands has built in heaven*
for the comfort of his children, and declaration of the honor of his Majesty.

Beside this in judging of the works of God, we must lay this for a sure
ground that the invisible works of God are always most excellent. In man there
is a soul and body, It is taken for a sure ^ule, that the invisible works of
God are most excellent.
both of them very beautiful workemanshippes, but that the invisible soul is
a far more excellent workemanshippe then the visible body, appears in this,
that whatsoever beauty, sense, agilitie, or any other worthy commendation the
body has, it has it from the quickening virtue of the soul, This we may see
in the workmanship of man.
without which, the most beautiful body is, but for matter a lump of clay,
for form like an Idol, having eyes, but see not, ears and hear not, feet and
walk not.

And so is it in all the rest of Gods works, The same is to be understood in
the Fabric of this world, which is very pleasant, and yet but a figure in
respect of that which is above.
the invisible being ever more excellent then the visible: this Universe with
the plenishing and furniture thereof is indeed a comely workemanshippe: the
Grecians called it (...) for the ornaments thereof: the Latins called it
Mundus for the cleanenesse, and tightnesse thereof, but the Apostle comparing
it with that building which is above, calls it (...), because it is but a
figure of a better, and more enduring substance, which is not seen.

The most pleasant part of this lodging, How far this visible world is
inferior to that invisible building.
is the sylering thereof, the firmament: which God has garnished with the Sun,
Moon and Stars as it were with shining pearls, to give light by course to all
that dwell in it: yet is it no more but the nethermost part of the Pauement of
our heavenly Palace: yea the Sun, which now is the most pleasant and
profitable creature that serves man in this present world, shall not have that
honor as to shine in that heavenly building: there shall be no need of Sun
nor Moon, there the glory of God shall be the light of that City: as lesser
lights are obscured at the presence of greater, so shall all these created
co^forts subject to sense, euanish, when God shall receive us in his
everlasting habitations, and he himself shall become al things in all unto us.

The 2. thing in this description is the manner of the building.
Not made with hands. The second part of this description points out the manner
of the building, the house is built by God in such sort, that no hand of man,
nor any other creature did help him in it. It is the Lords praise, that he
made and prepared that dwelling place for us, before he made our selves: yea as
our Savior witnesses before the foundations of the world were laid; Mat.
25.34. The Lord has prepared that house for us, and also prepares us for it
and it is also his praise, that he makes and prepares us for it, which two are
very comfortably conjoined by the Apostle Saint Peter, that God reserues that
inheritance for us in heaven, and keeps us also by his power on earth unto it:
so that al hands are here excluded from the praise, either of the building, or
yet of the obteyning of it by any thing that man can do, that the praise
alonely may be reserved to God, who is both the builder and giver of this
house, to the children of his good will in Christ.

The glory of both the creations belong to God only.
The work of the first creation God reioyces in it, and will have the glory
thereof only given to himself: he spoke it to his servant Job to humble him:
Where wast thou, Job. 38.4.
when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare if thou have understanding,
who has laid the m^asures thereof, if thou know? or who has stretched the
line over it, etc.? And much more are we to think that the glory of the
second creation, he will have ascr^bed to himself.

Of all his works he craves no more but the glory, Of all Gods works he
cra^es no more but the praise, and gives us the profit.
and is content that the fruit and benefit of them be ours: let us give unto
him that which he will not give to any other, namly his glory, and content us
with that which willingly he gives us, he would not suffer Israel tothink or
say that fortheir righteousness, they were entered in earthly Canaan, far less
will he be content that our entrance to heavenly Canaan should be ascribed to
the righteousness of man, or that man should say, My right hand has done it:
Psalm. 116.
Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be the praise, thy hand has
made that building, and thine hand must also bring us unto it.

The third thing in the description of this building, is the eternity thereof.
Eternal. It is thirdly described from the endurance thereof, which is unto
all eternity: Here we soiourne in a Tabernacle, there we shall dwell in a
Mansion house: here there is a definite time of days months and years
assigned to us, our life on earth is but momentanean, wherein if we speak as
the truth is, Our present life is but for a moment.
we live no more, but a moment at once, for the begun time is past unto us,
and we are dead unto it: the time to come is uncertain, and we cannot be said
to live unto it; it is only the present moment, wherein we live, which shortly
is done, and must give place to an other, that so by moments, one of them
succeeding to another, our silly life may be prorogate here upon earth.

And to the same purpose belongs that meditation of Basil, Basil. in Psalm. 143.
that our life on earth is finished by many deaths, for if we shall divide our
life into these four ages, Our life is finished by many deaths.
infancy, youth, manhood and old age: Our infancy is dead and gone already*
we may say with the Apostle, when I was a child I ^pake as a child, but to
that estate of childhood shall we never return again.

Our youth in like manner is past, This is made clea^e by parting our life into
^oure ages, every one whereof does die before we enter to another.
and of it we may say with David, I have been young and now am old, but what
we were shall we never be again. Our manly age in like manner in most part of
us is finished, or at least wearing away, and there remains no more in them,
who are falsely named to be of longest life among us, but theiroldage, which
shortly also by death shall be abolished, the most part of us have passed
through three deaths already, and have no more but the last and weakest time
of our life to soiourne upon earth, but in heaven our life shall not be
measured by days, months nor years: our house there is eternal, our estate
in glory unchangeable.

Since by nature we love a long life, and care for it, why will we not love an
eternal life.
And this should warn us with all godly care to make sure to our selves the
rights of that heavenly building, whereof I have spoken: If we once miss it, we
shall never recover it: and if once we get entrance into it, we shall never any
more remove out of it: It is a shame that we should take so much pains for a
long life on earth, and so little for an eternal life in heaven; to prolong
our life on earth, what is it we leave undone, that may help it? For this
cause we care for garments, we provide for nourishing meats, we purge the
body by medicines, but since nature has learned us to do so much for a long
life, what a folly is it that we should remain so careless as we are of
eternal life, notwithstanding that by the light of the Gospel we are taught,
how by godly care we might obtain it.

In Heaven. The last thing in the description of this building, is the
situa^ion thereof.
In the last room that building is described from the place whereunto it
stands. Among men, buildings commonly are commended from their situation: and
the Apostle to extol ours above all that are on earth, tells us, that it is
situate in heaven. The Lord has not given us with Esau, the fatness of the
earth to be our portion, neither has he set our Habitation among Dragons:
he has lifted us up into the place of Angels, from whence they fell by their
pride, even there has the humble suffering and obedience of our blessed Savior
exalted us, and set us, as says the Apostle, in the heavenly places: so that
we may rejoice with David. The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, Psalm.
16
and I have a very fair He^itage.

Dwelling places assigned to men according to the disposition of their persons.
I find in holy Scripture, that God has assigned habitations to men, according
to their estate, changing places to them according to the change of their
manners. Man in innocence had his dwelling in pleasant Paradise: Man after his
Apostasy was cast out to labor the cursed earth whichbears thorns and
thistles: Man continuing in Apostasy shall be sent down to the place of
utter darkness, and man received again to mercy, is restored to a Paradise,
as much more pleasant then that of Adams, as the second Adam is more excellent
then the first.

In heaven are none but Elects, If such comforts be on earth, what may we look
for in heaven.
in hell none but abiects: in earth there is a mixture of chafe andcorne,
wheat and popple. Goats and Sheep, always if such comforts be here where good
and evil are together, what delicates are there, where there is none but good
and if the pasturage here be so pleasant, where Goats and Sheep feed
together: what pleasures are there where the Sheep are gathered together by
themselves, Cant.
and their Pastor lies with them, and rests, feeding them without fear in the
noone tide of the day.

The place of our dwelling admonishes us that we should be holy and heavenly.
And as the consideration of the place renders us comfort, so does it also give
us this instruction, that we must be holy if we desire to dwell there, for no
unclean thing can enter into heavenly Jerusalem: we see that in the frame of
this world thingsare placed according to their excellency: the earth, as
grossest, is set into the lowest room, ^boue the earth is the water, as being
purer then the earth, above the water is the air, which is purer then the
water, above the air is the fire, and above the fire is the Firmament with the
celestial spheres, which are purer then any of them: and above them all is the
third heaven, wherein our building is situate, excelling in purity all these
things which are seen, whereunto we are admonished, that we who by nature are
not only of the earth, but are also earthly minded, must be transchanged by
grace, and endued with a heavenly disposition, before we can be admitted to
these new heavens, wherein, 2. Pet.
as says Saint Peter, dwells righteousness, and none but righteous, and renewed
men can inherit them.

Ver. 2. Therefore we sigh, desiring, The Apostle now comes to show a threefold
fruit of godliness, which the knowledge of the glory to come works in the
children of God.
etc. The Apostle having laid down that solid ground of comfort, which stands
to all Christians as a strong preseruatiueagainst the fear of death, comes now
to build upon it, and draws out of it a threefold fruit of godliness, which
he protests the certain knowledge of the glory to come, wrought in his heart,
and which if we also can feel wrought in our own hearts by the spirit of
God, shall serve unto us, as wholesome preparatiues to prepare us in our life,
The first is ^n earnest desire of that glory to come.
and makes us capable of that comfort of all Christians in our death: the first
fruit is an earnest desire of that glory to come: the second, a contentment,
with boldness to remove out of the body: the third a continual care, both
in life and death to please the Lord.

Here first we perceive the nature of that true and lively knowledge, The
nature of the lively knowledge, wrought in us by the Gospel.
which by the Gospel is wrought in the minds of men, not only does it let us
see high and excellent things, but also carries our hearts and affections after
them: for the Gospel is not only a mirror, wherein we behold the glory of
God with open face, It is not only a mirror whereby we see God, but it is his
power, whereby we are carried after him.
but also the power of God unto salvation, by which we are transformed into the
self same Image and similitude: and therefore the Apostle denies that they
have learned Jesus Christ, who have not learned to cast off the old man, which
is corrupted thorough deceiueablelusts and to put on the new, which after God
is created in righteousness, and true holiness* And if by this rule the me^
of this generation be tried, many shall be found ignorant of Christ, who seem
unto themselves to have learned him well enough. How the two lights of heaven
shadow two sorts of knowledge in the mind of man.


In the heavens are two lights, whereof the one, to wit, the Moon has light
without heat or changing virtue: the other, to wit the Sun, does not only
shine, but sends out such heat and virtue, that by it, things hard are
mollified, dead creatures are revived, and fading herbs and trees are made to
flourish: so is there in the mind of man two sorts of knowledge, the one lets
him see the good way, and allures his heart to follow it, the other gives him
light, whereby he may discern things, but allures allures him not to follow
the best, it increases light in the mind, but works not holiness in the heart,
it does not convert, but convince them; The knowl^^ge of many wo^kes nothing
but their conviction.
so is it with many in this age, whose knowledge is better then their
conscience, of whom we may say with the Apostle, it had bin better for them
not to have known the way of righteousness, nor after that they have known
it to turn from the holy commandment given unto them. 2 Pet. 2.21.


We sigh. T. ^^godly while they sigh for things that are to come do thereby
declare, that they find no contentment in these which are present.
The first effect which the certain knowledge of the glory to come, wroght in
the Apostle, is, as we heard a fervent desire thereof, which caused him to
break forth in sighing for it, for the man, who knows better things, which
are to come can not be content with the best of these, which are present, but
does in such sort use the^, that he declares he longs for better, by sighing
and lame^ting for the long delay thereof: as Job protests, that his sighing
came before his meat, and David mingled his cup with tears, so all the godly,
who know a better, think long till they enjoy it, Non satis futura gaudia
nosti, nisi re^uat consolari anima tua donec veniant: Thou knows not rightly
the joys to come, unless thy soul refuse all other comforts, till thou
obtain them.

Desires in the godly go besore satisfaction.
In the children of God, desire goes before satisfaction, but it is certain
what they desire according to Gods word, they shall obtain it. It is the
faculty of them who are in heaven, that they are satisfied with the fullness of
joy, which is in Gods face: it is the felicity of them, who are militant on
earth, to hunger and thirst for righteousness, with the which they shall be
satisfied: they have obtained in a great part, that which they desired; we are
made sure by Gods word to obtain that which now we desire through his grace:
for his promise is, Psalm. 145.19
The Lord will fulfill the desires of them who fear him, whether it be
righteousness here, or glory hereafter.

Our perfection vpon^ earth consists rather in desiring to do as we should,
then in doing it.
If then we cannot do as we should, at least let us desire to do so, tota vita
boni Christiani Sanctum desiderium est, the whole life of a good Christian is a
holy desire, Aug. in Joan. tract. 4. Romans 7.
yea, the Apostle is not ashamed to protest of himself, that his desires were
better then his deed, God accepts our desires for deeds.
for he desired to do the good whereunto he could not attain: and such is the
favor and indulgence of our God toward us, that our desires he accepts them
for deeds, and therefore should we be comforted against the conscience of our
wa^ts and insufficiency, by the unfeigned desires of better, which through his
grace are in us: for true desire of grace and glory is, an undoubted argument
of grace received, ^ut this is to ^e understood of true desires, which a^e
discerned from v^ine desires two ways.
and glory to be received.

But this as I have said, is to be understood of true, not of vain desires
such as was the desire of Balaam, who desired that he might die the death of
the righteous. Two ways may the one be discerned from the other: 1 True
desires are ay the longer, the greater.
first these desires which are wroght in the soul by the holy spirit, are ay
the longer, the more fervent, whereas the other is but a false conception, which
incontinent dies and euanishes away: Secondly, true desire of the glory to
come, 2 True desire uses all means lawful to bring us to the thing desired.
uses carefully all those means, which may bring us unto it, such as are the
exercises of the Word and Prayer, the forsaking of our sins, which have
divided us from God: for who can think with any reason, that he truly desires
to be with the Lord, who neither delights to hear the Lord in his word, nor to
speak to the Lord by prayer? and is not careful to remove these impediments,
which may stay his peace and reconciliation with God.

An example of true desire we have in Zacheus, An example thereof in Zacheus.
Luke 19.2
who being desirous to see CHRIST, and finding himself impeded by the
multitude, ran before, and climed up upon a tree, to supply the wants of his
low stature: and when he was called upon by JESUS, he obeyed the calling,
resolving to part from his evil gotten goods, that he might keep still the
Lord Jesus. So is it with e^eri^ soul which earnestly longs to enjoy the
Lord, it runs by all impediments, uses all lawful means, and refuses no
required condition; so that they are even content to deny themselves, take up
his cross and follow him.

Whereas the men of this world, The desire which worldlings have of Christ, is
described.
if they have any desire of Jesus Christ, it is like unto that which Merchants
have, who having tasted wines, like them very well, but refuse to buy them for
the greatness of the price, so they, having tasted of the powers of the life
to come* have a desire to be partakers of them, but when they hear it, cannot
be, but upon this condition, that they deny themselves and mortify their
earthly lusts, they refuse with that young man, who being called by Christ to
forsake all and follow him, did first crave license to go and kiss his
father: thus are they deceived with a vain hope, that a man may overtake both,
that is, embrace the perishing pleasures of sin in this life, and after be
partakers of the enduring pleasures of the life to come.

Clothed with our house. The (...) of glory ^o come is sh^dowed to us by sund^y
similitudes.
That state of glory, which before he compared to an house, he now compares
to a garment: for it is a customable thing to Gods spirit, to shadow that glory
to come, under sundry similitudes. The Apostle says it is a glory to be
revealed: Now it is shaddowed, but now it is not re^ealed: Whatsoever is spoken
of it, is as much less then it self, Romans 8.
as a shadow is less then the body: we see the shadows by which it is
figured, and hear of them, but the glory it self is such, as the eye has
not seen, and the ear has not heard, No glorious thing, but glory it self
is promised unto us. Be^^de fall ac p^^sen vitae.
it is pondus aeteru^ gloriae, an eternal weight of glory, says the Apostle
Non enim gloriosa vestis aut gloriosa domus, sed gloriaipsa promittitur, siquid
vero illoru^ aut similiu^ aliquando dicitur, figura est, it is neither a
glorious garment, nor a glorious house that God promises to us, but glory it
self: and if at any time mention be made of any such thing as house or
garment, it is a figure.

And yet for our information the spirit of God is forced to use such figures,
The spirit of God uses many similitudes to declare that no similitude can
express that glory.
as are borrow^d from most delectable things, and best known unto us, some way
to make us conceive that which fully we cannot understand, sometime calling it a
buildding, sometime a house, sometime a City, sometime a garment, and sometime an
inheritance: it is ay one thing which is promised, but many manner of ways
expressed To the Church of Ephesus is promised the tree of life, which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God: to the Church of Smyrna is promised immunity from
the second death: to the Church of Pergamus is promised hidden Manna, a white
stone and a new name, which no man knows, but he who receives it: to the Church
of Thyatira is promised the ruling Scepter and the morning Star: to the
Church of Sardis is promised the writing of their name in the book of life: to
the Church of Philadelphia is promised the honor of a Pillar in the Temple of
God, and to the Church of Laodicea is promised a place with Christ on his
Throne. That the spirit of God speaks of one thing under so many similitudes,
is, to declare that the glory of that Kingdom, and riches of that Inheritance
is greater then that any similitude is able to express it.

And hitherto tends the manner of speech used here by the Apostle, The godly
speak o^ ^e glory to come like men transported.
it is strang^to hear that a man should be clothed with an house, seeing in
common speech men are said to be clothed with garments, and not with houses,
but we must consider, that no order of words can be kept in speaking of that,
which passes understanding.

It is said of those three disciples, who saw the glory of Christ on mount
Tabor, that being ravished there with they spoke, and knew not what they said:
For no order of words can be kept in speaking of that which passes
understanding. Psalm. 36.8.
so does the contemplation of the glory to come, transport Gods children, that
they beecome, as the Psalmist says, In^briati ab vbertate domus dei, so
drunken with the pleasures of Gods house, that they forget where they are, they
speak not, look not, do not after the cus^^me of nature, so long as their
minds are carried after heavenly things: and these small beginnings may witness
unto us the excellency of that life, which at length shall change us
wonderfully from that which now we are.

Ver. 3. If so be, we shall be found clothed, The Apostle expones what he
meant by wishing to be clothed upon
and not naked. Because in the former verse the Apostle had said, he desired to
be clothed upon with his house, which is from heaven: that is, he desired not
to lay aside his body, but keeping it still, he wished to be clothed above it
with immortality and glory, he subioynes now a certain correction of it, I
desire it, says he, if so it may stand with the Lords dispensation, that when
I shall be received into that glory I be [found Clothed] to wit, with my body:
which way Henoch and Elijah entered into glory, and all the faithful, w^o shall
be found a hue at Christ's second coming, shall also the same way enter into
glory: for they shall not lay aside their bodies, but keeping them still as
garments and couerings to their soul, shall upon them be clothed with the
garment of immortality and glory, if this way says the Apostle, I be found
clothed and not Naked, that is, if I be found without a body, which way Adam,
Abraham, and the rest of the Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles,
entered into glory, they were indeed clothed with their house from Heaven, but
were not superuested or clothed upon, which here the Apostle protests he
desired, if it might stand with the Lords dispensation.

And of this condition which here the Apostle subioynes for correction of his
former speech, The Godly in desiring things not absolutely promised, submit
their will to Gods will.
we may learn how the godly in desiring of things not absolutely promised to
all Gods children, albeit given to some of them do so temper and moderate their
desires, that they submit their will to Gods most holy will: whereor we are
admonished how much more we ought to mortify in our selves the unlawful
desires of things absolutely prohibit as being against the will of God. Since
the Apostle will not seek that which God has granted to ^ome, Unlawful
desire of things simply aga^n^t Gods will, should be s^r srom us.
but conditionally, that it may stand with the will of God* may not we be
ashamed, to seek that which he has denied and forbidden unto al? Oh that we
could remember this, as of^ as our corrupt nature provokes us to desire those
things which God has forbidden: O man why will thou follow a will contrary to
God his most holy will, or what good can that do unto thee, which thou know
thou can not enjoy with the favor of thy God.

Again we see that albeit there be one end of all the children of God, All
Gods children shall come to one end, suppose not in one manner.
for at length they shall all be gathered from under the four corners of
heaven, and ^et down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of God,
yet do they not all come to it after one manner, for some of them as we have
spoken, shall not lay aside their bodies, but keeping them still shall be
transchanged in a moment, others again must leave their bodies behind them
till the resurrection: And this last, suppose our nature abhor it, we must
learn to be content with it even to be broken with the dolors of death, as
other Godly m^n: yea and our blessed Savior has been before us, esteeming it
comfort sufficient for us, Revel. 14.13
that we dye in the Lord, and so are sure to rest from our labors, But of
this we have spoken before.

Ver. 4. For we that are in this Tabernacle, The Apostle d^sires not ^to want
the body, if it might stand with the Lords disp^nsation,
s^gh and are burdened, because, etc. The Apostle here insists in his former
purpose, explayning more clearly, what it is that he desired: he protests he
lived in this body as a malecontent, who knowing a better, and sighing for a
better, esteemed it a burden to him to be holden back from it: And yet least
it should seem, he were offended at the body, he declares again that he
desired not to sunder with the body, i^ it might please the Lord, that keeping
still the body, he might be superuested, or clothed upon with his other most
excellent horse, which is from heaven.

Here first it comes to be enquired, How this pl^ce agrees with Philip. (...)
where he d^sires to be d^ssolued and loosed from the body.
seeing the Apostle, Phil. 1. affirms that he desired to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ, and again cried out, Romans 7.6. Miserable man that I a^, who
will deliver me from this body of death: how is it, that here he says he had
no will to be unclothed of the body? The answer is, that these are not
contrary, for in the one when he desired to be loosed from the body, it was
not for any hatred of the body, but for the love of Christ, and hatred of sin,
whereof he knew he could not be quitt so long as he dwelt in the body: And now
when he protests that he desired not to want the body, it is not for love of
sin in the body, nor ^or a^y contentmenth had to be absent from C^^ist, for
afterward considering he could not both abide in the body, and dwell with the
Lord too, he resolves willingly to remove out of the body, that he might
dwell with the Lord: So then the deire he has to keep still the body is upon a
two fold condition. First that sin and mortality wear not in it, but
utterly swallowed up of that life, and next that in the body he were
transported to abide and dwell with Jesus Christ.

In holy Scripture we find that there things has moved Gods children to
wish a delay of death: Delay of of death is some time desir^d of the Godly for
three respects
The first is want of preparation in themselves, for the Godly are nor always in
that estate of life, 1. That they may b^ b^tter prepa^ed to (...).
wherein they dare be bold to die, and then they desire a prorogation of their
life, Psalm. 39.13.
as D^uid did, Stay a little, that I may recover my strength before I go
hence, and be not. It is a comfortable meditation, which Naziansen has
concerning this: Nazian* od suum Animum.
It is hard (says he) for me to determine, whether I shall desire life or
death: on every hand are extremities. As to life, Nazianz^ns doubt whether he
should desire life or death.
my sins have already made it bitter, and heavy to me, and as to death, alas
if once it come, there is no medicine after it, left unto me, by which I may
cure my sins: whereof it is evident that the desire, which this holy man had
to live in the body, was that he might mourn for his sins, which he had
done in the body, admonishing us by hs example, that as long as God spares us,
we should vs^ our time we^l, not to multiply more offenses, which may b^eed us
terror in the hour of death, but careful to purge our consciences of the^e,
which we have contracted already.

When David came upon Saul in his camp and found him sleeping, A meditation
how as Daui^ spared Saul sle^ping in the camp.
he would neither slay him himself, nor suffer Abner to slay him, only he took
away his spear, So God ma^y ^ time has found us sleep^ng in our sins and has
not s^^ine us ^ut wakn^d us.
and his waterpot, and these also after that he had wakened him, he did again
restore unto hi^, declaring thereby that he no manner of way intended his
destruction. B^t this is no way comparable to these mani^old prooffes which God
has given us of his loving kindness, for many a time has he visited us in
this camp of our warfare, and alas has found us sleeping, when we should
have been waking, and has not taken us away in our sins to slay us* but
only has taken from us those things, wherein we placed ou^ strength, and
maintenance of our life, yet so that he has graciously restored them unto us.
But alas how many is th^re among us, But our wak^ng has been no b^tter nor
S^^ls, working in v^ a t^mpo^all r^p^n^ance.
who are no other way wakned with all this working of God, then Saul was with
the working of David, for it wroght in him a temporal repentance, and no more:
incontinent he returned to his old sins, and no better is it with many of
us, ^or a while after our recovery from sickness, or deliverance out of other
troubles* we are somewhat religious, but shortly after our repentance vanishes,
like the morning dew, and we return again to our old manners, 2 Pet. 2.22
How we should use the time of life, granted us on e^rth is sh^w^d by the
example of Dauid^ amba^sadors.
as the Sow to the puddle, and the Dog to his vomit, this is but to abuse the
time of Gods patience.

Where it were better for us to do, as did the Ambassadors of David, who
being abued by the King of Ammon, who cutted their garments to their hips and
shaued their beards; at the counsel of David their King, tarried still in
Jericho, the border of their land, till their beards were grown again, and
their garments were prepared for them: so we if we follow the counsel^ of our
King and Lord Jesus Christ, should tarry here upon earth, which to the Godly
is the border of heavenly Canaan* for no other end but that the shame which
Satan hathdone us, by deforming our face, in spoiling us of the image of God,
may be taken from us, and therefore it should ^ee far from us. to make o^r
shame any more by new sins, but rather by grouth in godliness, to recover
again our former Image, otherway if we still abuse the patience of God, we
justly deserve, that tribulation, and anguish of spir^t, fearful shame and
confusion should be upon us, and if we prevent it not, we may certainly look
for it, Quo enim diutius expectat Deus, Aug.
eo districtius ind^cabit.

The second reason that has moved the godly, 2. They desire delay of death,
that they may do the greater good in the body.
sometime to desire a prolongation of their days, is, that they might do the
greater good in the body, and therefore David considering, that they who are
gone to the grave, cannot praise God, Psalm. 6.
to wit^punc; as we do, who are clad with our bodies on earth, ^e prays God
to relee^e him of the heavy sickness vnde^ which he lay. And this same also
made the holy Apostle to doubt what he should choose, Phil. 1.
whether to live in the flesh, or to be loosed from the body, the one being
best for himself, the other better for the Church o^ God: And herein als^ we
are admonished to embrace the Apostle^, counsel, while ye have time, be doing
good to all men, Gala. 6.10.
e^pecially to them who are of the family of faith, and our Saviors warning,
John 11.19.
that we should work so long as the twelve hours of the day last. But this
conuinces the blockish stupiditie of many, whom God has suffered to live, but
they do no more praise him, nor if they were dead, and buried.

And the thi^d motive, 3. They desire delay of death for the ^oue they have to
the body, which they desire not to want
is the love of the body, Ineffahilis enim est animi ad corpus affectus. And no
marvel is it, that the soul be loath to sunder from the own body, cons^dering
that the body was created in the great wisdom, and goodness of God, to be
a companion to the soul and this reason the Apostle touches here in the
subsequent words, while he says, because we would not be unclothed, for
herein he declares that the cause, why with sighing he desired to be
clothed with his horse, which is from heaven, was not any misl^king he had of
the body, for he protests now, if it might please the Lord he desired not to
want it.

And this desire in it self is not evil, This love of ^^e body is not evil
in it self.
otherway it could not be in those souls which are glorified in heaven, for
even they long for their bodies, as being imperfect without them, for by the
first creation ^s I said, they were made companions, and therefore the one of
them without the other, cannot rest in contentment, the body without the soul,
it is as we see, but a dead stock, or carrion of flesh, whatsoever thing is
pleasant in the body, be it quickness of sense, agilitie, color, or beauty,
it has it all of the presence of the soul in it, the soul again suppose
glorified in heaven yet rests not in full contentment till it be revnit^d
again with the body, For ^uen the glorified soul rests not in full
contentment, so long as it wa^ts the bod Ber* tract. de diligendo deum.
declaring thereby, that without it, it cannot be perfited. Consortium enim
carnis spiritus non requireret, si absque illa consummaretur, The soul would
not desire the fellowship of flesh, if without it, it could be perfited, but
God has so provided that souls without their bodies, Ibid.
nec velint, nec valiant consummari, neither will nor can be consummat: And
therefore is it that the souls, while they have their bodies desire not to want
them, and while they want them, are not content, till again they receive them.

And of all this we are warned, Vhat great need there is to prepare our selves
to die with willingness
what great need we have to prepare our selves in time, with willingness to
remove out of the body: for since the Apostle protests, that it was grievous to
him to suffer the want of his body, we may easily think, that in regard of
our greater infirmities, it will be much more grievous unto us, and therefore
are we to endeavor by grace to make our selves willing to die, since by nature
we are so unwilling to it: And to this end let us reverence the working of our
God, For this cause God seasons to his children the pl^asurs of their life with
bitter pains.
who seasons the pleasures of our life with many pains, and gives us much
bitterness, as Nahomi spoke of herself to abate the comfort of our beauty,
while as by heavy troubles and crosses, he makes our life unpleasant, and our
bodies a burden to our selves. This the Lord does for no other end, but that
we may be made content willingly to quit our bodies for a time, whereas other
way, if they continued in their vigor, and health, we would be loath to want
them.

That mortality might be swallowed up. Yet the Apostle wishes not to k^epe the
body with the sin and mortality of the body.
The Apostle makes clear in these words, that which he has spoken before
obscurely, he wishes so to enter into life, if it might please the Lord, that
he went not to it by the way of mortality, but so that mortality might be
swallowed up of that life: he desires not then, to keep still the body, and
sin and death in the body, this were to put on a garment of immortality, upon
the rotten rags of mortal flesh, this were to desire to be glorious without,
while in the mean time filthy rottenness, and corruption is within, the
Apostle craves no such thing neither indeed can any such thing be, but his
desire is so to have his body preserved, and translated into that life, that
sin in the body, But so that sin and mortality might be swallowed up in the
body by that life, as at length it shall be.
and mortality flowing from sin were swallowed up, in such sort that no
footestep neither of the one, nor of the other were ^emaining in the body. And
this desire also at the length will be performed in all the children of God,
when ^his triumphant song shall be put in their mouths, O Death where is thy
Sting, 1 Cor. 15.55.
OF Grave where is thy victory, The Sting of Death is Sin, the strength of
Sin is the Law: But thanks be to God who has given us victory through our
Lord Jesus.

The excelle^sy of the life to come, it shall not leau^ any remanent of sin
or death in the body.
Again we are to mark here the excellency of that life, whereunto we are
begotten again, that it is such a life as shall swallow up all mortality, and
not suffer so much as any antecedent, or consequent of death to remain in us:
The Apostle says that death has reigned from the days of Adam, like a
tyrant, swallowing up in the wide mouth and gulf of mortality, al
generations, that have been sensyne, like the great depth of the Ocean,
supping up in her bosom, Death like a tyrant has devoured al since Adam, but
shall be devoured by that life.
all the rivers of the earth: but there will be a change for that life, for which
we hope, shall at length swallow up Mortality, and death in her bosom, all the
pains and dolors that goes before it, all the rottenness and corruption that
follows after it: Revel 21.4
yea not so much as a tear shall be left in the face of Gods children, far les
shall any remanents of that poison wherewith Satan infected our nature be left
in it, the Lord shall so illuminate us with his light, that no darkness shall
be left in us, he shall so revive, and quicken us with his life, that death
shall utterly be abolished, and he shall so refresh us with the joy of his
countenance, that all sorrow shall fly away, This is expressed by the
similitude of a little water turned in to wine.
yea so wonderful shall the change be, that as a drop of water powered into a
great quantity of Wine, does lose the v^ry nature of it, ^^r. ser. de diligendo
Deo.
dum and saporem vini inauit and colorem, and takes on it both the taste and
color of the Wine: so shall all humane cogitation, and affection, cease from
that which now it is, the Lord shall so replenish us, that he shall become all
in all unto us, he shall make us pertakers of the divine nature, and
transchange us into the similitude of his own Image.

And this also should uphold us against our natural fear of death: Comfort
against the fear of death.
Now we go to life, but through death, and we leave behind us for a time, a
dear pledge in the power of death; for death like unto a cruel monster^ bytes
from us in the by-passing, the half of us, to wit, the body, wherefore Mors a
mor su nomen accepit, said Augustine, because one part it bytes away, and
another it leaves behind it, but at length, when the day of our full victory
shall come, and the course of the battle changed, not a part of death only
shall be devoured, but altogether it shall be swallowed up in victory.

VER. 5. And he who has created us, etc.


LEast it should seem, He proves that this desire which he had, was no vain
desire by two reasons.
that the Apostle, in that which he has said before, were carried away with a
vain desire of that which shall never come to pass, he does now prove by two
arguments that it is no vain desire but such as at the length shall be
fulfiled both in him and all the rest of the children of God.

1. First because by Gods ordinance we are appointed to that immortal li^e,
both in the first and second creation.
The first argument is taken from Gods ordinance and appointment, the Lord says
he, has appointed us to immortality and life, and therefore of necessity we
must obtain it, for it is not possible that the Lord can be frustrate or
di^apointed of his end. If we look to the first creation, we were created to
the Image of God and consequently to be immortal, for immortality is a part of
the image of God, and if we look to the second creation, this same shall be
more manifest, for this cause did Christ die for us, that we might live
eternally with him, and certainly his death was in vain, if that life which he
has conquest unto us, did not at the length overcome all mortality and death
in us.

But there is yet greater comfort in this argument, Neither^ has God only
appointed us to that end, bu^ also by his own working in us perfils us to it.
as it is proposed by the Apostle, for he shows us, that not only are we by
Gods ordinance appointed to this end, but that the Lord also by his effectual
working in us, aduaunces us to the same end, for so the word (...) which
here the Apostle uses imports a present action of our God, perfiting in us our
salvation against all impediments, In the first creation, when once he began,
he continued working ay, and while he finished it, and no intervening
impediment could stay him from the perfiting of his purpose: He finished the
first creation against al impediments, so shall he do the second.
it pleased him in six days to absolve it, in every one whereof he made
something to be, which was not before, but til he had done all which he would,
he rested not, so is it in the work of our new creation, he has begun it
and we may be sure he will make an end; In one day he might, if he had willed,
perfetly have regenerate us, but pleases him in many days, and by degrees to
do it, always we are sure that neither Satan's malice, nor corruption of our
Nature, can stay him from finishing that which he has begun, The same God
who first command^d light to shine out of darkness, is he who has shined in
our hearts to give us the light of the glory of God, 2. Cor. 4.6.
in the face of Jesus Christ, and he first made us of dust, giving life and
beauty to that which was dead and without form, has taken in hand through
death and misery to perfect us to eternal life.

Comfortable i^ it to us that the certainty of our life stands in Gods purpose
which cannot be altered.
The certainty then of our glorification stands neither in us nor in our
desires, but in the stability of the purpose of the unchangeable God, of the
which it is not possible that he should be disappointed, as to man many a time
he proposes to himself an end of his actions, whereof he is frustrate, he
builds a house and dwells not in it, he plants a Vineyard, and e^tes not the
fruit thereof, he betrothes a wife and another marries her, Esa. 46.10.
but the counsel of the Lord shall stand, The Lord of hoasts has determined
it, and shall disanull it, his hand is stretched out and who shall turn it
away? will Satan, will sin, will death keep us from that glory, whereunto God
has appointed us? No, no, it is not possible: what the Lord has said, he will
do, blessed be the holy name of the Lord for ever, who has locked up our
salvation, and made it sure in his own unchangeable purpose.

This should uphold us against Satan's temptations.
It is true indeed that Satan is a restless tempter of all the children of
God, he does what he can to impede the work of our salvation, but let us be
comforted, he fights not against us, but against the Lord, let us therefore in
the strength of our God fight against him, and we shall be sure to overcome him,
only remember that as in some temptations he is to be resisted, as when he
tempts us to sin, either by presumption, or desperation, so in other
temptations he is to be despited, What a shameless tempter Satan is.
and rejected, as when he dare suggest that unto others, the contrary whereof
he believes himself, as namely that there is not a God, nor a judgment to
come, in others again, he is to be s^orned, as not worthy of an answer, as
when he charges Gods children with those things, which they never did, as he
can craftily abuse their fantasy to troble the peace of their mind: for he
that will answer every shameless assertion of Satan, shall not have leave to
do any other thing.

Satan was the enemy of gods glory, ere ever he became the enemy of o^r
salvation.
But in all these, as I said, let us hold fast our former ground of comfort;
that we fear not for him, that is against us, but stand sure, considering that
the Lord is with us, he that is the enemy of our peace, is also an enemy of the
glory of God, yea which is very comfortable, he was an enemy to God first, ere
ever he became an enemy to us, and it is only for the hatred he has to the
Lord our God, that he hates us, seeking to deface the glory of God, which
shined clearly in the first creation, but more clearly in the second creation
of man, but all in vain, for the Lord shall confound him, Rom 16.
and trample him shortly under the feet of his Saints.

But w^ are not to regard him, seeing God has taken in hand to work the work
of our salvation.
And hereunto also tends it, that the Apostle as he said before, that God is
the builder of our house which we have in heaven, so now he says that God
creats and perfits us unto it, these two joined together, 'render us most sure
comfort, that the Lord has not only prepared a Kingdom for us, but also
prepares us for it: he reserues in heaven, says Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 1.
an inheritance for us, and reserues us also in earth for it, thus all is of
him, both the place of our glory, and the grace, by which we come to it, that
the praise of all may return unto himself alone.

Who has also given us the earnest of the Spirit. 2. He proves it by the
earnest of the spirit which God has given us up (...) his word.
The second argument by which the Apostle proves, that the desire of
immortality in the godly is no vain desire, is here, that God hat^ not only
in his word promised to give it, but has also thereupon given us the earnest
of his Spirit, and therefore of necessity it must be performed, for God is not
as man, that he shouldlye or repent, the Lord is faithful, and will do as he
speaks.

Without this earnest of the spirit we can have no surety of our salvation.
This is the greates^ argument of comfort that we have in this life to sustain
us: It is indeed much, that we have the word, the promises, and the Oath of
God, sounded in our ears, and that we have the sacraments, as the seals of
God presented to our ears, but none of these can make us sure of a better life
after this, unless with them we have received the earnest of the spirit into
our hearts:

By the works and word of God we may know that universal covenant, There is
a covenant of God ^which man knows by his works, another by his word only,
the third by his word and Spirit.
which God has made with all mankind, that he w^ll not drown the worl^ again
with waters, for as God in his word has promised it, so has he also set his
rainebow in the firmament for a witness to confi^me it: By the word and
Sacraments, all that are in the visible Church may know that special cauenant,
which God has made with his adopted children, but that this same covenant of
grace is particularly bound up with thee, thou can not know except with the
Sacraments, thou have also received the spir^t.

Four things to be considered in this argument.
Now to make this comfort the more sensible unto us, we are here to consider
these four things: first, what is meant here by this Spirit, Secondly why is
it called an earnest, Thirdly how is it received, Fourthly whereby may we know,
whether we have received it or not.

By the Spirit here we understand that special grace of the holy Spirit, 1.
that is meant by the Spirit, to wit, that special grace of the Spirit, by which
Gods children are renewed and confirmed.
by which the Lord renews, strengthens, stablishes, and confirms his own
children, which for the purging virtue that is in it, to make clean them who
receive it, is compared to fire and water, and for the corroboratins, and
strengthening virtue that it has, is compared to holy ointment and for the
virtue it has to stablish and confirm our hearts against all doubting, is
caled, the earnest the Seal, and the (...)

How this grace of (...) spirit is called the earnest of the spirit, for two
causes.
And this grace of the spirit, is called the earnest of the spirit, first for
the measure, next for the nature and use thereof: for now we have it in a small
measure in comparison of that, which we shall receive hereafter: And we are to
observe it against the customable policy of Satan, who casts up to Gods
children the smalnes of their faith, love, and other graces of the spirit, of
purpose to drive them to despair, as if they had no grace at all, because it
is but small and little, The first is because that now we have it but in small
measure.
which they have, but we are to remember against him, that the best measure of
grace we have in this life, is compared to an earnest penny: we will not
therefore faint because now we have not the fullness, but rather will be
comforted, knowing assuredly that the Lord, who now has given us the earnest,
will afterward give us the principal, for the Kingdom of God in us proceeds
to perfection, from small beginnings, and therefore is the grouth thereof
compared by our Lord to the grouth of a little grain of mustard seed, which in
the beginning is small, but by time increases to an high tree.

Yet the small beginning of grace we have, is not small in Satan his ei^s yea
more then he is able to quench.
And truly that same little beginning of grace which god has wroght in us,
howsoever Satan extenuates it, and labors to make it seem little in our eyes,
yet is it not small in our own eyes, but much more the^ he would with to be in
us, and therefore does he what he can utterly to quench it, but in vain and
this same seed of grace in us how little soever, yet is it blessed of God, and
shall grow and increase to cast Sacan utterly out of that Kingdom, which once
he possessed in us, for if the beginnings of grace enable us to resist Satan,
shall not the perfection thereof much more enable us to oue^come him.

Now the nature and use of the earnest is, The next is in ^egard of the use
thereof, which is to bind ^ oath the giver and receiver.
as we know, to bind both the giver and receiver, the giver is bound by it to
stand to his word and promise, whats'euer that he has made, the receiver
again is bound to stand to the condition, whereupon he received it: and here we
are admonished that if on Gods part, we would have his earnest valid to bind
him to stand to his promises, we must on our part declare, that they are
forcible to bind us to stand to our promised duties: But alas in this
generation, men live as if the Lord were only bound to be merciful to them,
and they were not bound to be serviceable to him, but it were free to them to
live as pleases them. The Lord give us wise and understanding hearts, and
sanctified memories to remember it, as often as our enemies would solicit us to
transgress the commandments of our God, that by the bond of creation, by the
right of redemption, by our oath in baptism, by receiving the earnest of God
in our regeneration, beside innumerable other obligations, we are bound
servants to the Lord our God, with a solemn renuntiation of the Devil, the
world and the flesh.

3. How this Spirit is given and received. The giver is God by the means of
his word.
As to the third, the giving and receiving of this Spirit: it is certain that
the giving is every where ascrybed to God, as Ephesians. 1.13.2. Cor. for the
ministry of grace, God has reserved it to himself: the Ministry of the word,
by which he gives grace, he has concredited to men. Moses gave the law, but
grace comes by Christ, John baptises with water, Jesus baptises with the holy
Ghost, Paul may plant and Apollo water but God must give the increase. Yet is
it much that it pleses god to give his grace by the ministry of the word, and
therefore if we love the one, we must not mislike the other: That same holy
spirit who commanded Philip to join himself to the Eunuchs Chario^, Act.
8.27.
to teach him, might by himself have taught the Eunuch, but he would do it by
the minstery of a man. And the Lord might have caused the Angel who^ he sent to
Cornelius to have taught him, Act. 10.1.
but he would do it by the ministry of Peter and notable is it, that while
Peter is preaching the holy Ghost descended upon Cornelius and his friends.
Thus we see how God, who gives the grace, gives it by the ministry of the word.

VVe^ must not despise the word, if we desire to reeiue the spirit. Romans
10.13.14.
God has linked in one chain all the means of salvation, and man should not
press to sunder them, they who call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved,
but how shall they call on him, on whom they believe not, how shall they believe
but by hearing? how shall they hear but by preaching? and how shall men preach
except they be sent. I will not so be content with preaching, that I neglect
prayer, because the ministry is of men, but the grace is from God; neither
will I so depend on prayer, that I despise preaching, for he can never receive
grace from God, who despises the means, by which it pleases God to give it.

Now as to the fourth whereof we promised to speak, 4. How may we know we
have received this spirit.
it is a point most necessary to be known for our comfort, how we may know
whether if or not we have received this spirit, there are many in this age who
have heard the Testimony of God in his Gospel, who as yet have not received
the seal and Testimony, A very lamentable thing indeed, for albeit the Gospel
be a doctrine of joyful tidings, yet what comfort can it bring to the^, Many in
this age have heard the Testimony of God, who neu^r received the seal ther^of.
who are not assured they belong unto the^.

The Apostle writing to the Corinthians thanks God not only for that they had
hard the word but because the testimony of God, was confirmed unto the^, and
suchl^ke to the ^ phefia^s, 1 Cor. 6. Ephesians. 1.13.
he thanks God not only for that they heard the word of truth, which is the
Gospel of salvation, but also for that after they had believed, they were
sealed with the holy spirit of promise: but truly as the disciples at Ephesus
being asked if they had received the holy Ghost answered we know not if there
be such a thing, Act. 19.2.
as an holy Ghost, so is it with many in this age who have heard the gospel*
which is the testimony of Gods love, if they be asked whether if or not they
have received the earnest of the Spirit, which is the seal, and confirmation
of the testimony, shall be found not to know what the earnest of the Spirit
is.

But now to show in one word how it may be known, The spirit is God his
seal, and he imprints the image of God in all who receives him.
whether if or not we have received him, let us remember that the same holy
Spirit, which is here called the earnest of God, is also called the seal of
God. Now the nature and use of a seal, is that it leaves behind it, in that
which is stamped by it, and impression of that same form, which it has in it
self. Even so also the Spirit of God imprints the very image of God in the
hearts of so many, as are sealed by him, in which sense the Apostle says, Romans
6.17
that the Romans were delivered unto a form of doctrine, whereunto from the
heart they had been obedient, thereby declaring, that even as wax is made
conform to the print of the seal, unto which it is de^iuered so the hearts of
the Godly are made conform to the Image of God, This proves that licentious
men have not receiu^d Christ's spirit.
so soon as they are stamped with his holy spirit: So that they who live
licen^iously after the lusts of the flesh, declare themselves to be of their
father the devil, because as our Savior said to the carnal Jews, they do
his works, and it is but a lying presumption, when the like to these men dare
say, that they have received the earnest of the spirit.

VER 6. Therefore we are bold.


Follows now the 2. conclusion, The second fruit of godliness, which the
Aopstle gathered of his General ground of Comfort, is
which the certain knowledge of that glory to come, wrought in the Apostle, to
wi^te a contentment with boldness to remove out of the body, that he might
dwell with the Lord: and this has in it more t^en is in the former, for where
in the 1. he protested only he had a desire to that glory, yet so that he had
no will to want the body: A willing contentm^ to remoo^^ out of the body.
but now he goes further, considering that he was not able to enjoy them both
together, he protests he was gladly content to remove out of the body, that he
might dwell with the Lord. This meaning of the words shall be clear, if
after the sixth verse we read the eight, passing by the parenthesis, which is
in the seventh verse.

Of our Christian confidence in death.
The word the Apostle uses here, signifies such a boldness as stout-hearted men
use to set against great dangers, for where there is no cause of fear, where
can the praise of boldness be: there is then (will the Apostle say) matter of
great fear in death: I see before me a terrible deep and gulf of mortality,
through which I must go, many fearful enemies with whom I must fight before
I won to my Lord, What strong enemies we must fight withal that through
death we may won to our Lord
yet am I not afraid to encounter with them.

Against me is Satan with his principalities powers, and spiritual
wickedness, but I know that the seed of the woman has bruised the head of the
Serpent: Against me are a great multitude of my sins and the terrors of a
gilty conscience, but I know that Christ has once suffered for sins, 1. Pet
3 ^^ 8
the just for the unjust, that ^ee might bring us to God, so that now there is
no condemnation to t^em which are in him. Against me stands in my way dreadful
death, with the horrors of the grave, but I know my Lord has taken away the
sting of death and spoiled the grave of victory: Shall I then be afraid? No
certainly, but through the valley of death will I walk with boldn^s, ^ill I
come to the Lord my God.

And this boldness against death in the godly, Boldness of the Christian in
death, wherfrom proceeds it.
proceeds not only from the sure knowledge of a better life, but from the
present sense, and feeling of the same life begun in them, which they know
cannot be extinguished by death: Notable examples have we thereof in all ages,
to prove that it is no vain content, but the effectual power of God working
in his children.

The confident ^oldnesse of Ignatius in death.
Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, being brought to Rome in the third persecution
which was under Traian, gave a proof of his boldness for being condemned to
be cast to the beasts to be devoured by them, ^^en. lib. 5. cont. valent.
he gave this answer, nihil visibilium: nihil inuisibilium moror, modo
Christum acquiram, I stand says he, upon nothing visible, nothing invisible,
so that I may find and obtain the Lord Jesus, let fire come let the cross,
let beasts, let the breaking of my bones, the convulsion of my members, the
grinding of my body, yea let all the torments of Satan come upon me, I care not
for them so that I may enjoy the Lord Jesus.

And Policarpe who suffered in the fourth persecution under Aurelius Antoninus,
Eusebius. lib. 4. ca* 16. The confident boldness of Policarpus in death.
being brought to the place of execution, and desired by the Emperors Deputy
to blaspheme Christ, and he would let him go, answered: these fourscore and
six years, have I served Christ, and have found him a good Master to me, how
then can I curse my king who has saved me: But if ye will not (said the
deputy) I will cast thee to wild Beasts, who shall tear thee, Call them when
thou will (said the Martyr) it is fixed and determinat with me, that from good
things by repentance, I will never go back unto worse, But if ye fear not
beasts (said the Deputy) I shall bridle and danton you with fire: thou boasts
me said the Martyr with a fire, that burns for an hour, and shortly after
will be extinguished, but knows not that fire of the judgment to come, which
will burn for ever and ever, and then being brought to the fire, he was
filled with boldness, and hearty thanks giving* rejoicing that the Lord in
that day and hour had vouch^afed to receive him, in the number of his Martyrs,
to drink of the cup of his Lord Jesus Christ: Thus was he offered in a burnt
offering to the Lord, and no fear of death could be perceived in him.

The confident boldness of Basilius in death. Nazian. de vita Basil.
And the like Christian boldness was showed by Basil in that persecution under
Valens made by Modestus and Eusebius his Deputies: I will never (said he)
fear death, which can dono more but restore me to him that made me: all these
beside many other innumerable examples which might be alleged, if they be
compared with that great timiditie and fear, which is in us at the least
mention or appearance of death, may justly make us ashamed of that small
progress, which we have made in spiritual strength, Now in this time of so
clear a light, and plentiful grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Always. It is demanded if such boldness be in Gods children as is without all
fear.
But here least the Godly de discouraged, by reason of that fear of death,
which many a time they find in themselves, it is to be considered, if the
Apostle was always so bold that at no time he was fearful, or if such
confidence can be in any of Gods children, It is answered, fore^en our Savior
though he longd for death yet he suffered it not without fear.
as is without all vicissitude of fear, No surely for the same Apostle who
here reioices in his boldness pro^ests in an other place, that he had
fightings without, and terrors within: Yea our blessed Savior, albeit he
longed with a great desire to eat the passover, which was his last meal, and
after which immediately he knew his passion was to follow, yet when he entered
into the garden to his sufferings, he began also to be afraid, and proceeding
in fear he sweat blood and confessed that his soul was heavy unto the death.
Mar* 14.33 It is true there is no Comparison between his death and ours.
It is true there is no comparison between his death and ours, for he suffered
that death to be a satisfaction for our sins, and he alone trod the
winepresse of the wrath of God: but our death, neither is it a satisfaction for
sin, neither a stroke of the wrath of God, neither endure we it by our own
strength but are sustained in it by the spirit of our Lord, yet is it in such
fort made comfortable to us, that in some manner it is conformeable to his
death, Yet must our death someway be conformable to his, both in outward and
inward sufferings. Romans 8.
for so says the Apostle, that God has predestinate us to be conform to the
image of his son, and that not in heaven only, by rayning with him in glory,
but in earth also by carrying his image, and bearing of his Cross, both in our
life and death* and that not only by suffering the outward dolors of death,
caused by the separation of the soul and body, but also the inward fears and
terrors thereof, that so in our little measure tasting of that cup, whereof our
Savior drank before us, we might some way learn the great love he has
carried toward us.

So that we are not exempted from our own fears, And therefore shall we be
exercised with our own fears also.
wherewith in death after our small measure, God will have us exercised: which I
have marked, that we should not be discouraged with this tentation of the
fear of death, we may taste of it, but it shall not remain with us, for it is
certain, that in all Gods children faith shall prevail at length. and
confidence in Gods promises shall breed such bo^dnes, as shall cast out and
overcome all contrary fear in us.

What made the Apostle willing to remove out of the body
Knowing that while we are at home in, etc. In the end of this verse the
Apostle casts in two reasons which wrought in him, this confidence and
willingness to go out of the body, one is that so^ long as he was in the body,
he was absent from the Lord, another that removing out of the body, he knew he
should dwell with the Lord, the Apostle to express this, vse^two words, in the
original (...) which cannot be turned in to full significant speeches in our
languag, yet do they import thus much, that so long as we are here among our
own people in the body, we are absent from our people who are with the Lord.

So that he will here draw us to consider of two Cities, Of the two Cities or
Fellowshi^ of people whereof the one is in the earth the other in heaven.
two Countries, and two fellowships of people, whereof the one is in the earth,
the other in heaven, with the one we have fellowship so long as we are in the
body, and by expe^ience know, what are the comforts of our carnal kindred, of
our earthly country and city, but with the other we cannot have familiar
conversation, till we remove out of the body: And this also serves greatly, if
we consider it, to take from us our natural vnwilingnesse to d^e, the cause
whereof is, that we have no will to depart from our country, kindred and people:
Death is but a r^moving from a Burges-ship on earth to a better Burges-ship in
heaven.
but here we are taught that if it greiue us to depart from this people, it
should much more rejoice us to be gathered to that people, there is a better
Country, there a more glorious City, and a more excellent Burgeship, there is
that (...) whereof The Apostle, by which we are made free to greater liberties,
and privileges then any we can have here, and there is a kindred of people
sibber to us, and much worthier to be loved then that which is here, as the
heavens are more high and excellent then the earth. Oh that this light did a
way shine in our minds, that as often as we are troubled with the grief o^
Nature to forsake our people, which are on earth, we might be comforted by
grace, and made willing to go to our people which are in heaven.

Our life on earth is a Pilgrimage in heaven is our h^me.
For ^he Apostle co^paring these two together: he accounts our abiding here but
a Pilgrimage in respect of our remaining there, which is dwelling at home in
our own country, our best estate wherein we can be upon earth is but an absence
from the Lord: of all places in the world, a man naturally loves his native
country best, and of all parts of his country, he esteems, himself most
homely in his own house, and of all that is in his house, what has he nearer
to him then his own body, yet is it of truth, that not only in his own
Country, but even in his house, at his own fire, in his own bed, yea even in
his own body he is but a stranger, and therefore so should we live in it, as
ready to remove out of it, for here we have no continuing City.

If there were no more to make us loath this life, this is sufficient that it
holds us from God.
We are absent from the Lord. The loss that we sustain by our soiourning in
the body, the Apostle takes it up in few words, but very weighty, to wit, that
it keeps us absent from the Lord: and truly, if there were no more to sparre
us from the love of this life, yet this were enough that it holds us from the
Lord our God, whom above all, we ought to love most dearly, Nazianzen. de
cala. animae suae How the body is Remora Animae.
for this cause Nazianzen writing of the calamities of his soul, and of the
hindrances; which it has by the body, compares the body to that fi^h called
Remora, which retaynes the greatest Ship, notwithstanding she be under sail,
and makes her stand still: so is it with the body, that it presses down the
soul, and holds it back from the Lord, yea though her affection be intended
to be with the Lord, for no man can live in the body and see the Lord, Exodus 33.
and therefore like men oppressed, captiued and violently kept back from our
God, with whom feign we would be, should we live in the body, lamenting and
mourning with the Apostle, O miserable men that we are, Romans 7.
who shall deliver us from the body of death.

Again if this be the condition of the Godly that notwithstanding by faith
they have a most sweet fellowship with God, If even the godly in the ^^dy be
(...) from God, in what miserab^e absence a^e the wicked.
as ye shall afterward here, yet while they are in the body, they are absent
from God, in what miserable condition I pray you are the wicked, who being
without faith, are in a more fearful manner strangers from the life of God,
Ephe. 4.
Act. 17.
through the ignorance of God that is in them, for if even they who believe,
while they are in the body, are absent from the Lord, what shall we say, if the
(...) the Lord in this life, and will not know his way upon earth to walk in
it, shall against their will in the life to come, be banished from him and cast
into the utter borders of darkness, from his joyful face, from which most
unhappy condition the Lord deliver us: But as to our absence from ^od, it shall
shortly be recompensed with the most comfortable fruition of his presence, if
so be in the time of our absence, we so liueas ever present beforehim
studying to do his holy will that so we may be acceptable to him.

VER 7. For we walk by faith, etc.


BEcause he said before, We have now God present with us, but that presence is
absence in respect of that which is to come.
that in the body we are absent from the Lord, and it might have been
objected to him, how can this be, seeing not only with the rest of mankind
we live, and move, and have our being in him, but that this also, is the
particular privilege of a Christian, that he is the Temple and habitation of
God, wherein he dwells by his holy spirit, how then can we be said to be
absent from him. This doubt here in this Parenthesis he loses, by
distinguishing that presence of God which they enjoy, which are in heaven, from
that which we have who are on earth, showing that the most familiarpresence of
god, which we have on earth, if it be compared with that which we shall have in
heaven, is but absence from God, for we that are in the body, walk by faith,
where they that are out of the body enjoy him by sight, So that in this verse
we hauea brief description, both of our life who are militant here on earth,
and of theirs who are glorified and triumphant in heaven: we are walking, they
are resting, we believe, we look for the promised kingdom, but they do
presently enjoy it.

Here then we have three things to consider, Our l^fe on earth is a walking.
first how our life is ^ walking, secondly a walking by faith, thirdly how it
is not by sight. As to the first our best estate in this life is walking,
Seeing we are not yet at home to enjoy the sight of our fathers face, our next
best is to be walking homeward, they are blessed who are in Patria, and in the
second room blessed also who are in via ad pa^riam. Take heed we be in the
right way otherway our life is not a walking but a ^andring.


And here we are admonished to look to the ^ourse of our life, that we be
surewe are in the right way, otherway our life is not a walkin^ by faith but a
wandering in infidelity, John 14.6.
the way is Christ, I am the way, the verity and the life: a wonderful secret,
quod ipse rex patriae f^ctus est via ad patriam, that the king of the Country,
is become the way to the Country: therefore since he is life, we must walk to
him, since he is the way, and the verity, we must walk in him, and be in
him, and then do we walk in him, when we believe in him, and keep his
commandment declyning evil, following good using things indifferent to the
gory of God, and edification of our neighbor, if in any of these three we
fail, we are to know 'it is a step out of the way unto the which again we
have to return by repentance.

How our life is a walking by faith.
By faith. The second thing here is that we walk by faith, and this we are
said to do first, because faith by the light of the word lets us see the way
to Gods face, secondly because it allures our hearts, and makes them willing to
enter into it, thirdly it confirms us against all weariness that may arise of
the longsomnesse of our journey, though we cannot come to the end thereof, as
soon as we would, faith makes us through patience to wai^e for it; As likewise
it s^staines us against all impediments and offenses that are in the way, for
it is as a staff in the hand of a Pilgrim, which so soon as our journey is
ended, we shall lay from us, or faith shall cease, when we shall take up the
Lord by sight.

And not by sight, which is not simply spoken but in comparison.
Not by sight. The third thing in this description of ou^ life here on earth,
is that we walk not by sight, that is, not by such sight as they have, who
have ended their walking, and rest in the Lord, other way we are not to think
that faith by which we walk, leads us blindlings and without light, For
here w^ ^re not wit^out the sight of God
or that in this earth, we have no sight of God.

For first here he is seen in his works: the invisible things of God, Romans
1.
that is his eternal power and Godhead, 1. First we see God in his works.
are seen by the creation of the world forthis numerosity of so many kinds of
creatures, and the variety of their forms what else it, but as the Plato niques
called every beautiful created thing Splendour summi illius boni, or as Bernar^
calls them, Ber. in Cant* Ser. 31.
Radij Diuinitatis, monstrantes quod vere sit, a quo sunt, quid autem sit, non
plane definientes.

Secondly it pleased God by sundry apparitions to show himself to men from the
beginning, 2. The Fathers have seen him ^y sundry Visions.
appearing unto them, Non sicuti est sed sicut dignatus ^^t, for if they had
seen him as he is, then al of them had seen him after one manner, because he
is one, and this sight of God, was also external being exhibited Per imagines
forinsecus apparentes, Ibid.
seu voces sonantes.

3. In his Church he is seen by his word.
Thirdly it has pleased him in more comfortable manner, to reveal himself to
his Saints by his word, by which they behold his beauty in his temple, Psalm.
27.4 1. Cor. 3.18
and with open face see his image as it is represented to them, in the myrror
of the Gospel, and are transformed into the same.

And last of all he is seen of his own children by inward contemplation, His
Saints see him by inward Co^temp^ation.
quum per seipsum dignatur invisere animam quaerentem se, when by himself
without external means he vouchsafes to visit the soul that seeks him, and
this sight is Eo excellentior quo interior, the more excellent then the r^st
because it is more inward, for then is he seen in his favor and beauty, then
is he felt in the sweetness of his love, then is the mind so illuminate with
his light, that all other beauty in the world, seems but deformity in respect
of it, and the heart is so enamored with his love, that these things, which
were most dearly beloved of it before, become now loathsome like dung unto it.

Yet Certain it is, that the most excellent fight of God we have in this
life, Yet this sight if it be ^ompared ^^th the ^ight we shall get, is no sight.
Aug. de Consen* Evang.
if it be compared with that which is to come, is not worthy the name of
sight* homini enim mortalem vitam adhuc agenti, non protest contingere, vt
dimoto ac discusso omni nubilo phantasiaru^ corporalium, seremissim^
incommutabilis veritatis luce potiatur, it cannot said Augustine befall to a
man living in the body, to enjoy that most clear light of unchangeable truth,
in such sort, that al clouds of earthly fantasies and carnal conceptions be
chased away and removed from him, and hither tends the like saying of Gregory,
Gregory.
Rerum similitudinibus spec^lando non inuolui angelicae puritatis est, in
contemplation to have our mind free from earthly shadows in similitudes,
belongs to the purity of Angels, but not to man upon earth.

And the sight of faith which presently we have lets us see a better to come.
Nevertheless not only does faith presently open the eyes of our understanding
to behold in some sort the riches of that glorious inheritance, but in like
manner prepares them for that greater sight thereof, which is to be revealed
unto us, fides enim luce^^ non extinguit, sed custo^it, lucem temperat oculo
caliganti: and oculum praeparat luci, for faith does not extinguish light, but
preserues it, it tempers the light to our divine eye, and lets us look to it
through a veil only, least over great a glance of light should strike us
blind, And prepares also the eye of our mind for it.
and again prepares the eye for that light, which more clearly after is to be
reveled unto us. Ber. in Cant. Sermon 31.^
Quod videt Angelus hoc mihi seruat vmbra fidei, fidei sinu repositum, tempore
suo reuelandum, That which the Angel presently sees in heaven, is kept for me
wound up in the shadow of faith to be revealed in the dew time

The order app^inted by God, is that by faith we walk to sight, by ^earing to
seeing.
Always for our instruction, we must learn here to keep the order appointed by
God, that from faith we walk to light, we must hear the Lord before we can
see him, we must believe before we enjoy him, if we will not hear him, and
by hearing believe in him, and believing in him, walk toward him, we shall
never see him in mercy, nor come where he ^s to rest with him.

And again, A corroboratiue against such temptations as come from the world.
this sentence being laid up in our hearts, will serve to strengthen us
against the manifold temptations of Satan, by which he would allure us to the
love of worldly things Our life here on earth is a walking by Faith, and Faith
is of things which are not seen, and therefore should we not suffer our selves
to be snared and entangled with the lou^ of any thing, which falls under the
eye, nor diuerted by any thing, that is present, from the love and constant
expectation of better things which are to come.

Seeing we walk^ by fa^^h, no show of worldly pleas^re fal^ing under ou^ sight
should all^re us.
But as often as the world comes in to make a show of her pleasures to us* as
Satan presented to our Savior a show of the kingdoms of the earth, let us
remember this for an answer, We walk not by sight, but by faith, Let them be
delighted with such things ^s falls under natural ^ense, who have no hope of
better. Mine heart is above all these things which fall under the eye, What
ever the world can offer to our sense, is less then that which we hope to see.
whatsoever can be offered to mine eye, sounded in mine ear, or made
delightful to my taste, it is less then that whereat I would be, and which I
believe certainly to enjoy* I will suspend the satisfaction of mine eyes, till
the day come wherein I shall see my reedeemer, Job. 19.27.
whom with these eyes of mine I shall behold, and none other for me. Now I lou^
him and rejoice in hi^ sometime with joy v^^ speakable and glorious but shall
never be content till I see him, and fully enjoy him.

A threefold precept to be observed in using the things of this world.
And because so long as we are here, natures necessity compels us to use these
things which fall under our sense, let us in using of them observe this
threefold precept: First, that we use this world as if we used it not, 1. Cor.
7.3.
for the fashion of this world goes away: Secondly, 1. Cor. 6.12.
remember that all things are lawful, but all are not ex^^edient. And thirdly,
^^at of these which are expedient, Ibid.
it is not good thereby to come under the power of any thing, but to use the
Service of the Creature, and to keep the heart vnthralled with the servitude
thereof: to use in such sort things that are lawful, that we never lose for
love of them, The wicked walk by sight here and not by Faith, they shall never
see better things nor these they see now.
these which are more expedient, is a rare, and singular grace of God.

Last of all, this sentence being turned over let us see the contrary miserable
estate and disposition of the wicked they walk by sight, and not by faith,
they have no hope of better things, then these are, which are presently they
enjoy, they have their portion in this life, they have received their
consolation here, another heaven then that they have on earth, can they not
look for: And how lamentable their estate is, two things among many, The
Vanity of worldly pleasures discovered in two things.
may declare unto us, first that these same pleasures, wherein they delight, if
they be continual, are turned into ^^ines: and therefore man craves to be
refreshed always with an exchange, for that which now most earnestly he longed
for, in a short time becomes loathsome unto him, so that he is forced to reject
it, and make choice of another. Secondly grant that they could continue
without pain, yet can they not satisfy the soul of man, Eccles. 1.8
and this, as we are taught by Solomon, we find it in experience, for the eye
is not satisfied with seeing nor the ear with hearing: Miserable therefore are
they who set their delight upon such comfortless comforts.

VER. 8. Nevertheless we are bold etc.


The Apostle returns to finish his second conclusion.
IN this verse the Apostle returns to finish his second conclusion, which began
at the sixth verse, and ends in this eight, it depends on the former this way,
albeit we have no such clear sight of these things whereunto we are called,
as after this we shall get, but only walks toward them by faith, yet for
all that we are bold: or Nevertheless we are bold, etc.

Our first lesson arising of this particle here is this, How the impedime^ts
of our faith tends to the greater commendation thereof.
the more impediments we have to stay us from believing, the greater is and
shall be the praise of our faith, if notwithstanding of the^ all we continue
in believing: There are two great tentations that impugn our faith, one is the
want of good, B^ering of present evil, whereof we wou^^ feign be relieved, our
faith is tried.
which God has promised, but we see it not: the other is the presence of
evil, whereof now we would feign be relieved, and yet it lies still upon us.
1. Pet. 1.
Concerning this last, it is a notable saying the Apostle has, we are now in
heaviness through manifold tentations, that the trial of our faith, being much
more precious then Gold, when it is tried by fire, might be found to our
praise, honor, and glory, at the appearing of Christ, there we see that the
end of evils which now are suffered to lie upon us, is the trial of our
faith, and tha^ for our own greater praise, and glory: for where no fire is,
how can gold be purged, where no trouble is, how can faith be tried, and where
faith is not yet tried, how can it be praised.

And as to the other, By the Delay of good things promised which feign we would
have our faith is also tried.
when these good things which God has promised, are not seen of us but hidden
from our eyes, and delayed to be performed unto us, this is also for the
trial of our faith, for where we see salvation, what praise ^s it to believe:
but where we can neither see nor feel th^^e good things which God has
promised, but rather are exercised with contrary terrors and fears, if yet
we still cleave to the truth of the wordofgod, that certainly is an argument
of a great faith, It is greatest faith to believe where least is felt or seen.
and such was the faith* of that woman of Canaan, who being not only refused,
but as it were disdainefully rejected by Christ, did so trust unto the truth of
Gods word, that constantly she looked for mercy, at the hand o^ Christ, who
strongly by word had denied it unto her, and therefore received this
commendation in the end, O woman great is thy faith, Thus we see how in ^he
children of God, all these hindrances which we have to stay us from
believing, do so much the more commend, and approve our faith unto God.

We love rather. Of two loves we see in the Apostle, Of two loves the
stronger ouercomes the wea^^ in the Apostle.
the stronger ouercomming the weaker, he loved his body, and protested before,
he had no will to want it, but he loved the Lord Jesus better then his body,
and therefore perceiving that he cannot now enjoy them both together, for while
he was in the body, he was absent from the Lord, he is now very well content to
remove out of the body, that he might dwell with the Lord: there is nothing
naturally a man loves more then his body, nothing he fears more then death,
because it imports a dissolution of his body, but where the love of Christ is
strong in the heart, it casts out not only the fear of death, but over comes
also all other love whatsoever.

And here have we a point of holy wisdom discovered unto us, The readi^st
way to be quit of the pertur^ation of our affections, is to set them upon the
right^ objects.
by which we may cure that unquietness of mind, which arises in us of the
wandering of our affections after secondary objects: the best way to remedy it,
is to set our affections upon the right objects, if the love of the creature
have snared thee, set thy love on the Lord, and bend thy affection toward him,
and the other shall not troble thee: If the fear of men terrify thee, learn
to sanctify the Lord God in thine heart, make him thy fear, and and thou shall
not fear what flesh can do unto thee: and if the care of the world disquiet
thee, cast thy care upon God, and labor by continuance in prayer, how to feel
the sense of his love toward thee in Christ, and thou shall find, that where
the one care like thorns did prick thee with sorrows the other shall bring
contentment, peace, and joy unto thee.

But to return, The strong love of Christ that was in the Apostle condemns
the cold love that we have to ^im.
when we consider this strong love of Christ, that was in the Apostle, we we
have great cause to be ashamed of that weak and little love, which in our
hearts we feel, toward our LORD: how many this day profess that they love
him who for his love will not want the superfluities of this life, and what
hope then is there that for his sake, they will lay down the life it self, How
is it likely we will give our life for him who will not quit the superfluities
of our life for him.
if smaller crosses be unpleasant to us, and his love be not so strong in us,
as to make us rejoice in them: how shall death be welcomed of us, wherein there
is a concurse of all crosses into one: We must therefore learn, for the love
of Christ to inure our selves with the beginnings of mortification, not only
to slay the unlawful affections, but also to want ou^ wills even in those
things which are lawful: that so by degrees we may be enabled willingly to want
the body and all that ever we loved in the body for Jesus Christ's sake.

To remove out of the body. How death is discribed in regard of her effects
toward the body, and toward the soul.
Two manner of ways in this treatise does the Apostle discribe death, first in
regard of that which it does to the body, and then he calls it a dissolution
of our earthly Tabernacle: Next in regard of that which it does to the soul,
and so he calls it a removing out of the body, so that if we will think of
death, as the spirit of God does teach us, there is no cause why we should be
discouraged with it.

The death of the wicked is not a voluntary, but a compelled removing.
Again we see hear, that the death of the godly is a voluntary remoouing out
of the bcdy, to dwell with the Lord, as to the wicked like as they live in
disobedience, so they die in disobedience, their death is involuntary, that
which is spoken of that one wicked rich man, Luke 12.20
O fool this night they will take thy soul from thee, is true in all the
wicked, their spirits are taken from them against their will, Cyprian de mortal.
exeunt istinc necessitatis vinculo, non voluntatis obsequio, whereas the Godly
willingly commend their spirits into the hands of GOD, offering up both soul
and body to him in death, in a full free and voluntary oblation.

This difference between the death of the Godly and wicked men may be
commodiously shadowed by the fourth coming of Pharao his Butler, This
different death of the godly and (...), is sh^dowed in the ^ourth c^mming of
Pharao his Butler and B^ker out o^ prison
and Baker out of prison, whereof the one knew he should be restored to serve
the king his Master, and therefore went out with joy, the other knew by Joseph's
Prophesies he should be hanged within three days, and therefore if it had
been give to his choice, would still have remained in prison, rather then to
have come forth to be hanged: even so is it with the godly, who are certified
before hand, that they are received into favor, and after death shall have
pla^^ to stand about the throne of God, there to serve him by praising him
continually, are well content when the Lord calls them to remove out of the
body* whereas the other having received a sentence of condemnation within
themselves, no marvel they go out of the body, with fear and trembling, like
malefactors going from the prison, to the place of execution, vincti and
impliciti catenis variorum peccatorum ad terrib^le illud iudicium trahuntur.
Chrisost in Math. (...).


Or if the wicked die willingly, they die impatiently not for any love to be
with Christ.
Or otherway if at any time the wicked be willing to dye, it is not for any
love or knowledge they have, that they shall be with the Lord, but either else
because they are impatient of such heavy crosses as are upon their bodies, or
else because they cannot endure the terrors of a just accusing conscience, for
these causes oftentimes they have beeene forced to seek relief, by making
their refuge to the bosom of death, (...) relief (...) wicked get by putting
hand in them selfs is no better nor if a man, ^o save himself from water should
leap in the fire.
as did Saul, Achitophell and Judas, but all in vain, for by new sins the
worm of conscience is further wakened, but not extinguished, the breath of
natural life, thereby maybe suffocate, but the giltinesse of an evil
conscience is increased: so that in this their refuge of vanity they find no
more ease to their weary spirits, then if a man to eschew death by water,
should leap into the fire, which is no other thing in effect, but to exchange a
smaller pain with a greater, it being most certain, that all the pains which
wicked men sustain in this life, if they be compared with the pains of Hell,
Pains of this life compared with pains of hell, are but like reeke going
before the fire.
are but like unto reeke or smoke, which goes before the fire. If in the body
they may not abide the smoke of Gods wrath, how shall they abide to be burnt
with the fire thereof in hell, Yet in this confused and perturbed estate go
they out of the world, finding and feeling they are not well where they are,
and forwarned by their conscience, that a worse abides them.

Two things then are requisite to make us willing, He cannot remove willingly
and well out of the body, who finds not a hand behind him to put him out, and
another before him to receive him.
with comfort to remove out of the body. The first is, that the sense of our
misery, makes us weary of this life, seeing here we are absent from the Lord
the next is, that the hope of a better makes us willing to remove, knowing
that we shall dwell with the Lord: The one is as a hand behind us to put us out
of the world: The other is as a hand stretched out before to receive us into a
better: if the sense of misery put us not out, we shall be lik Israel,
delighting rather ot bide under banishment in Babell, then to follow Gods
calling to Canaan: and again if the sense of mercy make us not certain of a
better we shall be like them, who finding a hand behind them to put them out,
but none before them to take a gripe of them and pull them over, cannot but in
most miserable manner fall down into that pit, and gulf, which is between
the two prepared for the damned.

Souls of good men removing out of the body dwelt with the Lord.
And dwell with the Lord. Here we see that the souls of the godly after their
remoouing out of the body, have their dwelling with the Lord, it is not then as
some suppose, that the souls have any other resting place but heaven, wherein
they are till Christ his second coming, with which wrong opinion some of the
learned have bin stained, whose names with their nakedness we delight not to
discover, but as the Israelites did to the Egyptians, we will borrow their
Gold and Silver, and use it as our own, leaving their Claye and Brick unto
themselves, and will rest upon this most sure word of the Lord, that our Souls
remoouing out of the body, shall dwell with the Lord. What our Savior said to
that Convert on the Cross, belongs also after Death, to all the rest of his
children, This night thou shall be with me in Paradise, Athanas. Quest. 19.
Non enim propter solam latroni^ animam, Christus Deus noster paradis um
aperuit, Sed ob reliquas etiam Sanctorum animas.

Again, Mourning therefore should not be made for them who are departed, but
for our se^ues who r^main
we learn here that seeing Saints departed are but flitted to dwell wi^h the
Lord, we should so moderate our mourning for them, that we lament not their
estate, seeing they have changed for a better, but our own, who sustain by
their departure a twofold loss: First that such notable instruments of
comfort, First because they were pleag^s of Gods f^uour to us.
as have bin pledges to us of Gods favor should be taken from us, such was
the mourning of the Faithful for S. Stephen, Acts 8.
and of the Elders of Ephesus, A^ ^0.
for Saint Paul, when he told them, that they should see his face no more.
Next because the taking away of good men is a forerunner of evil days.
Secondly, because the taken away of godly men is a forerunner of evil days
to follow, the godly are as Pillars in a City, Esa. 57.
like as Lot was in Sodom, to hold back the judgment of God from it, thus
we see how in the death of others beloved of us, the causes of mourning should
respect our selves, The mourning to be made for them should be (...) their
death not after it is David did. ^ Sam. 12.16.
and not them, and as for that which may concern them, if any cause of
mourning be, it should be before their death and not after it, as David did,
who when his child was stricken with the hand of God, he fasted and mourned for
him seven days together, but when he saw that the Lord would not be
entreated to spare him, his servants having told him that the child was dead,
then he arose, and refreshed himself with meat, teaching us that the best
time of mourning for those whom we love, is to mourn for them while they are
alive, that so we may entreat the Lord to spare them, or then to receive them
into his favor, and not to take them away in the continuance of his anger, But
we commonl^ begin not ou^ mourning, till the time of mourning ^e past.
but the contrary commonly is done by us, for then do we begin our mourning,
when the time of mourning for them is past, that is when the judgment is given
out, both upon their souls and bodies, which by no entreaty of ours can be
revoked.

Last of all, Comfortable is it that our (...) in heaven is called a dwelling:
for it shows
comfortable is it, that our estate after this life, is called a dwelling with
the Lord, it is not a soiourning in a tabernacle as here we are, but a
dwelling in an everlasting habitation, the Lord Jesus shall stablish us there,
1. That we shall never remove out of it. Revel. 3.12.
as well grounded pillars in the temple of our God, and we shall never any more
go out: That we shall have sufficient furniture of all good (...) it.
and again seeing that is the place of the dwelling of God with his Saints,
and of them with him, it offers to our consideration, that great variety of
good without any want which there abydes us: for if upon earth Men of power
have their dwelling places abundantly furnished with all necessary good, what
shall we look for in the dwelling house of our God, Psalm. 65.4.
Blessed is he whom thou chusest, and causest to come to thee, he shall dwell
in thy courts and we shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thine house: The
best creatures which serve us now, shall not get that honor, as to serve us
there, Revel. 21 23.
There is no need of the Sun, nor of the Moon to shine in that City, for
the glory of God does light it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, The Lord
himself shall be all things in all unto us, Bern. What can be lacking where
God shall be An^ma Animae, yea all things in all unto us.
In a word then Anima, Animae erit Deus, God shall be the soul of our soul,
he only shall move it, he only shall possess it with him only shall it be
delighted, filled, and fully satisfied: We conclude then with David, How
excellent is thy mercy O God, Psalm 36.78
therefore the children of men trust under the shadow of thy wings: They shall
be satisfied with the fatness of thine house, and thou shall give them drink
out of the rivers of thy pleasures for with thee is the well of life, and in
thy light shall we see light.

O what a love of God is here, discovered unto us, Angels made Apostasy from
God, and mercy never (...) to them to restore them, Apost^t man received to
mercy and set in the pace (...) which Apostat Angels fell without rec^uery.
Jude 6.
Man also made Apostasy from God, and mercy is both offered, and given unto
him to restore him: Angels left their habitation, and are now reserved in
chains under da^kenesse to the judgment of the great day, Man is translated
from the Kingdom of darkness, to be raised up to the place from which Angels
fell: And where that state of glory was not made sure to Angels, for they l^ft
their first estate, it is made sure to man, we shall so be placed there, that
we shall dwell there, never any more to be removed from it, so has the Lord
declared the riches of his mercy upon us, his holy name be praised therefore.

The ^^ole reasons which make the godly willing to remove out of the body are
taken up in three.
Now out of all this, let us tak up in one short Sum, the reasons which here
moved the Apostle and makes all the rest of Gods children willingly content to
remove out of the body, we reduce the^ to three. 1. The misery present.
First the misery under which weely while we are in the body, 2. The felicity
to come.
Next the Felicity to which we go, when we remove out of the body, 3. ^he
helps for the journey.
and thirdly the helps we have to carry us on in this journey, from the body
to the Lord: and these are not unlike those 3. motives, which made Jacob
willing to depart from Canaan, suppose it was the Land of promise, to the land
of Egypt, wherein he knew his seed should be afflicted, Shadowed in three the
like, which made Jacob willing to go from Egypt to Can^an.
1. the scarsity and famine which was in Canaan, Next the plenty that was in
Egypt, whereof Joseph his beloved son, was governor and dispenser living
there in great honor, notwithstanding that all his fathers house supposed him
to have been dead and rotten: and thirdly the oracle of God warrnting him to
go, and the Chariots which were sent by Joseph to help him in the journey,
but we have (as I said) three greater motives to make us willing to go from
this Egypt, a land of darkness, a house of vile servitude and bondage, to our
heavenly Canaan.

For 1. what have we here in this life, In this life is a fearful famine of
all good.
but a fe^refull famine and scarsitie of all things which are truly good, it
is not worthy of the name of good, which commonly among men is esteemed good,
(...) Psa^. ^.
non solum quia facilem habeat ad res contrarias conuer^ionem, se^ quod etiam
possessores suos meliores red dear non valeat, not only because it is easily
turned into a contrary evil, And the best things which are here makes not their
possessors batter.
but also for that it is not able to make the possessors there, of any better,
and what a good I pray you can that be, by which he is not made good that
possesses it, Beatus ille qui post illa non abiit, Ber.
quae assequi miserum est, quia possessa oner ant, amata inquinant amissa
crusiant: happy is he that walks not after these things, which to obtain is a
misery, because being possessed they burden us, being loved they defile us,
being lost they torment us, and truly no better are the best things which
grow here, in this land of our Pilgrimage and absence from God. Our life is
but an exchanging of many sorrows, we live in the body like Israel in the
Wilderness in danger to be sting'de every hour with fiery Serpents, like
Daniell in the Den, in danger to be devoured by Lions, like Lot in Sodo^, vexed
with the uncleanness which is within us in our selves, and without us in
others.

But were it so, But albeit good things were here, yet were they to be
exchanged for better.
that we had abundance of good things in this life, yet should webe content to
go from them, seeing we know that by so doing we shall exchange for a a better:
for even now while we are in by body, we may find the experience, that at no
time we have such joy in the spirit, as when by fervent prayer, and heavenly
contemplation, after a sort we are ravished, and transported out of the body,
to walk with God and have familiar conversation with him, whereas otherway
when the soul comes down from contemplation, to exercice her function by
external senses, toward these things which are below, then is she incontinent
disquieted with perturbations, How the soul is abused in the body.
so that she cannot look out by the eye, and not be infected, nor hear by the
ear. and not be distracted, nor touch by the hand, and not be defiled. Thus
if the soul take a view of the things of this world by the senses, a world of
strange cogitations are wakened in her, which quickly again euanishes, if the
soul forsaking the familiar use of the senses by continuance in prayer ascend
unto God, Tun^ anima non fallitur, Ambros. d^ bono mortis. cap 3.
quando solium veritatis attingit, quando se s^cernit ab isto corpore,
decipiturenim visu oculorum auditu aurium.

The So^le has her great^^ (...) joy out of the body, while the body be
glorified.
That same reason by which Athanasius did prove that the Soul lives out of the
body, may serve to prove, that it shall live in greatest peace, and joy out
of the body, Si enim connexa corpori, Athanas. Cont. Gent.
extra Corpus vitam agit, corpore enim in lectulo cubante, as velut in morte
quiescente, ipsa naturam corporis transilit, For if the Soul, even while it is
knit to the body, lives a life without the body, as may be seen, in that
while the body is sleeping, and as it were resting in death, the Soul
transcends the nature of the body, how much more shall we think, that out of
the body, it lives the own quiet, and peaceable life, delivered from this
waltring Sea of rest^esse temptations wherein it is tossed too and fro, so long
as it is in the body.

And as to the second if* we look to these things, In heaven is wealth and
safety of all good things.
which are before us in heaven, there is our most loving Father, in whose face
is the fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for ever. More
there is not our younger, but our elder brother living and rayning in glory, he
once died for our Sins, but he is risen again and gone up before us, to
prepare a place for us. Since he is the fairest among the children of men,
What a blessed company shall we be gathered unto there.
and we have not yet scene him, if we love him, why do we not long to go to
him? Many also of our beloved are gone there before us to that assembly, Heb 12.
and Congregation of the first ^orne, wherein are the Spirits of just and
perfect men, and to the which, all these Sons of God, which shall remain
behind us, shall shortly be gathered, and shall it be grievous to us to
remove to so sweet a fellowlowship, when it shall please GOD in our cours^ to
call upon us.

And thirdly, 3. We have notable helps to carry us forward in the journey.
we have most notable helps given of God, to advance us in our journey, for
not only have we the Oracle of God to warrant us from all evil which may
follow upon our remoouing, 1. The Oracle to warrant us.
and to assure us of a joyful welcome, Come thou faithful servant, Luk^ 17
and enter into thy Masters rest, And again, Blessed are they that die in the
Lord, for they rest from their labor: 2. The Chariots of Angels to convey us.
But we have also Chariots, which our eldest Brother has sent to attend us,
and convey us in our journey, these are his holy Angels, who conveyed the Soul
of Lazarus from the dunghill unto Abraham's bosom, even these same fiery
Chariotes, which took up Elijah into heaven, wait upon us also to carry us
up, when the time of our Transmigration shall come.

Besides that, 3. The holy spirit within us to conduct us.
we have also with us the holy Spirit of promise, who as he is sent in our
hearts, to witness the love of God unto us, so does he remain with us, in the
troubles of our life he comforts us in the terrors of Death, he strengthens
us, and in all the way wherein we have to walk, he guides and conducts us,
till atlength he put us in possession of that inheritance. whereunto he has
Sealed us, and whereof then shall we be afraid.

An Exhortation to courage in Death. Col. 3 1.
Seeing then we are compassed with so many and great comforts, let us in time
transport our affections upward toward heaven, where Christ is at the right
hand of God, let us live in the body ready to go out of the body, when God
shall call us watching, and praying continually, for we know not the hour.
Beware that we lie not down into the hollow of our hearts, to sleep in
careless security, as Ionus sleeped in the sides of the Ship, least the
fearful tempest of Gods wrath come upon us unawares to wallow us, and wrap us
up in endless confussion, woe be to him that shall be found sleeping in his
sin^es, when the Lord calls upon him to come out of the body. How we should
stan^ ready to welcome it.
But let us stand prepared like Israel at the Passover with our loins girded
up, and our staff in our hand, waiting when the Lord shall warn us to
remove. As the Birds which are desirous to fly, stretch out their wings, so
the Soul, that would be with the Lord should first stretch out her affections
toward him. Or as Abraham sitting in the door of his Tabernacle, when the
Angels came to him, and El^iah standing in the mouth of his Cave, that he
might meet with the Lord, so should we soiourn in the body, that we come out
to the door, to the mouth of the borders of it ready always to remove out of it,
that we may be with the Lord, Luke ^^.^7
Blessed are these servants whom the Lord, when h^e comes, Naturalists
sometimes show a courage in death, which is not Christian confidence.
shall find waking.

And thus much concerning these reasons which makes the Godly willing to remove
out of the body, have we observed, not only for the comfort of Gods children,
but also to distinguish the death of the worldling from the death of the
Christian, for oftentimes in natural men, there is seen a carnal boldness to
die, by which they enforce themselves to dye courageous, and (as they call it)
like men, which neither works in them for the present any inward contentment,
nor yet assures the^ of any greater comfort, when they go out of the body, it
is no more but the last puff of their natural pride, which soon euanishes,
and is not Christian Magnanimity flowing from inward consolation of the
Spirit: ^^ither in ^^ing, nor suffering does God look to the show, but to the
power.
Surely neither in suffering nor in doing, does the Lord regard the outward
show of Godliness, but the power, Non enim florem interrogat, sed radicem,
Neither are we to think much of those who being but Martyrs Satanice Virtutis:
do in external appearance die with boldness, as may be seen in many, who being
of an evil conversation, die for the maintenance of an evil cause neither
ashamed of the one nor the other, these may pretend courage in the face, but be
sure can have no comfort in the conscience.

VER. 9. Wherefore also we Covet that, etc.


The third ^ruit of godliness which ^he Apostle gathers of his general gr^und
of comfort.
WE come now to the 3. conclusion, which the Apostle inferres upon his former
ground of comfort: which is that the certain knowledge of the glory to com
wrought in him a care both in life and death, to be acceptable to god, and this
conclusion is very well annexed to the former, they cannot be seperat: he that
loves to dwell with the Lord, no doubt will have a care to please him, we see
by experience, how careful we are to please those with whom we are to dwell
but a short while upon earth, much more will we be careful to please the Lord,
if so be we desire for ever to dwell with him: and again, where there is in
the life a care to please the Lord, there is also in death a boldness to go to
him, whereas an evil conscience desires not to hear the Lord, farrelesse dare
it ^ee bold to see him.

We Covet. The Apostles holy ambition by (...) he (...) with God.
The word which here the Apostle v^es commonly signifies an ambitious coveting
of honor: but here the Apostle uses it to the best, to express his most
earnest, and sincere affection, which carried him to love this honor, that he
might be in favor with the Lord his God, esteeming it the highest honor, to
be acceptable to the Lord his God, not to be greatwith men ofworldly power,
which is the greatest design of those who can mount no higher, then the earth,
b^t to be ^^eat with God, therefore protests he that where away soever, the
affections of other men go, this is the honor which he loved, that both in
life, and death, he might be acceptable to God.

As to that honor which may come to us, Honor which comes by courting with
men, is an eu^nishing shadow.
from the countenance ofman, by courting with them it is but an eu^nishing
shadow, they themselves in their best estate are altogether vanity, they are
but like unto grass, and their glory fades as a flower of the field, and what
true honor then can they communicate to us? let the most glorious Monarch, who
ever lived in the world, be presented to us, let him be placed in his Chariot
of Triumph, Two questions to discover t^^ ^anit^ o^ ^ man in his best estate.
decked in most gorgeous manner, with all magnificence that can be devised: two
questions propounded to him shall quickly discover his vanity: 1. What has
he to ^^ke up (...) magni^^^ence whi^^ he ha^^ ^ot (...) the (...).
First what has he here which is his own, let that which ^ee borrowed from
the creature to make up his begged glory be taken from him, and what behind
shall remain unto him? Next that state ofhonour wherein he stands how long
shall he continue in it: 2. How long shall he ^tand in that state of honor.
that Samaritan Prince, who this day leaned on the KINGS shoulder, and the
next day was trampled under the peoples feet may serve among many other
inumerable examples, to show how short and vain the glory of flesh is, as
Nebuchadnezars ^mage had a head of Gold, but feere o^ iron, and clay, so is it
with all the glorious pomp of worldlings, golden in the beginning but the end
thereof is dust and ashes.

Both the Christian and the worldlings seeks life, riches, and honor.
If we compare the Christian and the worldling together, we shall see that
both of them shoots at life, riches, and honor, these are the common ends of
all men's actions, but where the one pursues after apparens bonum, the other
fo^lowes after Reuer a bonum, they follow shows the other ^^e substance, they
are busied about the Chafe, (...) the (...) follows ^^e shadow (...), the
other the substance. Chris^^t. in Math. hom. 11.
the Christian is seeking the Corn, external things cannot content him,
frumentum pa^eis mensura minus est, led natura pretio sius, as Corn, suppose
it to be less i^ measure then the Chafe, yet is it more precious in Nature,
so do they know that inward, spiritual and invisible goods, are the most
excellent. With me ( says Wisdom) are durable riches and honor, Pro. ^.
this life is but a shadow: but Wisdom calls us to the fellows^ip of an
everlasting life, all the honor that is from the worlds, ends in shame, but
the honor which is from God is durable fugiamus ergo hinc, Ambros. de fuga
saeculi cap. 5.
vbi nihil est, vbi inane est omne quod magnificum putatur, vbi qui seputat
aliquid esse, nihil est, let us therefore fly out of this world, in the which
there is nothing, in the which, that which is thought to be most magnified, is
indeed but vanity, and he who thinks himself to be something, in very deed
is nothing, reli^quamus vmbram qui sole^ querimus, let us forsake the shadow,
who seek the Sun, and follow those things which by true light are discovered
to us to be best. Religion takes not away affections, but rectifies them.
Again we see here how religion takes not away from the Christian natural
affections, but only rectifies them, the Lord who in the 1. creation made them,
in the regeneration, does renew them tempering the^ in measure and setting ^he^
upon the right objects, for the affections so long as they are either
distempered and out of measure, or then diuerted from their own proper objects,
they breed in us manifold restless perturbations, Affec^^ons distempera^ or
diuerted from their right objects breed us trouble
even as the strings of an instrumentpunc; being distempered, (if ye touch
them) send out a very vngrate^ull sound, where o her way being rightly set, by
the hand of the Musician, they end out most pleasant melody, so is it with the
a^fections, if they be temperedby the spirit of God, and set upon the right
objects, they work in us a quiet meek and peaceabl^ spirit, and this is the
great benefit we have by religion and godliness, that our affections which are
like to furious Beasts, are tamed to our hand, since by nature we are covetous
of honor, religion teaches how to c^uet the best honor, and where by nature
we cannot be without care, religion teaches us how to bend our care to please
God that godly care may cause comfort to us, where the carnal is thorny, that
does but prick, and disquiet us, and so ^orth of the (...) of the affections.

Two (...) requi sit^ hold ^^fections moderate.
Now for this moderation of our affections, because they are sooner commoued,
then water is with the wind: Two things are most necessary: One is, that we
have continually in our mind some short precepts of the word, commanding us how
to temper them, and next that with the precepts we be instant in Prayer to
God, the whole nature of beasts has been tamed by the nature of man, Iam. 3.7
but the nature of man, no man is able to tame, what is spoken of the tongue,
is true of our whole nature, it is an unruly evil, we must therefore seek it
may be done by God, which is not possible to be done by man.

That both dwelling at home, The godly consecrate not their deathonely, but
their life also to God
etc.] But now to return. The Apostle protests that both dwelling at home, and
remooving from home, that is both in life, and in death it was his greatest
desire to be acceptable to GOD. It is certain that Ioab as profane a man as
he was in his life, yet when he was straited by death, ran to the horns of
the A^tar, All men feign (...) death to seek the Lord.
so the most profane and wicked men, when they come to the point of Death,
would give all the world if they had it, for the favor of God, then are they
content to hear the Preacher, then desire they some comfort of the word, and
that Prayers by the Church should be made unto God for them. Desiring in death
the means of reconcilia^^^^ which (...) they (...).
In a word, those same means of reconciliation with God, which they despised
in their life, they desi^^ them in death, but here is wisdom in time to do
that which we must be feign to do at the length. I see no other difference
between these wise and foolish Virgins in that Parable, but that the one did
that in time, which the other would feign have done out of time, but in vain.
And the Apostle here stands unto us for an example of this holy wisdom, he
offered up himself in a whole burnt offering to GOD, keeping nothing back,
nor dividing evil, as the manner of foolish men is.

They (...) ^ui^l (...) give (...) young years to Satan and their old days to
the Lord.
What greater folly then this, that thy dying days thou resoluest to offer them
unto God and the days of thy life, thou give them to the service of Satan
and sin: for evil dividing, Saul lost his Kingdom, for evil dividing
Ananias and Saphira lost their lives, but worse diuiders are they, who will
give their young years unto Satan, and their old and feeble age to the Lord,
Such under go Mala^hi^ curse (...).
this is to incur that fearful curse, Cursed be he that has a male in his
flock, (...) 1.
and vows, and Sacrifices a corrupt thing unto the LORD. Surely, as the
careless Husbandman, who sowes nothing in spring time, Reapes nothing in
Harvest: So he who in his life sowes not the seed of tears out of a penitent
heart, how shall he gather in death the fruit o^ joy, yea rather as the
idolatrous Israelites, when by many Apostasies they had provoked the Lord to
anger, And have cause to fear this fearful answer to be give (...) them
(...) death: Iud. ^^.
got this fearful answer from him, Go to the gods, whom ye have chosen,
let them save you in the time of your tribulation: So may they look for the
like answer, who in their life live as Rebels unto God, and then in death will
pray the Lord to receive them? No go your way to the Masters whom ye have
served, and let them receive you.

Now all this delay of Repentance, Delay of Repentance till old age is procured
by Satan's (...).
whereby men defer to do that in their life, which feign they would do in
death, comes to p^sse of Satan's sin^gular Policy who craftily steals away
from men the time of Grace, he dare not be so impudent, as to say plainly to
the wicked man, ye need not repent at all, he craves no more but a
supersedere, ye need not to repent as yet, every day he tempts thee with a
new bait, and so makes thee put off from day to day, till the last day come
wherein thou arT suddenly taken away, before thou can put order to thy
thoughts, for then a multitude of sins gathers against thee and confounds thee,
where if thou had fought against the^ severally before, thou might
easilyhaue overcome them. As in bodily diseases, Protract of time makes
diseases more incurable.
protract of time makes them the more incureable, so is it in the spiritual,
for no sin ends there where it begins, but if it be suffered to continue,
makes a progress always to the worse.

It is written of Pharao, Miserable Pharao delayed his deliu rance till the
morro^.
that being plagued with Frogs, that Moses offered to him; Concerning me,
command when thou will that I shall pray for thee, and the Frogs shall be
taken from thee, and sent into the River, (...). 8.9.
he answered him, Pray for me to morrow: what a misery is this, the plague of
God is upon him, and God offers by his servant to take it from him at such a
time as he himself should appoint, and yet the blind and hard hatred man has
no grace presently to seek the remedy, but puts it of til to morrow: but
truly more miserable are they to whom God by his Gospel every day offers
mercy, More ^^rable they (...) lay the ^^ceiuing the (...) the (...) to an
other time.
and grace, saying as much to them in effect as, when will thou that I shall
take thy sins from thee, when will thou that I deliver thee from the death
under which thou lie, but truly the answer which is given to the Lord is
worse then that answer of Pharao, for in effect this it is, no till the
morrow, yea no till the next year and which is worst of al, no til mine old
age: Let me first go, and kiss my father, then will I come, and follow thee let
me first delight my self with the pleasur^ of corrupt nature: and then shall I
amend my life, and become godly, ^issoluta certe, Aug. ad frat. in Eremo ser.
71.
and paralytica vox est de crastina cogitare conuersione, hodiernam negligere.

Our careful expedition to prevent all evils may befall to our bodies, Bodily
^uils we remedy without any delay.
may justly convict us for this carelessnes, that we have of our own
salvation, no man bears a burden longer then conuenie^tly he may be quit of
it, no man is soon^r wounded in his body, but incont^nent he cries for a
Physician, and if fire enter into the house, there is have made for water to
quench it, shall we be so wise in things pertaining to our bodies, and prove
foolish as concerning our souls? But are not so wise as concerning our souls.
why delight we to bear the burden of our sins any longer, since the Lord
Jesus offers to reliue us of it, we are wounded to the death, and will not
receive the Oil of that sweet Samaritan that we may be cured, the fire of Gods
wrath is kindled against us, and we make no have to get water out of t^^
fountain of David's house, which only is able to quench and slaken it: So soon
as the Angel troubled the waters of Siloam, Ioh. 5.
so soon such as were diseased, hasted to step down into it, that they might
be healed the lively and wholesome waters of Shiloh able to cur^ all out
sperituall diseases, flows abundantly among us, but alas we delay to seek our
health in them.

He that lives in hope of a lo^^ li^e, sha^^ live (...) care (...) make (...)
good.
But if it be so that thou live in hope, thy days will be long, why will thou not fall to in ^^me, and make them also good: for if God make thy days
long, and thou thy self make them evil by continual sinning, do^t thou not
turn good into eu^ll and so increa^eft double wrath and judgment upon thy
self. All thin^es that a man has, he would have it good, on^y ^e makes ^is
life evil.
Take heed to thy self, and consider how every thing which is thine, thou
would feign have it good, and pre^sest daily to make it better, if thou have
children thou would have them good, if thou have land, thou woulst have it
good, thy house, thy garments and all that thi^^ is, thou will have them good,
only here thou forgets thy self, that thy own life thou suffers to be
evil, and so Int^r omnia bona tua ipse malus es, in the mid^le of all thy good
things, thou thy self only art found evil.

The late repentance of the wicked, The late rep^ntance of men f^lls o^t often
like that of Esau.
falls out commonly to be like unto that of Esau, he sought the blessing
with tears, but he found it not ^and it is the common iudg^ment of all ^he
wicked, ^ee loved cursing and it shall come upon him, Psalm. ^^.17.
he loue^ not blessing, and it shall be far from him, they far deceive
themsel^s who t^inke they may when they will, even in an instant return to the
Lord: Many knotts that are surely casten, are not easily loosed, After long
wand^ring from God it is not easi^ to return to him.
and the heart which Satan has bound of along time, with the cords of manifold
transgressions, is not easily m^de free again, Joseph and Mary lost Christ at
Jerusalem, and went a days iourn^y from him, but sought him again^ three
days, before th^^ could find him, and think thou who a^l thy days have
lived in rebellion against God, that it is easy in a moment, to be reconciled
with him?

We see by daily experience how often it comes to pass^, In Gods iudgeme^^ ^t
falls osten out, that he who in life* forgets God in death ^orgets him self.
Vt hac anim duersione percut^atur peccator, vt morien^ obliuiscatur sui, qui
dum viueret oblitus est Dei. That with this fearful judgment, a sinner is
stricken, that in death he forgets hi^^elfe, who in ^is life did forget the
lord, as we see many of t^em suddenly taken away in their sins in such sort,
that not only sense, but reason and memory also is taken from them. Men for
their pleasure do i^ such fort, divide their life and death, that they live in
that state wherein neither intend they to die neither dare they dye, and God
for their punishment, forsakes them, letting them die in that same sinful
estate, wherein they lived. (...) who (...) will not (...) in (...) cann^^
(...) by Satan snared to destruction.
Thus betw^ene two, they fall into hell, while in their young yeare^ they will
not, and in their old age they cannot repent. But if we with the Apostle will
not delay in our life carefully to please him, then in our death shall we be
acceptable to him: If our life be the life of the righteous, out of doubt we
shall dye the death of righteous, and be welcomed of God with that joyful
sentence, Come to me thou faithful servant, which God of his mercy grant to
us, for Jesus Christ's sake to whom be praise and glory for ever.

FINIS.

