THE TRIAL OF VVITCH-CRAFT, SHOWING THE TRVE AND RIGHT METHOD of the
Discovery: WITH A Confutation of erroneous ways.

By JOHN COTTA, Doctor in Physic.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for RICHARD HIGGENBOTHAM, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Angel in Paul's Churchyard.

1624.

ORIGINAL CORRESPONDENCE To the Editor of the Northampton (...) Caronia^.
THE TRIAL OF WITCHCRAFT.
Sir, -- In "A Brief History of Witchcraft" (Tailor and Son, 1366) I find that
in 1616 Dr. John Cotta, an eminent physician of Northampton; published a
thoughtful work, decidedly in advance of his age, entitled "The Trial of
Witchcraft," and a foot-note gives the following: -- "The Trial of
Witchcraft, showing the Trve and Right Method of the Discovery: with a
Confutation of erroneous ways. By John Cotta, Doctor in Physic, London.
Printed by George Pvralowe for Samuel Rand, and are to be sold at his shop
near Holburne Bridge 1616 4 to." The following is the title of the second
edition: -- 'The Infallible Trve and Assvred VVitch: or the Second Edition, of
the Trial of Witchcraft. Shevving the Right and Trve Method of the
Discovery: with a Confutation of Erroneovs Ways, carefvlly Reviewed and more
fully Cleared and Augmented. By John Cotta Doctor in Physic, London: Printed
for I.L. by R.H., and are to be sold at sign of the Greyhound, in Paul's
Churchyard 1625 4 to." I have a copy of this work which contains the two title
pages, which read as follows: -- "The Trial of VVitch-craft, Showing the Trve
and Right Method of the Discovery: with a Confutation of erroneous ways. By
John Cotta Doctor in Physic, London. Printed by I.L. for Richard
Higgenbotham, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the Angel in Paul's
Churchyard 1624." Second title page. -- "The Infallible Trve and Assvrerd
VVitch: or the Second Edition of the Trial of Witchcraft, shevving the Right
and Trve Method of the Discovery: with a Confvtation of Erroneovs Ways,
Carefvlly Reviewed and more fully cleared and Augmented. By John Cotta, Doctor
in Physic. London, Printed by I.L. for Richard Higgenbotham and are to be
sold at his shop at the sign of the Angel in Paul's Churchyard 1624." Were
there two issues of "second edition" of this book in 1624 and 1625, or is the
quotation in "The History of Witchcraft" incorrect? -- Yours truly,

ANTIQVS.

THE TRIAL OF WITCHCRAFT.
Sir, -- If your correspondent "Antiqvs" would refer to the copy of my
"Bibliotheca Northantonensis," recently purchased by the Northampton Public
Library, he would see that my edition of the "History of Witchcraft" is
perfectly correct, and his own letter wrong. Surely a correspondent who cannot
correctly copy a title page that is before him should not be mistakenly
hypercritical about other people's books.

JOHN TAILOR.

Sir, -- In reply to Mr. Taylor's hasty (...), I (...) (...) ^y that although
the "Bibliotheca Northampton (...) verifies the quotation in the "History of
Wit^ it does not show my letter to be wrong. On (...) my letter with the title
pages I find it to be correct in every detail, the only difference being that
in the words "sold," "shop," and "sign," s's are tried (...) place of the
"long" s's used in the title page. As (...) edition (or variety of second
edition) appears to be unknown to Mr. Tailor. I presume the British Museum and
other large libraries do not possess one. -- Yours truly,

ANTIQVS.

1047 WITCHCRAFT. -- COTTA (John, M.D.) THE TRIAL OF WITCHCRAFT, showing the
Trve and Right Method of the Discovery, with a Confusation of erroneous ways.
By JOHN COTTA, Doctor in Physic. George Pvrslowe for Samvel Rand, 1616. FIRST
EDITION, sm. 4to, sewn, RARE, L6 15s
Cotta's most celebrated book. The erroneous ways of proving a witch confuted
by Cotta are those by means of fire and water and the like, which are
convincingly shown to be foolish and misleading; but the author would have
deserved more credit had he not at the same time expressed the interested
opinion that the best method of discovering witchcraft is to take a Physician's
advice on the subject.

THE INFALLIBLE TRVE AND ASSVRED VVITCH: OR, THE SECOND EDITION, OF THE TRIAL
OF WITCHCRAFT.

SHOWING THE RIGHT AND TRVE METHOD OF THE DISCOVERY: WITH A CONFVTATION OF
ERRONEOVS WAYS, CAREFVLLY REVIEWED AND more fully cleared and Augmented.

By JOHN COTTA, Doctor in Physic.

LONDON, Printed by I.L. for RICHARD HIGGENBOTHAM and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Angel in Paul's Churchyard.

1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR JAMES LEY KNIGHT and BARONET, Lord chief Justice
of ENGLAND, and to the rest of the Honorable, Right Reverend and worthy Judges.
RIGHT Honorable Lords; I formerly Dedicated a small Treatise unto the
Honorable Society of the reverend Judges, who then filled the awful seats
of Law and Justice. I adventure the second time to present it, reuiewed,
augmented, and cleared from some part of that darkness which happily has
hitherto clouded it from bright acceptance. Information tending unto truths
discovery, though from the meanest wit or person unto your Lordships, cannot
be unacceptable, whom Law does make the Sentensers of Truth; which is the
Soul and Sentense of the Law. The matter and subject propounded is not
trifling or unworthy, nor can be any disdain unto Noble greatness; nor is
unto any Honorable order more proper then to your Lordships. Indeed the
difficulty of the matter presses a studious consideration, an orderly
continual linking and holding together of all material circumstances unto the
maine scope, a faithful and strong memory, quickness of apprehension and
solid judgment, but in the end unto such as are industrious and desirous of
Truth, will yield a delightful and thanke-worthy compensation thereof. I
presume not to direct or prescribe, nor do purposely oppose any other
different opinion, but inoffensiuely tender my own unto the public good, and
having merely devoted it unto truth; do humbly submit it unto your Lordships,
the vowed Patrons of right and truth:

Your Lordships in all humble duty and desire, JOHN COTTA.

The Printer to the Reader.
THE Author perceiving his former Tractate or first edition thereof, either not
diligently read, or not truly by many men understood, he has now by a second
edition thereof offered more ease and light unto such as are willing to search
after truth, both by the addition of many things before omitted, as also by
this plain direction unto all the most special points in the whole Treatise,
as follows,

The contents of the first Chapter.
1. How Knowledge does come unto man. 2. How man's Knowledge is confined and
limited.
CHAP. II.
1. That many things are hidden from the Knowledge of all men indifferently by
the decree of God and Nature. 2. That many things are revealed unto the
industrious learned, which are hidden from the slothful and unlearned.
CHAP. III.
That witchcraft cannot be discovered or known, but by the common ways and
means of all other Knowledge and discovery.

CHAP. IIII.
1. The Knowledge and power of Spirits, how exceeding the Knowledge and power
of man. 2. Good Spirits and evil Spirits how discerned.
CHAP. V.
That the devil does and can work alone without the association of a Witch.

CHAP. VI.
1 The Devil associating with a Witch. 2. A Witch apparently discovered by the
Conduct of the outward sense, and testimony thereof. 3. That the Devil plays
the Iugler in many things, seeming to raise the dead, to transform into Cats
or Dogs or other Creatures, to present the same body in two distant places at
the same time. 4. The difference between things merely imagined or fancied,
and things really offered unto the outward sensetruly discerned. 5. That which
is supernatural or spiritual, may be discovered by the outward sense. 6. How
the counterfeit miracles of the devil may be discerned from the true miracles
of God.
CHAP. VII.
1. An assured Witch by evidence of reason convinced. 2. All Spirits that are
enquired at, are Devils. 3. Witches may be detected by professedly undertaking,
and upon promise or covenant performing revelations and discoueries above the
power and knowledge of man. 4. All men in whom the Devil does exercise
supernatural works or miracles, or by whom he does utter supernatural
revelations, are not simply therefore by necessary consequent of reason to be
esteemed. Witches but with some few considerations which therewith conjoined
and dewly weighed may infallibly prove their guilt thus: He that undertakes
revelations or works which are truly found supernatural, and cannot either
prove them to be of God, nor to be imposture, nor to be imposed upon him by
the Devil without his will, allowance, and liking thereof, that man by
certain Demonstration is a Witch or Sorcerer. What Witchcraft is, manifestly
described.
CHAP. VIII.
1. The diverse kinds and manners wherein Witches receive knowledge from
spirits, as Astrologers, as Wizards, as Physicians. That the Devil can both
inflict diseases, and cure where God permits.
CHAP. IX.
That since Imposters do counterfeit Witches, and under color of imposture,
Witches may hide their discovery, it is fit that diligently the Magistrate
inquire into Imposters.

CHAP. X.
1. Whether the diseased are bewitched, when and how it is certainly to be
known, when not, and when men ought to rest satisfied in desiring satisfaction
therein. 2. The marks of Witches vulgarly reported, and by oath deposed to be
found in their bodies, how to be tried and known from all natural diseases,
among which many are ve^ like unto them. 3. The necessity of consulting with
the Physician not only therein, but in all diseases supposed to be inflicted by
the Devil. 4. How far the vulgarly esteemed confession of a supposed Witch
is of validity to prove her a Witch.
CHAP. XI.
That Witches may be produced unto the bar of Justice two ways, first for
manifest works of Sorcery witnessed by the sense: secondly, for revelations
above the possibility and power of man.

CHAP. XII.
1. Presumption and probabilities against suspected Witches. 2. That Witchcraft
is a sin or crime which ought to be detected by testimony and by
manifestation thereof to sense or reason.
CHAP. XIII.
That men ought not to seek the discovery of Witches by unwarranted means
void of reason, or superstitious.

CHAP. XIV.
Casting Witches into the water, scratching, beating, whether any allowed
trial of a Witch.

CHAP. XV.
1. That revelations by the bewitched in their fits or traunces are no
sufficient proof against a Witch. 2. That the declaration by the bewitched of
secret marks in the bodies of suspected Witches are not justifiable to be
admitted as any true or allowable conuictions. 3. That the healing of the
bewitched by the compelled touch or action of the supposed Witch is no
reasonable accusation against any man, as therefore a Witch. 4. That there is
no more necessity of a miraculous detection of Witchcraft, then of any other
as hideous and abominable sin. 5. That the miracles and detections of crying
and hideous sins by visions and apparitions cannot certainly or assuredly be
manifested to be of God, and therefore simply in themselves, though revealing
truth they are not to be trusted or credited alone, but so far forth as they
do point unto, or occasion just and reasonable inquisition.
The conclusion of the whole Treatise inferring the two sorts of manifest
Witches generally through the whole work intended and by Demonstration made
evident, to be the same, against whom the Law of God was directed, as also that
there is no other trial of those Witches, but the means and ways in this
Treatise before mentioned.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr. EDWARD COKE Knight, Lord chief Justice of
ENGLAND, one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and
to the rest of the Honorable right Reverend and worthy Judges.
RIght Honorable Lords, where according unto the direction of good laws,
gracious Sovereigns nobly rule, and loyal Subjects freely obey, there the
Commonweal, which is the common good of both, produces the most royal,
happy and stable Monarchy. If ever any Kingdom has been fortunate, to give a
true mirror and example of this happiness, this famous Island has been
therein incomparable, wherein so many puissant Monarchs, successively swaying
this Imperial Diadem, according unto the ancient Laws and Customs of this
Nation, have so many hundreths of years governed this mighty people in peace
and honor at home, and victoriously led them in triumphant war abroad, as by
the glorious trumpe of foreign and domesticke fame and History is not
obscure. The splendour of this truth, the injurious aspersion of insufficiency
in our English laws, cannot without shame or blushing guilt behold.
Notwithstanding, since in some few things to be wanting, was never as yet
wanting in the most exquisite laws, Policy and State that ever has been,
and since the Law of God it self (though perfect in it self) through humane
imperfection in the true perfection was never yet seen, give mee-leaue through
all laws and Countries in one particular to wonder at their general defect.
What Law or Nation in the detection of Witches, and Witchcraft, has as yet
ever appeared competent, or from just exception exempt? How uncertain are
among all people differing judgments? Some judge no Witches at all, others
more then too many, others too few by many, in so opposite extremes, so
extremely opposite: I do not presume to prescribe how a law may become more
absolute or perfect, I only labor to enquire to learn. Among many general
directions by different Authors, diversely published, concerning the perfecting
of particular laws, (as far as perfection is possible unto humane frailty)
Demosthenes in his second Oration against Aristogiton, in my thought does seem
to equal (if not exceed) the most exquisite. Three things faith he (as may be
plainly out of the forenamed place collected) do concur unto the upright
constitution of every complete law, whereby it may be held sacred and
inuiolate. The first is, that it be (...), that is, that it be the ordinance
and gift of God. Secondly, that it be (...), that is, the sage and judicious
decree and counsel of the most wise and prudent. The third is, that it be
(...), that is, the universal consent of the whole state, City or country.
Certainly, the true cause of the forementioned general lamenesse, and
confusion of Laws in the proposed raze of Witchcraft consists herein.
First, for that men have not as yet sufficiently searched the holy Scriptures
to find out that (...), that is, what is the ordinance of God therein.
Secondly, for that men have not seriously consulted with that wisdom and
prudence, which by the light of nature and reason Almighty God has left
discouerable and allowed to be justly and truly deemed, (...) that is, the sage
counsel, determination and decree of the most judicious, prudent and wise men.

When these two are met and are agreed; namely, the ordinance of God, and the
upright and sincere counsel of the most holy, prudent and wise men, purposely
studied, and without superstition exercised therein: then will the happy
harmony of all men's hearts become easily runable thereto, which is, (...), that
is, the common consent of Prince, People, and Country. Unto this fair work
and building of God: let it not seem presumption, that I offer this my Moytie
of desire, and good will I know that in this subject, many ages of learned
Authors, have endlesly varied, many famous Writers have bin branded with
infamous errors, many excellent wits have run themselves almost out of their
wits, and those who have best deserved, their trembling pens have niggardly
dropped, and timorously pointed out any fully, or firmly avouched certainty.
It is notwithstanding no breach of rule of modesty, but my bounden duty, unto
the accomplishment and honor of truth, to add whatsoever in my utmost
endeavor may be conducible. Neither would my many conflicts, with difficulties
in this kind, hold me excused, if so often spurred, or rather galled, by so
frequent exercise, practice and conversation, with persons in so diverse
extraordinary manners afflicted, and supposed bewitched, it should awake no
answerable dispatch or display therein. Let it then seem no wonder, that a man
(though less then the least among men) who has not only as studiously as
others labored the same particular, and as diligently therein observed, but
has far more happily bin fortuned then others, with frequent matter, and
occurrents worthy observation, and has also been more plentifully gratified
with opportunity, to enrich his understanding with variety and worth of
objects, instructing his reason, and confirming his experience: Let it seem no
wonder (I say) that a mean wit, thus beyond others furnished thereto, may
adventure amiddest so many doubts and ambiguities, where with so many worthies
have been formerly entangled and perplexed, to avouch and prove certainty, and
demonstration. In this subject of Witchcraft, by better means aduantaged, if
beyond former times or Writers, I have happily proposed a more direct and
certain Module and Method of judging therein, I do not thereby arrogate unto
my self, but attribute unto the means, nor derogate from others, whom if the
like contingence of the same helps, had as freely and friendly affronted, and
the like facility had opened as ready access, I acknowledge in the guilty
sense of my own exiguitie (whether in the outward beauty of words, or inward
substance of understanding) it had been easy for any man to exceed with so
good means this so evil meandness of my performance. Since then (Right
Honorable Lords) the subject it self, and a pertinent and peculiar use
therein, do point unto your Honors the property of this Dedication, unto
whose tribunal the Laws of God and men appeal against that foul abominable
sin, let it not be censured pride or presumption, humbly to present unto your
Lordship that consideration and resolution which beyond my merit or desert,
Occurrents have freely administered unto long-distracted meditation. If there
may appear therein ought advancing truth, or serviceable unto the
Commonweal, vouchsafe for those good respects, it may be gracious in your
eyes, acceptable and worthy your noble favors and protection, against the
injuries of adverse obdurate custom, ignorance, envy, and the vulgar
indignation of common received and deceived opinion. In the mean season, my
devoted heart shall devoutly pray unto Almighty God for your Lordships long
life, the multiplication of many happy days, redoubled honor in your service
of God, your King and Country, and after this life, that life which ever
lasts.

Your Lordships, in the most humble desire, and tender of his deuotious service
and observance. JOHN COTTA.

To the Reader.
INgenious Reader, in this subject of Witchcraft which I here present unto
thee, thou art not ignorant, what obscurity, difficulty, difference,
contrariety and contradiction has among Authors and learned men in all ages
arisen. From the offusion of general ignorance, or superstitious blindness
herein, willing to withdraw the vulgar illusion; I have endeavored
Demonstratiuely to declare what portion of some more certainty in such
uncertainties, God and Nature has destined and allowed. It is not any worth
either arrogated unto my self, or derogated from others, but my studious
desire and vehement affection in this particular, together with some special
experience and pains upon diverse occurrents, and occasions extraordinarily
happening, that has drawn me forth to offer my opinion as the widows mite,
more happily in good will, and hearty affection, then in true value or deserved
esteem. If it may only give occasion unto a more exquisite pensell, it is the
height of my intention, and a complete recompense of my endeavor. For this
cause, and for common easy reading and apprehension, I have purposely avoided,
and discontinued the smooth third of a continued labored style, and have for
the most part preferred and inserted a plain texture, of a more vulgar and
careless phrase and word. The envious happily may cavil, that a Physician out
of his own supposed precincts, should rush into sacred lists, or enter upon so
high points of Divinity, as by an unavoidable intercurrence, do necessarily
insert themselves in this proposed subject. Divinity it self does herein
answer them. In the theory of Theology, it is the duty and praise of every
man, to be without curiosity fruitfully exercised.

For as touching matter of Divinity, as it falls out, or is incident in the
discourse of this small Treatise, I only propound such reasons and
considerations therein, as in common are allowable and commendable in every
Christian man, and therein I do neither usurpingly control others, nor
controulingly conclude my self, but willingly submit unto the grave censure
and dictature of the learned and reverend Divine. If therefore (good Reader,) I
have here published or communicated unto thee ought thankes-worthy, as it is by
me freely intended unto thee; so let it not from me be unfriendly extended by
thee. If I have in ought erred, let it be thy praise and goodness to make thy
use thereof without abuse. If thou have formerly thought amiss, and do here
read that is more right, be not ashamed ^o acknowledge thy better knowledge.
If thou list not to know, then know, that truth shall judge thee, and justify
her self without thee.

Thy well-willing friend. JOHN COTTA.

THE TRIAL OF WITCHCRAFT: Showing, the true and right Method of the
Discovery.
CHAP. I. Of natural knowledge, and how it is solely acquired, either by
Sense, or Reason, or by artificial and prudent coniectation.
AS there is one only Infinite, which has created all things finite: so is
there one only finite, most nearly like unto that Infinite, which is wisdom
and knowledge in men and Angels. The knowledge which is given to Angels, is
only known to God and Angels. The knowledge which is given to man, is known by
man, limited measured and confined. It is therefore by the most wise
Philosophers and fathers of former times, and the Sages of later times and ages
agreed, by a general consent and harmony of the same truth, that all things
which are allotted man to know or understand, are by two ways, or instruments
solely to be atchiued or hoped. The first of these is the inward understanding:
Scalig. de Subtle. Exercit. 307. sect. 22.
the second is the outward sense: The understanding has knowledge diverse
ways. First immediately, by an inbred Idea and understanding of certain
general notions common unto all men, and in them, and with them borne. This,
though intellectual, may be in some sort assimulated unto that natural
instinct in bruit creatures; by which, when they come first into the world, yet
immediately by the direction of Nature, they refuse, and fly from that which
is evil and harmefull, and seek and know that which is needful unto their
life and preservation. Secondly, the understanding has knowledge by
ratiociation, by the discourse and use of reason. By this ratiocination, we do
in many things gain a Omnis syl^gismus, vel ^egularis, and ^ecta ratioci^atio
est vel ^emonstrati^, vel diale^tica, Aristot. ib. Analyt.
certainety of knowledge; in other some a probability and likelihood only of
certainety, yet oft-times in a very great neerenesse Dialecticus ^llogismus,
^el ratiocina^o expropotionibus Dilecticis, vel ^robabilibus, ^cet non cer^vt
demon^ratius, syl^gismus, ta^en vera in^cia consti^it, ideoque est ^rarum
opiionum fons, ^ristot ibid.
and affinity with certainty. Knowledge likewise comes by the outward
senses, which do certainly and undoubtedly inform the understanding
concerning their several proper objects, where the faculty is sound, and the
instruments of sense, and the outward means of conueyance are rightly disposed.

Among these five senses, the fight and hearing, the eye and ear, are the most
excellent and chief ways of multiplication and increase of natural
knowledge. Besides these ways of knowledge; namely, the inward and the outward
sense, there never was, nor ever can be enumeration of any other. For this
cause the Philosophers have divided all things that are incident unto mankind,
to know or understand; either unto such things as immediately Hinc Syllo^smi
perfecti (...) imperfecti ^tio ex Ari^o^.
in their very first thought or mention do prove themselves, and at the first
consideration or sight are evident unto all men; or such as are directly
inferred and necessarily proved by other propositions, or such as by prudent
guess only and likely conjecture give a fair probability of truth and
certainty. Such things as immediately prove themselves, and are undoubted, in
their first view, are subject either to the sense only, or unto the
understanding only. Such things as are only proper to the sense, and thereto
immediately and properly subject, are things seen, heard, touched, tasted,
smelt; as colors, figures, lineaments, sounds, music, hardness, softnes,
drines, moisture, roughness, smoothness, sour, sweet, diversity of odours
and the like: in which, without the use of the five senses, men cannot be
sensible or know any thing in this inferior world under the heavens. Such
things as are subject unto the understanding only, and not unto the sense, and
immediately prove themselves, are general notions and receptions, inseparably
fixed in the understanding of all men. Of this kind are these positions in
Philosophy. All things that are made, have their matter, Materiam, Forman.
Priuationem.
out of which they were made, have their special forms and difference, by
which they are a part that they are: and lastly to that being, which they are,
are risen from that which they were not. Likewise, these positions in Logic:
Every proposition is true or false, affirmative or negative, and extends
generally unto all under the same kind, or to some particulars, or to a
singular, or is indefinite. Likewise, in Arithmaticke these: One is no number,
one cannot be divided, or is indivisible; four is more then two. Likewise, in
Physike these: Every man is sick or healthful, or a neuter: Contraries are
cured by contraries, as heat by cooling, cold by heating, moisture by drying,
dryness by moysting. As in these named Sciences, so in all other; there are
the like general notions, immediately at the first view proouing themselves
unto the understanding, and every man in common sense and reason, immediately
consents unto their truth; and he that denies it, or seeks proof thereof,
is esteemed justly made, or void of reason.

There are other things also subject unto the understanding only, which do not
immediately upon the first view or consideration (as the former) prove
themselves, but are proved by others more clear and evident then themselves;
as this proposition. The motion of the heavens is not infinite. This is not
manifest unto every man at first view, but requires another more manifest then
it self, to make it manifest thus: That which has a certain limited course,
circumuolution and motion, cannot be infinite; but Astronomy for many
thousands of years has discovered the courses, periods, reuolutions, and set
perambulations of the heavens, and therefore the motions of the heavens cannot
be infinite. It may here easily be observed, how the first position being
unable to prove it self, another more manifest does give it light, and does
deduce it unto that, which does so immediately prove it self unto common
sense, and reason, and observation of all ages and times, that no idiot can be
ignorant, or will deny it.

Thus has bin manifested, how some things are immediately understood in the
very first consideration and view: some are proved by themselves, some not
proved by themselves, but made evident by others. As many things are in the
former kinds and several manners manifested, and evidently proved unto reason,
sense, or understanding: so are there many things neither by themselves nor by
other evident, neither to the understanding and reason, or to the outward sense
at the first apparent, but remain ambiguous and doubtful. In these things
certainty of knowledge by manifest proof failing, there remains no other
refuge, but prudent and artificial conjecture, narrowly looking and searching
through probabilities, unto the nearest possibility of truth and certainty.

Fom hence do arise excellent uses and benefits unto understanding, though not
so far forth ofttimes gained, as is desired unto all private ends, yet so
far forth, as makes wise and understanding men excel and shine before
others. Hence it comes to pass that in doubtful cases, counsels and
attempts, one man is seen and known to over shine an other, as much as the
glorious Sun does his ecclipsed sister, the Moon. Hence have issued so many
noble and heroike Virtues; Sagacitie, exquisitnesse of judgment, Prudence,
Art, in the administration of high affairs. For, although in probabilities are
no evident certainties, yet do they so far forth oft-times advantage and
advance unto the knowledge of certainety, that it is almost equal unto
certainty, and does persuade and settle discreet resolution and disposition in
all affairs. In this consists the height, the tope, the some of Art, and the
perfection of all humane knowledge, above or beyond which, no man could ever
soar or level. By this light only the former mentioned means failing, is often
times gained much excellence of natural knowledge to man, beyond and without
which the eye and sight of knowledge in man is sealed up, his understanding
darkened, and cannot know many hidden things. And thus to him that rightly does
meditate and consider, it is undoubtedly clear and certain, how the Creator
and infinite Prince of all principles has founded the beginning and end, the
power and posse of all knowledge, upon one of the former ways of
inuestigation, beside which there is no natural knowledge to be expected.
Philosophy as yet never found other Quod non est secundum naturam, non
contine^ur a Scientia, Arist. Anal. poster.
ways unto that infinite number of all Arts and Sciences, so admirably
flourishing through so many ages of the world. For this cause the most excellent
and prime Philosopher, Aristotle, rejects whatsoever cannot be found by
Sense, or proved by reason, as spurious. Likewise Ptolomie has bounded the
true Art of Astronomy within fatum Physicum, within a necessity in Nature,
and to distinguish it from superstition (wherewith curiosity usually defiles
or intangleth it) does limit it intra conuenientem naturae modum, that is,
within proportion and measure answerable to Reason and Nature. For this cause
also, all true Philosophers have determined the two only instruments of all
true Arts, to be Reason and experience, which Galen does call the two legs
whereupon the Art of Physike does consist. And therefore in the second chapter
of his Finitiones medicae, he says, Optimus is est Medicus, qui omnia in
Medicina recta agit ratione, that is, he who does all things in his subject of
Physike, according to right rule of reason, is the most excellent Physicion.

From hence also all true Artists have defined Art to be, Habitus cum ratione
factiuus, that is, a settled ability, and promptness of action, and
operation according to reason. Upon this ground others have built other true
rules and observations, concerning true and lawful Arts. Therefore (says
Galen) ars non est ex ijs quorum neutiquam est potestas, Isagog. chap. 5. that
is, Art is not of such things as cannot be accomplished. Which is worthy
noting, to distinguish prestigious and supposed Arts from true Art. To this
others likewise have added another observation, that is; that Art is employed
about such things as are in reason profitable and not vain. So says Scaliger,
exercit. 37. Sect. 31. Ars non est de rebus inutilibus. It is yet further
observed upon the same ground, that true Art does not confound or cloud it
self in mists, but reduces unto order, light and reason, things dissipate,
confused, and out of order and reason (as Cicero affirms) Ars res diuulsas
dissolutasque conglutinat, and ratione quadam constringit. Upon the same
grounds diverse renowned commonweals have expelled all false and forged Arts:
as, Necromancy, Aeromancy, Geomancy, with other sortiligous Diuinations. Upon
the same reasons, diverse Emperors, Kings, Kingdoms and Laws, have exploded,
censured, and condemned all such as under pretext of the wholesome Arts of
Astronomy, Mathematikes, and the like, have run into foolish curiosities,
impostures, and deceitful practices. Justinian the Roman Lawgiver and
Emperor, his laws are extant to this purpose. Likewise Tiberius his Decrees
for the expulsion of counterfeit Mathematicians and Magicians. And Vlpian in
his book de Mathematicis and Maleficis, testifies the publication of their
goods, and their inhibition by the Emperors from communion with other Citizens
so much as in fire or water. And as Reason, good Laws, Kingdoms, Nations, and
Commonweals have distinguished ingenuous, liberal, true and profitable
Arts, and Sciences builded upon reason, truth and understanding; from base,
ignoble, unprofitable, needless, curious, and erroneous Arts: so has the
holy Scripture both justified, sanctified, and commended the one, and
condemned, and nominated with rebuke and shame the other. The first is evident,
Exodus 3. verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. where Almighty God does testify concerning
the knowledge and skill of workmanship in gold, silver, and stone, that he
gave it by his Spirit unto Bezaleel, and Aholiab, who were workmen according to
knowledge and understanding in that lawful Art, profitable unto the building
of Gods house. The second is manifest, Acts 19. verse 19. where it is in their
due commendations recorded, that those who before used and practiced vain and
curious Arts, when they were by the preaching of the Apostles truly converted,
in token of their undissembled repentance, they absolutely renounced and
disclaimed their vain learning, and openly burnt their books, though valued
at an high rate and rich price.

CHAP. II. That no Knowledge can come unto man in any Art or Science, but by
Sense or Reason, or likely and artificial conjecture, is proved by the Science
and Knowledge of Physike in stead of all other Arts and Sciences.
NOw for the better impression of that which has been before said: that is,
that nothing is or can be detected, or is liable unto man's knowledge, which
comes not unto him by the help of Reason, the inward or the outward Sense,
Demonstration, Ratiocination, or judicious and prudent Coniectation in
reasonable likelihood: let us examine any one particular, ingenuous, liberal
or lawful Art or Science, in stead of many, and therein view, how by the
former mentioned keys, doors and entrances solely, are opened the ways unto
their contemplations, study, and perfect apprehension. And if one Art or
Science may be sufficient herein, I think it most fit to choose my own,
because as to my self most prompt; so unto any other not unprofitable. All
diseases that happen unto the body of man are either outward or inward, and
therefore either seen by the eye, and deprehended by the outward Sense, or
conceived only by Reason and the inward Understanding. Inward diseases, and
subject only unto reason and understanding do sometimes appear clearly and
certainly to reason and understanding; sometimes they do not appear
certain, or by certain notes or signs, but by likely marks only, which are
the grounds of artificial conjecture.

And as some diseases are apparent to outward sense, some evident to inward
reason, some by artificial conjecture only in learned, exact search and
perquisition pursued unto their discovery: so also are many diseases hidden
from all these ways of inuestigation, and therefore remain as remembrances of
man's manifold ignorance in this life, and of the secret reservation of Gods
decree and prohibition. As then in those diseases which are apparent unto
sight, it is blindness in a Physicion to make question; in those which are
evident to reason, to make doubt, is reasonlesse fatuitie; in those which may
be attained by artificial coniectation, search or perquisition, either to be
stacke, is sloth, or to be unable, is insufficiency: so in those diseases,
which neither outward sense, nor inward reason, nor Art, nor artificial
conjecture can possibly discover; to hope or seek beyond Sense and Reason, and
reasonable likelihood, is reasonlesse and senseless striving, and impatience
of those bounds which God has set to limit the curiosity of man. For better
proof and illustration, it will not be impertinent to nominate some
particular diseases in all these kinds. First for outward diseases, and such as
are evident to outward sense, they are infinite. Who that is the least
practiced in Physic, does not assuredly know, when, with his eyes he does
behold an inflammation, a Schirrus, a Gangrene, Cancer, Callus, Fistula, Ulcer,
Leprosy, Psora, Struma, Petechia, Variola, Iaundes, Gout, Tabescence,
Extenuation, and the like. Secondly, for inward diseases evident to reason; he
that is least learned, does know that all diseases which may be defined, must
necessarily be evident to reason; as also, that it is not difficult to define
innumerable diseases to him that is able to Genus morbi proximum, cum part
affecta coniunctum constituit morbi speciem.
conioine with the part affected, the true immediate kind of the affection.
The stomach ceasing her proper function of concoction, or deprived of
appetite, does it not thereby manifestly prove unto reason some inward ill
affection therein? If with that ill affection be joined a manifest inward
heat about the region of the stomach, accompanied with an Ague, dryness,
thirst and other accidents, and consequences of heat, is not as plainly
detected the kind of the affection to be hot?

Thus both the part affected, which is the stomach apparently (because there
the former accidents are found originally moving and first seated,) and also
the ill affection (which by the manifest burning heat does prove her kind)
being both conjoined, do truly define the disease to be an inflammation of
the stomach. The like may be said of the inflammations of all other inward
parts of Plurisies, Phrensies, inflammation of the Liver, Spleen, Womb,
Reins, Guts and other parts, the certain testimonies of excessive heat
giving demonstration of an inflammation, and the pain (or at least, some
defect) or defection in the proper offices of the parts manifesting the parts
themselves. As concerning inward inflammations of diverse parts, so likewise of
inward Ulcers, and other maladies may be instanced. The disease of the bladder
is often certainly known, by pain in the part, or by cessation of his proper
functions, or defection therein, and the kind of disease therein by the
excretions oft-times proceeding from it. And thus an Ulcer is often discovered in
the bladder, by pain, with purulent and sanguiuolent miction. Diseases
likewise of the head are certainly discovered and detected unto reason, by
defects growing; sometimes in the understanding, sometimes in the memory,
sometimes in the imagination, sometimes in all those together, and sometimes in
the general motion of the whole body. Diseases of the heart likewise, appear
by the evil and faulty motions of the pulse, by soundings and defections in
liuelihood of the spirits and vital faculty. Diseases of the Womb or Mother
likewise do often demonstrate themselves by deprived or depraved motions. It
were tedious to make a particular enumeration of all diseases of this kind,
which are in the same manner evident and apparent unto reason.

Now let us briefly also consider some diseases, which are neither evident to
Reason, nor manifest to Sense; but are gained, detected, and hunted out of
their deep and hidden couerts, by the quick and exquisite sent of probable
and artificial conjecture; the necessity or use whereof, either in an
ambiguous complication of doubtful diseases, or in the extrication of any
intricate single affection or malady, there is no man in Physic exercised,
who does not daily find. Many examples of diseases of this kind would cause
the small body of this little work voluminously to swell: we will therefore
only propose one.

Let us suppose a sick man, doubtfully and diversely with these accidents
afflicted: namely, a continual fever, a cough, spitting of blood, shortness
of wind, headache, deliration, want of sleep, dryness, thirst, pains in
diverse parts, sides, ribs, back and belly: What disease or diseases here
are, can neither be manifest to sense, distracted in this confusion, multitude
and concurrence of accidents; nor yet be evident to reason at the first view,
because it requires so different consideration, and divided contemplation of
so many seuerals apart. Here then it remains, that learned, judicious,
prudent, and discreet artificial conjecture proceed exactly to distinguish
and analise, as follows. All the sorenamed pains, distempers and accidents
may indifferently arise, either from the Lungs inflamed, or the Liver, or the
Midriffe, or the Pleura; because any one of these by it self does usually
bring forth all, or most part of them. Here then prudent, artificial, and
exquisite perpension does exactly value and esteem all the different manners,
quantities, qualities, positions and situations of pains; likewise accidents,
motions, times, manners of motion, caracters, orders, and all other both
substantial and circumstantiall considerations.

And first, as touching the fever, headache, thirst, idleness of brain
(because they are common to many other diseases besides these, and require no
curious, but a more careless and common respect,) prudent and circumspect
coniectation does leave their needless confusion of more useful and needful
perpension, and does more narrowly search about those accidents, which are more
inseparable, proper and peculiar unto the diseases named, and by exact
disquisition in their differencies, does notwithstanding sist out their hidden
and secretly couched differencies, by which, in exact view they are found and
distinguished sufficiently differing. The inseparable accidents which do
peculiarly, or for the most part accompany the diseases before named, that is,
the inflammation of the Lungs, the Liver, the Midriffe and the Pleura, are
cough, shortness of wind, spitting of blood, pains about the ribs, sides,
belly, which in all these named diseases, more or less are present, either
primarily, or by consent of one part with another. These, though seldom absent
from most of the four former diseases, and therefore not easily distinguished,
when they proceed from the one or the other; yet rightly weighed, and accurately
considered in their several manners, measures, and right positions in every
one, when apart and single, they do likewise in their confused mixture one
with another, yield distinct and several difference to him, that in a
judicious and discerning thought, does bear their just distinctions apart. For
illustration, spitting of blood is usually a companion to all, or most of the
four named diseases; but in one in less quantity, in another more; in one
after one manner, in another after another; in one by vomiting, in another by
expectoration, and in another by coughing; in one with much expuition, in
another with little; in one with danger of strangulation and suffocation, in
another without; in one with thickness, blackness, and small quantity of
blood, in another with thinness, brightness of color, and more quantity; and
in one of these also with less, and in another with more difficulty and
labor. Shortness of wind, or difficulty of breathing, is a common companion
to all the named diseases; but in one with frequent expuition, in another
without, and where, with expuition, in one with more facility, in another with
difficulty, in one with one manner of distension of the instruments of
respiration, in another with another, in one kind of difficulty of respiration
more frequent, in another less, in one more grievous, in another tolerable.

The like may be said of coughing, and pains. Coughing in one of the forenamed
diseases is with much, in another with little, and in another with no expuition
at all; in one continual, in another with intermission; in one with intension,
in another with remission; in one loud, in another still; and where, with
expectoration, in one of one color and quantity, in another of another, and in
another of none at all; in one easy, gentle, free and without pain, in
another, grievous and painful; yea suffocatory, and near to strangle. Pain
likewise is a common companion to all the mentioned diseases; but distinguished
in the one and the other, by the manner, nature, and situation of the several
parts, which apart is every one it possesses, and also by the different odds,
fashions, and kinds of pain; some being sharp, some dull, some quick, some
slow, some with distension, some with punction, some with heaviness and
sensible weight, some more grievous to the Patient lying, some to him sitting
or standing, some more calm in one position of the body, and some in another.

And thus prudent an skillful conjecture, by due and diligent perpension,
comparing together odds, and exactly referring unto true discerning the
several properties and differences of accidents, their manner proportions, and
other due circumstances, does in the end reduce every accident to his right
disease, and every disease to his right cause; whereby the prudent, and
judicious Physicion does clearly understand directly and timely to apply proper
and pertinent remedies. And thus in doubtful cases, which are neither evident
to Reason, nor manifest to Sense in the Art and exercise of Physike, it is
manifest how solert and accurate coniectation, through the clouds and mists of
ambiguities, does in the end so clearly send forth and give so fair a light,
that doubt it self does become out of doubt, and is little inferior unto
certain and plain demonstration. As a short sum of all that has been said,
whatsoever has been declared of diseases, the same may be propounded
concerning their issues very briefly.

The issues of all diseases are either informed from Sense, or evident by
reason, or serutable by artificial conjecture. Examples of the first kind are
manifest, when with our eyes we behold the motion and Sense external and other
outward functions of the body, either abolished, or in an high degree deprived
of their power and natural use.

This certain testimony of our sight does certainly inform the
understanding, concerning the dangerous issue.

Examples of the second kind are manifest likewise, we find either the causes
of diseases vnremoueably fixed, or the disease it self rooted in the substance
of any of the principal parts, or accidents in malignitie, vehemence, and fury
irresistible. In these cases a doubtful and hard issue is evident to Reason by
just consequent.

Examples of the latter kind are also apparent, when in diseases, good and
evil signs are so doubtfully mixed, that some promise Life, others as much
threaten Death: some in number discourage, other some in worth as much as
encourage. We do often see and know in the midst of this mist and darkness,
where there appears not to a common sense so much as the least show of any
indication of certain issue; yet through the exquisiteness of prudent and
artificial perpension, and due exact distinction in the forementioned seeming
inscrutable odds; the learned Physicion even in the first scarce sensible
budding of indication, and in the first most imperfect and scarce-being thereof
does often discover that true event, which usually and for the most part is seen
and observed to come to pass.

If any man not rightly apprehending reason, make a doubt or question of any
such possible exquisitnes, let him consider and behold it by an easy example.
In an inequality of one and the same Vermiculant pulse, where the beginning of
the same distension is quicker, the next continuation or middle part is s^ower,
and the beginning of the end thereof, ending almost before it begin: it must
needs be very difficult, nay, almost impossible unto the first view of Sense
or Reason, or to a common judgment or learning, to divide really, and
distinguish this one short small motion into two or three distinct times and
parts of motion, the space so very short, the faculty of moving so low and
weak, and the moving it self almost altogether in an insensible exiguitie,
and an indivisible degree of lowness.

We see oft-times a common vulgar cannot in his reason conceive it, much less
by his sense at all perceive it. Neither is it found easy to every man, though
learned therein, yea, or educate thereto, either perfectly to apprehend the
general Idea of such a motion, or at all in the first proofs and trials of
his sense or hand to deprehend any particular. Notwithstanding, the Physicion
that exquisitely discerns and judges, does both in reason see, that every
single smallest motion, has his diverse distinct division of parts, and also by
his discerning, wary, judicious and exercised touch, does apartly detect and
discover it: And thus has been proved by several instances taken in the art of
Physic, in stead of al other Arts and Sciences, for avoiding tediousness
and confusion, that all knowledge, all Art, all Science whatsoever given unto
man, has no other entrance, means, or ways thereto, but through Sense or
Reason, or prudent and artificial conjecture, sagacitie and exquisiteness of
judging and discerning thereby.

And that it may the better appear, that beyond these ways and lights, the
Physicion cannot find any knowledge or discovery of Diseases: let us view some
particular examples of some Diseases for this cause vndiscouerable, and not to
be detected: and therewith consider the impossibility of discovery to consist
solely herein; namely, for that they are removed from any capacity of Sense or
Reason, and from the reach of all artificial search, scrutiny and accurate
insight derived from both, which is the highest strain of humane
Understanding. In the general it cannot be denied (except of such whose
understandings are extremely blind) that it is impossible, that those diseases
should or can be at all so much as suspected (and therefore much less known)
which yield no show, no sign, no indication of themselves. There needs
hereof no other, nor better proof, then the enumeration of some particular
diseases of this kind.

Are not diverse secret and hidden Apostemations, and other inward collections
of vicious matter in the body, daily Seminaries of unexpected and wondered
shapes of corruption and putrefaction, which lying long hidden in the body, and
by an insensible growth taking deep root, in the end suddenly break forth
beyond all possible expectation, or thought of the most excellent, exquisite
and subtle circumspection and disquisition? For a brief confirmation hereof,
Hollerius does mention a man, the cause of whose disease while he lived, being
unknown to Physicions, and Art, after his decease his guts were found
gangrened and perished, and therein things viewed like unto Water-snakes, and
his Liver full of schirrose knots.

There happened unto my self this year last past, a Patient, a very worthy
Gentleman, who being extremely vexed with the Strangury, Disurie, and Ischurie
together with pissing of blood in great abundance, and the stone, by the use
and accommodation of remedies, found much ease, mitigation of pains, and
qualification of the extremity of all the former accidents. Notwithstanding,
for that there were certain indications of an Ulcer in the body or capacity
of the Bladder, his recovery was not expected, but after his decease, in the
dissection of his body, his Bladder was found rotten, broken and black, without
any manifest matter therein as cause thereof, or so much as one stone, although
he had formerly and immediately before avoided many stones at several times.
This I produce, being fresh in memory, as an instance of impossibility of
knowledge unto a Physicion in many and frequent cases. For how could the
fracture or color of his Bladder, while the Patient was living, by any
exquisiteness of Art or understanding, be known in any possibility, means,
or power of man, although all the other accidents above mentioned, were
undoubtedly, by certain indications and signs discovered? I might here
deliver many other like Examples out of mine own knowledge; I will only call
to remembrance one more.

I was of late years Physicion unto a right Noble Lady; the cause of whose
apparent dangerous estate, diverse learned and famous Physicions conjoined with
my self, could never discover. In the dissection of her body after her
decease, her heart was found enclosed with a shining rotten gelly, and the very
substance of the heart of the same color.

In the same Lady, an intolerable pain about the bottom of her stomach, by
fits deprived her of all ease by day, and of rest by night, and could never be
either known in the cause, or removed in the accident by any mean or remedy:
but after death, in the dissection of her body before mentioned, a black round
gelly as big as a Tenice ball, did manifest it self in that place, where, in
her life, the intolerable pain was seated and fixed.

Of this evil discoloration of her heart, of the matter and evil color of
that matter wherewith her heart was environed; as also of that collected gelly
in her stomach, what possible knowledge (think you) or exquisite
understanding, or art of man could ever in her life time give any notice or
information? Like unto this is that which Hollerius in the 21. of his rare
observations does mention. In a sick man perplexed in a strange manner from an
unknown cause in his life, after his death his liver and epiploon did appear
corrupted and putrified, his stomach toward the bottom bruised and full of
black juice or humor. Christophorus Schillincus, opening the body of a child
after death, reports, that he saw in the small veins, running through the
substance of the liver, many small scrauling worms then living. Beniuenius
does make mention of a woman tormented grievously by a needle in her stomach,
which was impossible by any art or exquisitnesse of understanding to be
conceived or suspected, if nature it self working it out through the body and
substance of the stomach, unto the outward view and Sense, had not so
discovered it. I will not here mention the generation of worms, stones, and
the like in the guts, gall, heart, longs and other parts, of which no Art, or
excellence of knowledge can possibly take notice, until they have proved
themselves unto the sight. Many diseases of these kinds being fearful and
terrible accidents, and afflictions unto the body, yet for the most part are
never detected; because they have not only no proper true certain likely, but
no possible means or way of indication or notice at all, in any reason or
understanding of humane Art or Science; without which the most exquisite and
Scientificall Clerks are altogether disabled, and must necessarily be
ignorant. Thus has been at large manifested, that nothing can be unto the
Physician in his Art and Science known, which either by outward Sense or
inward is not apparent, or by likely and artificial conjecture from both, is
not detected or discerned. The like might be urged concerning the trials of
Law and Justice, and inquisitions of offenses and errors against the Law,
which are the diseases of a Commonweal, as the former of the body of man.
Many offenses against the Law are apparent unto the outward Sense, as sight or
hearing: and therefore being witnessed by hearers or beholders, are without
doubt or difficulty immediately dispatched, sentensed, and adjudged. Many also
are evident to reason, which therefore are held and reputed inuincibly and
infallibly to convince.

Many offenses also there are, neither manifest to Sense, nor evident to
reason, against which only likelihood and presumptions do arise in judgment;
whereby notwithstanding, through narrow search and sifting, strict examination,
circumspect and curious view of every circumstance, together with every
material moment and odds thoroughly, and unto the depth and bottom by subtle
disquisition fadomed, the learned, prudent, and discerning Judge does often
detect and bring unto light many hidden, intestine, and secret mischiefs,
which vnsensibly and vnobseruedly would otherwise oppress and subvert the
Commonweal. When by none of these ways of extrication the truth can
possibly be gained, the wise and upright Judge unto necessity in want of due
warrant unto just proceeding, does with patience and sobriety submit. For
this cause (as may be seen upon records) many cases justly necessarily and
unavoidably stand perpetually inscrutable, undecided and never determined, as
certain proofs and evidences of the limitation and annihilation of man's
knowledge in many things of this life: Almighty God oft-times decreeing to
hide some truth from the fight of man, and detaining it in his own secret
will and pleasure.

CHAP. III. Whether Witchcraft have any other ways or means of
inuestigation, then these before mentioned, and what is the true inuestigation.
IT has been at large before declared, how God and Nature have limited and
confined all knowledge of man, within certain ways and bounds, out of which,
and beyond which it cannot pass; as also for that cause, that no justifiable
Art or true Science whatsoever, does or can exceed those restraints. There
have bin also diverse examples produced of the necessity of man's ignorance, in
the impossibility of much knowledge, and discovery of things hidden and
inhibited by the just and unsearchable decrees of God and Nature. It remains
now to enquire concerning our particular subject of Witchcraft, whether in the
common way of all other detections of trueths, it ought likewise consist; or
whether by it self it have other privileges beyond all other trials. If
reason be the sole eye and light of natural understanding which God has given
unto reasonable man (as is before proved.) If without it can be no natural
knowledge, no Art, no Science, no discovery. If Law among all people and
nations be so just in all things, as to do or allow nothing against true
reason (in which consists right.) If God himself, and all flourishing
Commonweals have tied men and Laws, and the decision by them of all doubts,
questions and controversies, either unto right proof, evidence and allegation,
according unto reason, or at least, fair likelihood, presumption, and
probability; and beyond these there never was, is, or can be any just
judgment or trial: How is it possible that man can attain any knowledge of
Witchcraft, if not by those means, by which only his nature is capable of
whatsoever is allotted to be known thereto? If this be infallibly true, man
must either by the former common ways of knowledge and detection, know
likewise and detect Witchcraft, or else be altogether ignorant thereof;
whereof the contrary by daily experience is manifest. It may be and is
objected, that it is a hard and difficult matter to detect Witchcraft, by the
former and ordinary courses, as is often seen and found apparent. So is it
likewise equally difficult, and as hard by the same means often times, for many
a just man to prove and clear his opposed innocence, and for many an
injuriously wronged wretch to prove his right, to defend his goods, yea, life
it self from violence; notwithstanding, this is no allowance unto another way,
no reason or justification of any unwarranted way, or way out of the way of
Reason, Justice, and Law, be his burden never so importable, or his injury
exceeding cruelty.

For, if God had allowed unto men always smooth, assured, certain and
infallible ways unto the satisfaction of their wants, and the accomplishment
of their intentions and desires without failing; what would become of Religion,
Virtue, and Wisdom? Then should every man be alike wise, and men would be so
confident in their own strength and power, and so proud, that they would
forget God and never think of the Almighty. If the means and ways unto all
knowledge, and the information of our desires and affections, did meet with no
impediment, to opposition, no contradiction, no casualty to intercept, and all
things should prosperously succeed unto our means and endeavors, there would
never be any use of Patience, T^perance, or dependence upon the divine
providence; and consequently, little acknowledgement, and less worship and
adoration of our Creator, who according to his wisdom, good will and
pleasure, does otherwise govern, guide, order and dispose all things. For if
unto our supposed needful ends, uses and necessary desires were certain and
uncontrolled ways, nothing impossible, nothing denied; then were our lust a
Law, and man in no power but in his own, in no awe, in no Law, in no rule.

Therefore Almighty God in his great and unspeakable Wisdom has subjected
vain man, and made his pride subject to infinite creatures, limits,
restraints, coertions, thereby to reach him true wisdom, piety, trust,
dependence, worship, and adoration of his all-restraining and allimiting
unlimited power. Man therefore must thereby learn to be contented so to know,
as therewith to learn to know himself; that is, with his large portion, his
lot, his manifold indowments, his excellency of Sense, Reason, Understanding,
Prudence, Art, not to forget or spurn at their interdictions, prohibitions,
and enjoined lots, beyond which to desire to know, is curiosity, is folly:
S^pientia, ve^a nolle nimis sapere, says the Poet. It is true Wisdom, not to
be too wise: that is, not to know, nor desire to know more then is allowed or
needful: needful, not in our desires, but Gods Decree.

Here then let ^e entreat reasonable men, not too much (as is usual) to swell
with indignation, or to be puffed with impatience, where God does not apertly
reveal and plainly (as they desire and think needful) the subtle engines,
and mystical craft of the Devil in the Machinations of Witches and Sorcerers;
but soberly, modestly, and discreetly, so far forth be contented to pursue
the trial and just way of their discovery, as with sense, with reason, with
Religion is just and righteous, knowing that whatsoever is beyond these lists,
is reasonlesse, senseless, and impious.

For since God and Nature (as is before said) has limited the scrutinie of all
true Arts, and Sciences, all natural knowledge for discovery of controversies
and resolutions unto the lights of Reason and Sense, and artificial
conjecture, prudence, Art, Sagacitie, and subtlety of understanding derived
from thence; unto what other bar or seat of Justice can Witchcraft appeal
or be brought?

It may be objected, the Art of Witchcraft, being supernatural, and the
practice thereof sustained by an extraordinary power; that therefore the means
and ways of discovery must be likewise more then ordinary and supernatural.

Hereto is truly answered, that since the nature and power of Spirits is
unknown unto man (as all things supernatural) and can be, and is no
otherwise known, but by examining the works issuing from thence, and
comparing them aright with that which is natural (because man in his Reason
and understanding cannot discern that which is truly transcending his Nature,
otherwise, then observing how far it exceeds that which is according to
Nature:) therefore (I say) the works of the Devil, or Witches, though
sustained and produced by a supernatural power, yet can have no other way for
their detection by man, but that which is ordinary unto man, and natural and
possible unto man; for that which is above or beyond his power, or Nature, is
not his own. From hence must necessarily be concluded, that there is no other
ordinary way unto man (who knows or can know nothing but that is natural)
unto the discovery of that is supernatural, but that way which is likewise
natural. Although therefore the subject of Witchcraft require a greater
measure of knowledge to discern that which is therein really, and truly
supernatural, from that which in nature oft-times has a very great likeness,
and a deceivable similitude therewith: yet is the way unto that knowledge, the
common high way which conducteth unto all other knowledge whatsoever. And that
this also is the same way and direction, which the holy Scripture it self
does intend, for the discovery of witches, and their sentensing is manifest.
Number. 39.30. Deuteronomy. 17.6. and 19.15. Matthew. 18.16. John 8.17. 2. Corinthians. 13.1.
Hobr. 10.28. In these named places it is required, that no man be judged in
matter of weight, or death, but by the testimony of two witnesses, at the
least. Witchcraft therefore being a matter, both of weight, and death, cannot
according unto Gods word, be judged but by testimony of witnesses: whatsoever
is witnessed, must necessarily be subject to sense, since no man can witness
ought, whereof there is not sense. From hence then it is ineuitably concluded,
that the works of Witches, are no other way to be discerned, or judged, but
by the common way of discovery, by deeds, and works apparent to sense, and
the testimony thereof. Let men then be persuaded and contented (since God has
allotted, and allowed unto the nature and power of man no other way) in this
only warranted true way to seek the discovery, to find the footing, path,
and steppings of Witchcraft, as of all other things, which by the Decree of
God are revealed unto man, and subject unto the knowledge of man. It may be
here demanded, whether Almighty God does not extraordinarily, and miraculously
at some time discover this so abominable sin of Witchcraft, as well as by
ordinary means leave it unto discovery? This doubt shall more fitly in more
due place be hereafter at large discoursed. It has now been here manifested,
that there is or can be no other ordinary trial of Witchcraft, then that
which is common unto all other detections of truth: and also that all
derections subject unto the discovery of man (as has been before cleared)
are drawn and derived either from Sense or Reason, or likely probability
raised from both.

Before I do proceed farther, for his more facill understanding, I do
admonish the Reader, that he distinguish, what is meant by the supernatural
works; namely, whatsoever is effected, in, upon, or by any corporal
substances, or sublunarie bodies, which is above the nature, and power of those
bodies, or sublun^rie substances. They are not supernatural, in regard of
those spiritual substances, which are the proper agents, and unto whom such
works, are no more then natural; but in regard of those bodily substances,
upon which, in which, or by which, those spiritual substances do work, as
merely their patients, and being in themselves, or own nature deprived of any
such possibility.

CHAP. IIII. Of the works of Witches and Devils.
BEfore we proceed further to treat concerning matter of Witchcraft,
according to the former ways of discovery and inuestigation: it will be
needful to distinguish who is the true Author, cause, and immediate workman of
the supernatural works which by Sorcery and Witchcraft are compassed or
brought to pass.

All created substances endowed with powers and virtue from God their Creator,
are either bodily, or corporal substances, or spiritual, or mixed and between
both.

Bodily and corporal substances are the heavens, the celestial bodies of the
Stars, of the Sun, of the Moon; the bodies of the elements, and all
elementarie substances from them derived and composed.

Spiritual substances are either Angels, or Devils, or souls of men after
death, separated from their bodies.

Mixed substances, partly Spiritual, partly bodily, are mankind compounded of
a natural body, and understanding soul.

Hence it comes to pass, that man by his understanding Spirit, does together
with Angels, Spirits, and Devils, participate and understand many things; as
the Scripture revealed; the History and Creation of the whole world; many
truths of God; the grounds of Reason; the principles of Nature; many general
rules and observations, and infinite particular objects of many things past,
present, and to come. But for that this understanding Soul is depressed, and
imprisoned in this life by the body, by the passions, diseases, and manifold
encumbrances thereof, and cannot extend or enlarge it self further unto any
portion of knowledge, then through the narrow windows, closures, parts and
organs of the body: therefore must necessarily the knowledge of man be much
inferior unto that measure of knowledge, which Spirits, being of a more
subtle essence, and free from the burden and encumbrance of an earthly
tabernacle or prison, do in a more large extent enjoy.

As is said of the difference of knowledge in Spirits, beyond the power and
nature of man: so may be said from the same reason of the difference of the
works of spirits, far enlarging and extending their virtue and power, beyond
the power and force of men.

The works of men, are confined within the power and nature of these
sublunarie bodies, unto which they are annexed, and tied.

The works of Spirits are limited to no corporal substance or body, but
spaciously compass the whole and universal body of the sublunary or inferior
world (as the Devil does witness of himself, Job 1. verse 7.) and are not
tied unto any particular place, but rule generally therein, and in all places by
the permission of God, as is evident, Ephesians. 2. ver. 2. where the Devil is
called the Prince that rules in the air, even the Spirit that now works in
the children of disobedience: and likewise, Ephesians. 6. verse. 12. where he is
called the Prince of darkness of this world.

From these undoubted grounds, it is necessarily inferred, that both all
knowledge exceeding the knowledge of man, must needs issue from the knowledge
of Spirits, and also that all works exceeding and transcendent, above the
power and nature of corporal substances, must necessarily be the force of
Spirits. It may now be demanded, how the works of good Spirits shall be
known and distinguished from the works of evil Spirits and devils, since
both their works proceed from the same nature, substance, and spiritual
essence common unto them both. This shall appear by the consideration of the
orders and sorts of good Spirits, expressed in holy Scripture, and their
properties, besides which, all other are necessarily evil, and therefore
devils; like unto whom likewise, by just consequent must be their works, the
one reciprocally Angeli bo^ non possunt ^ peccare, con^firmati per gratiam.
Angeli mali, per malitiam obstinati non possunt been velle Magis^ Sent. did.
7. lib. 2.
discovering the other. All good Spirits are either Angels and Messengers of
God, specially sent with his holy embassage, to special holy men, for special
holy ends; as was the Seraphin sent unto Isaiah, the 6. Chapter, verse 6. and
as were the Angels unto the Shepherds, when our Savior was borne, or as were
the Angels which were sent unto the Patriarchs of old, or else tutelar Angels,
ordinarily commanded to guide, protect, and defend the Elect and chosen
children of God, as is manifest both by the testimony of our Savior, Math. 18.
verse. 10. See that you despise not (says our blessed Savior) one of these
little ones: For I say unto you, that in heaven their Angels always behold the
face of my Father, which is in heaven. And by that Text also, Heb. 1. verse. 14.
Are they not all ministering Spirits (says the Apostle, speaking of Angels)
sent forth to minister for their sakes, who shall be heirs of salvation?
Beside these orders of good and holy Spirits, neither has the holy Scripture,
neither has the light of reason, or nature, or observation, known or
discovered any other.

All the works likewise and employments of these good Spirits, are all and
ever observed to be like themselves, holy, good, freely serving and ministering
unto the express will, known and undoubted pleasure of Almighty God, as is
certainly confirmed, Psalm. 103. verse 20. Praise ye the Lord (says the
Psalmist) ye his Angels that excel in power, that do his commandments in
obeying the voice of his word. All works therefore or effects issuing from
Spirits, that cannot be proved and manifested to be first commanded by Boni
Ange^ difficile co^^rent, nec ni^summi Dei ^ssa capessunt ^rnel. de ^bd. Rer.
^us. lib. 1. ca. ^
God; secondly, tending folely to the execution of his will; and thirdly, are
not contained in one of the four first mentioned offices and administrations
of Spirits, they are all certainly and assuredly to be suspected as works of
devils and evil spirits, whom God does permit (as says S. Augustine in his 3.
Book de Trinitate) to bring to pass such works of theirs, partly to deceive
those wicked, which God in judgment has given over to be deceived of devils;
partly, to quicken and stir up the godly and holy man, and to try and prove
him thereby, as he did his faithful servant Job.

Now for a more distinct cleerenesse and light unto the proof of these
suspected works of devils, it is very profitable, necessary and pertinent,
that we consider their kinds, which are two. The first kind is of such
supernatural works as are done by the devil solely and simply to his own
ends or use, without any reference or respect to any contract or covenant with
man. The second kind is of such transcendent works, as are done with a
respect or reference unto some contract or covenant with man. In the first, the
devil is solely Inter malecium and mer^ Diaboli ^pus distingu^r. Binsfeldi^
Explicat. in ^lud. 5.
an Agent for himself, without the consent or knowledge of man. In the second,
the supernatural and transcendent works are truly, essentially, and
immediately from the devils; also (because out of the reach or power of any
command of man simply) yet therein man has a property and interest by covenant
and contract, and deriuation thereof from the devil, which is truly and
solely Sorcerie, and Witchcraft: for since supernatural works are only
proper to a Spirit, and above the nature and power of man, they cannot truly
and properly be esteemed his; and therefore it is not the supernatural work
it self, but man's contract and combination therein with the devil, his
consent ^t fiat male^cium haec ^ia concur.
and allowance thereof, that does make it his, and him a Witch, a Sorcerer,
which is a ^nt, nempe ^eus permit^ns, Diaboli ^otestas, ho^inis malefi^
voluntas li^e consenti^s. Binsfel^ de con^ Sagar.
contracter with the devil. Tacit i^uocaiur D^mon quoti^ quis conte^ it illud
fae^ per causas ^curales qua^ nec virture sua naturali neque ex diuina aut
ecclesiastica p^ suntid face^ Binsfeldius.
Now let us proceed to consider how these supernatural works in the former
several kinds are or may be detected, some by Reason, some by Sense.

CHAP. V. The works of the Devil by himself, solely wrought without the
association of man.
IT is not destitute of easy proof, that there are many supernatural works
of the devil manifest to sense, wherein man does not participate in knowledge,
contract or consent with him. Did not the Devil in the body of a Serpent
miraculously Instrume^tum diaboli^ Serpens. T^melius. Iun^ The Serpen^ did
verily speak. It w^ a true serpe^ net a shado^ The devil spoke in the Serpent
as the Angel the Ass. Dr. Will^
reason, dispute, speak and confer with Eua, Genesis 3? Was not his speech and
voice undoubtedly, manifestly, perceptibly, and truly heard, and sounding in
her ears? There then was no man as yet borne that could combine with the
devil in this supernatural work, or that could then be found a Witch.
Likewise, was not the devils carriage of the body of our Savior, and setting
it upon a pinnacle of the Temple, manifest to the eye? Was not the fire which
the devil Job. 1. ver^
brought down from heaven in so miraculous manner, and in so extraordinary
power to devour so many thousands of Jobs sheep, truly visible? The Messenger
escaping to bring the tidings does witness it. Was not the power of the devil
seen at such time, as in the Gospel he carried whole herds of swine headlong
into the Sea? Was not the Devil seen to rend and tear the bodies of men by
him possessed, in an extraordinary and supernatural manner and sort, Mark
the first, Luke 4. Math. 17. Mark the ninth? Was not the very voice of a
Spirit heard and distinguished, when the devil in so fearful and marvelous
manner cried out in the possessed, Math. 8. Mark. 5. Luke 8? Did not the people
behold the miraculous force of the devil casting the possessed into the
midst of them, Luke 4. verse 33, 34, 35? Did not the people hear and behold
a foul Spirit crying aloud, and in an admirable power and manner coming out
of the possessed, Mark 1.24, 25, 26, 27? All these were works supernatural
of the devil, and manifest to outward sense; yet no mention, no suspicion, no
reason of mention, or suspicion of a Witch or Sorcerer: wherein therefore the
devil alone was sole Agent. But it may be objected, that these examples out of
the holy Scriptures are recorded as things specially seen, or noted in some
special ages and times, which aftertimes and other ages do not, or cannot
afford.

The contrary is manifest by the faithful histories and true reports of
Ethnicke writers, who living in distant ages, do not differ in the true
consent and harmony of the same report, concerning the same things, as they
have succeeded in their several ages. It is not incredible, but certain unto
any common Reader, what diverse authors of approved faith and credit, in
several ages have written: how the devil not only out of the bodies and
several parts, Oracula e^ta sunt per ^denda pu^lae. Mornae^ de verit. ^l cap.
23. (...) Diodoro.
a part of the bodies of men have uttered words, and spoken with the voice of
men, even as in the Gospel he did out of the possessed; but also out of trees,
caves of earth, images and statues. The first is evident by the general report
from one succeeding age unto another, concerning the Pythons Pythonici (...)
Ventriloqui, and the like. The second was never hid many hundredth of years,
for many ages long before the birth of our blessed Savior, as is apparent by
the famous Oracle of Delphos, the Oak of Dedona, the Statue of Memnon. Petrus
Gregorius Tholosanus, in his Syntagma iuris, recites this history concerning
certain statues at Alexandria, that they did fall unto the ground sudainly,
and with an audible voice declared the death of Mauricius the Emperor, even at
the same moment and point of time when he was then slain at Rome.

As the Devil does show himself by voices and sounds in trees, caves,
statues, and the like: so does he in diverse other outward shapes and forms of
other creatures.

Thus he appeared unto Eua, and spoke unto her in the shape of a Serpent
aforesaid. Of his appearance in diverse other forms likewise are many
Testimonies. Neither do Philosophers differ or doubt herein. Aristotle in his
Metaphysickes has these words. (...). That is, substances are called simple
bodies, as water, earth, fire and the like, and things compounded thereof, as
living creatures and spirits: which is so far forth to be understood of
spirits, as they were in assumed shapes visible. Orpheus does number six kinds
of these visible devils or spirits. (...), That is, Spirits inhabiting the
heavenly regions, Spirits ruling in the air, in the water, in the fire, in the
earth, and under the earth. The Spirits in the Air Plato says, are presidents
of divination, of miracles, and of Chaldaike Magic. The Spirits in the earth,
and under the earth are such as appear in the shape of Dogs, and Goats, and
the like, moving men unto foul and unlawful lusts as Ianus Jocobus
Boissardus in his tractate de Magia and genijs does testify. The same Author
unto this purpose cites Saint August. lib. 2. Super Genesi^ ad literam,
confirming that Spirits do use the help of Aerie bodies or substances that
they may appear unto men. Unto this opinion of the apparitions of Spirits
variety of story likewise does bring forth faith and credit. I will not mention
the apparition which happened unto Athen^dorus the Philosopher reported by
Pliny, nor Brutus his Genius after the death of Julius Caesar, appearing and
speaking unto him, nor those representations, which in the shape of men
appeared unto Lucius Domitius, returning toward Rome as Suetonius reports,
adding for confirmation of truth in the History, that the apparition touching
his beard, it instantly changed from the former perfect black unto a lively
yellow, and thereupon he was afterward surnamed Oenobarbus. I will not farther
cite ancient time^ herein. Let us come unto later days and writers. It is
reported by John de Serres the French Chronicler, that the late reno^med K. of
France, Henry the 4. being in his hunting sports, a Devil or Spirit presented
unto the Kings ears and his whole company, a great cry of hounds, and winding
of horns. The King commanded Count Soissons to go see who it was, wondering
who durst interrupt his game. The Earl still issuing forward toward the noise,
still heard it, but seemed nothing nearer unto it, though desiring to come
nearest unto it. At length a big black man presented himself in the
thickest of the bushes, and speaking unto the Earl some few words, sudainly
vanished.

There could be no deceit in so many ears and witnesses, nor can the objection
of a mere imagination stand uncontrolled of the just reproof of want of wit
and good manners, in doubt or denial of so fair and so well advised due
testimonies.

Master Fox, in the life of Martin Luther, does relate the apparition and
conference of the Devil with a young man; who upon contracts agreed between
the Devil and himself, delivered unto the Devil his bond for conditioned
performances.

Speed in his Chronicle, and relation of the passage of many affairs, within
the time of Henry the 4. does make mention of the apparition of the Devil in
the habit of a Minorite Friar at Danbury Church in Essex, with such thundering,
lightning, tempests, and fire-bals, that the ^le of the Church brake, and half
the Chancell was carried away.

I will not further recite infinite Histories and Reports, which may seem to
depend upon the obscure or doubted credit of superstitious factions, or
partial Authors, but of such only as by the common consent of times, and
general voice of all Writers, exact credit and esteem.

I^ this kind what a multitude of Examples does the whole current and stream
of all Writers of all ages afford? Who almost that reads any ancient
classical Author, can avoid the common mention of fained gods, Vide Platonem
in Epinomide de viribus and poteaatibus Heroum, quos Latini Lemures dixerunt De
Geniis item diis and daemonibus promiscue in coelo, terra, and singulis mundi
regionibus distributis vide in Politico. Vide Platonem. 4. de legibus. Quos ibi
Plato promiscue Daemones appellat, Latini his nominibus, and quibusdam officiis
distinxerint.
and godesses of the field, of the woods, of the mountains of houses, of
deserts, of rivers, of springs, and the like, offering themselves unto men and
people, sometimes in one shape, sometimes in another; requiring worship,
ceremonies and rites; some in one manner, some in another; doing strange and
admired works oft-times, sometimes pleasantly encountering people, sometimes
menacing?

Hereupon grew the multitude and variety of names given unto them, according
to the several manners, shapes, gestures, and places which they used; as Vide
Platonem in Epinomide de viribus and poteaatibus Heroum, quos Latini Lemures
dixerunt De Geniis item diis and daemonibus promiscue in coelo, terra, and
singulis mundi regionibus distributis vide in Politico. Vide Platonem. 4. de
legibus. Quos ibi Plato promiscue Daemones appellat, Latini his nominibus, and
quibusdam officiis distinxerint.
Fauni, Satyri, Nymphae, Empusa, Lemares. All Christians, who know God, his
word, and truth, and thereby believe one only true God, must needs assure
themselves that all these were evil Spirits, and Devils. Vide Platonem in
Epinomide de viribus and poteaatibus Heroum, quos Latini Lemures dixerunt De
Geniis item diis and daemonibus promiscue in coelo, terra, and singulis mundi
regionibus distributis vide in Politico. Vide Platonem. 4. de legibus. Quos ibi
Plato promiscue Daemones appellat, Latini his nominibus, and quibusdam officiis
distinxerint.
That such were, all times, ages, histories, and records of times with one
universal consent confirm. That they were manifestly seen, known, and
familiarly by the outward senses discerned and distinguished, cannot be
denied, by the several descriptions of their manners, assumed shapes and
gestures.

And thus briefly avoiding the tediousness of the multitude of uncertain
particular examples given by private men, I have by undoubted and uncontrolled
references unto ages and successions of continued histories from one unto
another manifested, how among the heathen, the Devil has apparently offered
himself unto the outward sense, without the association of a Witch or
Sorcerer: Which was likewise before proved by instances out of the holy
Scripture. In all these the Devil has affected to Fauni Syluani incubi Dufii
Daemones fuere. August. De Ciuit Dei. Diabosus, Dei aemusus quo se fal^aci
similitudine infin^ uet in anim o^ simplicium. Calvin. lib 1. Instit. cap. 8.
Sect. 2.
counterfeit the apparitions of the blessed Angels of God unto his holy
servants, thereby to make himself like or equal unto God in ignorant and
unbelieving hearts.

CHAP. VI. Works done by the Devil, with respect unto Covenant with Man.
IT now follows to give examples of such supernatural works as are offered
by the Devil, wherein man has an interest and property by contract with the
Devil; as also to show that these works are manifest in like manner unto the
outward sense. Unto this proof out of holy Scripture, behold the Witch of
Endor. Did not Saul contract with her, and she promise unto Saul to bring up
Samuel unto him? Did not Saul see the vision raised by her, or at least speak
thereto, and receive answer therefrom, 1. Sam. 28.8? were not then his eyes
and ears (those two outward senses) certain witnesses of her Sorcerie? Behold
also the Sorcerers of Egypt. Did not Phaeraoh see and view with his eyes those
great and mighty Sorceries, water turned into blood, rods into Serpents,
Frogs caused to issue out upon the face of the earth?

And as the holy Scripture does afford us these examples, so are the histories
of all ages, people, and countries, fraught with the like as manifest to sense
as these, and as apparently detecting and pointing out the Sorcerer and Sorcery.

Liuy reports, in those ancient days of Rome, that the Roman Claudia, a
vestall Virgin, did show her self in act, able alone with ease and facility
to draw a mighty ship by a small line or girdle, which was in the weight and
greatness immovable, against the force and power of many strong men, assisted
by the strength of cattle accustomed to draw mighty and heavy burdens. That
this was an act supernatural, and above, and beyond any natural virtue or
force in her Nature, is madness to doubt. That in this supernatural act also,
she had a property by her allowance and likeing thereof, expressed by her
voluntary action of undertaking and drawing; who can make doubt? The act was
supernatural, and above her power and nature: her good will, allowance, and
voluntary putting the act in practice, did prove her consent, if not contract,
with that power and nature superior unto her own, which is undoubtedly,
Sorcery, and Witchcraft. To this purpose, says Bin^fieldiu^, Explicat. in
praelud. 5. Requiritar in maleficio hominis libero voluntas quam Diabolus non
potest cogere, sed persuadere tantum aut terrere. That is, in Witchcraft
necessarily the will, or consent of man, must concur with the Devils work,
for the Devil cannot force, or compel the will of man, but persuades it
only, or affrighteth it. And again he faith, that whosoever does pretend to
do those things, which are above the power, and reach of man, by any natural
causes, which causes are allowed no such effects, either in nature, or in Gods
word, or by any ordinance of of his Church, that man does closely, or tacitly
invoke the Devil. Quoties (inquit) quis contendit illud fac^re, per causas
naturales, quae nec virtute sua naturali, neque ex diuina aut Ecclesiastica
possunt illud facere, Tacit in vocatur Demon.

Tuccia also a vestall Virgin, is reported by mumbling of a certain prayer, to
keep water within a sieve, or a riddle, as witnesses not only Pliny, but even
Tertullian.

De diuina. generibus. page 118.
Camerarius makes mention of a man, who armed only with certain charms,
would undertake to receive upon his body, without harm, bullets, or shot out
of the fiery Cannon.

He makes also mention of another, who would undertake to lay his hand upon
the mouth of the like instrument, even when the fire was already given, and
thereby cause the flame appearing in the mouth thereof, together with the shot
there, to stay.

The like is reported by Ianus, Iacobus, Boissardus, concerning a Germane Count
in his book de Diuinatione. It is related upon good record, that Decius Actius
the Augur, was able to report unto Tar^inius the Roman King, the very
particular which he intended, and prepared in his most secret designs. It is
written of the Enthusiastes, or Prophetesses of Diana in Castab^la, a town of
Cilicia, that they would walk usually, and voluntarily, with naked and bare
feet, upon hot burning coals, without any hurt, or alteration by the fire. It
is recorded concerning Pythagoras, that he would by certain secret words,
compel a feeding Ox, Bullock, or the like, immediately to stand still, and
forbear his meat. Others report of him, that he would command wild beasts, and
Birds, Bears, and Eagles, to come unto him, to grow tame, to follow him. It is
credibly reported of the same Pythagoras, that he was at once by several
parties seen, in the very same point of time, both in the City of Tharium,
and the town of Metapontum.

Apollonius likewise was translated, as it were, in the twinkling of an eye, or
in the space of a word speaking from Smyrna, unto Ephesus, as some Histories
report. That the power by which these things were done, was more then humane,
no Reason can doubt. That also the voluntary accession of those men's disposing,
or apting themselves unto these works, does prove their consent, and by
consent in consequence of reason, society with a Spirit, who can doubt? And
for this cause, Binsfieldius terms it a tacit contract, as is aforesaid.

But here by the way, is just occasion offered unto a question; namely, whether
a Spirit or Devil can cause or bring to pass, that the same true body at once
may be really in two distant places, as it seems by this history of
Pythagoras.

The answer hereto must needs in reason be negative; because it is
impossible in nature, and in the ordinary unchangeable course of all things by
God created, that one individual and continued substance, or entire thing
should be wholly divided from it self, and yet be it self, or possibly be
twice, or be in two places, and yet be but one and the self same thing.

We must therefore rather here think that the devil is a Iuggler, presenting
the lively shape and pourt^aiture of Pythagoras in one place, and thereto happily
by his supernatural power, adding a counterfeit liuelihood of speech and
gesture, while the true substance is certainly and truly seen in another
place. That these like practices are usual with the devil, is apparent in
many other kinds beside. Did he not undertake, Math. 4. verse 8. unto wisdom
it self but blessed Savior, to show unto him all the Kingdoms of the earth,
a thing so far out of his reach and compass, but only by a lying and iugling
vision? If this he does unto the Son of God, how shall the silly sons of
sinful men escape? It is written by some Authors, that the devil has
persuaded some foolish Sorcerers and Witches, that he has changed their
bodies and substances, into Carts, Asses, Birds, and other creatures, which
Transfor mationes cattos aut pos pharstice et pe^ praestigias et non realiter
fiunt. August. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 18.
really and indeed without illusion (if it be not presumption to reason with
the Devil) is impossible unto him to do. For there can be no real or true
matamorphosing of one substance or nature into another, but either by creation
or generation. The one is the sole immediate hand of God, communicable to no
creature (because there cannot be two Creators) the other is natural the
finger-worke and power of God in nature, and proper to the nature of living
animate creatures, not to Angels or Spirits.

Again, creation is the work of an infinite power, and therefore of God
alone, because there can be but one Infinite, whose nature containing all
things, and contained of nothing, can admit no equal, no second, no other. The
Devil then cannot create. That likewise he cannot cause these transmutations
by generation, is as plain and evident, because a true and real generation
has many precedent Generat non est nil^ tempore id apparata ^teria per ar^
cessionem, mutationis quam Gr^ (...) recentiore Ciceronia^ maluerunt
co^mutationem. Sca^ de subt. ex^ cit. 6. sect.
alterations, and by little and little in space of time grows unto the
perfection of that kind, unto which it does tend or is begotten; but these
seeming transmutations by the Devil of the substances of Men into Cactes, and
the like, are swift and sudden, in a moment, and without preparation: and
therefore are no true, but seeming and iuggling transmutations.

Here ^ay be again objected, that the Devil is able to work above the power
of Nature; and therefore beside and above the natural course of generation,
he is able to make these real transmutations. It is answered, though the
devil indeed, as a Spirit, may do, and does many things above and beyond the
course of some particular natures: yet does he not, nor is able to rule or
command over general Nature, or infringe or alter her inviolable decrees in
the perpetual and neuer-interrupted order of all generations; neither is he
generally. Master of universal Nature, but Nature Master and Commander of
him. For Nature is nothing else but the ordinary Natura est den^ia Dei ^estas.
^alig.
power of God in all things created, among which the Devil being a creature,
is contained, and therefore subject to that universal power.

For this cause, although above the power of our particular nature, the Devil
as a Spirit does many things, which in respect of our nature, are
supernatural; yet in respect of the power of Nature in universal, they are
but natural unto himself and other Spirits, who also are a kind of creature
contained within the general nature of things created: Opposite therefore,
contraries, against or above the general Natura est ^iuersalis, est
^rticularis.
power of Nature, he can do nothing. Therefore, to conclud this point, he
cannot be able to command or compass any generation above the power of
Nature, whose power is more universal and greater then his. We will then hence
conclude, that above and beyond the universal Nature and course of all
generation, he cannot make a true transmutation of the substance of any one
creature into another.

It was before proved, that it is impossible for him to do it by creation. It
is here manifest, that he cannot do it by any course of true generation. There
can be no real transmutation of one substance into another, without either a
creation or generation. We will therefore conclude with the saying of Saint
Augustine de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 18. cap. 18. Nec sane Daemones naturas creant,
sed specie tenus, quae a De^ cr^ata sunt, commutant, vt videantur esse quae non
sunt: that is, devils cannot create any nature or substance, but in iuggling
show or seeming only, whereby with false shadows and outward induced shapes
covering those things which are created of God, by these commutations they
cause them to seem that which they are not indeed.

Concerning other manifest iugglings and illusions of the Devil, diverse
authors have given diverse examples, but that which above all the rest does most
palpably detect him herein, is a history related by Ioannes Baptista Porta in
his second book De Magia naturali. He there witnesses, that upon the Devils
suggestion, a Witch believed firmly, and persuaded her self, that all the
night she had rid in the air, over diverse great Mountains, and met
inconuenticles of other Sorceresses; when the same night the mentioned Author
himself, with others, had watched and seen her, all that imagined time of her
transuection in the air, to be within her chamber profoundly sleeping; yea,
had smitten her, made her flesh blue with strokes, and could not a wake her,
nor persuade her afterward, when she was a waked that they had so used her, or
at all had either seen or beheld her. Thus preualent was the iuggling power of
the Devil.

S. Austine de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 18. does deliver an History concerning the
father of one Praestantius, who lying in a deep trance so profoundly that no
means could awake him, did dream (as when he awaked he did report) that he
was transformed into an Ass, and carried bags or burdens of come into a
camp of Soldiers. At the same time, in the same manner, such a like Ass as
he in dream imagined himself did bring such burdens into the same camp.

From these examples may be justly drawn a plain demonstration of the Devils
palpable iuggling and illusion, which also may serve for confirmation, together
with the reasons before annexed unto my former answer, concerning the Devils
seeming, or deceitful presentation of the real body of Pythagoras in two
distant places at once, in the same point of time. And from all these conioined
and conferred, may be truly inferred and collected, that the Devil as he
does many supernatural works really, so he does many other by illusion and
beguiling the imagination.

These his iugglings notwithstanding are things also supernatural, and tricks
only possible to Spirits and impossible to man. For it is impossible to man to
frame so lively a seeming presence of man in one place, that it shall not be
discerned otherwise then the very same true presence and real substance which
is really in another place, as also to fasten such dreams as were before
mentioned, upon men, and according to those dreams to cause the things
dreamed, by the witness and testimony of other beholders, to be brought to
pass in so lively likeness and similitude, as cannot be discerned and
discovered otherwise then the very same that they were in dream likewise
believed.

From hence it does also follow very necessarily, that what man soever shall
undertake these supernatural iuglings, which are only possible in the power
of Spirits, and of the Devil alone, is thereby as truly convinced to be a
Witch or Sorcerer, as he that undertakes any of the former real supernatural
works, or any other of the like kind, because they are both and all alike
proper only to the devil, and wherein man can have no property or power but
by and through him. Let us now then again return unto the Devils real
supernatural performances and works, unto Sorcerers, from whence by the way
of answer unto the former doubt, concerning Pythagoras his supposed realty of
being at once in two places, we have hitherto only digressed.

It is written as a thing usual unto many famous Magicians, Sorcerers and
Witches, unto the view and sight of some admitted spectators, to raise
resemblances of the dead, which seems a thing undoubted by the Witch of
Endor, raising Samuel the Prophet unto Saul the King before mentioned.

In this kind those famous and renowned Witches Medea and Circe in old and
ancient times are reported to excel. Hence among the Heathen had Necromancie
the reason of the name and (...) which is divination by calling up, or raising
the dead.

Later times have not been behind former times in the record of the like: but
to add reason to enforce the truth of report herein; I will answer an
objection which may be made. Whether in these apparitions there be only
illusion and imagination; or some thing truly and really visible unto the
outward sense.

As touching the real raising of the dead, it is impossible unto the limited
power of the Devil, either in the substance of body or soul, to reduce or
bring the dead back into this world, or life, or sense again; because in
death, by the unchangeable, and unalterable decree of God in his holy Writ, the
body returns into dust from whence it came, and the Soul to God who gave it.

Notwithstanding, since the outward shape and figure, and proportion of any
substance, and not the substance it self, or creature, is the true and
natural object of the eye, according to the Philosopher, who truly says, Res
non videntur, sed rerum species; that is, the substances or things themselves
are not offered, nor come unto the sight, but only their shape, and outward
figure, as also for that common sense and experience do teach us, that it is a
thing absurd, and impossible, that all those bodies and substances, which in
infinite number we daily see, and behold really and materially in their
corporal substances, and dimensions, should be contained in the small body of
the eye: for these causes (I say) it is possible according to reason, that the
Devil in these supposed apparitions of the bodies and substances of dead men,
may present true, real, and natural objects, certain and assured unto the
eye and sight, if he can only present thereto the outward lively
pourtraitures, and shapes of the substances or bodies, though the bodies
themselves be away. That the Devil can do this, is no doubt. For if man by
Art can usually divide the outward shapes, and figures of creatures and
substances, from the substances and creatures themselves (as is apparent by the
looking glass) and the cunning Painter can in another borrowed substance,
separated from their true, right and proper substance, represent perfectly the
true and lively shape of men, and other creatures, even when they are not only
absent, and removed in far distant places, but when oft-times they have many
years been swallowed of the grave; why should it be thought impossible unto
the Devil (who certainly is more then exquisite Apelles excellent) to offer
and present unto the eye likewise any true shape whatsoever?

If he can offer the true shape (as is not to be doubted) he does offer a true
and perfect object; and therefore that which is truly and certainly manifest
to sense, although speech and the motion thereof, without another visible body
to sustain it (being impossible unto shapes and pourtraitures drawn by men)
be things supernatural, and truly spiritual, which do therefore make it a
work proper unto the Devil.

And thus it is apparent, that the supposed apparitions which the Devil does
offer of dead men, may be esteemed and reckoned among such supernatural works
of devils and Sorcerers, as manifestly are brought to outward sense.

Now let us turn to view some other kinds of the same works of the same
Authors.

It is reported by some Writers of worthy credit, that the bodies of Sorcerers
and Witches have bin really carried, and locally removed from on place into
another by the devil.

And of later times (as Bartholomaeus de Spina does witness) the inquisitions
have condemned unto perpetual prison, and their detained Witches, who by their
own confession, and others proof, have by the Devil been transported into so
far distant places, in few hours, that afterward it has bin a travel of
many days, by their own natural power to return again from whence they
were manifestly by the devil carried.

It is a thing likewise written and vulgarly received, that Witches are
oft-times seen bodily to haunt places, fields, houses, graves, and sepulchers,
in an unusual and miraculous manner and wondered fashion. These things, and
infinite more, whether true or no, cannot be known, but to him that does
himself behold, and can from his own sight avouch them really true, and not
imaginary. To perform some manner of asportation, and local translation of
the bodies of Witches and Sorcerers, it seems in reason a thing whereunto the
Devil is not unable.

First, for that it appears within the power of a Spirit, by the history of
the Prophet Habacuc, whom the Angel carried by the hair of the head, out of
Judea into Babylon. The natural faculties and properties of a Spirit, given in
their creation, and by their essential forms united unto them, the Devil
does participate with all other Spirits whatsoever, though in his fall from
heaven, he lost their true happiness and perfect fruition in the face and
favor of God his Creator.

Secondly, for that there are undoubted examples in holy Scripture, of the
devils power in the local translation, not only of bodies inanimate: as fire,
winds, tempests, houses (as is apparent in the history of Job) and of animate
bodies also, or bodies of brute creatures (as is evident in the herds of swine
which he carried headlong into the Sea) but likewise of the bodies of men, as
is clear in the Gospel, where it is said, that the Devil did cast the bodies
of the possessed into the midst of the people. If the Devil could cast, or
carry their bodies the distance there expressed (whatsoever or how little so
ever it was) it does manifestly prove his power, in the local motion of men's
bodies, although the full extent of his power therein be not necessarily thence
collected.

Concerning the taking the body of our Savior, and setting it upon a pinnacle
of the Temple, I will not urge, but do conclude upon my former reasons
sufficiently and necessarily, that the Devil, where God himself does not
countermaund, or prohibit him, has power to dispose and transport our
natural bodies. I will not cite a multitude of Authors herein, and from them
borrow needless examples. As some may be true, so I do not believe all, and
very few I wish trusted, where the proose does not manifestly exceed all
exception.

I conclude, that it is possible, that sometimes the supernatural power of the
Devil in this kind, as in other before mentioned, may appear unto outward
sense manifest, and the Witch or Sorcerer be found a voluntary with him. And
as is said of this kind, so may be said of many more besides those before
mentioned.

Charmers.
Concerning the manifest supernatural works done by Charmers, who is ignorant?
To omit the histories of Medea and Circe those old famous Hags, who were seen
by charms immediately to cause grain to wither upon the ground; the current
of waters to stand still; the stream to run back against the course,
tempests, rain, thunder, winds to rise and fall at their word and command,
for an assured testimony of the true and real harms, which Charmers
manifestly unto outward view and sense did unto the ancient world, is as yet
extant so many hundreths of years, the Law of the twelve Roman Tables,
wherein was a Decree and Statute made to prevent and restrain the manifest
wrongs and injuries of Charmers. Alienas Segetes ne incantato, says the Law,
Alienas Segetes in-cantando ne pellexeris, that is, Let no man charm his
neighbors grain. Let no man by charms and incantations carry away or
transport another grain. There are many other true reports and records of
other wonderful works and supernatural feats, all alike offered unto the
outward sense: There inumeration or citation is not further needful. It is
sufficient whatsoever or how many soever they be, that they are works
supernatural, that they are manifest to sense, that they are of the Devil,
and that the Witch or Sorcerer does manifest his guilt therein, by voluntary
presenting himself therein, by manifest undertaking any part or office in the
performance or by promising, and according to promise causing to come to pass.
The reason is infallible. He that does undertake voluntarily, does present
himself and does promise and according to promise, cause to be performed that
which is in another power, and impossible unto himself, does thereby
necessarily and unanswerably prove himself to have an interest, a power, a
contract with that other, which for any may to have with the Devil, is society
with Devils, which is Witchcraft and Sorcerie.

And thus has been declared, how the supernatuall works of the Devil and
Sorcerers may be manifest to the outward sense, and the true testimony thereof.

An objection here may be made, that many of the former works may seem
manifest to the sense, which indeed and truth are deceits of the imagination
and illusion, and therefore there can be no such certainty unto the outward
sense. It is truly Things i^ agined and fancied, easi^ discerned from those
things which are real and true objects of the sense.
answered, He that wants so much true judgment, as to distinguish when he
does see a certain true object offered unto his sight from without, and when
he is incountred only with a resemblance thereof from within his fancy and
imagination, is diseased in body or mind, or both, and therefore is no
competent Judge or witness in these or any other weighty affairs. For that is
in health of body, and in the outward organes and instruments of sense, and
sound in his reason, judgment, and understanding, though sometime the fogge
and mist of deceived sense, or fancy, ouershadow the brightness of true and
vndeceiued reason for a short time in him yet it cannot so perpetually eclipse
it, but it will recover his light and true splendour again, and truth will shine
more excellently in the end out of that darkness. This is very lively seen in
the example of S. Peter. Acts 12. verse 10.12. who at first did think he had
only seen the Angel which God sent unto him to deliver him out of bonds, in
a dream or vision: but when afterward he was come to himself, and his true
sense and reason, he then perfectly discerned and knew that he was rea^y
delivered out of prison by an Angel of God.

If men could not certainly discern between that which they do really see,
and that they falsely imagine in visions, dreams and fancy, then were the
life of man most miserable, there could be no certainty of truth, no excelling
in knowledge or understanding. All men should be a like unable to distinguish,
whether we live in dreams only, or in wakeful deed. But the certain
knowledge which God has given unto mankind in so infinite kinds and
measures, does prove the eminence of reason and understanding above the
intanglements and depression of sense and fancy.

There remains as yet another doubt, which is, how those things which before
were mentioned to be spiritual and supernatural can be subject in reason unto
outward sense or be known thereby, howsoever by the former examples, it does
so seem. It is true that a Spirit and a Spiritual work simply in it self in
the own nature and substance, cannot be seen by any bodily eyes, or be
deprehended by any outward sense.

Notwithstanding, as they do mix themselves with bodily * substances,
Spiritus in^pori and a ^sibus nori^ remoti peribus con^icui. ^ernel l. 1. de
^b. Ret. cause. ^ap. 11.
which are subject to sense, by accident Spirits, and spiritual operations,
are certainly tried and discovered even unto sense. For how is it possible that
a Spirit should mix it self in corporal things, but the discrepant nature
thereof, and mighty difference, must produce and beget some great apparent
alteration, which alteration being beyond the wonted nature of the one, does
prove another superior nature in the other? For illustration hereof, let us
borrow an instance from one of the forenamed manifest Sorceries. Water is
turned into blood by a Spiritual power. The eye does manifestly see the water,
and as apparently after see the blood, and is a true and vndeceiued witness of
both. Reason and common sense do know the transmutation to proceed from an
invisible power, which appearing in visible bodies, is by them apart seen, and
does detect an invisible Author, because an immediate effect manifested to
sense, does necessarily in nature prove the immediate cause, though hidden and
unknown to sense. That invisible and spiritual things may, by those things
which are visible and bodily, be conceived and discerned, the holy Scripture
does witness in these words of Saint Paul, Romans 1.20 The invisible things of
God (says he) are seen by the visible things, or by his works in the
creation of the world, which are visible.

It may be here demanded, since it is the property of the Devil, in his
seeming miraculous contriuements and actions (though a limited and finite
object creature of God) yet to endeavor to counterfeit and imitate the most
high and mightiest works of wonder of the infinite Creator, thereby to
magnify, deifie, and equal himself unto God in unbelieving and seduced
hearts: Since, I say, this is his property, how shall the frail understanding
and capacity of man distinguish the maruailes of the devil, so lively
resembled thereto, from the true miracles, and truly miraculous works of God,
that thereby with more facility, and less confusion, industrious minds may
discover the proper works and acts of the Devil, and his associates,
Enchaunters, Witches, and Sorcerers? First, the true miracles of God being
transcendent above all created power, and the immediate effects only of a
creating virtue, Almighty God for his sole good will and pleasure does usually
and ever dispense by the hands and through the administration of holy men,
Prophets and Apostles manifestly called of God. Secondly, the end and scope of
Gods miracles, directly and mainely aim and are bent at the glory of God, and
the benefit of his people, not unto any private end, any particular vain end,
tending to satisfaction of private lusts and curiosity.

For this cause the holy Apostles used the gift of miracles not unto any other
ends, then unto the confirmation of that holy Gospel, which they preached and
published from God, neither did they therein ascribe ought unto their own
praise or glory, but solely unto the praise and glory of God, and the good of
his Church.

That this was their true end, and ought to be the scope and end of all that
receive the power of miracles from God, Saint Paul does witness and teach, 1.
Cor. chap. 12. verse 4, 5, 6, 7. Now there are (says he) diversities of gifts,
but the same Spirit: and there are diversities of administrations, but the same
Lord: and there are diversities of operations, but God is the same which
works all in all. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man
to profit withal.

It is from hence manifest, that if any miracles proceed from God as Author,
they are dispensed by men, sanctified by God, and who can and are able to
prove and justify their warrant from God: as also that these men of God do
solely profess and bend them unto the glory of God, and the weal of his
Church. This then is the square and infallible rule by which all miracles do
stand or fall, and are approved either to be of God, or convinced to be of
Devils.

Let us then conclude this point, with that excellent and divine saying of
Theophilact, upon the 9. chap. of S. Luke. Praedicatio miraculis and miracula
praedicatione sanciuntur. Multi enim saepe miracula ediderunt per Daemones, sed
ecrum doctrina non erat sana, quamobrem earum miracula non extiterunt a Deo.
That is, the word of God does establish and confirm the truth of miracles, and
miracles ratify and confirm the authority and truth of the word. For many
have done miracles by the power of the Devil, but their doctrine was corrupt
and not found; and therefore their miracles were not of God. Wheresoever
therefore miracles or supernatural works shall dare to show their heads, not
contained within those limits or compass, that is neither proved immediately
from God himself, nor mediately by him revealed in his writ and word of truth,
they are justly to be suspected to issue from the enemies of God; the Devil,
and evil Spirits, and therefore their Authors ought to be accomptant therein
unto Justice, and all religious Ministers and servants of God and Justice, in
the most strict and severe extent of Law. And thus much concerning the
manifestation of the supernatural works of Witches and Sorcerers, unto or
through the outward Sense.

CHAP. VII. The works of the Devil or Witches manifest to Reason, or
consequence of Reason, and how detected.
ALl doubts being cleared, it has undoubtedly appeared how supernatural and
spiritual works are apparent to sense. It now follows to declare, how
likewise they are evident to Reason, or necessary to consequence of Reason.

Those things are said to be proper objects of Reason and understanding: which,
being remote from the immediate view or notice of the outward senses, are
grounded upon universal and intellectual known positions, propositions, and
certain undoubted general notions, by necessary collections, or
raciocinations. That we may build the foundation of this our Reason or
Raciocination upon the infallible truth of Gods holy Word which shall never be
shaken: let us for the detection of Witches and Sorcerers, by reason, and
consequence of reason, syllogise directly and immediately from God himself.

Thus says Almighty God, Isaiah chap. 8. verse. 19. And when they shall say
unto you, Enquire of those that have a Spirit of Divination, and at the
South-sayers, which murmr and whisper, should not a people enquire of their
God? Under this interrogatiue (should not a people inquire of their God?) is
understood this affirmative; A people should enquire of no other Spirit, but of
their God alone.

From this holy text and writ, reason does assume and collect necessarily, and
truly.

First, that many things are hidden from the knowledge of man, which are
revealed unto the science and knowledge of Spirits. Otherwise neither would man
ask or enquire of Spirits (as has been usual in all ages) neither should
God have occasion here to forbid the enquiring at Spirits. That the ignorance
also of man in things known to Spirits, is the true, first and original
motive or reason for enquiring at Spirits, is very plain by the words of King
Saul, 1. Sam. 28.15. God is departed from me (says he) unto the vision of
Samuel, raised by the Devil, and answers me no more, neither by Prophets,
neither by dreams: therefore have I called thee, that thou may tell me what
I should do.

Here is a manifest grant of knowledge in Spirits above men. Secondly, reason
does hence collect, that all Spirits that do suffer themselves to be enquired
at, are evil Spirits, and therefore Devils; because Almighty God has here
expressly forbidden the enquiring at any other Spirit beside himself: and
therefore good and holy Spirits will not, nor Angeli boni non possunt peccare,
Pet. Lomb. d. 7. l. 2. This does condemn that white Magic or Theourgia which
is supposed or pretended conference with good Spirits.
can not disobey the commandment of God, nor countenance or assist men in so
doing. Thirdly, reason does necessarily hence conclude, that such men as are
enquired at for revelations of things hidden from the skill and possibility of
knowledge in man, are Sorcerers, Witches, and South-sayers, if promising and
performing according thereto really, and yet not warranted by God his word, nor
assisted by nature.

The consequence and inference of this reason is just; for that to promise
those things, or to undertake those things which are out of their own
knowledge, and solely and properly in the knowledge of Spirits and Devils,
does manifestly prove in the performance, their interest, society, and
contract with Spirits and Devils, which is Sorcery and Witchcraft.

It may be here objected, that there are some men who affect to be resorted
unto, and to be enquired at in things supposed hidden from the knowledge of
man, and to be reputed able unto such Revelations, though happily they practice
to deceive, under the color of pretense, of such ability.

It is justly hereto answered, that this their presumption ought to be severely
enquired into, whether it do taste of ought that is diabolical, of the
Devil, or supernatural: and if nothing so do, yet in this Grand cause of God
himself, the religious jealousy of the prudent Magistrate, ought to punish
their presumption, which dare affect to undertake the name or note of a sin,
so odious and abominable unto Almighty God. Let us for better impression,
again repeat and iterate those things which were collected out of the
propounded text.

First, that there is knowledge in Spirits of things hidden, and separated from
the knowledge of man.

Secondly, that such Spirits as are enquired at, and do reveal such knowledge
unto man, are Devils.

Thirdly, that men which do practice to be enquired at for such supposed
Revelations, ought not only to be justly suspected, and inquired into, but
that if they be found therewithal, to know and reveal those things, which are
indeed and really above and beyond the knowledge of man, and are properly and
only in the power of Spirits; that then this does infallibly prove their
interest power, and society with Devils, which is certain and assured Sorcery
and Witchcraft.

And thus has reason drawn a demonstration out of the book of God, of a
certain Witch, and manifest Sorcerer. Let us now exercise our selves in the
consideration, examination, and trial of some particulars herein.

It is said of Apollonius, that he foretold the day, the hour of the day, the
moment of the hour; wherein Coccius Nerra the Emperor should die, long before
the time and being in far distant places removed from him. It is reported of
the same Apollonius, that being consulted by one who for that purpose came unto
him, how he might grow rich, Apollonius appointed him to buy a certain field
or ground, and to be careful in tilling and plowing thereof, which after he
had done a while, he found in the end a great treasure and so became rich. It
is written of the same Apollonius also, He made known unto Titus Vespatian,
the time and manner of his death, enquiring it at his hands. These things with
many other the like Ianus Iacobus Boissardus, relates in the life of
Apollonius.

Who has not heard of the name and mention of that famous and renowned British
Wizard Merlin, and of his high and great esteem among Princes for his
prophesies? Unto his foresight and predictions, from many foregoing ages, the
successes and events of diverse Princes affairs, in their several reigns,
have been usually by diverse times and histories referred.

For this cause Master Camden, in the description of Caermarden-shire, does
term him the Tages of the Britans.

Speed in his tractate of the ancient Inhabitants of great Britane; as also of
the life of Aurelius, Ambrosius, and of the reign of King John, and of Henry
the fourth, does out of Malmesbury, and others, recite diverse accidents and
events, in several succeeding ages, unto his oraculous and miraculous
illuminations, ascribed to have been fores^ene, foretold, and known.

If there be truth in those Oracles, and ancient foreseeing Revelations, they
do necessarily infer the assistance of a power, far superior unto all the
power of man. Therefore whosoever does find them true, must conclude their
Author a Witch or Sorcerer. Neither has the general reception, or opinion of
Authors, been herefrom different, who have published him the son of an
Incubus, or the son of a Witch, begotten by the Devil. As it is said of this
ancient time-noted, and age-viewed Sorcerer; so may be testified of many other.

What shall we judge of that infamous woman, among the French, called Ioane of
Arc, by others Ioane Pucell de Dieu? John de Serres, the French Historian, does
report that she had many miraculous Revelations, whereof the King (then Charles
the seventh) and all his Army and men of war, were open wondering
witnesses, and in those revelations for the most part, there was found no less
wondrous truth, then true wonder, as says Serres, although some others have
judged her an Imposteresse only. By her sole encouragement, and stout assurance
of success, built upon miraculous revelations, the French prosperously
incountred the victorious English in France, at several times, and against all
humane reason, recovered their in reason-vnrecouerable, and most desperate
standing, even near unto the pit of utter downfall, with more then
unspeakable amazement and terror, unto the suddenly confounded English.

Notwithstanding, at length she was taken prisoner by the English, executed
and burnt for her Witchcraft. What shall we say or judge of other the like
Authors, and broachers of supernatural revelations, and predictions in other
times? The forementioned Historian reports, that a Wizard foretold Duke
Biron of his death, and that he should dye by the back blow of a Burguignon,
who afterward proved his Executioner, being that Country man.

Melancton out of Carrion does recite the mention of a woman, of the order of
the Druides among the Tungri, who foretold Dioclesian that he should be
Emperor of Rome, when he had first killed a Boar, which proved afterward one
Aper, then an Usurper, which in the Latin tongue signifies a Boar.

Suetonius writes of a Diuinour, who long before was able to make known the
death, and the manner of the death, and murder of Julius Caesar.

Philippe de Commines, in his 8. book, chap. 19. does make mention of one
Friar Hierome, and of his many admirable revelations and predictions,
concerning the affairs of the King of France, which as from Friars own mouth,
he himself did often hear, so with his own eyes he did witness and behold
their issue true. It was disputed, whether in these transcendent revelations
the Friar were a Some Au^ors do ^rite, that ^is man was ^ holy man, ^d a man
of ^od. If it ^ay he pro^d, that he ^ceiued ^ose his re^lations from ^od. I do
^scribe. If cannot be ^ooued, that ^e did re^ue them ^m God, ^is most ^taine,
that ^y were of ^ Devil, ^ce in super^urall reue^ions there ^ be no o^r
medium. Speed.
man of God or no, and it is doubtfully there concluded.

In these like revelations and prophecies, reason cannot deny, but must
acknowledge the manifest impression and stamp, of more then humane Science or
demonstration. If we desire or affect more specially to view what our own
Histories at home afford: who can deny him a Wizard, or Witch, who as Master
Speed and others testify, in the reign of Richard the Usurper foretold, that
upon the same stone where he dash his spur, riding toward Bosworth field,
he should dash his head in his return: which proved accordingly true, when
being slain in battle, he was carried naked out of the field, and his head
hanging low by the horse side behind his bearer, did smite upon the same stone
in repassage, where before in passage he had strooken his heel and spur.

What can be deemed less of the Author of that prophecy in Edward the fourth;
that is, that Some Au^ors do ^rite, that ^is man was ^ holy man, ^d a man of
^od. If it ^ay he pro^d, that he ^ceiued ^ose his re^lations from ^od. I do
^scribe. If cannot be ^ooued, that ^e did re^ue them ^m God, ^is most ^taine,
that ^y were of ^ Devil, ^ce in super^urall reue^ions there ^ be no o^r
medium. Speed.
G. should murder King Edwards heirs, which G. understood of the Duke of
Gloucester, was too true.

How can he likewise escape the just suspicion of the same foul crime, from
whom originally or first was derived that prophecy or prediction in Henry the
fifth, concerning his son, as yet then unborn, videlicet, that what Henry of
Monmouth should win (which was Henry the fifth) Henry of Windsor should lose
(which was Henry the sixth and his son) as it after came truly to pass?
These things as I said before, do necessarily infer a power far superior,
unto the power of man, and therefore prove their voluntary undertakers
Witches, or Sorcerers. This does Binsfeldius in his Tract, de Malef.
confessionis, confidently affirm in these words, Referri non possunt ad causas
naturales, sed ad Daemonas hi effectus, nempe response dare de occultis ferri,
per verem, per loca remotissima. That is, these things can have no relation
unto natural causes, namely, to give answer unto things hidden from man, to
fly in the air, and the like, but are to be attributed unto the power of the
Devil, or Devils.

But here may be objected, that since it is said by God himself, that no man
ought to ask of any other Spirit, but of God alone, things hidden and
unrevealed to men, Isa. 8. verse 19. before alleged; and since for that cause
it is not to be doubted, that many things may be revealed by God unto men, for
this cause and reason (I say) it may be deemed and objected, that some of the
former revelations and prophecies may be free from the imputation of
Witchcraft, and Sorcery.

It is unanswerably answered to this objection: First, that all the revelations
and prophecies which are of God, are ever published by Prophets, and men of
God, immediately called by God himself, unto those functions and places.
Secondly, those vessels, and servants of God, which are the publishers of Gods
revelations or pophecies, do ever avouch, and openly profess God himself, to
be Author thereof, from whom they only claim, and openly proclaim their
immediate, and express warrant and Commission, as appears by all the
prefixions of their prophecies: Thus says the Lord, The Word of the Lord, The
burden of the Lord, The revelation of Jesus Christ, and the like. Thirdly, the
revelations and prophecies, which are thus derived and sent from God, carry in
themselves some manifest stamp of their authority, and power from God, in some
fruits or effects correspondent, and answerable to the nature, will, and
pleasure of God, and are directly and originally bent, and intended unto the
glory of God, and the public weal, and good of his Church, and people.

By these notes, and infallible marks of Gods holy prophecies and revelations,
may be evidently discerned a clear difference, and distinction thereof from
devilish predictions, and Sorcerous Prognostications, which therefore cannot
shrowde, or hide themselves under color or pretense thereof, being duly and
rightly expended.

It may be yet further objected, that some learned and truly religious
servants of God (though no public Ministers, of Prophetical functions or
callings) have had sometimes their special revelations of some particular
things, in which it were not only manifestly injurious, but plainly and
extremely ridiculous to account them Witches. It is true, and cannot be denied,
that Almighty God sometimes, by dreams, sometimes by secret prodigies, does
admonish some his private servants, good and holy men, of some things to come,
for their own private and retired reformation, information or better
preparation; not for profane or trifling ends, or uses, but that any
prophecies or revelations, can be of God, that are obscurely whispred, or cast
abroad for such uses, by any unwarranted or profane Authors, without any
manifest warrant, Commission or authority from God, in the upright judgment
of all men, that truly worship and fear the true God, the God of hosts, is
much irreligion, and profane credulity to avouch, or affirm. Nay, it is
altogether contrary and contradictory, and therefore impossible to God his
miraculous revelations, visions and prophecies, ordinarily, or commonly to
serve, or wait upon the ordinary ends, or uses of private men, since all true
miracles, and miraculous revelations are ever in their proper nature, and true
end, solely attendant upon God his immediate command and Word, unto his
extraordinary works. To make it therefore ordinary, or a thing common, or of
customary practice, to foretell or give prediction of things to come, must
necessarily proceed from the Devil, since the gift of true prophecy, and the
Spirit of true revelation, is not subjected to the common or usual intentions
of men; neither can profit or commodity, or sale be made thereof by men at
their pleasure, as is not unwonted with all the disciples of Simon Magus,
Sorcerers and Witches, in their markets and fayres made of their prophecies and
revelations.

If then these whispered revelations cannot be of God, then are they
necessarily of the Devil. If they proceed from the Devil, then by an
inevitable conclusion, those men are his instruments or organs, by whom or
through whom they originally flow, or are derived unto men and published. It
may be yet further objected, that in men possessed by the Devil, as were
those^men in the Gospel, whose bodies the Devil did really rend and tear (in
whom he did roar and cry out) whom he cast into the midst of the people.
It may be (I say) objected, that in those possessed and the like, there may be
revealed many things hidden from men, without the imputation or just opinion of
Witchcraft or Sorcerie in them.

That this may be, is manifest in the Gospel, where the Devil in the
possessed uttered words of knowledge then hidden from men, but by
extraordinary revelation, when he acknowledged our Savior to be Jesus the
Son of the living God. This could not in any possibility of man's reason be
known unto the possessed, because it was then but in part revealed unto the
Disciples themselves, who were as yet but learners themselves and Scholars of
that Divinity; neither had the natural man, or the world as yet so much as
tasted, or sauoured any notice thereof.

The like may be objected concerning those that are obsessed. I call them
obsessed, in whose bodies outwardly appearing no extraordinary signs or
tokens of the Devils corporal presidence, or Master Perkins in his discourse
of Witchcraft chap. 3. page 122. does divide likewise Witches unto such within
whom the Devil is not inwardly, but from without does inspire them and within
whom he is, as was the Pythonisse at Phillippi, Acts 16.16.
residence in them (as was in the possessed manifest) yet are their minds,
understanding, wills, and reason palpably observed to be besieged, captiued and
enchanted, by an extraordinary and more then natural, or rather an infernal
invasion of the Devils illusions, for the magnifying and advancing whereof, the
Devil does oft-times mix and temper them with some rare and wonderful
revelations, by or through the obsessed delivered.

From these objections both concerning the possessed, and also the obsessed,
does issue a necessary sequel, that prophecies and revelations are not
always inseparable testimonies of a Witch.

It is truly hereto answered, that solely and simply revelations are not
sufficient evidences, or conuictions of a Witch, or Sorcerer, but with
difference and distinction.

Supernatural revelations vnrequiredly transfused and transferred by the
Devil, do not prove the persons in whom they are found, to be their own
free or desirous Agents in consent therein, but rather properly and truly the
Devils Patients, and therefore it cannot be their guilt, but his intrusion,
usurpation, and insidiation: but supernatural revelations, in which any man
shall knowingly, and delibrately consult with, or inquire at a known Spirit,
and inioying the free liberty of his will, not depraved or corrupted by
illusions or diseases, shall with consent or allowance thereof entertain,
commerce conference or assistance of Spirits unto that purpose: such
revelations (I say) wheresoever truly and duly detected, do demonstratiuely
and infallibly point on a Witch or Sorcerer, by what way soever he do
practice with the Devil, whether by coniuration, spells, or other Magic
rites, or by vulgar trading with him, by familiar speech and express contract,
as is most usual with vulgar and unlearned Witches. It is not the different
manner of contracting, or couenanting with the Devil, that makes a new or a
different species of a Witch, for by what name soever, in what manner soever,
any man does contract with the Devil, he is a Witch or Sorcerer, says
Binsfeldius, and inuocateth the Devil.

Although therefore the possessed, or obsessed, are justly acquit in their
revelations and prophecies, because transmitted or sent unrequired, and
vnknowingly unto them, yet cannot the Witch or Sorcerer be any thing at all
aduantaged, or cleared in his revelations, which are ever detected to be both
by him affected (as is proved by his mercinarie sale thereof) and also are
forethought and premeditate, as is evident by his promised and couenanted
undertaking thereof, according to conditions or agreement.

That we may make this point yet more clear, let us yet farther examine, and
consider what Witchcraft is. These are the express words of Binsfeldius a
Papist Divine, in his tract de Confessionibus Sagarum and Veneficorum. Vt fiat
maleficium haec tria concurrant necesse est inquit, Deus permittens, secundo
Diaboli potestas, tertio hominis malefici voluntas libere consentiens. That is,
unto Witchcraft three things necessarily concur: first God permitting:
secondly the Devil working: thirdly, man thereto consenting or yielding his
free will. Unto the very same purpose, says a learned Protestant Divine our
countriman, Perkins in his description of Witchcraft, including the work or
assistance of the Devil, the permission of God, and a wicked art freely
practiced by man, and chap. 5. of his discourse of Witchcraft, he pronounces
also him a Witch, whosoever wittingly or willingly consents to use the aid
or assistance of the Devil, in the working of wonders above the ordinary
course of nature. I name these two Divines only, because in this particular
they seem to me to have best satisfied, and by the common consent both of
Papist, and Protestant Divines, the truth does more vncontrouersedly appear
Catholic and firm, most other learned men that I have seen on both parts,
having generally or for the most part comparatively been defective. Scaliger
in his book de Sabtilitate, consents with them both, exercit. 347. where
speaking of the impossibility, of one man hurting another merely by bare
words, he has these words.

There is a greater power then words says he, namely, the Devil does the
mischief upon the uttering of such words; and the foolish sottish man, that
pronounces or utters them, supposes that by virtue of his words it is done.
Ipse igitur agit Demon (inquit) stultus and vecors putat suis se verbis agere;
unto the same effect are the words of S. Augustine, by Magic Art says he,
miracles and things above nature are brought to pass, Miracula Magicis artibus
fiunt. lib. 3. de Trinitate. The word Magic does insinuate, or employ, or
include both a Devil, and a supernatural effect or miracle, as in the former
words of Scaliger, also the supernatural effect and consequent of mumbling,
argued a power in them above the power of a mere voice, or speech, which
therefore says Scaliger, was the Devil. In both likewise, the will and consent
of man was apparent. In the first, where S. Augustine calls Magic an Art,
that imployeth a man's consent, for that Arts are willingly, and wittingly
studied by man. In the second, where Scaliger in the mumbling of words of
supernatural effect, affirms that the foolish man who uttered them, supposed
those effects to proceed from his words; his uttering therefore such words,
with that expectance, proved his liking and consent unto such effects. And
thus it is undoubtedly apparent, by these Authors in their descriptions of
Magic, and Witchcraft, that necessarily by consent of reason, though not
always in express words, is understood and included, both something
supernatural, and the will and consent of man thereto. And this may yet be
made apparent, by the words of the same Scaliger, Exercit. 327. Magi (inquit)
suas effectiones violentias appellant: propterea quod vires suas supra eas,
quae naturae ordine fieri videntur exercent. That is, Magitians term their
works violencies, because they exercise violent force, or power, above the
course or order of humane nature. The Magitians giving names unto their works,
above humane power or nature, and boasting them as their own, does prove
their free will and consent. Those their works being supernatural, do prove
them to be of the Devil, as the very usual understanding of the word
Magitian, whereby they are ordinarily termed, does testify. And thus it is
manifest. First, that in Witchcraft the effect or work done is supernatural,
above the reach and power of man. Secondly, that in that work the Magitian, or
Witch, has a willing interest.

And hence now is manifest also, what Witchcraft is, namely, a work or
effect, above the nature or power of man, wherein notwithstanding is the will,
consent, and assent of man. This no man can deny, the demonstration being so
evident.

It now follows to enquire, how this Witchcraft shall be detected, or
discovered; Secondly, how shall man's free will, or consent therein be
discovered. Unto the first, is easily answered, videlicet, the supernatural
work or effect does appear by it self, when it is manifest and apparent
above the nature, reach, and power of man, such as are diverse effects and
works formerly mentioned. Unto the second I answer, that man's free will, good
will, consent, assent, or allowance therein is discovered by the same true
acts or means, whereby any man his consent or assent is usually discovered,
indicted, and arraigned in the case of Treason, Murder, Fellonie.

In case of Treason, Murder, Fellonie, consent is discovered in usual course
and practice of the Law, either by some manifest act promoting or furthering
those wicked intents, or by conniuence therein: by wilfully not seeing, or by
silence, or not revealing,

As therefore in those heinous crimes justly; so in this high Treason against
God, and adherence unto his enemy the Devil, in like manner any man his
wicked assent, content, or good liking, is to be traced and discovered by any
act tending unto the promoting thereof, by his conniuing, willingly concealing,
or silence: For as in case of Treason, Murder, Fellonie, whosoever permits
or admits any of those crimes, whosoever only consents thereto, conniueth,
keeps counsel, or concealeth, is justly by the law held, judged, and
condemned as a Traitor, Murderer, or Fellon himself; So by the same equity
and reason in high Treason against God (such as is Witchcraft and adhering
unto the Devil his enemy) whosoever shall consent thereto, conniue, or give
allowance is certainly a Witch himself, and guilty of Witchcraft. This is the
reason why all Writers, with one consent do as well hold and condemn for
Witchcraft the tacit contract as the express. Wherein in express terms
vocally any man couenanteth with the Devil, or contracteth. A tacit contract
is, when any man takes upon him to do, that by natural causes, which causes
are allowed no such effects in course of nature, nor yet are allowed unto any
such effects beside the course of nature; Either by God, his Word, or by the
Ordinances of his Church. To this effect expressly says Binsfeldius lib. de
Confess. Malefic: and Sagarum: Tacit (inquit) inuocatur Demon quoties quis
contendit illud, facere per causes naturales, quae nec virtute sua naturali,
neque ex Diuina, aut Ecclesiastica possunt illud facere. To the same purpose
says Perkins cap. 5. of his discourse of Witchcraft, giving allowance, says
he, unto means not allowed by God makes a Witch. That there are such effects,
the same Author does instance in another place, in these words, Referri
(inquit) non possunt ad causas naturales sed ad Daemonas hi effectus, ferri per
aerem dare responsa de occultis; That is, these effects cannot be referred unto
any natural causes, but unto the power of Devils, namely, to fly in the air,
to reveal things hidden from man. For this cause also says Perkins, Divining
of things to come peremptorily, conuinceth the Author a Witch.

To conclude therefore, whosoever takes upon him to do these things, or the
like, and cannot justify them done according unto the virtue or power of
natural causes, or (if besides course of nature) cannot prove or warrant them
to be of God, neither by his Word, nor Ordinance of his Church, that man is a
Magitian, a Witch, or Sorcerer. But here it is requisite, and fit that men do
distinguish between things vnwarrantably done beside course of nature; and
therefore necessarily to be tried and judged by those rules of Gods Word, and
Church. And between those things, which are likewise vnwarrantably done, but
are above the course of nature, yet are likewise to be tried by the same rules,
and limits of Gods Word, and Church.

For as besides course of nature are many things, as Sacraments, rites,
Ceremonies. Which are to have allowance of their being from the same
limitations, or else are to be condemned. So there are things above nature as
miracles, which also are to have their allowance, and approbation by the former
rules.

It follows therefore necessarily from hence, that whatsoever supernatural
effect, or above the power, or nature of man does happen, and is not warranted
or allowed by God, his Word, or Church, that certainly is of the Devil. If it
be of the Devil, then whosoever does allow, yield his good will, consent, or
by any way or means, or art does promote or further, it is a Witch, as he who
in Treason, or Murder, conniueth or consents, is a Traitor or Murderer as is
aforesaid. That a supernatural work, or an effect above nature, is to be held
Diabolical, is not only proved by examination and trial of God, his Word,
and Church, but reason it self does also demonstrate it. Every supernatural
effect, has a supernatural cause. Every supernatural cause is God, or the
Devil, there being no mean between, but one or the other. Good Angels or
spirits do work their supernatural effects also or above nature, but those
their supernatural works are always directed and commanded by God, and
therefore are of God, and carry with them evidence immediate from God. All
supernatural works that are of God, are warranted from God. Therefore
whatsoever supernatural work cannot be warranted of God, is of the Devil.
Whether it may be warranted to be of God, will appear easily by the former
limitations and rules. If therefore a supernatural work appear not to be of
God, by the former limitations, and examination; then is it certainly of the
Devil. By necessary consequence, therefore of reason it follows, that
whosoever unto any such effect or work, thus demonstratiuely discovered to be
of the Devil, does give any allowance or consent, though never so tacitly, or
closely, yea though ignorant of the quality or degree of the sin, yet in his
rash and unadvised and inconsiderate yielding or conniuing therein, he is
guilty, accessory, and a very Witch himself, as is aforesaid in case of
Treason, and the like grievous offenses against a Prince or State. For the
ignorance of the law excuses no man, yea and in this particular, So many fair
directions by learned Writers given, does leave men inexcusable, and makes
ignorance wilful, and resolute, and excludes easy pardon. Neither can the
most simple ignorance justify any man, although it may qualify the degree or
grieuousnesse of punishment.

If this law seem strict and hard. Let men consider the greatness, and
grieuousnesse of the sin, and the pernicious consequence thereof. Which
justly does urge, and impose the necessary; fearful rigor, and strictness
of the law. The necessity and equity hereof is apparent in case of high
Treason aforesaid against a Prince, or State, wherein usually they who are
simply, or ignorantly drawn, or used, or are instruments in any sort, to
further or promote the mischief, are as well liable unto the severe
inquisition, and terrible censure of the law, as are they who were the maine
plotters and contriuers. Witchcraft is high Treason against God himself, a
combining, and adhering unto his enemy the Devil, a desperate renouncing of
God and all goodness, and a worship of Devils. In this abominable sin
therefore, in any kind or sort, in any manner or action, to be friend, aid or
convince is no less then high Treason against God also, wherein as well the
accessarie as the principal are both guilty. Whosoever therefore shall in
matter of this high nature or danger, dare or hazard to do any thing that may
be questioned or justly suspected in that kind, or to tend thereto, cannot be
by his ignorance excused.

Thus I objections doubts and impediments removed, let us build a
neuer-deceiuing, and inuiolate conclusion concerning Witches, upon this
neuer-failing nor shaken foundation: that is, all supernatural works
revelations or prophecies whatsoever, that issue not either immediately, and
manifestly from God himself, or from his Word or Church allowed (the proof
and touchstone whereof has been before touched, and briefly declared) or
from the Devil in the ignorant possessed or obsessed, or are not counterfeit
and imposturous (which is likewise elsewhere in the due place considered) all
other revelations or works (I say) whatsoever, not excepted nor included in one
of these, are undoubtedly issuing from Witches and Sorcerers, and are certain
and demonstratiue proofs and evidences of Witchcraft and Sorcery, in whom
they are originally first detected. And thus how Reason does cull and draw
forth a Witch or Sorcerer, has evidently been cleared and declared.

CHAP. VIII. Of diverse kinds and manners, wherein Sorcerers and Witches,
receive knowledge from Spirits.
AS Almighty God has out of the Text before mentioned, Isaiah 8. in general
made evident, who is infallibly a Witch or Sorcerer: so has he in other places
of Scripture manifested some of their several kinds, according to the
different shapes and forms, in which they do enquire at Spirits for their
knowledge and revelations.

This is apparent out of the 18. chap. of Deuteronomie, verse 10. Let none be
sound amongst you that uses Witchcraft. What Witchcraft is, was before out
of the Prophet Isaiah declared.

Now in this place does follow the enumeration of some of the special or
particular shapes in which they shroud themselves. Let none be found among you
(says the Prophet) that uses Witchcraft: and immediately after does add
those particular forms in which they enquire: A regarder of times: a marker of
the flying of fowls: a Charmer: a Sooth-sayer, or that asks counsel of the
dead. As therefore before we proved, that the infallible true note of a Witch
in general, and in common unto all Witches, and Sorcerers, of what kind so
ever, is to be enquired at in things hidden from men (as is likewise by those
words of Saul apparent, Sam. 1. chap. 28 verse 7. Seek me a woman that has a
familiar Spirit, that I may go to her and ask of her:) so here in this text
are reckoned up some of their several shapes, by which in true and sound
reason, and the due consequent thereof, we may consider and collect many other,
though not here numbered, or mentioned.

For since the common and inseparable sign or mark of Witches is certainly
made known to be, the practice of revealing unto men that enquire those
things which are hidden from men, and only revealed by Spirits: it follows
by necessary consequent, that not only those which are here specially
nominated, in that shape of marking of the flying of fowls, or of charming, or
of raising the dead, but all other whatsoever, in what other shape so ever that
is, has, or can be devised, that shall be found to practice or undertake to be
enquired at, and to give answer and revelation of things separated from the
knowledge of man, and which God has hidden from men, and therefore has
forbidden by Spirits to be made known to men; all such (I say) in what shape
so ever, as well in these kinds here named, are, according to the general note
of a Witch, to be judged Witches and Sorcerers.

For as the holy Scripture has nominated and pointed out unto us some few
kinds, as a light only unto all the rest: so may common experience by these
bring others unto our view, and all ages have upon the records of time and
History, left unto succeeding posterity, many shapes more of memorable and
famous Witches; not only in these shapes and forms shrouded, which are here
mentioned but in many other.

Besides those kinds therefore, which here the holy Scripture has nominated,
let us take a short view of some other, which are in other shapes found (since
all are in their common kind and nature the same.) It is no strange thing,
that in the shape, and under the precense of Astrology, Astrologers
some men have hidden sorcerous practice, and performing under the color
thereof such things as were only in the power of Spirits, have thereby
clearly manifested, that they derived and borrowed them of Spirits. Saxo
Grammaticus, in his history de rebus Danicis, does make mention of a sort of
Wizards, who would undertake for gain, to foretell the certain state and
constitution of weather to come so assuredly, that they would usually fell unto
Merchants prosperous and fortunate winds, when by adverse and opposite gales
they were deteyned from their intended voyage.

This kind of Sorcerer may very rightly be referred unto that which in Deuter.
18. verse 10. is noted by a regarder of times, which perhaps may also not
unaptly be understood a Magical Astrologer. His performance above the nature
and power of his Art, of that which is only in the power of a Spirit, does
both detect the Devil to be chief Author of the works, and the other to be
also guilty to the work.

That the professors of Astrology have in former ages unto Astrology joined
this devilish skill and custom; as also other kinds of Diabolical
Diuinations, plainly does appear.

First, by the word of God, Daniel 2. verse 2. wherewith the Astrologers, the
Caldeans, Magicians, Sorcerers and Enchanters are conjoined.

Secondly, it does appear by the Laws, which by the Roman Emperors were
provided against them jointly together, with Caldeans, Magicians, and
Southsayers. The words of one ancient Law are, Nemo Aruspicem consulat, aut
Mathematicum, nemo Ariolum, Caldeum, Magum, that is, let it be enacted or
ordered that no man ask counsel of a South-sayer, a Mathematician, an
Astrologer, a Caldean, a Magician.

Dion in the 27. book of History, does make mention of Astrologers, who by
devilish skill practiced and used to send the Devil to present This kind of
Devil is ^alled, (...).
dreams unto men in their sleep* for which cause Tiberius the Emperor
revenged himself upon such Astrologers, though otherwise himself a great
friend and lover of Astrology. Sir Christopher Heyd^ in his defense of
judicial Astrology, does out of Os^ander recite this distinction of
Astrology: Page 27.
Astrologia pura qua nihil habet de Magi^, that is, Astrology that is not
mixed, no^ intermidieth with Magic. Whereby is necessarily concluded, that
Astrology may be, and sometimes is impure and defiled with Magic and
Sorcerie. In other places of the same work, he makes a difference between
Astrologers Page 29.
simply, and such as with Astrology joined Magic. And out of Brentius he
recites these words, Non negat Hierimias ca^ partem Astrologiae, quae sequitur
manifestas natura rations; that is, the Prophet Jeremy does not deny or
condemn that part of Astrology, which is guided by manifest reason or cause
in nature. Hereby then is unavoidably concluded, that the Prophet of God
condemns that part of Astrology, which exceeds causes and reason in
nature, and that necessarily must needs be Sorcery and Magic. As it is not
obscure, that some men under the color of Astrology have practiced Magic
and Sorcery; so is it no less evident, that many others, under the pretense of
aduising and counselling in Physic. For curation or Prognostication of
diseases, have likewise exercised the same devilish practice.

That this has been no new vpstare custom, the multitude of diseases, which
ancient times do register to have been cured by enchaunted Spells, and words,
and Magic skill, does plentifully witness. The most ancient father of all
Physic and Physicions, the incomparable worthy founder of Method and Art,
Hipp. libro de Sacro mor bo de Magis.
Hippocrates, Dioscor. li. 2. cap. 102.
Dioscorides, Theophrastus de hist. Plant. Trallianus. lib. 9. cap. 4.
Theophrastus, with other succeeding Ancients, do generally all acknowledge
the force and power of Magical curation. Galen in his younger time gave no
credit thereto, but in the more aged Galenus li. de Medica Homeri tractatione.
experience of right observation he does acknowledge it. I will not stuff
this small Treatise with the particular citation of every Author. Later
Physicians also of the best and most choice note, do herein, with former ages
consent and concur, and experience does confirm truth in both.

Whosoever is acquainted with books and reading, shall every where meet a
world of the wonders of cures, by words, by looks, by signs, by figures, by
characters, and ceremonious rites. As what the practice of former ages has
been is manifest; so what our age and later time does herein afford, is
almost no where in this kingdom obscure. The nearest unto that impudence,
which herein this our time does produce and set forth, is that history of a
Germane Witch, reported in the Ma^etis Maleficarum.

There was (as the Author of that work says) sometime a Sorceresse in
Germany, who usually cured not only all that were bewitched, but all kind of
diseased people, so far beyond all power or course of Art and Nature, and
with such facility, that all use of the Art of Physic, or of Physicions was
altogether (for a time) neglected and forsaken; while people from all
Countries, both near and remote, in such numbers and frequence resorted unto
her, that the Governor of that Country imposing upon every man one penny that
resorted unto her, thereby raised himself a mighty treasure.

What others among the most ancient Author, that are not Physicians do
publish, concerning the power of incantations in the curing of diseases is
needless to write. He that has read any few lines of old Homer, or of diverse
other aged Poets, shall find plentiful record hereof. Herodatus is not silent
herein. But to omit all their needless testimonies, Physicians of these last
times, of the most eminent note and worth (whose pens are yet scarce d^ie)
do witness the truth hereof from their own knowledge, fight and experience.
Above the rest, Fer^ ^i^ de Abditis ner^ causis, is worthy any man's pains or
view.

Let us now lastly see what may be collected out of the book of God,
concerning the power of the Devil in curing diseases, from whom all these
inferior Agents, Witches and Sorcerers do derive their power and skill. If it
be in his power, where God does permit, to induce diseases, it must needs
be in his power to cease or calm diseases; because both causing and curing,
consist in the virtue and force of the same means. He therefore that knows
how and by that cause the disease is induced, does necessarily understand;
that by the remouall of that cause it is cured, and according to that rule can
equally, as well by remouall of that cause, cure, as by the induction of the
cause bring sickness. For this reason it is a maxi^ in Physic infallible,
that he is the most excellent Physician, who knows best the causes of
diseases, and who upon the knowledge of their true causes does found the right
method of their curation.

That the Devil does both know the causes of diseases, and also how by them
to procure and produce diseases, is manifest by the History of Job, upon whom
he brought that grievous general b^ch and byle, over all his body, Job chap.
2. verse 7. That he did this by the force of causes in nature, must needs be
evident. First, because he is a creature, and subject and limited by nature
unto and within he^ li^; and therefore is not able absolutely and simply
without causes and means in nature, to produce any effects in nature, although
our ignorance of his power and knowledge (because it so far excels our
power or nature) does call all his works justly supernatural. Secondly, for
that by ^es and dotches are known natural diseases; and therefore had
natural causes, although happily unknown to any man, and beyond the nature of
knowledge or skill in man.

These reasons of the Devils impossibility, to work those effects without
nature, are thus yet more briefly and clearly made infallible. Of Creatio est
constitutio substantiae ex ^ihilo, Scali. ^e Subt. Exer^it. vi. Sect. 13
nothing simply to produce any thing unto a true being and existence, is the
sole and proper work of any infinite Creator, and impossible unto any
creature. Therefore the Devil being a creature, could not bring those diseases
upon Job, but by created means preexisting in created nature, in which he is
contained and limited. And thus much concerning that kind of Witch and
Sorcerer, which is enquired at concerning the curing and issue of diseases,
which we will conclude with this note, that all learned men of the best
experience have observed; that in those cures by Witches and Sorcerers, the
Devil has never perfectly healed, but for a time; or else where he has
seemed most perfectly to cure, it has been for a reservation of the body by
him cured, unto a greater and further mischief in time to succcede. Besides,
this kind of Witch, by means unknown to man, or by a supernatural virtue in
known means, above and beyond their nature, undertaking to cure the sick, or
to foretell the event and issues of diseases, there is also another kind which
does undertake to be enquired at for extraordinary revelation of such
diseased persons, as are bewitched or possessed by the Devil. This kind is
not obscure, at this day swarming in the Kingdom, whereof no man can be
ignorant, Wisemen and Wisewomen.
who lusts to observe the uncontrolled liberty and license of open and
ordinary resort in all places unto wisemen, and wise-women, so vulgarly termed
for their reputed knowledge concerning such diseased persons as are supposed to
be bewitched.

But it may be objected, that many of these two last mentioned forts are
rather deceivers, and Impostors only, who by an opinion of this power, and not
by any real power herein, do deceive, seduce, and beguile the people. This
cannot in some be denied: notwithstanding least impious imposture be still
tolerated to be a covert to hide the manifest devilish practice of Witches,
under pretense thereof (whereby it shall ever continue in this shape neglected
or unspied) I will both briefly give satisfaction how the one may be
distinguished from the other, and also declare how men ceasing to enquire at
Devils and Witches, or Impostors, may learn to enquire of their God alone, and
by the light of nature and reason (which he has given unto them) in his
fear, with his allowance and approbation, more truly and certainly inform
themselves.

CHAP. IX. Of Wizards and Impostors, how they differ from Witches.
HOw Witchcraft in diverse kinds may, according to evidence of reason, be
detected, has been before made manifest. How imposture may be discovered
(sense there is so good use and necessity of the distinction thereof, for the
more perfect separating and setting a part of Witchcraft by it self) we will
likewise briefly make manifest.

Qui oculos fallent, alia pro aliis subditia ostentantes, ii praestigiatores ab
antiquis dicti sunt. Scaliger. Impostura ab eo dicta, quod adulterinas merces,
pro veris supponit, Vlpian, Impostores dicuntur versuti and fallaces homines,
qui merces adulterinas pro veris supponunt, Accursius.
The Impostor is he who pretends truth, but intends falsehood. For this
cause sometimes under an holy pretense, he makes God the Ephesians. 4.14.
Author of his unholy prestigiation, and slandereth God unto his face,
sometimes to be reputed an Col. 2.23.
Angel of light, he makes himself a license to counterfeit the Devil. He
proposes it his trade to seduce, and lives by lying. Sometimes in show and
pollicitation he is a Witch but in the performance of the greater sin he is
less just, and in the personate resemblance solely a Iugler. For as the Witch
performs that which in true, and infallible reason is transcendent and above
nature; so the Impostor performs that which in false and fallible reason and
opinion, only seems parallel.

Hence as Witches do strange and supernatural works, and truly unto reason
worthy of wonder; so the Impostor does things void of accomptable reason, in
shadow, show, and seeming only supernatural, wondered and admired. And hence
it comes to pass, that with undiscerning minds, they are sometimes mistaken
and confounded See Reginald Scot in his discovery of Witchcraft, where in
regard of the seeming likeness of Impostures and Witchcraft, erroneously he
confounds them as one and the self same sin.
on for another.

From hence it is also necessarily concluded, that as Witchcraft is discovered
by a supernatural work above reason, whereto the Witches consent if
accessory; so an Impostor is detected by a work void of accomptable reason,
but in a deceiving false Visar or show, wherewith the purpose and intention of
the Deceiuer or Impostor does concur. As therefore the suspected Witch is
tied to answer unto any just doubt, which may be directly urged against his
or her manifest voluntary action, that is proved supernatural: so is a truly
doubted Impostor bound to give satisfaction, for such his ambiguous actions, as
do in likely reason appear fraudulent, vain, prestigious, iuggling,
couzening, or deceiving. And thus shall each appear in his own true shape
apart of diverse kinds of Witchcraft, I have before produced examples.

I am here likewise very pertinently, Examples of Imposture in general.
for further illustration, propose some examples of Imposture in general, that
the odiousness of this foul sin may appear more foul, and the ougly face
thereof may be more fully discoured.

Among multitude of examples, I will recite only some few, whereof some
consist in lewd and guilefull contriuement of action, other in the bewitching
power of false prophecies, revelations, predictions and prognostications,

Concerning the first, who can be ignorant of the impious Mahomet, who by
guilefull counterfeit miracles, and pretended angelical illuminated works,
first magnified and set up that heathenish Polidorus Virgil lib. 7. cap. vult.
Empire, and Religion of the blasphemous Turks?

The History of Sebastian, the pretended Portugal King, John de Serres,
according to Master Crimstones translation thereof (if he were a true Impostor
indeed, and were not injuriously traduced, and blurred with undeserved reproach)
is an incomparable example, above and beyond many other. I will refer my
Reader to to the Author himself.

If we desire more near or domestical examples herein, Henry the seventh,
Speed.
a boy of mean parentage, through imposturous machinations opposed, set up and
crowned King in Ireland, against that famous and renowned Prince Henry the
seventh, putting him in great danger of his life and crown of England.

Mary, there arose an Impostor, stiling himself Edward the sixth. The danger
of the progress of that Impostor (if it had prevailed) who knows not? The
manifest wrongs, injuries, and impeachments also from counterfeit prophecies,
revelations, and predictions, issuing not only unto private men and families,
but unto Kingdoms, Empiers, and Commonweals, are infinite.

Julian, an Emperor of Rome, though otherwise a mighty and learned Prince,
and valiant soldier, by a prophecy of an Impostresse or seeming Pythonisse,
promising his conquest, and triumph over the Kingdom of Persia, was thither
hastened unto his deserved death, and the vengeance of God upon his infamous
Apostasy.

John de Serres, the French Chronicler, that the power and force of some
pretended revelations, and visions of a young Shepherd, in the reign of
Charles the seventh King of France, was to preualent, that it persuaded Pothon
that great and famous French Captain, with the Martial of France, to arm and
encounter the then victorious English in the bowels of that Kingdom; by which
unadvised attempt, the French were supprised and taken by the English.

Martha Brosier, counterfeiting the fits and passions of such as were
possessed, in short time became so powerful in illusion, that she ministered
much matter of wonder and amazement, not only unto private men, but unto the
Kings Counsel, to Preachers in pulpits, yea unto the whole Parliament, until
the counterfeit Devil enduring some punishment and restraint, forsook his
pretended possession.

Edward the fourth, his brother George Speed.
Duke of Clarence, was hastened unto his untimely death, even by the allowance
of his brother King, upon the fear of a vain and flying prophecy, that G. of
King Edwards heirs should be the murderer.

In the time of Henry the eight, the holy Maid of Kent

In the same kings reign, the bewitching esteem, credit, Edward Speed.
Lord Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, first into high Treason, and to reach at
the Crown, and after from thence thrust him headlong or headless into his
grave.

In the reign of Edward the sixth, there was a prophecy Kett, and those
Norfolk Rebels, was hartned and encouraged to proceed in their rebellion and
outrage, unto the great danger and damage of the Kingdom, and in the end unto
their own destruction: That blind pretended prophecy, in the insidiation of
vain and credulous minds, was somewhat like unto that ambiguous Oracle in the
Poet.

Aio, te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse:
I say, the son of Aeacus the Roman power shall quell.
This Oracle may on either side indifferently, either actiuely or passiuely be
understood. Like unto it was that prestigious prophecy, which the rebellious
Norfolcians with their Kett trusted: Hob, Dic, and Hic with c^es and cl^uted
shoone,
Shall fill up Duffin-dale with slaughtered bodies soon.


The Rebels understanding this blind revelation, or prediction, concerning the
victory wherein they themselves should be Agents and not Patients, (as
afterward their own ruin did truly interpret it) and dreaming the filling up
of the Dussin dale to be intended of other men's dead bodies, and not their
own, where thereby incited with furious courage, unto the hazard of the
kingdom and their native Country, until their own mangled and slaughtered
carcases became butchered spectacles, and bloody monuments of such illusion and
imposture.

Prior Speed.
Bolton of St. Bartholmewes in London, who in the reign of Henry the eight,
upon the impression of an universal World flood, grounded upon pretended
miraculous predictions, ridiculously builds himself an house or neast on the
top of Harrow hill, to save himself from drowning?

What mighty terrors did the wicked imposturous predictions of strange events
in the admirable year 88. strike into the common people or vulgars of England?
from whence, what different distractions in many private men did bring forth,
to relate, were just matter of profound laughter. What translations of
dwellings, peregrinations into other Countries, exchange of inheritances for
moneys, and other ridiculous extrauagant molitions did the approach of that
year diversely prepare? I will not waste paper in any more Philippe de
Commines, book 4. cha. 10. taxes our English Nation for the multitude and
vanity of lying Prophecies in this kind.
particular recitals: Our later age and time has not been barren of many
wicked and harmefull fruits of imposturous prophecies, neither have they
altogether escaped the eye of Justice, nor the blurre of infamy written in
their names and chronicled memory. And although many impostures (because
practiced upon private and more obscure personages) are less known and
published, then such as are committed against Princes and States, and therefore
are more remarkable in the eyes of all men, yet are they both equally in their
natures pernicious. It were not now impertinent from the declaration of the
mischiefs of imposture in general, to descend unto some such in particular,
as are practiced under the lying pretense and false color of a transcendent
and Magic virtue. In examples of this kind, Examples of imposture under
colou^ of Magic skill or Witc^ craft.
Reignald Scott does ouer-abound in his discovery. I have my self noted and
known some men (I could say some men of the Clergy) who to draw wonder and
custom unto their practice in Physic (wherein Sacriligiously they spend
their best and chief time and hours, with open neglect of God and his
service.) I know some I say, who are not ashamed profanely and most
irreligiously, to affect among vulgars, to gain the opinion of skill in
Coniuration, Magic, and Diuell-charming.

By this imposturous Art or device many years together (not among men
Religious, Orthodoxe, or iudiciously learned) but among vulgars, and sometimes
also among some great and mighty men) they have become unworthily magnified
Physicians, above other far more worthy, and performing sometimes, some
things praise worthy (as is oft-times contingent unto the meanest practisers)
they still gain countenance, and time to rob God of the first fruits of
their time, strength, and labors, and the Church of their more requisite maine
study and employment. It is not unknown how common it is among these men, to
profess the erecting of figures, the giving of answers as Wizards, the
revealing of things hidden, as Magitians, unto the great dishonor of God, the
shame of the Church, the Laws and Kingdom. How usual it is with many other
Iuglers and Mountibankes, by the reputation of Witches imposturously to
promise, and undertake miraculous curations, and Prognostications of diseases
and their issues, is not unknown unto any common obseruer: wherein, for
brevity sake, and to avoid confusion, and the crambe or iteration of the same
things. I will refer the Reader to a former manuell, called The discovery of
Erroneous practices in Physic, where although, by reason of my absence beyond
and beside the Errata, many errors both in some words and sense, do still
remain; yet there are many things in this kind worthy notice. Read page 71.
the Treatise of Wizards; likewise, in the second marginall note of the page 53.
an History of a Surgeon, famous in curing such as were bewitched: Likewise
page 109.110.111. an History of imposture, under the color and pretense of the
inspection, and judging of Vrines: and likewise, page 60. and from thence unto
the end of that whole Chapter. There is a very rare, but tree, description of a
Gentlewoman, about six years past, cured of diverse kinds of convulsions, and
other Apoplecktike, Epileptike, Cataleptike, and Paralytike fits, and other
kinds of accidents of affinity therewith. After she was almost cured of
those diseases, but the cure not fully accomplished, it was by a reputed Wizard
whispered, and thereupon believed, that the Gentlewoman was merely bewitched,
supposed Witches were accused. The Gentlewoman has been free from all those
accidents there mentioned, the space of six years now past.

In this last past seventh year, since the writing of that history, some of
the former fits are Plurimae autem passiones puerulis indicantur in septem
menfibus nonnullae in 7. anno Hipp. Aphor. 28 lib. 3. Morbi Diutini ad
septenarii rationem habent Crisim, non septena^ii quoad menses modo, sed quoad
annos. Galen, in dictum Aphorism.
critically again returned: the same Wizard or Deceiuer resorted unto and
enquired at, does now again avouch her to be bewitched; upon opinon whereof
and trust in his illusion, the timely use and benefit of due counsel has
been much omitted and neglected. Her diseases which formerly, far exceeded
these which now are, in number, frequence and vehemence, were in shorter space
cured, and so continued the space of six years together. These few which now
do return, due counsel and time neglected, though being in number fewer,
less intricate, and far less violent, have notwithstanding a far larger
space of time continued.

If that Counselor or undertaker to counsel, be a Wizzard in name and
reputation only (as I do guess and deem him) then is this History an
incomparable example and instance of the wickedness, impiety and cruelty of
imposture and Impostours. If he be found a Witch, then is it an unanswerable
evidence and instance of the Devils iuggling, lying, illusion and deceiving,
whereof we made mention and proof before in the question or doubt concerning
Pythagoras realty in two places. For, in true reason and judicious discerning,
it is as clear as the brightest day, that no accident befalling the
Gentlewoman mentioned, can be other then natural or farther supernatural,
then either the Devils credit with a Witch, or an Impostors credit with
deceived and seduced men is able to inchaunt persuasion unto vain affiance in
them. I refer the Reader to the consideration of the History at large, with
that which here is added: I will only exhort all men not to be in those
doubtful cases, too violent, nor rash in asking or believing unworthy or
worthless counsel, but to ask it of such as are truly and godly learned and
prudent, and not of Impostours or Seducers, considering that the consequence of
rashness, mistaking error and ignorance; are no less then the life or death
of the sick, a putting out of the eyes and light of reason, which God and
Nature has given man to walk withal in the dark pilgrimage of this life; a
deprivation of due remedies which God has allowed (while beguiled with vain
and foolish opinion, with wilful blindness, they worthily esteem not, nor
will expect his grace and favor therein.

Assuredly, he that does give up himself to become a prey to folly and
illusion, and led by deceivers headlong into confused, unjustifiable,
unwarranted and inhibited explorations and trials, does forsake the guidance
and use of right reason, and in stead thereof, is intemperately distracted with
impatience of expectation of due respect and esteem of Gods ordinance and
allowance in his ordinary means, may justly fear that God has decreed and
determined, not only to dispoile him of that common blessing which he has
promised to all that duly seek, and rightly use his allowed means; but also
that he leaves him unto the cursed path and way of perpetual blindness and
hardness of heart therein, except his special and extraordinary divine grace
in time reduce his dangerous steps. For certainly he unto whose blinded eyes
God does offer so great mercy and favor, as is plainly evident in all his
ordained ordinary means, unto every good that befalls man in this life, and
with thankfulness cannot or will not behold it, when it is laid at his
unthankful feet, is in a desperate way of a lethargicall disposition, or
senseless memory and oblivion, both of his reason, and of himself, and of
Gods merciful goodness toward him. And thus the ugliness of imposture both
by the description thereof, and also by example does appear, wherein may be
first seen, how they that trust thereto, do forsake God, themselves and their
own common sense and reason, and give themselves to be swallowed up of lying
and illusion. Secondly, in the whole course of imposture it self, is seen the
continual practice of merciless impiety, the usual wrong of the afflicted,
the belying of truth, the deceiving the miserable, the deprivation of the
sick, of the use of due remedies and means which God has made and blessed
unto men, that with praise unto his name, patience and due dependence upon his
providence therein, can be contented to seek and expect the likely and
hopeful issue thereof, in usual course of nature. Lastly, may be collected,
and observed, the use and necessity of distinction between Imposture and
Witchcraft; namely, that the odious and abominable sin of Witchcraft be not
suffered to continue, unregarded or neglected, under the color of vain
Imposture, and that the Devil be not suffered to live amongst us, too
commonly, and too openly, in the coat and habit of a foolish Impostor, or
Iuggler. For certainly nothing does more hood-winke the through discovery of
Sorcerers, then remissness and omission of inquisition, and castigation of
Impostors, out of whose leaven (no doubt) but diligent animaduersion, might
ofttimes boult out many a subtle and concealed Witch.

CHAP. X. How men may by reason and nature be satisfied, concerning such sick
persons as are indeed and truly bewitched.
IT follows now, according to promise, briefly to point unto direction, how
men leaving to inquire at Witches and Sorcerers, and Impostors, concerning the
sick, supposed to be bewitched, may inquire and be better satisfied by the
light of Reason; which God has given unto them. Reason does detect the sick
to be afflicted by the immediate supernatural power of the Devil, two ways:
The first way is, by such things as are subject and manifest unto the learned
Physicion only: the second is, by such things as are subject and manifest unto
a vulgar view.

Those things which are manifest unto the Physician alone are of two sorts. The
first is, when in the likeness and similitude of a disease, the secret working
of a supernatural power does hide it self, having no cause or possbilitie of
being in that kind or nature. The second is, when natural remedies or means
according unto Art and due discretion applied, do extraordinarily or
miraculously either lose their manifest inevitable nature, use, and operation,
or else produce effects and consequences, against or above their nature, the
impossibility of either of these in usual or ordinary course of nature, does
certainly prove an infallibility of a superior nature, which assuredly
therefore must needs be either Divine or Diabolical.

This conclusion concerning the infallibility of a supernatural mouer, from
the like assumption, the learned and worthy preserver of reverent antiquity,
Master Camden, in his description of Cheshire, has truly inferred upon the
miraculous prelusions, and presages, ever and prepetually forerunning the death
of the heirs of the house or family of the Briertons. These and such like
things (says he) are done either by the holy tuteler Angels of men, or else by
Devils who by Gods permission mightily show their power in this inferior world.

Whenever therefore the Physician shall truly discover a manifest
transcending power, manner, or motion in any supposed disease, there is an
undoubted conclusion of the Author. Where likewise remedies find
concomitances, or consequences contrary to their nature, or such as never were,
nor ever can be contingent in course of nature: this assumption truly granted,
does inuincibly infer a transcendent force and virtue therein never to be
denied. The Demonstration hereof is evident. A proper cause is certainly
known where is detected his proper effect. Ergo, where is effected ought
supernatural, there is infallibly discovered a supernatural cause.

Thus how diseases, and the wonderful accidents which often happen in diseases,
may be by the Physicion detected, according unto the rule of reason, whether
induced by the Devil or no, is briefly pointed at.

How the guilt of any man therein with the Devil (which does only convince a
Witch) may and ought appear, has been before declared, and shall likewise
hereafter be further made clear.

It will not now be immateriall or unprofitable, for confirmation,
illustration, and better proof of those two ways, which are distinguished to
be only subject, and manifest unto the Physicion, in the detection of the
secret works of Devils and Witches in diseases, to produce one or two examples
of both.

Concerning the first, Fernelius in his 2. book De Abd. Rer. causis, chap. 16.
delivers a history of a young man of a noble family, who was by a violent
convulsion in an extraordinary manner long time tormented. Diverse learned
Physicions remained long time doubting and unsatisfied, both in the cause of
this disease, as also of the seat or place where the cause, with any
sufficient reason, might be judged settled.

Behold very pregnant inducements of the finger of the Devil, moving in the
disease. One was the incredible velocitie of motion in the diseased, impossible
unto the force of man: the other was, for that in all the fits and convulsions,
though very strong and vehement, his sense and understanding remained in the
diseased, perfect and nothing obscured, or interrupted, which in convulsions
according unto natural causes was never seen, and is impossible.

The force of these reasons to euince the presidence of the Devil, in the
manner and motion of the forenamed disease, the Devil himself did shortly
after justify, declaring and professing himself the Author thereof in plainly
expressed words.

In the forenamed book and chapter, there is another report or relation of a
man sudainly surprised, with an extraordinary fashion, or shape of madness or
frenzy, wherein he uttered and revealed things hidden, and of profound
Science and revelation, not only above the pitch and power of natural
capacity, and the stimulation thereof in diseases contingent, and the forgerie
of fained ecstasy, but really in true and upright judgment, and impartial
discerning of a Physician beyond all question and exception supernatuall. The
sequel after made it good. These examples are sufficient unto men that are
wise, and with whom reason has authority. I do not affect unadvised
multiplication herein, suspecting many histories, and reports of diverse Authors.

The possibility of those which are here produced, beside the unstained credit
of the Author, is apertly confirmed by the holy Scripture, where, in the
Lunatike the Devil manifested himself by actions, only proper and
appropriate unto the power of a Spirit: such was his casting the Lunatike into
the fire, and into the water, his violent ^ending and tearing him, which were
things by the Physician iudiciously distinguished, in most part impossible unto
the power and nature of the Lunatike himself, or of his disease alone, though
not all.

The man possessed among the Gaedarens, Matthew. 8. Mark. 5. Luke 8. likewise
does establish the same, who was known and seen evidently by the Physician,
how far simply or solely diseased, and how far possessed beyond diseased
ecstasies by those undoubted works, and that finger of the Devil, when he
easily brake in pieces those iron chains wherewith the Lunatike was bound: so
that no force thereof whatsoever could hold or bind him; as also when he
uttered and spoke that more then humane understanding and revelation of Jesus
Christ to be the Son of God: a knowledge as yet vncommunicated unto mankind,
and unto reason impossible.

Concerning the second way of detection, subject unto the Physician alone,
namely, when natural remedies aptly applied, are attended with supernatural
consequences, contrary to their nature, or above the same, out of the former
Author, and forenamed place. there is an example also without farther
straggling of unquestioned estimation. A certain man there mentioned,
vehemently burning and thirsting, and by intolerable heat compelled to seek
any mitigation, or extinction of his heat and thirst, in want of drink or
other fitting liquor, happened to find an Apple, in the moisture and natural
juice whereof, hoping the usual short refreshing of the tongue, he, after the
first tasting thereof, immediately found (not only that which was contrary to
the nature of an Apple, greater burning and thirst then before) but had
instantly his mouth and jaws so fast closed and sealed up thereby, that he
hardly escaped strangling.

The reasonable doubt of the latitation of the Devil, in this fair,
harmless, and usual remedy of the tongues, thirst and drines, was afterward
made more evident and manifest by the sudaine and swift obsession of his mind,
with frightfull visions, whereof as in the disposition, temper, substance or
quality of his brain or body, there was no ground or cause, so in the Apple
it self, was no other pernicious mixture, but that the Devil, as with Judas
Sop, though wholesome and saving in it self, so in this medicinal fruit,
entered and possessed, where God permitted. The like may be said of other both
outward and inward remedies, which by a Magic power are and may be often
interrupted, turned and bent unto a use contrary to their nature.

For this cause Hippocrates himself in his book de Sacro morbo, and de Natura
muliebri, does acknowledge many accidents, as also diseases and remedies
themselves to be divine, as having their cause and being above the course of
nature. When therefore fitting unto any cause, matter, or humor in the body,
according to true Art and Reason discovered, apt and fit remedies, are aptly
and fitly by the judicious Physician applied, notwithstanding, contrary to the
nature and custom of such remedies, they have unusual and justly wondered
effects, is there not just matter of doubt concerning an unusual and
extraordinary cause answereable thereto? The deep and mystical contengents in
this kind, and their hidden reason and cause, the unlearned man, or he that is
not exercised in difficult discoueries, cannot discern, nor can the intricate
and perplexed implications therein, of doubts and ambiguites, possibly become
intelligible in every ordinary apprehension; yet by the former easy and
familiar example, every man may guess and conjecture at the most abstruse. The
subtlety of the Devil does easily deceive a vulgar thought, and in the
clouds and mists of doubts and difficulties beguileth usually the dim sight
and disquisition.

The learned Physician, notwithstanding possessing true judgment and learning;
who does and can warily observe, and distinguish first the wonders of nature
unknown unto every mediocrity of knowing: secondly, the true wonders above
nature in due collation with nature to be known, does not easily or rashly
with vulgars, err or run mad in the confusion of vain and idle scruples.
The wonders of nature, are such natural diseases as are seen in their wondered
and admired shapes or mixture, to have a great likeness or deceiving identitie
with such maladies, as are inflicted by the Devil. The wonders above nature,
are such diseases, as are truly and undoubtedly known and proved to have no
consistence, or power of consistence, or cause in sublunary nature.

For illustation hereof, I will give one material instance fitting our present
time, that shall apertly without exception manifest the distinction of both
these kinds, therewith declaring the great odds and difference between true
knowledge and understanding in the learned Physician, and the amazed
wonderments of vulgars and ignorant men.

There are vulgarly reported among our English vulgers to be in the bodies of
many Witches, certain marks or excrescencies which are usually deemed the
randevowe of the Devil, where by covenant he does suck the blood of
Witches. These excrescencies are usually described to bear sometimes the shape
of Wars and Tears, or some other such like tumors. They are most commonly
found in the privy parts. They are found sudainely after their appearance,
sometimes to vanish. They do often bleed, and therefore are vulgarly deemed, the
remaining dropping of the Devils sucking.

There are diseases likewise, like unto these by Physicians many hundredth of
years published, and both by ancient Physicians and Chirurgions, as also by
those of later times often cured. That this be not esteemed as a wonder, or a
fable, I will produce some of their several shapes; described by several
Authors, and will cite them according to their usual names which are these,
Thymion, Nymphe, Cleitoris, Cercosis, Morum, Alhasce, Ficus, Mariscae.

Of the first thus says Paulus Aegineta in his sixth book, and 71. chapter. It
is an excrescence or eminence, standing out from the rest of the flesh,
sometimes red, sometimes white, for the most part without pain, the bigness
of an Egyptian bean and of the colors of the flowers of Thyme. They are
found, says he, in the privy part of women, and are cured by cutting them
away. Ioannes Hucherus of the City of Beuois in France, sometimes one of the
Kings counsel and Physician unto his person, in his second book concerning
barrenness does testify, that the former excrescence does sometimes grow in
some length, sometimes in the hands, sometimes in the feet, sometimes in the
thighs, sometimes in the thighs, sometimes in the face, but says that they
are most troublesome in the privy parts both of man and woman.

Celsus says in his first book chap. 28. that these excrescencies do
sometimes open and bleed, and send out blood. Thymion (inquit) facile finditur
and cruentatur, nonnunquam aliquantum sanguinis fundit. Antonius Musa upon the
26. Aph. of Hippocrates the third book testifies by his observation in diverse
particulars, that the former disease or excrescence does oft-times wear and
vanish away without help or remedy.

The second disease or excrescence called Nymphs, Paulus Aegineta, in his 6.
book 8. chap. does describe to be a swelling or growing out of a piece of
flesh in the secret part of a woman rising oft-times unto an indecent fashion
and a great bigness. Auicenne delivers the same description. Tom. 1. Fen.
21. Tract. 4. and Albucasis Chirurg. Part. 2. Chap. 72, 73, 74.

The third excrescence called Cleitoris is little different from the former by
the description of the same Authors. Auicen lib. 3. Fen. 28. Paulus Aegineta in
the forementioned place.

The fourth excrescence called Cerrosis the same Author in the same place
compares unto a long tail and says, that it hangs down, and issues out
of the part before mentioned in women, and is cured by being cut away.

The fifth excrescence called Morum has that name from his likeness unto a
Mulberrie.

The sixth, called Alkasce, from his likeness unto a Bramble leaf. Auicenne
Tom. 1. lib. 3. Fen. 21. Tract. 4. cap. 20. As for the seventh and eight
Excrescences, growing likewise as the rest about the secret parts, they have
been so commonly in ancient times known, that Martial the Poet out of his
own acquaintance with them, has made sport thereof in witty verse.

Dicemus ficus quas scimus in arbore nasci,
Dicemus ficus Caeciliane tuos.
Of the Mariscae, thus also writes Invenal.

Coeduntur tumidae medico ridente, Mariscae. Of these Mariscae thus says
Antonius Musa upon the Aph. 30. lib. 3. We call them, says he, crests or
combs, from their likeness unto the comb of a Cock, which says he, if they
be not in time cut away, and cured by actual cauteries, they are never cured
at all. Thus much concerning these diseases, out of learned Authors. Let us now
consider these natural diseases, which are called wonders in nature, (because
not ordinarily or vulgarly seen) with those marks of Witches or diseases, and
excrescencies effected and caused by the Devil in Witches, which (therefore
must needs be wonders above nature.) Let us (I say) compare them together, the
one with the other. Their exceeding near neighborhood and likeness, no
common understanding, as they are described truly and lively, can choose but
acknowledge. To confound or mistake the one for the other, is very easy, but
yet dangerous and pernicious. I will not deny against due testimonies, and the
free confessions of the Witches themselves, that such marks may be by the
Devil upon covenant made, in way of an hellish sacrament, between the Devil
and the Witch: but where the confession of the Witch her self, being free from
just exception does not appear, nor the Devil to any spectatours, does show
himself in the act of sucking, which he never does (as my incredulous
thoughts persuade my self) where I say, these appear not to be manifest
without fraud, there it is requisite, and necessary, that either we discharge
the Devil, and acquit him of the slander, or else discover it by some other
sign or note, which may justly be appropriated unto the Devil, that his
finger or guilt has been therein.

This is reason, without which ought be no persuasion. Every tree is to be
known by his own fruit, says our Savior. Therefore the devil, is to be
known by the works, and fruits of a Devil, proper and belonging unto him.
Try and discern the Spirits, (says the Scripture) whether they be of God, or
no. And how can they be discerned, if there were not some notes, or properties
known unto holy discerning minds, whereby they may be discerned. It is
madness therefore, to suppose it possible to know that which is done by a
Spirit, wherein is no evidence, impression, sign, show, or property of a
Spirit. For as a natural cause cannot be known, but by his natural effect;
so is it impossible, that a spiritual cause should be known, but by some
supernatural effect. For this cause, in all places of Scripture, where are set
forth the outward works, or actions of the Devil, they do there likewise all
appear to be his, in some extraordinary and supernatural note or manner.

The casting the bodies of the possessed in the Gospel, into the midst of the
people, was a thing extraordinary, impossible, and unusual unto the voluntary
motion of men alone. The bringing of fire from Heaven to devour so many of
Jobs sheep, was in the manner beyond the nature usual, and ordinary force, or
custom of fire. The carriage of the herds of Swine headlong into the Sea, was
manifestly beyond the nature of their natural motion, yea, against their
nature.

Here may be objected, that the Devil does ordinarily work, and produce
things of seeming wonder, and strange consequence, wherein notwithstanding,
does not appear any sign or impression, of any supernatural cause or
author, as is seen in many things produced in men, and issuing from his
usual tentations of men.

The answer is, that the Devil does work upon man, two ways.

The first is, immediately by the temptings, and soliciting only of man unto
works, which properly are affected by man himself, in the usual course and
power of man's nature.

The second is, immediately by his own proper action, as he is a Spirit, and
immediately works in himself, the work of a Spirit.

In the first, the Devil is not properly said to work in himself, but rather
to give and offer occasion unto the disposition and affections of man, thereby
exciting, and tempting man unto that work, which therefore only carries the
stamp of a work, proper unto a man.

In the second, the Devil works immediately himself, as he is a Spirit, and
in that work therefore must necessarily likewise be seen, and appear the
stamp of a Spirit, since in the course and order of all things created
whatsoever, the true and immediate cause, his immediate true and proper effect,
is the sole true infallible stamp, evidence, and proof thereof.

The works therefore, which are called or esteemed the Devils, in regard of
his tentations, and incitations of man, unto foolish, wicked, and often wondered
mischievous actions, are only and truly called devilish, as proceeding from
the Devils instigation only, but are not truly or properly, or immediately
any works of the Devil, and therefore it is not requisite, that in such
works of the Devil, improperly called his, there should appear any signs,
proper unto the works of a Spirit or Devil.

Since then it is infallible, that there can be no possible discovery of any
cause whatsoever, natural, or supernatural, but by such accidents, effects,
or properties as properly belong, or issue from that cause, and since proper
effects appearing, do only discover their causes more clearly, where they
appear more clear, and more obscurely, where they do appear more obscure,
and nothing at all, where they appear not all: Since I say this is true, and
never to be infringed, those supposed Witches marks, before they can justly
and truly be judged to be by the Devil effected or used, must by some
stamp or sign proper to himself, or to his works, or to his use or
property therein, be so determined and convinced to be.

The wonder indeed of their strange shapes, form and manner, is sufficient to
amaze such as are not iudiciously read, or are unlearned: but the Physician who
knows such diseases to be in nature, by that knowledge of their nature,
knowing likewise that they do not exceed nature, does justly stand apart,
and divide himself from the vulgar error and opinion, that they are any
marks to be appropriate unto the Devil.

And hence appears the necessity of conuincing the forementioned Witches
marks to be supernatural, before upon their shape or appearance only, it
can be esteemed just, either to impute unto the Devil, or to call any man
into question. Before they can be truly judged or determined, whether
supernatural or no, the necessity of consulting with the learned Physician,
is likewise demonstrated. Of which we may yet again, give another
demonstration within the same instance. It has been sometimes by oath
confirmed and deposed, that these forementioned marks of Witches, have
(immediately after they have been seen) sudainely vanished to be no more
seen. The question may be, whether their sudaine disparence after their
manifest appearance, be in nature possible unto such like diseases or no. It
is known unto the Physician, that many diseases do insensibly grow, and
insensibly also wear and vanish away, without any knowledge or notice thereof
taken by the diseased. This therefore solely can be no note of a supernatural
mark, whatsoever passionate ignorants fondly dispute, to maintain their own
wills and preiudicate resolutions. I do grant, if those material
excrescencies, do in a moment vanish away, without any precedent preparation,
or alteration tending thereto, or do in an instant appear, and in the same
moment, without any mutation or proportion of time instantly vanish, then must
this be granted supernatural: Quia nihil fit in momento, that is, no natural
being has desinence or being, without proportined time, beyond which nothing
can be really or indeed in sublunarie nature, whether there be in the
vanishing of the former marks, proportion of time or no, and the due
antecedent mutations, and alterations in nature requisite, who can truly
judge, but he who does both know the general course of nature in all things,
and also the particular course, in the nature of diseases, which is the learned
Physician alone. It may be objected, that many common men in the former
marks, may as easily see and discern that which is supernatural oft-times,
as the greatest Clerks.

For example, it has been published by Authors of great note, that Oracles
have been uttered, and articulate sounds heard distinctly issuing from the
privy parts of a Pythonisse. Any man that does know, or hear such sounds out
of that place, can as directly and as truly as the Physician avouch this to be
supernatural.

It was sometime openly objected, against a Witch in Northamptonshire at the
public Assise, that a Rat was often observed to resort unto her privy part, and
with her liking and sufferance there to suck. This was by oath and testimony
urged against her, and she her self confessed it to be true. If the oath and
testimony of sufficient witnesses, confirm the History to be true, there is
no man unto whom this is not apparent, as well as unto the Physician to be
more then natural. Hereto we do answer, that although it cannot be denied,
that many things may evidently declare themselves unto every vulgar, as unto
the learned Physician to be supernatural; yet does not this truth in some
cases, euince it true in all cases. Because some things are not denied unto a
vulgar eye or judgment, it does not thence follow necessarily, that all things
are thereto evident.

It is further objected, that in those cases, Physicians are often found
deceived, as well as other men. It is answered, that among Physicians, as among
all sorts of other men, there are many vulgars, who are, and may be
ordinarily, and easily deceived, yea amongst the judicious and learned also,
who cannot so ordinarily or easily be deceived, yet there must be some wants
and imperfections, since no man in this mortal life can be in all particular
points perfect. Notwithstanding, this does not excuse those who are unlearned,
and have many more gross wants and imperfections, for not consulting with
those that have less, since imperfect perfection of knowledge, is far better
guide then imperfection, gross ignorance, and privation of Art and knowledge.

It may be yet demanded, what if the Physician or learned man, cannot detect
the Devil in these named marks, since the devil is able to have a finger
happily in them, where no note or sign thereof shall at all appear?

Answer hereto is, where God does give unto men no means, no way or
possibility unto their desired satisfaction, there they ought to rest
contented, since the contrary is precipitation, and impatience with God his
good will and pleasure, and unbridled curiosity. For as in other cases,
namely, Felony, Murder, all Law both Divine and Humane, does forbid to
accuse the Murderer, or Felon, where God has not discovered his guilt by any
sign, evidence, or proof thereof; so in case of Witchcraft, where God has
not revealed it by any reasonable proof, unto the learned and judicious, there
has no man warrant to accuse, or challeng upon superstitious grounds, or
surmises only. And though this moderation be just and fit to be held, where
God has inhibited the contrary; yet it is no Apology or excuse for
negligence, contempt, and want of diligent inquisition at any other time,
whenever God does permit or offer means, hope or possibility thereto.

There may here a question be pertinently moved, namely, Whether these marks
before mentioned, where proved supernatural, do therefore necessarily
convince the party upon whom they are found, a Witch, yea or no.

Answer hereto is, that simply and alone, such marks do not prove a Witch
at all, but with some limitations and considerations, they do absolutely and
infallibly demonstrate a Witch.

Those limitations are these; First, that those marks certainly detected to
be supernatural, be by circumstances, presumptions on necessary inference, of
reason proved to be known, by the party in whom they are found, that they are
of the Devil, or by the Devil there placed.

Secondly, that they are there continued, maintained, or preserved with the
liking and allowance of that party. The reason of these limitations is
manifest, for that the Devil is able to impose diverse diseases, as also such
like supernatural marks or excrescencies, as are before mentioned, upon men
without their liking or consent, where God does so permit him. This is evident
by the History of Job, upon whom the Devil brought extraordinary, and more
then usual botches, biles, and sores, beyond the common course and nature of
those diseases, and this he did full sore against the will, and liking of
righteous Job. No man can justly be accused or suspected in that act wherein
he is no agent, but an unwilling Patient, nor can be accessory unto
concurrence, or consent with any author in his act, if that author be not
known unto him, or not conceived by him to be author. Indeed, if any man be
found with such marks, who may be convinced to know them to be of the Devil,
and then to like or to be contented with them, assuredly by manifest
demonstration, that man is a Witch, if not by an express and open, yet by an
occult allowance of the Devils possession and power, of that part or portion in
him. Whosoever gives any possession of himself unto the Devil, either in
part or in whole, does thereby renounce his Creator, and by this combination
with the Devil, is a Witch, or Sorcerer.

There remains as yet a doubt or question, Whether simply the affirmation of
a supposed Witch (which is vulgarly but not properly called and deemed her
confession) that the Devil does suck him or her, as also whether the
affirmation of a supposed Witch, affirming herself to be a Witch, do
infallibly convince that supposed Witch, to be a Witch indeed; and whether
that affirmation be sufficient (as commonly deemed her own confession) to
condemn her.

The answer is negative. The reason is, for that many affirmations in
themselves, and at first view do seem true serious and sufficient; which
better and more consideratly examined, are oft-times even senseless and
ridiculous; and therefore justly are denied credit.

And for this cause no accusations, whether against any man himself, or
against another, wherein is no probability or likelihood, no color or
possibility of being; either are or ought to be admitted or heard in justice
in any Courts of Justice. And for this cause the testimonies, accusations, or
confessions which by fools, or madmen are avouched, are by all nations through
the world in law not valued, and rejected. The same regard is had of the
affirmations and testimonies of children and of melancholy people, and likewise
of men with years and age doting, or by diseases or cares manifestly decrepite
in their wits and senses. That such decrepits there are usually walking among
men not noted nor known unto most, or many, except sometimes upon especial
occasion or trial of them made, is no wonder.

I did my self know some lately living, who formerly have been very
understanding, yet diverse years before their end, were with age in their
inward senses so worn and wasted; that although as reasonable creatures unto
the common view, they talked, conuersed, conferred, spoke many times, and in
many things with very good reason, and sensibly; yet oft-times by sudden
enterchanges, they neither knew reason nor themselves, nor their own names nor
children.

I now know a man near an hundredth year old, who having in my late
remembrance been an excellent penman, does neither now know a word, nor can
write nor name so much as one letter among the four and twenty; yet has he
his sight good, as by his discerning and upon his view thereof, giving right
name and title unto other as small forms and characters is apparent. His
memory sometimes even of the same things is altogether gone by fits; and by
fits sometimes returns in many things, but not in all, nor in any always or
certainly. Other some I have known in their memory and fancy by age so
worn, that they could not hold or retain in the one so much as that which
very lately was in their eye; in the other so much as that which was in the
same instant almost conceived; affirming things in this confusion which never
were nor ever could be; and denying their sight of those things which from
their sight thereof they had truly before named of their own accord; one
while constantly believing and avouching whatsoever was said or informed them,
though never so dissonant from sense or reason; another while as confidently
denying whatsoever truth was said or urged, though never so manifest unto their
sight or sense. This is not strange in age, since in diseases it is usual for
men sometimes for a time to lose their memory alone, sometimes their reason
alone, sometines imagination: sometimes part of one; and part of another;
sometimes all; sometimes perfectly none; and yet imperfect in every one. It
sometimes also is seen (as Galen says) that a man inioying absolutely and
accurately all his inward senses of right reason, memory and imagination in all
other things beside; yet in some one particular alone and in no other
whatsoever is ever constantly and without change void of sense or reason, and
as a very mad man or fool.

Thus much is also written by others of many wise and learned men; who
notwithstanding in some one particular alone have discovered them selves to be
very fools or mad men: constantly affirming themselves to be dogs, horses,
glasses, and for that one folly never reclaimed, in all other things being
judicious, learned, discreet and solid. Neither is every vulgar man, nor every
wan vulgarly learned not accurately judging able to discern these defects, at
first, or always; much less where they are hardly and difficultly espied, or
by fits only do show themselves. How possible is it for these sorts of people
either to be persuaded by others, or from their own guide and unstable
conceit to affirm any thing whatsoever concerning themselves or others? and
for that cause how necessary is it in matter of weight and judgments,
especially of life, to take heed of their rash admittance unto accusations or
testimonies concerning themselves or any others. Unto a confession so properly
and truly called, do necessarily concur three things. First, in a
confession is properly implied and understood the party confessing to be
capable of reason, because without reason he can neither know nor judge of
himself nor of his guilt. Secondly, in a confession is requisite and necessary
that a party confessing himself does truly know what the Law does take and
define that offense to be which he does assume unto himself. For by ignorance
of the law sometimes silly men suppose themselves and others to have incurred
the danger of the Law, where he that truly understands the Law is able to
inform him the contrary: and for this cause the law it self does give leave
to consult with the Lawyer, and with such as profess and are skillful in the
Law.

Divines likewise generally acknowledge and grant, that there is a mistaking,
an ignorantly and a falsely accusing conscience or guilt, as well as a
conscience justly judging and accusing.

And for this cause many a man may take himself to be a Thief, a Witch or
other offender, who does not truly or rightly konw what Theft in his own case
or some other points is, or what Witchcraft or some other offenses either
truly in themselves are, or by the Law are understood; being in some cases not
known or agreed, among Lawyers themselves. It is therefore senseless that a
man can accuse himself justly of an offense which he does not know; and
therefore also is it as unjust to admit such an accusation against himself.

Thirdly, in a confession is employed and presupposed a precedent manifest
offense or guilt either by fair evidence likely to be proved, or at least by
due circumstances and presumptions justly suspected or questioned.

I do hence conclude demonstratiuely, that if a supposed Witch be not first
found capable of reason, and free from dotage with age or years or sickness;
and do not also know what Witchcraft or a Witch is, and thirdly if the
Witchcraft or sin it self be not upon sufficient grounds either proved,
or at lest questioned; the mere accusation of such a supposed Witch against
her self without the former considerations, is not simply or alone sufficient
to convince or condemn her; neither is such an accusation, truly or properly
to be termed a confession. And thus we have made evident by this instance of
the supposed Witches marks, how the learned Physician possessing true Art and
learning, is not so commonly as the vulgar sort transported into the maze of
vain wonder and ignorant admiration, but duly and truly weighing reason does
apart distinguish and put true difference between the wonders in nature, and
the wonders above nature.

The wonders in nature are such diseases, as in their strange shape and
likeness, do counterfeit such maladies, as are induced by the Devil or by
Witchcraft. Wonders above nature, are such diseases, wherein the finger of the
Devil is indeed and really discovered.

Concerning the first kind (as here) so formerly in a former Manuell, I have
briefly delivered, both some of their general Page. 58 59 60
descriptions, denied by no man that in ancient time was, or at this time is a
judicious and learned Physician, as also diverse of their Page 61 62 63 64
particular Histories in the persons of some sick men known unto my self.

Of the second it is here needless to propound any more particulars then those
above mentioned, which I esteem for the general illustration sufficient. In
true and right decision and distinction of the one from the other,
multiplicitie of consideration and circumspection ought diligently attend the
intricate maze and labyrinth of error, and illusion in their deceivable
likenesses, whereby the Devil, for his own advantage, and the perdition of
seduced and beguiled men, does sometimes cunningly hide his own works, and
the devilish practices of Witches and Sorcerers, from their due detection and
punishment; sometimes to ensnare the guiltless and innocent, does iugglingly
seem to do those things which Nature does justly challenge, not as his, but
as her own, in just balance weighed. It is most certain, that the Devil
cannot possibly mix himself, or his power, with any inferior nature,
substance or body, but the alteration, by the conjunction of so far
discrepant natures, in the unchangeable decree of the universal nature of all
things, necessarily and unavoidably produced, must needs witness and
manifestly detect it in the great and mighty odds. This is very evident and
apparent in all the supernatural works of the Devil, before mentioned in the
general discourse of this small Treatise or work, whether such as were
declared manifest to sense, or such as were evident to reason; whether such as
were effected by the Devil himself, with the consent or contract of a
Sorcerer or Witch, or such as were without their knowledge, society, or
contract performed by himself. All those supernatural works of both these
kinds were therefore known to be supernatural, because they were above and
beyond any cause in sublunary nature. The like the learned Physician may
certainly conclude, concerning diseases inflicted or moved by the Devil. For
it is impossible that the finger or power of the Devil should be in any
malady, but such a cause must needs produce some effect like it self, where
true and judicious discerning is able to find the infallible, certain, and
vndeceiued stamp of difference. Thus far has bin briefly declared, how the
Physician properly and by himself does alone enter into the due consideration
and examination of diseases (where is just occasion of question) whether
naturally or supernaturally inferred. How unfit it is here to admit every idiot
for a Physician or Counselor (as is too common both in these and all other
affairs of health) let wise men judge.

Certainly from hence it comes to pass, that most men for ever live in
perpetual confusion of their thoughts in these cases, and as a just judgment
of God against their careless search and neglect of learned and warranted true
counsel, all certainety and truth herein does still fly far from them. For as
in these ambiguities is requisite and necessary, a learned, judicious, and
prudent Physician; so is it as necessary that he find those that need herein
advice, truly and constantly obedient unto good reason, temperate and
discreet, not mutable upon every vain and idle project to start away, and to
be transported from a reasonable, just and discreet proceeding, unto
uncertain, vain, and Empiricall trials, since wisdom, knowledge and truth
are never truly found, but only of those, that with diligence, patience, and
perseverance search and seek them out. It remains now to come unto the
second way of detection of the bewitched sick, which was before said to
consist in such things as were subject and manifest unto a vulgar view, as the
first unto the learned Physician alone. As of the first, some few examples have
been propounded, so of the latter let us also view other some.

In the time of their puroxismes or fits, some diseased persons have been
seen to vomit crooked iron, coals, brimstone, nails, needles, pinnes, lumps
of lead, wax, hair, straw, and the like, in such quantity, figure, fashion
and proportion, as could never possibly pass down, or arise up through the
natural narrowness of the throar, or be contained in the unproportionable
small capacity, natural susceptibility and position of the stomach. These
things at any time happening, are palpable and not obscure to any eye without
difficulty, offering themselves to plain and open view.

These like accidents Beninenius, Wierus, Codronchins and others also, even in
in our time and country, have published to have been seen by themselves. Some
other sick persons have, in the time of the exacerbations of their fits,
spoken languages knowingly and understandingly, which in former time they did
never know, nor could afterward know again: as Fernelius a learned Physician,
and beyond exception worthy credit, does witness concerning a Sick man known
to himself.

Some Sick men also have revealed and declared words, gestures, actions done
in far distant places, even in the very time and moment of their acting,
doing, and uttering, as I have known my self in some, and as is testified
likewise to have been heard, known, and seen by diverse witnesses worthy
credit in our See a Treatise of the Witches of Warbozyes.
country, in diverse bewitched Sick people.

As these examples are manifest to any beholder, which shall at any time happen
to view them: so are the examples of the first and second kind evident to the
reason and judgment of the learned and judicious Physicion, and all do
therefore certainly detect and prove a supernatural Author, cause, or
virtue, because they are manifest supernatural effects.

Thus have we pointed out briefly, the detection of the bewitched Sick, both
by learned Reason proper unto the judicious Physicion, and also by common sense
and reason in all men.

If men more at large please to exercise themselves in due consideration and
proof hereof, they shall find more certain and sound satisfaction and fruit,
with the blessing and allowance of God, then can issue out of the mouths of
Sorcerers and Witches, which God has cursed, and disallowed, and in whose
hearts and mouths, the Devil is often a lying Spirit.

It has been briefly, and yet sufficiently herein proved, that Almighty God
has given unto Reason light, whereby reasonable, temperate and sober minds,
through circumspect care and diligence, may see and behold whatsoever is truly
possible, or just for man to know, with the favor and allowance of Gods grace,
in the detection and discovery of the bewitched Sick. Whosoever therefore
shall contemn, or neglect this light, and shall ask counsel of Devils and
Witches, the open and proclaimed enemies of God, do certainly relinquish
their faith, and trust in God their Creator, and their patience and dependence
upon his providence.

And although it may sometimes fall out, that prosperous issue does seem to
follow the counsel of the Devil, yet does it behoone men to be wary, and not
presume, lest it prove only a sweet bait, that by a sensible good, the
devil may draw their bewitched desirous vain minds unto an insensible
damnable hurt. For certainly, he who will rather be beholding unto the Devil,
for his life or health, then choose to die in the gracious and merciful hand of
God his Creator, can never expect to participate any portion of salvation in
him, without extraordinary repentance.

Thus much concerning the reasonable discovery of the bewitched Sick, wherein
leaving to enquire at Witches, Sorcercers, or impostors, upright men, that love
or fear God, or embrace Religion or common reason, may and ought confine and
satisfy their just desires.

CHAP. XI. The production of the works of Witches and Sorcerers, unto the
public seat and censure of Justice.
WE have hitherto considered, how the works of Devils and Witches, may be both
manifest to Sense, and evident to Reason. They have in their diverse kinds and
different performances and manners distinctly been instanced. Besides those
kinds which have been mentioned, there may be innumerable more, among which
are those who undertake and are enquired at, to reveal treasures hid, goods
lost or conueighed away, the works and guilt of other Witches, good fortunes,
and evil fortunes in diverse affairs, disseignes and attempts: as also those
who undertake by enchantment, to lead captive the wills and minds of men, unto
extraordinary and unreasonable desires or lusts, hatred or love unto, or
against this or that person, or this or that particular thing, above or beyond
the natural power of resistance, and the force and usual guidance of natural
reason, in the ordinary course of man's will and nature: but they are all
included in the same general kind, and common proof of their devilish
impiety, derived from the word of God before alleged unanswerably, and the
true consequence of Reason from thence.

The difference that is in their diverse kinds, does only arise from their
several subjects, manners, ceremonies, and rites, according to their several
differing contracts with the Devil: some using in their works, revelations or
oraculous answers, of the demand of resorting people in one manner, fashion,
ceremony, gesture, and rite; some in another, and some in none at all,
certain, or unchangeable.

Concerning these ceremonies, with their several contracts, and the manners
thereof, I will not write, partly, because in this place not much material;
partly, because they are difficult to detect, except by the Witches own free
confession, which happens very rare and seldom; partly, because they tend
more to the satisfaction of curiosity then of use and therefore are not
without some danger published. It has now been manifest by the word and mouth
of God, unto the reason of man, how a Witch or Sorcerer may evidently appear
unto right Reason; namely by his voluntary undertaking to be enquired at, for
knowledge and revelation of such things as are hidden by God from all knowledge
of men, and are solely and properly in the knowledge of Spirits, as has been
by learned Authors and by reason declared.

The revelation being found supernatural, does discover the supernatural
Agent or Author the Devil, whose proper act whatsoever man does undertake in
part, or in whole, must necessarily buy or borrow from him, and thereby be
convinced undoubtedly of contract with him.

We have produced diverse sorts of noted Practisers likewise of this inhibited
contract, both in the holy Scripture expressly nominated, and also by their
ordinary common custom herein observed in several kinds.

Concerning them all, we will conclude as a corallary unto all that went
before, with the testimony and confirmation of Lucius Apuleius, that famous,
expert, and learned Magician, in his book de Aureo Asino, from his long proof
and acquaintance with the Devil: Daemones (says he) praesident Auguriis,
Aruspiciis, oraculis, Magorum miraeculis, that is, the Devils are chief
presidents, have chief power or authority, are chief Masters, Guides, or
Rulers over Divination, or revelation by the signs taken in flying of fowls,
of divination by inspection of the entralls of beasts, of Oracles, and of all
the miracles or miraculous works of Magicians. They that will not believe the
holy Scripture, nor the testimony of so many men and ages, that the Devil is
the sole Author of vain miraculous revelations, diuinations and works, let
them credit the Magician his own mouth.

As we have hitherto viewed, how Witchcraft and Witches may be, first, by
sense manifestly detected: secondly, by reason evidently convicted: so let us
now consider, how they may be both produced unto the bar of Justice, and be
arraigned and condemned of manifest high Treason against Almighty God, and of
combination with his open and professed enemy the Devil.

Concerning the first, since it chiefly consists in that which is manifest
unto the outward sense, if the witnesses of the manifest magical and
supernatural act, be substantial, sufficient, able to judge, free from
exception of malice, partiality, distraction, folly; and if by conference and
counsel with learned men, religiously and industriously exercised, in judging
in those affairs, there be justly deemed no deception of sense, mistaking of
reason or imagination, I see no true cause, why it should deserve an Crimina
Meleficorum sunt communis fori, Pertinent ad forum Ecclesiasticum quatenus sunt
Haeretici pertinent ad forum seculare quatenus caedes perpetrant in hominibus
aut aliis animalibus, Binsfildius praelud 13.
Ignoramus, or not be reputed a true Bill, worthy to be inquired, as a case
fit and mature for the same due trial, which Justice, Law, and equity have
ordained in common unto all other rightful hearings and proceedings by
witness and testimony, although it is likely to prove a rare plea or cause,
because in reason not too frequently to be found, and far less Quidam plus
aequo tribuunt operationi Daemonum, Binsfeldius.
in it self common or usual, then is vulgarly reputed. It might
notwithstanding, happily be more often detected, if more diligently according to
reason inquired.

The second kind of Witch by evidence of reason discovered, is far more
frequent then the first, as appears by the variety and multitude of names,
which it has branded upon it, and the diversity of kinds and fashions which
it has put on. It is likewise more easily detected and proved.

A supernatural revelation being first made truly manifest (lest
preposterously we happily call a surmised, or falsely suspected offender into
question, before any offense be apparent or known; which is an unjust injury,
and worthy of rebuke and shame with God and just men) a supernatural
revelation (I say) being manifest, any man's guilty contract therein is proved,
by his undertaking to be enquired at therein.

That undertaking likewise is easily known and discovered by those that have
inquired. The foundation of this way of inuestigation of this Witch or
Sorcerer, is the Word of God it self before recited, and just and true reason
built thereupon, cannot fall or be shaken.

Thus having brought these prisoners to the Bar, I there arrest any farther
progress, and leave them to Justice, to the decree and sentence of the
reverend, grave, and learned Judge, and so proceed the third promised way of
inuestigation, and inquisition of Witches and Sorcerers, according to likely
presumption, probable and artificial conjecture.

But before we arrive upon that point, it is necessary, that first a
material objection be satisfied. That is, in the forementioned Judgment of
supernatural works of Sorcery manifest to sense, how can any true testimony
or witness be required or expected, since doubt is made whether really or
truly, or ^elusorily and in seeming only, many or most things of that kind,
are seen or heard? Hereto is answered: As a true substance is seen not of it
self simply, but in and by the outward true sign, shape, proportion, colors,
and dimension inherent therein, and inseparable therefrom; so the true
likeness, resemblance and pourtraiture of that substance, when separated from
that substance, is as truly and as really seen. Therefore, experience does
show us, that the same eye which saw the shape, proportion, and figure,
together with the true substance, does as perfectly both see and know it, when
it is separated from the substance by the Art of the Painter.

As in the true miracles of God, wrought by the hand of his servant Moses, the
true and undoubted substance of a truly created Serpent, was seen when it was
changed from a rod, by the outward proper and inherent shape: so as truly
war an outward pourtraiture and likeness of Serpents seen, in the false
miracle of the seeming transmutation of the Sorcerers rods. For how could
religion or reason condemn those miracles of the Devil for illusions, if the
lively resemblance of miracles appearing manifestly unto the eye, had not
thereby made them known? For an example, or illustration, how is a iuggling
deceit known but by the eye? The sight is said to be deceived therein.
Therefore it does see that which does deceive. Reason likewise comparing that
which was seen, with that which is not seen; that is, the counterfeit with
the true substance, does prove the counterfeit the present object of the
sight. The same eyes therefore that saw, in the true miracles of Moses, the
substance of a Serpent by the true inseparable inherent shape, saw likewise the
true image and picture of a Serpent, in the false and seeming miracles of the
Enchaunters of Egypt. The testimony of the presentation of both unto the eye,
is as true as truth it self; because the Word of truth has said it. That
the Devil is as powerful as the most excellent Painter, to represent any the
most true and lively likeness of any creature, is in reason clear, and has
been also before proved.

Therefore a true testimony may be truly given, and justly accepted or taken
of a lively shape, figure, likeness, or proportion, really presented (by the
Art of the Devil) unto the eye. All the doubt then remaining, is, to put a
true difference between that which our imagination does represent unto us,
from within the brain, and that which we see without by the outward sense.
This difference will best appear by an example. Fernelius in his first book,
cap. 11. de Abd. rer. cause. does make mention of a man, who by the force of
charms, would conjure into a looking glass certain shapes or visions, which
there would either by writing, or by lively presentations so perfectly express
and satisfy, whatsoever he did demand or command unto them, that easily and
readily it might be distinguished, and known by standers by. This Fernelius
does report that he saw himself. What shall we say herein? Was this
Devilish practice a thing doubtful? Was it not manifest to many eyes,
diversity of beholders, and the judicious view of a learned and discerning
sight. The like Franciscus Picus Miraudula reports, videlicet, that a famous
Magician of Italy in his time, did keep the skull of a dead man, out of which
the Devil did deliver answers unto men enquiring, when the Wizard had first
uttered certain words, and had turned the skull toward the Sun. These things
being palpably seen, could not be mere imagination. Those things which are
merely in imagination (with those men whom diseases deprive not of their sense
or reason) are by right reason and true sense, after a short time of their
preualence, easily detected to be imaginary; but those things which are truly,
really, and certainly seen, remain the same for ever after in their due
reception of sense; with undoubted and unchanged allowance of reason.

Hence it is, that a man in a sleep or dream, though for a short space, he
does often times verily, really, and very feelingly (as it were) think himself
in many actions and employments; yet when he awaked from sleep, his sense and
reason do tell him he was but in a dream. Many sick persons likewise
usually, though waking, dream of things falsely imagined, but the disease
being gone, and their sense and reason therefrom recovered, they then know and
laugh at the fallacies of their imaginations. By these short instances it is
apparent, that it is not a thing impossible, but usual and familiar unto all
kind of men that want not their common wits, to distinguish between those
things which are only in imagination, and those which are real and indeed.

From hence we may then truly conclude, that against the acts of Sorcerie and
Witchcraft manifest to sense, the due testimonies of understanding, discreet,
and just men, ought to be no less equivalent then against another open acts,
or crime whatsoever, whereof the Witch of Endor may serve to shut up and
conclude all doubt for ever herein, for an unanswerable instance and proof.
She acknowledges her guilt and crime might be made manifest unto Saul in
these words, 1. Sam. 28.9. Wherefore seek thou to take me in a snare, to
cause me to die? Saul likewise himself does grant unto her, the sufficiency
of his testimony to cause her to die, verse 9. in these words, As the Lord
lives, no harm shall come unto thee, for this thing: meaning, by his
testimony of her fact, no harm should come unto her. But here may be
objected, that it was not his testimony of her fact of raising the vision of
Saul, which the Witch did fear, but his testimony of her confession of her
self to be a Witch, by promising to undertake it. The contrary is manifest by
the Text, verse 21. See, thy handmaide has obeyed thy voice, and I have put my
soul in thy hand, and have obeyed the word which thou said unto me. And thus
is the doubt concerning the sufficiency of testimonies, and witness in case
of Witchcraft satisfied. It now remains as was promised and intended, that
we next view that light unto the discovery of Witchcraft, which artificial
conjecture, probable reason and likely presumption do afford, since what sense
and reason have made manifest is already declared.

CHAP. XII. That Witches and Witchcraft may be discovered by probable reason
and presumption.
AS from things evident to sense, and manifest to reason, there issues a
certainety of undoubted knowledge: so in things that carry only probability,
diligence does beget and produce verity and Opinio vera est habitus circa
conclusiones ex Dialecticis pronunciatis, Arist. in lib. Analyt.
truth of opinion. Hence it comes to pass, that he who truly knows, and
knowingly can distinguish and discern the validity, nature, difference, and
right use of probabilities, does most seldom in his opinions mistake or err.

Hence also it comes to pass, that according to several measures, and
degrees of diligence, study, practice, and exercise of judging in
probabilities, men do diversely differ, some excelling other in the merited
styles and attributes of subtlety, Policy, Sagacity, Exquisitenes. It is true,
that in probability, is no perpetual Certum est, quod nunquam aliter fiat,
probabile, quod plerunque ita fiat, Cicero.
certainty: notwithstanding he that warily and wisely weighs it, cannot in
the uncertainty thereof but find more certainty, then in blind and unlikely
casualtie; then in rash attempts and prosecutions, void of counsel, or likely
reason.

For although sometimes those things which seem most likely and probable, do
happen to prove false, yet does nature and reason teach and inioyne us rather
to give credit thereto; and experience does manifest that the cause of
deception therein, for the most part, does consist in the weakness of man's
judging thereof aright. For in judging of probabilities, are great odds, some
things only seem probable to such as are Probabilia sunt; quae probantur aut
omnibus, aut plurimis, aut certe sapientibus, and iis si non plurimis, at
maxim probatis, quorum est spectata Sapientia, Aristot.
wise, learned, expert, subtle: some unto the most exquisite Judges alone:
some to every vulgar; some to the choice and best sort of Vulgars, and not unto
all; and in these differences, does necessarily breed much error and
mistaking. Notwithstanding, the virtue and force of probability it self,
simply does not deceive, or usually fail, but as it is diversely and
differently conceived by men, that often proves false, which seemed likely.
Vatem hunc perhibemus optimum, says Cicero, qui been conijciet, that is, we
avouch and affirm that man to be the best Prophet, or prognosticator of issues
to come or happen, who has the power and skill of right and true conjecture,
which ever consists in the exquisite perpension of probable inducements.

What is among men more admired, or more worthy to be admired, then this art,
this skill, this power? Who does not know what use, also what benefit does
arise thereby, both unto the true warrant and allowance of action, and also
unto the maintenance, and justification of right opinion, in counsels and
deliberation? As in all other faculties and sciences, the excellency and
necessity thereof does brightly shine: so most apertly unto common
observation, it does prove and manifest it self in the two several
professions of the Logician and the Orator.

The Logician in his discrepations and questions, concerning doubts and
ambiguities, by the diligence of subtle dispute, from the light of
probability, rectifieth the unstable fluctuation of unconstant opinion, and
produces through mature disquisition, and raciocination, what is most safe,
most consonant with truth, to hold, affirm, or be persuaded.

The Orator in his coniecturall state or questions, in his pleas of doubtful
and controuersed facts, or rights, wherein oft-times probability and
likelihood, seem to stand equal and impartial unto both parts:
notwithstanding by mature, acute, and seasonable pressing, and urging that
which is most like, most reasonable, and consonant with right, with law and
equity, in the end does bring into light, and discover, what is most equal,
upright, and worthy to be credited, or respected. What euictions of truth and
right, what conuictions of guilt and error do daily issue from hence, common
experience, does prove and demonstrate.

Thus much briefly prefixed in general, concerning the necessity, light and
truth of probabilities; it now remains to consider the use and power thereof
likewise, in our particular proposed subject of Witchcraft, which common sense
does not only justify (as in all other subjects) but the word of undoubted
truth.

Almighty God, in case of Idolatry, does not only publish and proclaim his
detestation of that great sin it self, but therewith does include whatsoever
has any probability of respect, or reference thereto; whether in affection
and inclination, or in ceremony or superstitious show. This is evident, Deuteronomy.
18. verse 9. where he first forbids his people so much as to imitate, or do
after the manners of the Gentiles; and afterward particulariseth their making
their sons and daughters to pass through the fire. Likewise Leuit. 19.27, 28.
where he forbids as much as the cutting of his peoples heads, or the corners
of their heads round, or ma^ring the tufts of their beards, or marking or
cutting of their flesh, as was the manner of Infidels and Gentiles, in their
mourning and lamenting of the dead. Likewise Deuteronomy. 16.21. where he forbids
so much as the planting of any groves of trees near his Altar, because it was
the custom, invention, manner, and resemblance of Idolaters.

As in case of Idolatry, so in case of Witchcraft, which is likewise a kind
of Idolatry, because the worship of Devils, Almighty God in those places of
holy Writ, where he publishes and proclaims his high displeasure against
Witches and Sorcerers, with that abominable sin it self, does also condemn
as abominable; First, in general all kind of show, of affection, liking,
inclination, or respect thereof; Secondly, any customs, fashions, rites,
ceremonies, superstitions, or gestures from thence derived, or belonging
thereto.

The first is manifest, Leuit. 19. verse 31. There the Prophet, from their God
Jehovah, does charge his people, that they do not so much as turn toward, or
decline toward Sorcerers or South-sayers, vouchsafe to ask any question, or to
respect them: and Leuit. 20. verse 6. he gives judgment and sentence of
death, against that soul that does but turn or look toward them.

The second is likewise manifest, Isaiah 8. verse 19. where Almighty God
notes the superstitious peepings, whisperings, and mutterings of Sorcerers,
and according to those gestures, does with reproach term them whisperers,
mutterers and peepers: and Deuteronomy. 18. verse 10, 11. he rehearses their
mumblings, and charmings, and their superstitious marking the flying of fowls;
and Leuit. 19. verse 26. he notes their vain and ceremonious observing of
times.

If then Almighty God be so strict, that he will not endure or tolerate so
much as a friendly looking toward Sorcerers: the least respect given unto them,
or so much as a demand of a question at their hands, any inclination toward
them, any their ceremonies, rites or superstitions, yea, so small a matter as
their very outward gestures; how can religious zeal, or the duty of man toward
God his Creator, esteem any of these, or the like, or the least of them, less
then sufficient matter of probable doubt, presumption, religious jealousy, and
suspicion against such men, as do, or dare presume to imitate, to practice or
use them?

As the holy Scripture has pointed out some few gestures, manners, and rites
of Sorcerers, for an example and light unto all other of the same kind: so
has the daily observations of succeeding times added infinite more, which
have, do, and still may increase, multiply, and be added, and newly invented,
and put on new different shapes and fashions, according to the fancy of the
contractors therein, which are the Devil, and man possessed by him, in whose
powers and will, according to the nature, quality and conditions of their
contract, depends and consists the variation, or innovation of ceremonious
rites.

For this cause, among Authors and records both of elder and later times, we
read of such diversities and numbers of superstitions litations, dedications,
performances, and a diabolical solemnities. As therefore we have manifested
such superstitious rites, ceremonies and gestures of Sorcerers, as the holy
Scripture has noted and deciphered; so let us propound some other by
aftertimes, and other Authors observed.

Some have used in their intention or execution of their Diabolical works, or
in the way of prelusion one kind of See Master Perkins discovery of
Witchcraft, chap. 2. page 48.
ceremonious homage, and some another. Some do never attempt nor enterprise a
Diabolical execution, but with mumblings, whisperings, and secret sounds, and
words heard grumbling in their mouths: as Theophrastus in his 9. book of
herbs and plants does witness, concerning certain Magicians in gathering
Helleborus, and Mandragora: and as is likewise undoubtedly discovered, by the
great attributes that are by many famous Writers ascribed unto the Caball of
the Jews, and unto letters, characters, words, sillables and sentences
superstitiously pronounced.

Galen writes, that a certain Sorcerer by uttering and muttering but one
word, immediately killed, or caused to dye a Serpent or Scorpion. Beniuenius in
his book de Abd. morb. cause. affirms, That some kind of people have been
observed to do hurt and to surprise others, by using only certain sacred and
holy words. It is apparent likewise, that others have accomplished their
devilish ends, by apparitions, shapes, or figures, raised or coniured into
glasses; as Fernelius, an eyewitness, in his book de Abdit. rer. cause. does
publish. Some receive power and virtue from the Devil unto their Diabolical
preparations, by certain enchanted herbs, or medicines which they mix and
gather, sometimes with brass hooks, sometimes by Mooneshine in the night,
sometimes with their feet bare and naked, and their bodies clothed with white
shirts, as Pliny reports. Some are reported, to obtain of the Devil their
desired ends or works, by delivering unto the Devil bonds or covenants,
written with their own hands. This Serres the French Chronicler does report,
confessed by certain Witches, in the reign of Henry the fourth. And Mr. Fox,
in the life of Martin Luther, does make mention of a young man, who delivered a
bond unto the Devil, upon certain conditions, which bond was written with the
young man's own blood, and upon his repentance, and the earnest zealous prayer
of the people unto God in his behalf, was redeliuered, and cast into the
Church in the view and sight of the whole assembly there and then being. Some
derive an effectual virtue unto their decreed Devilish works, by hanging
characters or papers about the neck, as Pliny reports. Some practice to
bring their Devilish ends unto issue, by coniured images and pictures of wax,
gold, earth, or other matter, as Thomas Aquinas in his book de occultis
Naturae witnesses.

Holing shed, page 534. does chronicle the execution of certain Traitors, for
conspiring the king of Englands death by Sorcerous and Magical pictures of
wax. The same author, page 1271. does report, that in the twentieth year of
Queen ELIZABETH, a figure-flinger (as he terms him) being suspected as a
Coniurer or Witch, sudainely dying, there was found about him (besides books
of coniuration, and other Sorcerous papers or Characters) the picture of a man
wrought out of Tynne. Some late writers have observed, that diverse Witches by
such pictures, have caused the persons thereby represented secretly to languish
and consume, as was lately proved against some late famous Witches of
Yorke-shire and Lancaster, by the testimonies beyond exception of witnesses,
not only present, but presidents in their trial and arraignment. Some execute
their hellish intentions by infernal compositions, drawn out of the bowels of
dead and murdered Infants; as Ioannes Baptist Porta in his book de Magia
naturali, does from his own knowledge affirm, and thereto the Malleus
Maleficarum with others do assent.

Some practice also Sorcery by tying knots, as Sant Jerome testifies in vita
Hilarij, concerning a priest of Aesculapius at Memphis. Some practice
Witchcraft by touching with the hand or finger only, as Biniuenius says.
Some in their Sorcerous acts or coniurations, use partchment made of the skin
of Infants, or children borne before their time: as Serres reports from the
confession of Witches, in the time and reign of Henry the fourth detected.
Some for the promoting of their Devilish devices, use the ministry of living
creatures, or of Devils and spirits in their Perkins discourse of Witchcraft,
chap. 2. page. 48.
likeness as histories report, and Theocritus in his Pharmacentria, seems to
credit, inducing there a Sorceresse, who by the power of her bird, did draw
and force her Lover to come unto her.

This seems not impossible unto a Witch, by the multitude of living shapes,
which the Devil in former ages has usually assumed, termed Faunes, Satyrs,
Nymphs, and the like, familiarly conuersing with men. Some bring their cursed
Sorcery unto their wished end, by sacrificing unto the Devil some living
creatures, as Serres likewise witneseth, from the confession of Witches in
Henry the fourth of France deprehended; among whom, one confessed to have
offered unto his Devil or Spirit a Beetle.

This seems not improbable, by the Diabolical litations and bloody
sacrifices, not only of other creatures, but even of men, wherewith in ancient
time the heathen pleased their gods, which were no other then Devils. And
rather then the Devil will altogether want worship, he is sometimes contented
to accept the parings of nails; as Serres from the confession of certain
French Witches does report. Some Authors write, that some sorts of Sorcerers
are observed to fasten upon men their Magical mischievous effects, and works,
by conueying or delivering unto the persons, whom they mean to assault, meats,
or drinks, or other such like; as is evident by the general known power of
the Magic cups of the inchaunted Filtra or love draughts: and as seems
justified by S. Augustine, in his 18. book de Ciuitate Dei, making mention of
a woman who be witched others, by delivering only a piece of cheese. Some of
our late Countrie-men have observed, some Witches to mischief or surprise such
as they intend maliciously to destroy, by obtaining some part or parcel of
their garments, or any excrements belonging unto them, as their hair, or the
like.

It is not to be doubted that the Devil, that old Protens, is able to change
and metamorphise his rites, ceremonies, and superstitions, into what new shapes
or forms are best suitable to his pleasure and his fellow-contractors most
commodious uses and purposes. Concerning all the former mentioned, although it
be exceeding difficult; nay, an impossible thing for any man to avouch every of
them true in his own knowledge or experience; yet for that some kinds of them
we may assuredly know and believe from God himself, who has in his sacred
word nominated both Isaiah 8.19.
apparitions of the Devil, as also, incantations, charms, Sam. 1.28. 8. Exodus
Leuit. Deuteron.
spells and familiarity with Spirits, as also for that reason does demonstrate,
that there may be many more kinds, besides those named of the same likeness,
nature abused, and devilish use; and for that unto othersome, the credit, worth
and merit of those Writers by whom they have been observed and published, does
give weight and estimation, it may be approved as an infallible conclusion,
that wheresoever any of them or the like, being diligently enquired after, are
either really found, or in appearance or show resembling, that there (with the
concurrence of circumstances, and approved precedence of a manifest work of
Sorcery consenting) that there, I say, it ought to be sufficient and
uncontrolled matter, or occasion of just suspicion and presumption against the
particular, in whom they are by just witnesses free from exception, detected
and palpably known, practiced and exercised. As we have now briefly recited
and called to mind some sorts of such ceremonies, rites, superstitions,
manners, instruments and gestures as are annexed unto that kind of Sorcery or
Witchcraft which consists in action: So let us also recite some other sorts
of ceremonies, rites, and superstitions, which belong unto that kind of
Sorcery which is conversant in diuinations, revelations of things hidden,
predictions, and prophecies. Diuinations according to nature or art, as Cicero
distinguishes in his first book de Diuinatione, we do not intend or purpose,
but that divination which the same Author in the same place does refer into a
power above man, which he there terms the power of the gods, between whom
and divination, the Stoickes make this reciprocation, Si sit Diuinatio, Dij
sunt, si Dij sine est Diuinatio; that is, if there be right divination or
prediction of things to come not contained in Art or Nature, certainly that
divination is of the gods, as reciprocally where there are Gods, there is
divination. Here we see plainly, not only the antiquity, but the direct
original of diuinations, and that they do manifestly derive themselves from
Idol-gods, from Infidels, from Idolaters.

This is further evident likewise, by the general current and report of all
Histories, even from the first beginning and foundation of Rome by Romulus, as
through all ancient writings and writers, the frequent mention of Augury,
Aruspicy, Extispicy, and the like, does plentifully witness. The holy
Scripture also and Word of God does testify the same, Deuteronomy. 18. verse 9, 10,
11. where divination by the flying of fowls, by the observation of times, and
the like, are reckoned among the abominations of the Nations, or Gentiles.

The original then of Diuinations issuing from Devils (because from false
gods, the gods of the heathen and Idolaters) let us for the better noting of
the abomination it self, observe and point out some of their ceremonies,
manners, and superstitions also.

Some in old time used to divine, as by the flying of fowls, so by viewing of
lightning, by monsters, by lots, by inspection of the Stars, by dreams, per
monstra, and portenta, fulgura, sorts, Insomnia, per Astra, as Cicero
testifies at large in his books de Diuinatione. Some did use to draw their
Diuinations out of tubs, or vessels of water, whereinto were cast certain thin
plates of silver and gold, and other precious Jewels, by which the Devils
(which Infidels ignorantly called their gods) were allured to answer unto
demands, doubts, and questions, as is by Psellus described, and was usual
among the Assyrian coniectors. Some derived their Diuinations from
looking-glasses, wherein the Devil satisfied unto demands and questions, by
figures and shapes there appearing.

This kind of Divination was called (...) whereunto came very near and was
like (...). Some fetch their Diuinations by lots, taken from points, letters,
characters, figures, words, syllables, sentences, which kind of divination is
distinguished by the name of (...). If we should number up every particular
kind of shape, wherein Divination does shrowde it self, it would prove a
long and tedious voyage, not only through fire, water, air, earth, and other
far distant and divided parts of the wide and spacious world, but through
siues, riddles, the guts and bowels of the dead, and many other secret haunts
and holes, wherein as the invincible Labyrinths of intricate illusions, the
Devil does shadow and hide his subtle insidiation of silly deceived man.

He that desires more curiously to read other particulars herein, I refer
him unto S. Augustine, de natura Daemonum, and to Camerarius, de Diuinationum
generibus. It is sufficient that the truth and possibility of these kinds of
Diuinations and the like, with their ceremonies, rites, customs, and
superstitions; as also their detested original, end, use, and abomination, is
esteemed devilish by the Word of God, and his most sacred voice, wherein under
those kinds of Divination, by the flying of fowls, observation of times,
Deuteronomy. 18. verse 10, 11. and vain gazing and beholding the Stars, Isaiah
47.19. he displayeth and judges the nature and quality of all other the like,
covered by what styles or names soever. The enumeration of any more sorts,
might increase in number, and advance curiosity, but can add nothing in
substance or material use. The reason that the Devil requires these rites
and ceremonies, S. Augustine does declare lib. 21. cap. 6. de Cinit. Dei,
Alliciuntur Daemones (says he) per varia genera lapidum, herbarum, lignorum,
animalium, carminum, ri^uum, non vt animalia cibis sed vt spiritus signis, in
quantum scilicet haec iis adhibentur in signum diuini honoris cuius ipsi sunt
cupidi. That is, Devils are drawn or Coniured, by diverse kinds of stones,
herbs, woods, creatures, words, rimes, rites, or ceremonies, not as living
creatures desire food, but as spirits rejoice or delight in signs, because
those signs argue respect, worship, and honor, whereof they are very
ambitious and desirous, as affecting Divine worship in malice of God himself
and his Divine worship. To the same purpose says Binsfeldius Comment. vel
Explicat. in praelud. 9. Delectantur Daemones signis cum imitaeri Deum studeant
in Sacramentis suis. That is, Devils delight in signs, rites, and ceremonies,
as desiring to imitate, or to be like God in his Sacraments.

We have summarily (wherein for our information is sufficient competence)
produced some few sorts of ceremonies, rites, and superstitious gestures in
both kinds, that is, both such as belong to that kind of Sorcery, which
consists in act, and working, as also that which is exercised in Divination,
prediction, and revelation.

The general rule and reason is the same, and extends it self equally
against both.

Let us then in the conclusion thus conioyne them both together. What man is he
among men so blind, who beholding any man the former ceremonies, rites,
prelusions, or gestures, being suspicious notes, marks, cognizances, and
badges of Sorcerers and Witches, in either kind, and does not think that he
may with good reason doubt the ordianry correspondence of fruits, and works
answerable thereto? Unto the former presumption, if circumstances of time,
place, instruments and means, fitting such devilish Acts, opportunity, and
the like do add their force, does not just occasion of doubt increase? For
illustration and example, let us suppose a person of a curious and Mast.
Perkins in his discourse of Witchcraft, chap. 1. page 11.
inquisitiue disposition in things hidden or inhibited, a man void of the
fear and knowledge of God, a searcher after Sorcerers, and their devilish
Arts, educate among them by kindred, affinity, or neighborhood, with them
having general opportunity unto inchoation into that Diabolical mystery, a
man likely and prone to become a receptacle of Devils, expressed by his long
observed, or known flying from, or hating all occasions or places, where the
name, mention, worship, or adoration of Almighty God is in any kind used; a
man out of whose cursed lips has at any time been heard, the Perkins chap 2.
page 48. discourse of Witchcraft.
renouncing of God, or voluntary profession or love and friendship unto the
Devil (all which with horror sometimes my own ears did hear, in a She was
easy and ready to profess, that she renounced God and all his works, but
being required to say that she renounced the Devil and all his works she did
refus^ it with this addition of the reason, (videlicet) for that the Devil had
never done her any hur^
woman at an open assise, being there indicted upon suspicion of Witchcraft.)

Let us yet further consider in the same man, an extraordinary alienation of
himself, from all society and company with men (for that familiar
conversation with Devils, begets an hatred and detestation, both of the
remembrance of God or sight of men) likewise a frequentation or solemn
haunting of desarte Serres, from the confession of Witches detected an^
censured in the reign of Henry 4. of France.
places, forsaken and unaccustomed of men, the habitations of Zijm and Iijm,
graves and sepulchers. This seems, Math. 8. Luke 8. Mark 5. in the possessed
true.

The possessed and the Witch, are both the habitacles of Devils; with this
only difference, that the Witch does willingly entertain him.

His custom of haunting tombs and sepulchers, in the one does make it
probable, and credible in the other. Likewise a solitary solacing himself, or
accustoming abroad often, and usually alone, and vnacompanied at times and hours
unusual and uncouth to men, as the most dark seasons of the night, fitting
the dark works, and the workmen of the Prince of Darkness.

Let us yet more particularly observe this man branded with the former note,
seeming or professing to practice works above the power and possibility of
man, to threaten or promise to perform, beyond the custom of men, whether in
general, or toward any particular. In a devilish intendred action bent
against any particular, likewise we may diligently examine any manifest
special provocation, first given: secondly, an apparent apprehension thereof
expressed by words, gestures, or deeds: thirdly intention, or expectation,
succeeding the provocation, starting out oft-times, or intimated by any rash,
unadvised, or sudaine, project, of headie and unbridled passion: fourthly, the
opportunity suitable unto such an intended desseigne as time and place
competent for access, speech, sight, or receiving from, or giving unto the
particular, against whom such devilish thoughts are set, any thing, wherein
any enchanted power or virtue is usually hid and conueighed.

After a Sorcerous deed is thus certainly observed to proceed, we may then
further with vigilant circumspection view, whether ought may be detected,
justly arguing his rejoicing pride, or boasting therein, that stands justly
suspected, or ought that may prove or express his doubt, or fear of
discovery, his guilty looks, cunning euasions, shifting, lying, or
contradictory answers, and apologies unto particulars urged.

These circumstances and the like, though each alone and single may seem of no
moment or weight, yet concurring together, or aptly conferred, they often produce
a worth from whence does issue full and complete satisfaction. Verisimilia
singula suo pondere mouent, coaceruata multum proficiunt (says Cicero) that
is, every single circumstance has his weight and use, but consenting and
concurring together, they do much advantage. Since then what virtue or power
soever, circumstances and presumptions, do usually and generally unfold in all
other subjects or matters whatsoever, the same equally and as largely, reason
does here display and offer in this of Witchcraft: why should not the like
practice thereof herein also be urged and found, as likely and succesfull? I
do not commend or allow the usual rash, foolish and fantastical abuse of
circumstances, nor their wresting and forging, nor the coniuration or raising
up of their likeness, and shadows, without any substance or truth (as is too
common and vulgar) out of mere fancy or defect of true judgment, without the
due manifestation of a certain crime first in this kind assured.

But where all the former circumstances do truly and really occur, or most
of them, or the most material amongst them with an apparent uncontrolled
precedent evidence of an undoubted act of Sorcery, and are not indirectly
wrested or guilefully extorted, but directly proved, and fairly produced and
urged; what man inioying his common sense or reason, can be ignorant, what a
large scope and fair field they do yield to sent, to trace and chase the
most hidden and secret guilt of Witches whatsoever, out of their utmost
shifting most close couerts and subtle concealements?

I do not affirm circumstances and presumptions, simply in themselves
sufficient to prove or condemn a Witch: but what reasonable man will or can
doubt or deny, where first a manifest work of Sorcery is with true judgment
discerned, and known certainly perpetrate: that the former circumstances and
presumptions pointing unto a particular, do give sufficient warrant, reason,
and matter of calling that particular into question, and of inioyning and
urging him unto his purgation and justification from those evil apparances,
whereby through the differencies, iarres, contrarieties, and contradictions of
the false faces and vizards of seeming truth (because identity and unity is
properly and solely found with truth it self inviolable and the same)
guiltiness is often unable to find a covert to hid it self, but rubbed or
galled unto the quick, does break out and issue forth in his own perfect and
vndeceiuing liknesse. It may be objected, that it does commonly fall out, and
is so often seen, that the hearts of Witches are by the Devil so possessed, so
hardened and sealed up against all touch, either of any conscience, or the least
spark of the affections of men left in them, that there is no possibility, or
hope of any preualence, by the pressing of any presumptions or circumstances,
which they for the most part will answer with wilful and perverse silence.

This is and may be sometimes true, yet is no sufficient reason, why due proof
and trial should not always diligently be made herein, since first experience
it self does witness a manifest benefit thereby: secondly, the like
reasonable course and practice is known both usual, fruitful and effectual
in all other disquisitions, and inquisitions whatsoever: and thirdly, the
Devil himself, the Witches and Sorcerers great and graund Master, though of
far fewer words then Witches, (as seldom speaking at all) and abounding with
far more subtlety and cunning; yet is he not able by all his art or cunning,
always to hide his own works, but by presumptions and circumstances, wise
and understanding hearts do often discern and discover them, as is by daily
experience seen and testified, and is confirmed by the proof which all holy
and godly men have ever had thereof. And to this purpose, and for this cause
the holy Scripture does require Gods chosen children, to sift and try the
Spirits, whether they be of God or no; that is, whether they be of his holy
spirit, or of the evil spirit which is the Devil.

Although therefore God for his own secret decree, or purpose, do permit the
Devil sometimes to hide and shadow the guilt of his associates, Witches and
Sorcerers, from the sight or deprehension of man, and thereby, sometimes,
frustrate man's just endeavor and duty of their discovery; yet does he not
totally or altogether herein subject, or captiuate, or abridge man's power or
possibility of preualence, even against all the power and force of Devils, as
oft-times our dullest senses cannot choose but witness.

Could the Devil, or their own craft whatsoever, deliver the Sorcerers from
destruction out of the hands of Saul, who justly destroyed them all out of the
land of Israel, 1. Sam. 18. verse 9. or out of the hands of Josias, who
according to law, took away or abolished all that had familiar Spirits, and
Southsayers. 2. Kings chap. 23. verse 24? The extirpation of these Southsayers,
by those Princes, was commended of God, and by his Law commanded, Leuit.
20.27. The same Law of God commands, that no man be judged or put to death,
but by the mouth of two witnesses, from whence it is necessarily collected,
that the works of Sorcery are not always hidden, but oft-times so open, that
they may be manifestly noted; otherwise, how could they be testified, which
unto their condemnation the Law does ever presuppose and necessarily command?

Neither is this Law of God any thing discrepant from the commom equity of all
laws, or from reason it self: first, for that many works of Sorcery do
immediately in their first view, manifest themselves to the sense, as is
evident, by the miraculous works of the Enchaunters of Egypt, practiced in the
sight of Pharaoh King of Egypt. Secondly, for that many works are apparent
manifestly to Reason, in which, though the sense cannot immediately discern,
or take notice of their quality and author; yet by necessary inference and
evidence of reason, they are certainly and demonstratiuely proved to issue
from the power and force of Spirits and Devils, as has been formerly
declared, concerning both works and also diuinations, prophecies, and
revelations hidden from all curiosity and possibility of man. Thirdly, for that
circumstances and presumptions do with good and likely reason call into
question, and justly charge with suspicion (as has been instanced) concerning
the performers and practisers of ceremonious rites, superstitious gestures,
actions and manners usual unto Witches and Sorcerers. Since then, as is before
proved, Almighty God does inioyne a necessity of testimonies, unto all
condemnations and judgments of death whatsoever, and testimony does always
necessarily include a manifestation of whatsoever is testified, either to
sense, or reason, or both; it follows as a necessary conclusion unto all that
has bin said: that from things either manifest to sense, or evident to reason,
issues wholly and solely, not only the reasonable and likely way of detection
of Witches, but the very true way by God himself, in all true reason intended
and commanded. And from this way it is, both by multitudes of examples, by
experience and reason manifest, that neither Witches, nor the Devil himself
is altogether able to hide or defend their guilt. Diligence therefore herein
duly and carefully exercising it self certainly shall not, nor can prove
the Law of God vain, nor the own endeavor frustrate or void, although happily
difficulties and impediments may sometimes interrupt, as in all other cases and
affairs is usual.

Thus has been made manifest how Witchcraft is discouerable by sense, and
evident by reason; likewise, that it is no more inscrutable or hidden from
detection in the inquisition thereof, by signs of presumption, probable and
likely conjecture or suspicion, then all other intricate or hidden subjects, or
objects of the understanding whatsoever. For, although presumptions are alone
no sufficient proof, yet do they yield matter and occasion of diligent and
judicious inquisition, which is the reasonable way and due method of upright
proceeding, and the common, hopeful and warranted path unto all detections, in
all other cases of doubt and difficulty whatsoever; wherein I see no cause or
reason, why judicious, wary and wise practice and proof, weighing and pressing
circumstances into the bone and marrow, should not equally, in case of
Witchcraft, as in all other cases of judgment and inquisitions (though not
ever because that exceedes the nature of presumption) equally, I say, and as
often should not confound the guilty, and chase and wind out as fair an issue.

Certainly, if men would more industriously exercise their sharper wits,
exquisite sense, and awaked judgments, according unto the former reasonable,
religious, and judicious ways, exempt from the burden and encumbrance of
blind superstitions, traditionary and imaginary inventions and customs, no
doubt, but experience would yield and bring forth in short time, a much more
rich increase of satisfaction, and more happy detection in judicial
proceedings.

It is true, that in the case of Witchcraft many things are very difficult,
hidden and infolded in mists and clouds, ouershadowing our reason and best
understanding.

Notwithstanding, why should men be more impatient or dejected, that in matters
of Witchcraft, many things are often hidden from our knowledge, and discovery,
when the same darkness, obscurity, difficulty and doubtfulnesse, is a thing
ordinary in many other subjects beside, as necessary unto us, and concerning
which, it may be no less truly said, that in this life of mortality, much
more is that which is unknown, then that which is known and revealed unto us.

Hence is that ancient saying of the Philosopher: Hoc tantum scio, quod nihil
scio, that is, so few are those things, which are demonstratiuely, truly, and
certainly known, that they are nothing in comparison of the infinite number
and multitude of such things, as are either only probable, or obscure or
inscrutable.

For to deny that God has given unto man a great measure of knowledge in many
things, were not only gross darkness and blindness, but great ingratitude,
yea impiety. Nevertheless, it were also as great fatuity not to see or
acknowledge, that God has mixed this knowledge with much intricate difficulty
and ambiguity, which notwithstanding he does in his wisdom more or less
reveal distribute and dispense, in several measures, unto several men,
according to their several cares, studies, indefatigable pains, and more
industrious endeavor, in seeking and inquiring it: in defect whereof more
commonly then either in Gods decreed restraint, or natures abnuence, men's
desires and labors are so often annihilate.

CHAP. XIII. The confutation of diverse erroneous ways, unto the discovery of
Witches, vulgarly received and approved.
AS true religion does truly teach the true worship of God in that true manner
which he requires, and commands: so superstition in an unapt measure or
manner, does offer up and sacrifice her vain and foolish zeal or fear. Unto
her therefore and her sacrifice, thus does Almighty God reply; Who required
this at your hands? I hate and abhor your Sabboths and your new Moons, Isa.
12.13. The heathen Orator could say, Religio continetur cultu pio Deorum. True
religion consists in the holy and true worship of God. Unto the advancing of
the worship of the true God, the extirpation of Witches and Witchcraft
(because it is the most abominable kind of Idolatry) is a special service,
and acceptable duty unto God, expressly commanded by himself, Deuteronomy. 17.3, 4,
5.

In the performance therefore of this worship, as it is solely and truly
religious, to seek their extermination by those means, and in that manner,
which Almighty God does approve and allow: so with misgouerned zeal or fear,
in the ignorance, or neglect of the right manner or way, inconsiderately to
follow unwarranted paths thereto, is plain Superstition.

Julius Scaliger, in his third book of Poetry, thus describes very lively
the nature of Superstition. Superstitio satisfacit ad notandum eum habitum, quo
metuimus, aut Deum sine ratione, aut ei opera attribuimus quae opera ne
cogitauit quidem vnquam ille, that is, this word Superstition does serve to set
forth such an habit or disposition of mind, wherein we worship or so fear
God, as is void of cause or reason, or unto our own hurt or damage, we
attribute unto God, as of God, those works or things, which Almighty God
himself never thought or intended. The word which the Greeks use for
Superstition, is (...) inconsulta and absurda diuinae potentiae formido, that
is, an absurd, and ill-aduised fear or worship of God, which certainly is
there, where he neither requires it, nor is true cause or reason either of
such worship, or in such sort or manner.

In this special part therefore of the worship and fear of God, namely, in
the discovery of Witchcraft and Sorcery, as we have before labored to find
out those ways which are lawful, justifiable, and allowed: so let us now
briefly display the folly and vanity of erroneous and blind paths, pointing
deceitfully thereto; that we seek not superstitiously to serve God, in our
enjoined and commanded duties of the discoueries of Witches, with our own
vanities or follies, rash inventions, or devices; but in reasonable, just,
discreet and religious proceeding, which is only and solely acceptable with
God.

In former ages and times, have been published by diverse writers, many
ridiculous traditions, herein so vain, and so far unworthy any serious
confutation, that they scarce deserve so much as bare mention.

Of this sort are the imagined profligations of the fits of the bewitched, by
beholding the face of a Priest, by being touched by hallowed ointments, or
liniments, by the virtue of exorcisation, of incense, of odours, of certain
mumbled sacred or mystical words.

I will therefore omit these, as by time it self worn exolete, found
worthless, and almost of later writers left namelesse, and will only oppose
and examine such later experiments, as do in our time and country most
prevail in esteem.

CHAP. XIIII. The casting of Witches into the water, Scratching, Beating,
Pinching, and drawing of blood of Witches.
IT is vulgarly credited, that the casting of supposed Witches bound into the
water, and the water refusing or not suffering them to sink within her bosom
or bowels, is an infallible detection that such are Witches.

If this experiment be true, then must it necessarily so be, either as a thing
ordinary, or as a thing extraordinary: because nothing can happen or fall out,
that is not limited within this circuit or compass.

That which is ordinary, is natural; as likewise that which is natural, is
ordinary. Aristotle in the second of his Ethickes says of that which is
natural quod aliter non assurscit, that is, ordinarily it is not otherwise,
then ever the same. From whence it does follow by good consequent, that
whatsoever is ordinary, must be natural, because it keeps the same course
and order, which is the property of nature.

For this cause Scaliger in his book de subtilitate says, Natura est
ordinaria Dei potestas, that is, nature is the ordinary power of God, in the
ordinary course and government of all things.

If then this experiment in the trial of Witches, be as a thing ordinary (as
it is vulgarly esteemed) it must be found likewise natural. If it cannot be
found natural, it cannot be ordinary. That it is not, nor cannot be natural,
is manifest.

First, for that the ordinary nature of things senseless and void of reason,
does not distinguish one person from another, virtue from vice, a good man from
an evil man. This our Savior himself does confirm, Math. 5. verse. 45. God
makes his sun to arise on the evil, and the good, and sends rain on the
just and unjust.

Nay, we may further observe in the book of God, and also read in the book
of nature and common experience, that the common benefit of nature, is not
only vouchsafed unto all wicked men indifferently, but even unto Devils
themselves, who do not only participate in nature the common essence,
faculties and powers, proper unto the substance and nature of all other
Spirits; but also do exercise these powers and spiritual forces usually upon
other inferior natures, subject unto their supernatural nature, reach and
efficacy, as is often seen in their works even upon the bodies and goods of
the blessed Saints and sons of God.

Hereby then is evident, that nature cannot take notice, or distinguish a
wicked man, no not a Devil, and therefore much less a Witch.

But here may be objected, that diverse herbs and other simples, produce many
strange and wondered effects, by an hidden secret, and occult quality and
property in nature, though there appear no manifest quality oft-times in
them, by which in reason or probability they should or can be effectual
thereto. This Physicions do daily witness and prove true.

Why then may not there be likewise yielded the like hidden power, or
antipatheticall virtue in the nature of the element of water, and thereby a
Witch be detected; as well without known cause or reason thereof in nature;
notwithstanding naturally the evils or diseases both of body and mind, are
both detected, and cured by elementary substances or compositions, in which
there is no manifest known proportion therewith?

It is truly answered, that although in this supposed experiment of the
disposition of the element of water toward Witches, casualty may happily
sometimes seem to justify it true; yet is not this sufficient to euince it a
thing natural. Those things which are natural, necessarily and ever produce
their effect, except some manifest or extraordinary interception or impediment
hinder.

Thus fire does necessarily, ordinarily, and always burn and consume any
combustible matter or fuel being added thereto, except either some manifest or
extraordinary hindrance oppose it. The like may be said of all other elements
for their natural effects in their proper objects. Natural medicines
likewise, if rightly accommodated with prudence, art and discretion unto the
right disease, do never fail their usual productions or effects.

This Almighty God in his holy writ does confirm, and long and aged experience
of many hundreths of years has successively witnessed, wherein the ancient
records of all learned writers, have ever testified innumerable medicinal herbs
and drugges, certainly and truly to be ever the same. Present times do
likewise see and witness it, and no man does or can doubt it in the right
proof. Concerning any such nature or custom in the element of water, in the
refragation of Witches, who was as yet ever able to write and fully resolve, or
prove it ordinary, necessary, certain, ever or for the most part, not failing
as is in course of nature most infallible and never doubted? What former ages
have successively vouchsafed the mention of truth or certainty therein? Has
Almighty God, at all, so much as approved any opinion or thought thereof? Is it
not rather to be justly doubted, that it may be esteemed among the abominations
of the Gentiles, which God in his people does detest, Deuteronomy. 18. verse 9? Do
all men in our time, or good and just men avouch their own proof in the
trial thereof? Or contrariwise, do not many wise, religious, learned and
equal minds with reason reject and contemn it? Does Law as yet establish it,
or reason prove it? How can it then be proposed as equivalent with those
reasonable means or ways, of just proceedings or trials, which God, his
divine Law, his law of nature, judgment, reason, experience, and the laws of
men have ever witnessed, perpetually and only assured certain and infallible?

It wants the universal testimony of former ages and Writers; in this our
age it is held in jealousy with the most judicious, sage, and wise: It has no
reasonable proof, no justifiable trial has dared to avouch it upon public
record, no law has as yet, thought it worthy of admittance; and the Law of
God is not proved to prove or approve it. If it had been a thing natural,
ordinary, of necessary, or of certain operation or power, and therein so
evidently remarkable, it is impossible it should have escaped authentical
approbation, or the same notable testimonies, which all other tried truths have
ever obtained. From the former premises therefore we conclude, that it cannot
be a thing natural, necessary or ordinary. If it be not ordinary, then is it
not always the same; if not always the same, then is it sometimes failing; if
sometimes failing, then is it not infallible; if not infallible, then in no
true judgment or justice to be trusted or credited. It now remains to
inquire, whether being proved false or ordinary, it may not be proved true as
extraordinary (for to esteem or grant it both is an impossibility in nature,
and an absurdity in reason.) Let us grant, it may be judged and deemed
extraordinary; the next doubt then remaining is, whether being extraordinary or
miraculous, it be of God or of the Devil.

The reason why some men suppose it should be of God, is, for that the water is
an element which is used in Baptism, and therefore by the miraculous and
extraordinary power of God, does reject and refuse those who have renounced
their vow and promise thereby, made unto God, of which sort are Witches.

If this reason be sound and good, why should not Bread and Wine, being
elements in that Sacrement of the Eucharist, be likewise noted and observed to
trurne back, or fly away from the thraotes, mouths, and teeth of Witches? and
why, (if for the former reason, the water being an element in the Sacrament of
covenant, made with God, in the first initiation into the faith, do for that
cause refuse to receive Witches into her bosom, and thereby give an infallible
proof of a Witch?) Why, I say, should not by the same reason Bread and Wine,
being elements in the Sacrament of confirmation and growth of faith, refuse and
fly from those much more, whose faith and promise made unto God in riper and
more understanding years, is by them renounced? And why for that cause, should
not Bread and Wine become as infallible marks and testimonies unto the
detection of Witches? If the reason be good in the first, it must necessarily
be the same in the second; and if it fail in the second, it cannot be good or
sound in the first. Neither does it or can it stand with any good reason at
all, that because so small part of the element of water, is set apart unto that
religious service in the Sacrament; therefore, the whole element of water, or
all other waters must thereby obtain any general common property above the
kind or nature. Neither is it as yet agreed, or concluded generally among the
most learned, and reverend Divines, whether that small part of water which in
particular is set apart, or used in the Sacrament, does thereby receive any
manifest alteration at all in substance, essence, nature or quality. If then
that part of the element of water it self, which is hallowed unto that holy
use, be not manifested, or apparently proved to be thereby endowed with any
virtue, much less can it communicate any virtue unto other waters, which did
not participate therewith in the same religious service. Except then there may
be proved by this religious use of water, some more endowment of sense or
religion therein, then is in other elements, why should it more fly from a
Witch then the fire, then the air, then the earth? The fire does warm them,
the air flies not from them, but gives them breathing; the earth refuses
not to bear them, to feed them, to bury them. Why then should the water alone
run away or fly from them? It may be answered, that it is a miracle, whereof
therefore there neither can nor ought reason in nature to be demanded or
given. If it be a miracle, it is either a true miracle, which only and solely
does exceed the power of any Non est creator, nisi qui principaliter format:
nec quisquam hoc potest, nisi ^nus Creator Deus. Aug. 3. de Trin.
created nature, or is a seeming miracle by the power of the Devil, working
effects in respect of man's reason, nature, and power supernatural and
impossible; notwithstanding confined and limited within the general rule,
reason and power of universal nature, which he Augustinus 3. de Trin. Alia
potest si non prohibea^ur, Demon: Alia non potest, etsi permittatur,
que^admodum homo potest, ambulate si non prohibeatur, volare non potest, et^i
permittatur Petr. Lomb. Sent. lib. 2. Did 7.
cannot exceed or transcend, being a finite creature, and no infinite Creator.

Miracles, of the first kind, are raising from the dead the son of the widow
of Sarepta, by Elias 3. of the kings, 17. the dividing the water of Jordan with
Elias cloak, 4. of the Kings 2. the curing of the sick by S. Paul's
handkercher, Act. 5.19. the raising Lazarus by our blessed Savior, and the
like.

Miracles of the second kind, are all the works of the Enchanters of Egypt,
Exodus 7. which were only devilish sleights, cunning Augustinus 3. de Trin.
Alia potest si non prohibea^ur, Demon: Alia non potest, etsi permittatur,
que^admodum homo potest, ambulate si non prohibeatur, volare non potest, et^i
permittatur Petr. Lomb. Sent. lib. 2. Did 7.
imitations, countersets, and Diabolical resemblances and shadows of the true
miracles, wrought by Almighty God, in the hand of his servant Moses.

If this miracle, or this miraculous detection of Witches by water, be of this
later kind, it is of the Devil; and is not to be esteemed or named, where the
Name of God is feared or called upon.

For although the cunning fraud of the Devil, above and beyond all capacity
of the weak sense and understanding of man, do so lively oft-times cast
before our eyes, the outward shape and similitude of the miracles of God, that
man is not able easily to distinguish them, or at first sight to put a true
difference: yet must men studiously, and circumspectly be advised herein, lest
rashly they confound, or equal the vile and abject illusions of that damned
creature the Devil (though never so wonderful in our eyes) unto the infinite
power of the Almighty Creator, in his true and truly created miracles, which
is an high dishonor unto our God, and accursed impiety.

For this cause, the holy Scripture has admonished and warned the weakness
of humane understanding, not to be transported by signs and wonders, nor to
trust or give credit to every miracle: and our Savior himself, Math. 24.
verse. 24. does furnish his Disciples with careful warning herein. And S.
John, in his Revelation fore-telleth, that in the latter days and times, the
Devil and the great Whore of Babylon, shall with great signs, wonders, and
miracles, seduce and deceive the last ages, and people of the world.

Since then miracles are of no validity, except certainly and truly known to
be of God; and since also it is not easy for every Spirit to discern therein;
let us duly examine and sift this our supposed and proposed miracle in the
trial and detection of Witches. Petrus Gregorius Tholosanus in his Syntagma
Iuris, lib. 2. cap. 12. in a tractate concerning the Relics and Monuments of
Saints, together with miracles, does give very honest, sound, and substantial
direction.

First, that all credited miracles be found and allowed by religious (...) and
authority.

Secondly, that the persons by whom they are first revealed or known, or by
whom they are avouched, be testes idonei, omnique exceptione maiores, that is,
that they be worthy witnesses of undoubted and unstained credit and worth, free
from all just exception, of holy life, and unstained conversation. Without
these cautions (says he) no miracles ought to be esteemed, or received as of
truth.

How far our vulgar trial of Witches, by the supposed miraculous indication
and detection of them by the water, is different from this care or respect,
this equity, religion, or humanity, common practice does openly declare, when
without allowance of any law, or respect of common civility, every private,
rash, and turbulent person, upon his own surmise of a Witch, dare barbarously
undertake by uncivil force and lawless violence, to cast poor people bound
into the water, and there deteine them, for their own vain and foolish lusts,
without sense, or care of the shameful wrong, or injury, which may befall
oft-times innocents thereby.

Though this kind of trial of a Witch, might happily prove in it self worthy
to be allowed, yet is it not in every private person justifiable, or tolerable,
or without warrant of authority in any sort excusable. The manner therefore of
this vulgar trial, must needs with just and honest minds, vncontrouersedly,
and undoubtedly, be rusticall, barbarous, and rude. Now to return again into
the truth of the miracle it self in this trial.

First, let us enquire with Petrus Gregorius, what religious laws or
authority have admitted it as true.

Secondly, what religious, reverend, judicious, grave, or holy Spectators, or
eyewitnesses do avouch it. Let us yet farther proceed with the same Author,
in the forenamed Syntagma, lib. 34. cap. 21. and by some other rules, farther
examine this miracle, if it be well and duly avouched and credited, concerning
the being thereof, whether that being be not a being of the Devil, and of his
miracles. Conatus omnis Daemonum (says the Author) vnum habet generalem
scopum, operibus Dei se obijcere, ei debitum honorem subfurari, pios hominum
animos sibi lucri facere, and a vero Deo retrahere. That is, the works of the
Devil have one general scope; namely, to oppose themselves against the works
of God, to rob God of his honor, to draw the hearts of men from God, and to
gain them unto himself. Let us now consider the forenamed miracle by these
rules.

Concerning the approbation thereof by any religious laws or authority, I have
never read my self, nor have heard by others, of any authentike suffrage from
classical Author, and with good reason, I may conceive and judge a nullity
therein.

Concerning any religious, learned, and judicious Spectators and auouchers of
this miracle, whose faith and credit may be wholly free from al just exception,
it has ever been a difficult and hard task to furnish any true sufficiency
or competency in this kind, though multitudes and swarms of deceived Vulgars,
continually and violently obtrude their fantastical sominations. Since then
as yet there does no manifest law stand up to patronage this miracle, and the
learned, religious, and holy man able to discern and judge, and free from
exception, is not at all, or hardly to be produced or found to avouch or
countenance it true; it may be with good reason suspected, and that reason may
justly dissuade all sudden, rash, or hasty credit or trust thereof. Now let us
examine, if it were undoubtedly to be assumed as true, whether being true, it
be not as truly of the Devil. And first let us consider, whether it do not
oppose the works of God, which was the first direction of Gregorius. It is
herein truly convicted, because the nouelty and supposed miraculous force and
might thereof, does first usually and easily intise unsettled brains, rashly to
forsake the ways of judgment and judicious legal proceeding, which is the
ordinance and work of God: secondly, does imbolden staggering and unresolved
minds presumptuously without warrant to expect, to ask or seek a sign or
miracle, which ordinarily or unnecessarily required, our blessed Savior
apertly condemns, Math. 16. An adulterous and unbelieving generation does
seek a sign or miracle. And as herein it directly opposes against the decree
and work of God; so likewise by giving occasion and way, that supposed
miracles may become vulgarly common and ordinary, whereby the true miracles and
miraculous works of God also may grow with undiscerning men of less esteem,
vile and of no account. Nam miracula Dei assiduitate viluerunt (says S.
Augustine) the miracles and miraculous works of God, being often seen, become
of small or no reputation. The second trial of a false miracle, was the robbing
of God of his due honor and praise, which in this proposed miracle is partly
proved; by making the extraordinary work or use of miracles ordinary, and
thereby derogating from the power, worth and nature of Gods true miracles (as
is before said): partly by unthankful vnder-valewing, omitting, or
relinquishing the ordinary means of trials and detections of doubtful truths,
which God has made and given in his good grace; and therefore their contempt
and neglect is a manifest robbing of God of his due praise and glory therein.
The third trial of the Devils property in miracles, was the seducing of men's
hearts from God unto himself, which in our supposed miracle may be necessarily
concluded. For if the miracle it self be upon good grounds before alleged,
rightfully deemed to be of the Devil; it must necessarily follow, that
whatsoever esteem or reputation is given thereto, is a secret sacrifice of
ignorance or superstition unto the Devil, and an hidden and covert seduction
from God: and thus has been proved, or at least, with good reason alleged.
First that the trial of Witches by water, is not natural or according to any
reason in nature. Secondly, if it be extraordinary and a miracle, that it is in
greater likelihood and probability a miracle of the Devil to ensnare, then any
manifest miracle of God to glorify his name, which is the true end of right
miracles. Concerning the other imagined trials of Witches, as by beating,
scratching, drawing blood from supposed or suspected Witches, whereby it is
said that the fits or diseases of the bewitched do cease miraculously; as also
concerning the burning of bewitched cattle, whereby it is said, that the Witch
is miraculously compelled to present her self.

These, and the like, I think it vain and needless, particularly or singly
to confute, because it does directly appear, by their examination, according
to the former rules produced against the naturalizing of the detection of
Witches by casting them into the water, that first they are excluded out of the
number of things natural: secondly, that being reputed as miracles, they will
also be rather justly judged miracles of the Devil, then of God, by the former
reasons which have stripped the supposed miraculous detection of Witches by the
water, of any hopeful opinion that they can be of God.

Nor does our law now in force, differ here from rejecting such like miraculous
trialls. See the trial by Ordell abolished by Parliament the third year of
Henry the third, Coke 9. Rep. Case Abbot de Strata Mercella Fol. 33.

CHAP. XV. The exploration of Witches, by supernatural revelations in the
bewitched, by signs and secret marks, declared by the bewitched, to be in the
body of the suspected Witch, by the touch of the Witch curing the touched
bewitched.
THere remain as yet other miraculous explorations of a Witch, carrying in
their first view a far more wondered representation then any or all the former
explorations. One is, when persons bewitched, shall in the time of their
strange fits or traunces nominate or accuse a Witch, and for a true testimony
against him, or her, thus nominated, shall reveal secret marks in his or her
body, never before seen or known by any creature; nay, the very words or
works, which the supposed, or thus nominated Witch shall be acting or speaking
in far distant places, even in the very moment and point of time, while they
are in acting or speaking; all which I have sometimes my self heard and seen
proved true. This is reputed a certain conviction of a witch. An othor
miraculous trial of a Witch and like unto this, wonderful is; when a supposed
Witch required by the bewitched, does touch him or her (though when unknown or
unperceived by the bewitched themselves,) yet according to the prediction of
that issue by the bewitched, he or she immediately are delivered from the
present fit or agony, that then was upon him or her, which I have also my self
seen. For the better discovery of truth in these so wondered difficulties, let
us first recall to mind these few observations in our former Treatise
determined and proved. First, that the Devil does many miraculous and
supernatural things merely simply and alone of himself, for his own ends,
and without the instigation or association of a Witch. This was made manifest
by his conference, disputation and speech with Eua after a miraculous manner,
out of the body of the Serpent, when as yet neither Witch, nor Witchcraft were
come into the world. Secondly, that the Devil is able to obtrude or impose his
supernatural or miraculous works upon men, against their knowledge, liking,
will, or affection, and being unrequired. This is clear by his transuection of
the body of our blessed Savior, as also by his violent casting of the bodies
of the possessed, amongst the people mentioned in the Gospel. Thirdly, let us
not here forget specially, that he is able to transmit and send unto, or into
men unrequired, and without their desire or assent, secret powers, force,
knowledge, illuminations, and supernatural revelations. This was proved by
the possessed in the Gospel, who from a secret and hidden revelation and
power, above and beyond themselves, were able to utter that high mystery, as
yet hidden from the world, that Jesus was the Son of the living God. This
could not be known unto them, by their own reason or nature, being above and
beyond all reason or nature, and by grace only then begun to be revealed unto
the blessed Disciples themselves. To think that the possessed could have that
knowledge equally with the Disciples by the same grace, were impious derogation
from their Apostolical privilege and prerogative therein, unto whom did
properly belong the first fruits thereof alone.

This supernatural revelation therefore was transfused into the possessed by
the Devil, who could not be ignorant of the Lion of Juda, the mighty destroyer
of his spiritual kingdom, long before the disciples were borne, or capable of
knowledge. And thus having recalled these observations, from them do issue
these necessary inferences. First, that all supernatural acts or works in men,
are not to be imputed unto those men. Secondly, that for this cause those
supernatural works, are only to be imputed unto men which the Devil,
according unto contract or Covenant which those men does practice and produce.

And for this cause, in the inquisition of Witchcraft, when we have truly
first detected an act, done by a spiritual and supernatural force (because it
is in all laws injurious, to accuse of any act, before it be certainly known
the act has been committed) then, and not before, we ought endeavor directly
and necessarily to prove the contract, consent, and affection of the person
suspected, unto, or in that supernatural act, that being no less essential,
to detect and discover the true and undoubted Witch; then the supernatural
act, being certainly apparent, does undoubtedly prove the Devil, and his
power therein.

This equal regard, in case of Witchcraft, ought to be carefully balanced,
without which vain and unstable men shall ever at their lust and pleasure,
upon affections and passions, be privileged with impunity, to lay unjust
imputations, and to use wrongful violence and oppression beyond all equity,
or reason.

When therefore men that are prudent, judicious, and able to discern, do
first advisedly upon good ground and reason, adiudge a supernatural act
evidently done, or at least worthy to be suspected: secondly, shall by just and
reasonable proof, or at least lively and fair presumption detect the
contract, affection, or consent of any man in that act; then and not before, is
the accusation, inquisition and indictment of Witchcraft, against any man
equal and just.

For since a supernatural work can be truly and simply no act of a natural
man, and is the immediate hand and power of a Devil (as is formerly proved)
it is the man's consent, contract and covenant alone, in the act with the
Devil, that being detected and discovered, does infallibly and essentially
prove him a Witch, and not the act itself.

These observations, and considerations, first necessarily prefixed, let us now
proceed unto the two former propounded experiments of the miraculous detection
of Witches.

It is necessarily true, that it can solely proceed from a supernatural power,
that the bewitched are enabled in their traunces, to foretell the sequel of
the supposed Witches touch: likewise, that the nominated Witch, shall
accordingly by her touch immediately free and dispossess the Sick or the
bewitched of their agonies.

It is as necessarily true also, that it can solely proceed from a
supernatural power, that the bewitched are able in their traunces to nominate
the most secret and hidden marks in the bodies of the suspected Witch, her
present speech Herein the Devil affects to imitate the power of God in his
holy Prophet, who was able by his divine revelation to make known what the King
spoke in his Privy Chamber. 2. Kings verse 12. cap. 6. He herein also
counterfetteth the Divinity of our Savior, seeing Nathaniel, when he was
under the Fig Tree. Ioh. 1.48.
and actions in far distant places, and the like, but whether these
miraculous Revelations, with their answerable events, ought to be esteemed
just conuictions of the persons thus by a supernatural finger, pointed out and
noted; as also whether they proceed of God or of the Devil, is very
material, to examine and consider.

If they proceed from God, their end, their extraordinary necessity and use,
bent solely unto the immediate special glory, or extraordinary glorification
of God therein, will evidently declare.

What more extraordinary glorification of God can be pretended in the
needfulnesse of a miraculous detection of Witchcraft, then of any other sin
committed, as immediately against God, and with as high an hand? Witchcraft is
indeed one kind of horrid renunciation, and forsaking of God, but there are
many more kinds much more hellish then this secret and concealed defection: as
the open cursings, wilful blasphemings, and spiteful railings upon God, even
unto his face, professed hatred and contempt of God.

Among many Offenders in these kinds, after their own long provoking
continuance therein, and Almighty God his unspeakable long suffering and
patience: some few sometimes have been made hideous spectacles and examples
unto the rest, of the infinite power and justice of God, his insufferable
displeasure, indignation and direful revenging wrath. In this number was, for
some time Nebuchadneser, and Pharaoh King of Egypt, and in later times Julian
the Apostata, and others the like. Many other as high Blasphemers, and
despisers of God, notwithstanding have been permitted to escape any such
miraculous punishments, or fearful notorious exposings unto the worlds view.

Rabshakeh, railing on the living God, in the open view and hearing of the men
of Israel, and Olofernes denying the God of heaven, were not miraculously, or
by any immediate hand of God smitten, but were suffered to grow on, until
their harvest of confusion was ripe. That high degree of blasphemy against the
Son of the living God, hanging upon the Cross for the sins of mankind,
committed by the cruel and hard-hearted Jews, in scorning, scoffing, and
spiteful derision both of God in heaven, Math. 27, verse 43. and also of the
eternal Savior of the world, descended from heaven, was not by God then
extraordinarily revenged (as the incomparable greatness of the sin might
seem to require) but was in Almighty God his just judgment, suffered, until
in the due time, their own execrations, and cursings of themselves, and their
posterity, thereby to hasten and purchase the effusion of that holy innocent
blood, did fall upon them so heavily, that their whole Nation, People, and
Kingdom, became extirpate, vile, and vagabond for ever upon the face of the
earth. It is recorded in the Revelation, chap. 13. verse 5, 6, 7. concerning
the Beast, that he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God, his Tabernacle,
and the Saints; that he spoke great mighty blasphemies, yet power was given
unto him to continue, and prevail therein many years, and a large space of
time.

By these few examples it is evident, that neither the height, the nature, the
quantity, nor the quality, of the most abominable, or provoking sin, most
odious unto God and men, does usually, or always draw down from heaven upon
it self a miraculous immediate hard of Gods wrath. We may easily instance the
like, concerning the sin of witchcraft, which is our particular subject.

Although by the hand of his holy servant Saint Paul, Almghty God did
miraculously smite the Sorcerer Elymas, and as writers report, Simon Magus, by
the hand of St. Peter, multitudes and societies of other Sorcerers, and
Southsayers among the Caldeans, escaped not only the hands of Nebuchadneser,
in his wrath; but as it seems in the prophecy of Daniel, they lived many
years in high esteem, fame, and renown, both in their own Nation, and also
in foreign Countries, yea through the world. There is no doubt, that Egypt
likewise did abound with swarms of Sorcerers, as the holy Scripture, and all
times and writers report. Among the people of God also, the Israelites, it is
manifest that diverse Sorcerers and Witches did shrowed themselves, and lived
with impunity, as appears by the Witch of Endor, which king Saules severity,
in their general extirpation through the whole kingdom, had notwithstanding
passed by, and left unespied; as also by that special note and commendations,
from Gods own mouth and word of Joshua, that is, that he had taken away from
amiddest his people, all the Enchanters and Sorcerers: by which it is likely
and cannot be denied, that through the lenity or carelessness of former
Princes, they formerly had long securely their breathed. That God does not use
by miracles to detect all, or most Enchanters, Magicians, or Witches, is
farther made undoubted; because it should follow then and thence necessarily,
that he has both in the first ages of the world, ordained laws, and ordinary,
legal courses of proceeding against them in vain; as also for that he does,
in the holy records of his sacred word, make known his Decree, that they shall
be permitted to live and continue upon the face of the earth among other, and
as other unrepentant sinners, until his second coming, and the last day of
eternal doom, Reuelat. chap. 22. verse. 15. without shall be Enchanters. If
his Justice and severe judgment should by his miraculous power make so narrow
search amongst them, as ordinarily to root them out, it were impossible any one
of them should escape his all-seeing reuengefull hand, to survive unto his
general decreed day of sentence, and dreadful doom, of all kind of sins
and sinners, which both in justice unto some, and mercy unto other some, his
infinite goodness and wisdom has decreed, shall not be frustrate. Although
therefore Almighty God does sometimes stretch forth his mighty hand miraculously
to smite, or bring into light some horrid sins and sinners, his exrraordinary
power therein sometimes only extended, at his own good will and pleasure,
does not justify the presumptuous expectation of the dispensation thereof in
any particular. God who is the God of order, and not of confusion, does not
ordinarily dispense his extraordinary works, nor usually confound
indifferently, so different natures in their end and use, and his own decree.
Nature it self does also teach an impossibility in that which is
extraordinary, to become or be expected ordinary. In that way which is
ordinary, the industruous, the diligent, the provident man therefore does with
careful perseverance uprightly walk. The slothful, only the intemperate,
the improuident man, either by folly or ignorance loses or by idle sloth
forgetteh, or omitteth, his ordinary way or opportunity, and ridiculously
hops or trusts unto the redemption thereof, by extraordinary contingents or
events.

Thus it has appeared, that in regard of any more special or extraordinary
glorification of God, in the detection of Witches, rather then of other as
great and as abominable sinners, their is no needful or necessary use of
miracles.

The second consideration was, whether they are not rather of the Devil, then
of God; as also, how they may be any just conuictions of the supposed or
suspected guilty.

We will first herein examine the touch of the supposed Witch, immediately
commanding the cessation of the supposed fits of the bewitched. That this is a
false or Diabolical miracle and not of God, may be justly doubted.

First, because the holy and blessed power of working miracles (among which,
the healing the Sick or the possessed was not the least) was never of God
dispensed, to haunt or follow the touch of wicked men, or Sorcerers or Witches.

Secondly, for that the true miracles of God (which were ever dispensed, either
for the common good of his Church, or the declaration of his glorious truth, or
for the extraordinary punishment and destruction of evil men) did never
obscurely, or indirectly, prove themselves or their ends, but in their
manifestation were enabled to ouer-shine clearly, all the fogges and mists of
doubt or question.

The contrary hereunto in this our suspected miracle is manifest, wherein is
ridiculously imagined, that the blessed gift and virtue of healing the sick,
descended from God above, may be reputed in the hands of a Witch a sign or
testimony of his or her guilt and impiety, which ever has been, and is in it
self a special grace and favor of God, and was ever used rather as a
confirmation of the truth of Gods Ministers and servants. Let us now consider
how this miraculous touch and the efficacy thereof, may be any just conviction
of a Witch. No man can doubt that the virtue wherewith this touch was endued,
was supernatural. If it be supernatural, how can man, unto whom nothing
simply is possible, that is not natural, be justly reputed any proper Agent
therein? If he cannot be esteemed in himself any possible or true Agent,
then it remains, that he can only be interessed therein, as an accessory
in consent; as a Solicitor or Tenant unto a superior power. If that superior
power (as is before proved in the falsehood of his miracle) be the Devil, the
least reasonable doubt remaining whether the Devil alone, or with the consent
or contract of the suspected person has produced that wonderful effect: with
what Religion or reason can any man rather incline to credit the Devils
information in the mouth of the bewitched (who is the common accuser of God to
men, and of men to God) then in requisite pity, piety, and humane respect
unto his own kind to tender the weakness of frail man, against the
subtilty of the deceitful Devil. Shall man with man find less favor, then
the Devil with man against man? That the Devil is able by the permission of
God, to annex or hang this miracle upon this or that particular, is manifest,
by the possessed in the Gospel; upon whom and their natural actions and
motions, he cast supernatural consequences or concomitances. Was not their
speech attended with supernatural revelation, their hands with supernatural
force, to rend and tear in pieces iron chains and bonds? If the Devil be
able to transfuse, or cast these miraculous concomitances or consequences
alone, and without allowance of any man or person where God does permit; how is
it in any equity or reason just, that these impositions of the Devil should be
imputed unto any man? God forbid, that the Devils signs and wonders, nay his
truths should become any legal allegations or evidences in law. We may
therefore conclude it unjust, that the forenamed miraculous effects by the
Devil wrought and imputed by the bewitched, should be esteemed a sign or
infallible mark against any man, as therefore convinced a Witch, for that the
Devil and the bewitched have so deciphered him. These like miraculous
stratagems may be exercised upon any man, or unto any man's actions may be
deceitfully or fraudulently by the Devil conioined or apted. This therefore
does not infer any man's guilt therein. It ought be a man's own proper
contract therein with the Devil, necessarily and directly proved, that shall
justly condemn him. This contract may be and is plainly detected, by sifting
and considering, that man's voluntarily assisting or promoting, promising, or
undertaking such supernatural works, with answerable performance thereof. As
has been said, concerning the miraculous consequence of the touch of a
suspected Witch; so may be determined concerning the supernatural revelations
of secret marks or signs in her body, according unto the prediction of the
bewitched, as also of the discovery of the present actions, gestures, and
speeches of supposed Witches in far distant places. Diverse examples I my
self have seen in these kinds: I must necessarily acknowledge a more then
natural power therein, because far beyond the nature, reason, or power of
man. But there is notwithstanding sufficient matter of doubt, whether such
revelations, secret signs, and marks, though found in the named persons or
parts true, as also the right pourtraitures and shapes of the supposed or
accused Witches, though never of the bewitched before seen, and yet by the
bewitched truly described; there is, I say, notwithstanding, sufficient matter
of doubt, whether they are not very insufficient to charge or accuse any
particular thus pointed out or marked. The Law and express commandment of God
does allow of no revelation from any other Spirit, but from himself, Isa.
8.19. Whether these revelations are immediately of God, if their due
examination by the rule of his Word ESTIN AMARTIA ANOMIA. Quicquid non congruit
cum lege, peccatum est.
do not clearly determine, rash or hasty perturbation or passion ought not
presume it. The laws of men also admit no supernatural illuminations or
revelations, as any grounds of just trials or decisions of right or truth. It
follows therefore necessarily, that they are void, and ought to be of no force
or credit in upright judgment with just and righteous men. It may be
objected, that truth is found in these revelations, and truth ought be of
regard. It may hereto again be replied, that although truth in it self be
great, and ought and will prevail; yet in the abuse, evil use, or corrupted,
or depraved end thereof, it ought not deceive nor is of force. The Devil, as
all other cunning liars and deceivers and imitators of that his art, usually
mix truths with lies, that those truths giving credit unto lies, men may
believe both and so be deceived. It was ever the only safe way of lying, to
face and guard it with some plausible truths. In the former revelations
therefore, representations and true descriptions in the bewitched, of persons
of secret marks and signs, of speeches, gestures, and the like, although the
Devil be found true, or speaking truth, yet may he notwithstanding happily be
therein also a liar, while truly describing their persons, shapes, marks,
manners and gestures, speeches and the like, he falsely and lyingly adds
thereby a seeming or deceiving necessity of their guilt, as if therein or
thereby necesarily inferred. The fallicy illusion and the lyingly true
revelations of the Devil, may by many examples be manifested. Ianus Iacobus
Boissardus in his tract. de Diuinatione Chap. 5. reports an admirable story
of a noble Gentleman his familiar friend, and known unto himself. This man
flying from his own native Country for fear of punishment for a murder by
him committed, and living in far distant coasts, desired curiously to enquire
what his wife was in his absence doing, whom he had (being very fair young
and beautiful) married two months only before his departure or voluntary
exile. For this purpose he came unto a Magitian living in the place of exile,
who lively described unto him the true fashion, building, and ornaments of his
house where his wife in his absence lived, her apparel, countenance, and the
like, as they were perfectly foreknowne unto himself. He farther expecting to
learn what she was at that present instant doing. The Magitian made known
that there was then in her company a beautiful young man with his hose or
breeches about his heels standing near or close unto her. Upon the known
truth of the Magician his first description of his house and wife, the
gentleman assuring himself of the truth of the second description of seeming
manifest adultrey in her, secretly steals home with an absolute resolution by
murdering of her to be revenged, and coming home by stealth near unto the
place where his house and her dwelling was, by a ring (which as an infallible
testimony of her true love she had delivered unto him at his departure) he
immediately caused her to come unto him. Her kind and loving intertainement so
qualified and mollified his intended rage and fury, that he had patience first
to confer with her, which before his sight of her, he did not intend. After
her conference he demanded whether such a day (naming the certain day) she
did not wear apparel of such a color and fashion. She answered with wonder
that it was true. He again demanded what that was which she smothed and
handled in her hand, and who that young man was which stood near her with his
hose about his heels. She hereat amazed and perceauing the sudden change of a
fierce and cruel look in her husband, desired him to be pacified and better
informed. The young man was his own brother who could witness the truth
thereof, and that which she smoothed or stroked in her hand was a plaster
which she did smooth for him and applied unto his hip, where he had a very
greiuous and painful ulcer. This being found true, the husband sorrowed for
his bloody intention, and detested the execrable and damnable Art of the
Magician, and the soul lying truth of the Devil. How foulely likewise many
other men by these like dark and double dealing truths, equivocations, and
amphobologies, have been deceived consulting with the devil and his oracles
may be by many other examples testified. The same Author mentions the
oraculous revelation by dream presented unto the daughter of Polycrates of
Samos. It was revealed unto her that her father should be taken up into heaven,
be washed by Jupiter and anointed by the Sun. This after proved true but in a
dreaming sense. For Polycrates being surprised by Orantes, was hanged up toward
heaven upon an high Cross, where Jupiter (that is the air) with his moisture
did wash him, and the Sun melting his grease and the substance of his flesh did
so anoint him as was least imagined or suspected. Plutarke in the life of
Anniball reports that Anniball consulted with the oracle concerning his own
reserved destiny or end. The oracle answered that Libissa land should bury his
corpse. Hereupon he presumed that he should return into that his own country
and therein his old age die. He grew therefore secure and careless. But shortly
afterward being taken by the Romans in a little obscure village by the sea
coast called by the name of Libissa, he there grew weary of his life and
poisoned himself in the Devils truth: behold untruth and deceit. Libissa
buried Anniball, but not Libissa by Anniball either known or possible to be
imagined. These examples are sufficient whereby is plainly seen the dangerous
deceitful fallacy of the devil even where he speaks truth. Let us now
return again unto our former miraculous prediction of the Devil by the mouth
of the bewitched concerning the cure of the bewitched by the touch of the
supposed Witch. We may boldly affirm that in this case or in any other, if it
were possible for the devil to speak the truth, truly, wholly, impartially;
so as it might appear plain, evident, manifest; yet ought we not from him
believe it or receive it. This is in our blessed Savior made undoubted, who in
the Gospel often rebuked him even speaking truth, as also in S. Paul rebuking
the Pythonisse, truly affirming, and acknowledging him the servant and
Minister of God. If the devil then speaking truth, may not be allowed or
credited; how shall revelations, miracles or oracles proceeding from him, be
they never so true, or approved with any show of true Religion or reason,
become any just probations or allegations in law, equity or justice? it may be
objected, that many times men have bin by dreams and visions admonished of
secret and concealed hideous murders, and other evil facts committed privily,
whereby the Malefactors and their guilt have bin admirably produced unto due
punishment. This truth is even by Heathen Authors witnessed, and in our time
the like have happened, and is testified by witnesses, whose faith and credit is
free from all exception. Although this be true and cannot be denied, some
reasons notwithstanding do persuade that it is more safe to incline, to
suspect that these like visions or dreams are rather of the Devil, then
rashly to determine or decree that they are immediately of God. First, for that
though happily they might be sometimes so granted, yet o^ght we not too swiftly
or suddenly so believe, for that by the lively counterfeit of the true visions,
dreams and revelations of God, the Devil has ever usually practiced to be
taken and esteemed as God: the allowance whereof by men is high blasphemy
against God, and ignorant occult adoration of Devils. Secondly, for that no
visions, dreams, or revelations, ought to be esteemed of God, originally or
immediately, which do respect or answer curiosity of knowledge or desire, as
most of the forementioned kinds usually are wont. Thirdly, for that the visions
of God, as they are ever bent unto an extraordinary, divine end, and an
universal good, so are they ever dispensed by the ministry of men, who have
manifest commission, or warrant from God, either mediate, or immediate. The
mediate is proved by the manifestation of the means: the immediate, by the
evident reflection of a manifest divinity, in the power and authority thereof.
For as it is said of the word of God, Heb. 4. verse 12. so must it necessarily
be concluded of all the true miracles, visions, or revelations of God, that
they are lively, and mighty in operation.

This is seen in the miracles wrought by Moses, which the Sorcerers themselves
could not deny to be the finger of God, Genesis 8. verse 19. This is likewise
seen in Simon Magus, who could not but acknowledge the miraculous power of the
holy Ghost, by the laying on of the Apostles hands, so far forth that in the
consideration of his own guilt, and of a conuincing power or deity therein,
he desired them to pray for him.

The same is also witnessed in the servants of the high Priests who being sent
with wicked malice, and cursed prejudice to entrap and betray our Savior, were
by the miraculous power of his word and works compelled to proclaim and
confess; No man ever spoke like this man. All these notes or marks, of the
true visions, dreams, or revelations of God, are ever generally, or for the
most part wanting in the forementioned kinds, which being never free from some
suspicious note of godly jealousy, therefore ought not but with much doubt and
difficulty be at any time admitted. It may be as yet further objected. How can
it otherwise be deemed, then that God himself is the Author of the former
revelations, since they tend unto his glory in the detecting and punishing of
so hideous sins? It is hereto answered, that Almighty God is able to use and
command evil instruments unto good ends. He has ordained the Devil himself
to be the common accuser of all sins and sinners. It is therefore no
inconvenience nor repugnant unto religion or reason, to affirm, that the
Devil himself, in the forementioned visions or dreams, by the commandment
or permission of God, is the producer of the forementioned murders, evil
facts, unto light and judgment. God for his own glory permits the Devil
by these his wonderful revelations, to detect the named sins and sinners.
The Devil also for his own end, and desire of their destruction, does execute
the Decree of God for their just punishment.

But here may be objected again, that the Devil in his revelations (as is
before mentioned) is not to be believed or credited, although he spoke truth.
How then may men be allowed, to admit or make use of these his visions or
dreams in this kind.

It is hereto replied, Almighty God himself does both permit and hear the
Devil when he accuses, as is manifest by holy Scriptures. Therefore among
men, and by men also, his accusations may be heard and considered.
Notwithstanding, since he is often a false Accuser, and the enemy of God and
truth, he may not be credited in himself, no nor truth it self simply as in
his mouth. Upon his accusation therefore, if truth and certainety do declare
itself, the force and virtue thereof, and not the accusation does conduct,
upright men and minds, unto proceeding and judgment; it is not the Devils
accusation, but the truth it self, unto which happily that accusation did point
inquisition, that by itself made manifest, is therefore credited.

And thus with brevity has the vanity both of all superstitious, and also of
all miraculous ways of the detection of Witches and Witchcraft, been in some
few of their particulars generally unmasked. There are, and may be many more
besides these, which in these, and with these, will likewise perish and vanish,
being by the same rule and reason compelled unto the golden trial of sincere
religion and affection.

The sole, true and warranted way, wherein uprightly men may walk herein
before God and men, has been in this Treatise formerly disquired and
discoursed. Therein (intelligent Reader) thou may observe two sorts of
manifest Witches: The one is offered unto the outward sense, in his apparent
and palpable Sorcerous works: The other is made evident by plain
demonstration out of the sacred word of truth. It has ever prevailed with
vulgar custom (because most sensible of the most gross harms more open to
sense) to cast chiefly, or for the most part, the eye and common jealousy
upon the first kind. The other kind (because usually lest noted of sense, and
therefore esteemed least harmefull to men) is both in the just protraction or
production thereof unto the bar of Justice much more rare and seldom, and
also in common and vulgar observation is little or not at all considered.

Hence it proceeds, that most men do doubtfully resolve thereof; Yea, some
men admire a worth therein, others esteeeme it of reasonable and commendable
use, unto the satisfaction of their curiosities, in things secret and hidden
from the knowledge of man.

But since Almighty God has more specially (as is in the former Treatise
proved) both given most certain and plain indication, and information of
this kind, by the expressed fruits thereof, and the necessary inference of
familiarity and consultation with other Spirits then himself, Isaiah 8. verse
19. and has also so often in so diverse places iterated the great abomination,
and his high detestation thereof, it is not only the saving duty of all
private men to take more diligent and wary notice thereof, thereby to eschew
and fly from it, according unto Gods express charge and command; but it is
the charge of Princes and Magistrates also, to fulfill thereby the commanded
execution of Gods holy wrath and vengeance upon it; for which pleasing service
and sacrifice unto him, Almighty God has upon the everlasting records of his
holy word fixed for ever the so memorable praise, and commendation of those
famous Princes, who have dedicated themselves unto his will therein. As it has
been declared by what means Witches and Sorcerers, in two kinds severally
may be manifestly charged, challenged, and proved as certain and undoubted
Offenders: so also how far presumption probabilities, or matter of just
suspicion in both may blamelesly guide, and conduct upright and equal
inquisition, has been briefly instanced. From all which it is evident:
first, that God in nature has not shut up in this subject, the common intrance
and door of judging, trying or deciding as equally, as in other cases:
secondly, that beside and beyond that way, which God has left open unto
sensible and reasonable progress, herein it must necessarily be preposterous
presumption to break out, or ouer-reach, as also in stead of that plain
approved and authentike walk for the trials of truth; the judgment and
condemnation of others, and the establishment of men's own thoughts, and
minds, to seek irreligious footing, in the Labyrinth of amazing wonderments,
and reasonlesse traditions and experiments. To walk in these ways, is no
better then to run away from God, in whom to trust, though with some
restraint, and coertion of our longing vain desires, and satisfactions is
truly far more happy then out of the conduct of his allowance therein, to
enjoy the fullest measure or ouerflow of all the most obsequious influencies of
humane bliss. If true religion and piety could settle this consideration, the
common folly of misgouerned, petulant, inordinate, and intemperate expatiations
in this kind, would not only in private men more usually blush and be
ashamed, but a more even, straight, and uninterrupted way, being prepared
thereby unto justice, would usually bring forth a much more happy issue, then
now is ordinary. Thus far the love of truth, which I have ever carefully
sought and studied, has offered violence unto my private thoughts and
meditations, exposing them unto the hazard of public view.

As my labor is not lost unto my self, and my own more confirmed
satisfaction thereby: so if there be therein any good unto the common good, I
know, good men will not for the thorn, refuse the fruit, for defect of
elegance in style, or obscurity of worth in the Author, quarrel with the
matter it self.

FINIS.

